URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAET/2025/121.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:57:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
May v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia & Anor [2025] SAET 121 (5 November 2025)
May v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia & Anor
[2025] SAET 121
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNAL
MAY, Rebecca
AURORA DAIRIES PTY LTD
South Australian Employment Court
– Hearing and Determination
ET-23-03621
HEARING DATES:
11 & 12 November 2024, 28 & 29 January 2025,
14 & 15 April 2025, 2 May 2025
JUDGMENT OF:
His Honour Deputy President Judge
DELIVERED ON:
5 November 2025
CATCHWORDS:
Application for review of a decision to reject claims for two
injuries, a fall said to have caused a neck and left arm injury in May
an aggravation of those injuries in March 2023 from lifting a trailer –
The applicant did not advise the employer
that she had sustained an injury until
early 2023 and did not claim compensation for the alleged fall until April 2023
applicant and her daughter claimed that the daughter was present at
the time of the fall – The employer’s records state
applicant’s daughter did not commence employment with the employer until
two weeks after the date given for the fall
– The employer and
compensating authority contend that the claim was concocted and the fall did not
1. The applicant’s evidence is unreliable
– The witnesses who supported the applicant’s version of events all
that they may have the date of the fall wrong – It is likely that
those witnesses confused or conflated the fall the applicant
claimed to have
with a fall that she did have in July 2022 in which she did not sustain an
injury to her neck or left arm –
The fall did not occur and the applicant
did not sustain an injury to her neck or left arm from a fall at work – 2.
The lifting
incident of March 2023 occurred and may have caused a minor or
transitory aggravation of symptoms but the applicant was already incapacitated
for work by reason of pre-existing cervical spinal degeneration and the
applicant required surgery for that condition prior to the
incident of March
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
Neat Holdings Pty Ltd v Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
[1992] HCA 66
(1992) 110 ALR 449
Rejfek v McElroy
[1965] HCA 46
(1965) 112 CLR
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Dr P Salu
Respondent: Mr T Birchall
Other Party: Mr N
Solicitors:
Applicant: Mahony’s
Respondent: Minter Ellison
Other Party: Piper
decision concerns a claim for compensation for a neck injury that the applicant,
Rebecca May, claims to have sustained in a fall
on 2 May 2022 and an aggravation
of the injury in March 2023. The respondent compensating authority (the
Corporation), and the employer,
Aurora Dairies Pty Ltd (Aurora), contend there
was no fall and no neck injury.
14 April 2023, Ms May gave notice of having sustained injuries from a fall at
work on 2 May 2022. The Injury Notification Summary
states that Ms May tripped
on a hose, landed on her left side, tried to break the fall with her left elbow
and immediately felt neck
pain. Ms May continued to work her normal hours after
the incident and lost no time from work.
has a record of Ms May tripping over a hose at work and grazing her right knee
in a fall on 20 July 2022. No other injury was
reported to have occurred as a
result of that incident.
26 March 2023, about one month before she gave notice of having sustained a neck
injury on 2 May 2022, Ms May went to pick up a
cage trailer at work that did not
have a jockey wheel and experienced lower back pain. She presented to hospital
on 8 April 2023.
Radiology of the whole spine was undertaken and showed neck
pathology, namely a C4/5 broad based disc bulge, left foraminal C6 nerve
impingement and a C6/7 posterior disc bulge.
May claims that her daughter, Monique Mitchell, was present when she fell at
work on 2 May 2022. Aurora claims that Ms Mitchell
did not commence her
employment until 16 May 2022.
May was born in April 1977. When she was about 16 years old, she fell from a
motorcycle. On 25 July 2001 Ms May injured her lower
back at work and
subsequently claimed compensation.
May commenced employment at Melinda Dairies as a full-time farm hand in or
around 2006. She injured her back again in 2007 and
claimed compensation.
Between 2008 and 2014 Ms May worked for 7 employers, 5 of them in the rural
and farming sphere. Ms May appears
to not have been in employment between 2014
records state that Ms May commenced employment with Aurora on 7 December 2021.
Ms May maintains that the commencement
date was 19 December 2021. That
factual disagreement is just one of many between the parties.
Non-expert evidence
Rebecca May
her first affidavit Ms May stated that she was scheduled to work morning shift
on 2 May 2022 and that she was driven to work that
day by her son, Josh Amos,
along with her daughter, Monique Mitchell.
May stated that she and Ms Mitchell “were scheduled to more or less
‘work together’” that
Ms May then stated that she
fell onto the floor after tripping on a milking hose which was about 10 cm in
her affidavit Ms May stated: “I seemingly landed on my Bilateral hands,
Bilateral elbows and Bilateral
In giving oral
evidence, Ms May asked counsel what the word “bilateral” means and
she said that it is not a word she
Ms May deposed that most
of the impact of the fall was to the left side of her body. She felt pain in her
“Left Elbow region”
which “was also emitting from [her] Left
Shoulder and [her] Left
There was also pain in
her “Right Upper
Bilateral Knees”.
May’s affidavit states that she stayed on the ground for some time and was
crying. She stated that Ms Mitchell, came up behind
her and laughed until she
realised Ms May was hurt. The affidavit does not state that Ms Mitchell was
present when Ms May fell or
that she witnessed the fall.
May deposed that after the fall, James Davey came across her, got her a chair
and said that he would “put in an Incident
She also deposed that Mr
Amos, who also works for Aurora, checked on her. She said Ms Mitchell had
gone back to work “to make
sure that we did not fall further
May deposed that she went home with Mr Amos and Ms Mitchell. She stated that she
was in pain that night and the next morning but
went to work the next day. She
described the development of the pain the next day in a high degree of detail.
May claimed there was a toolbox meeting in May 2022 at which “Peter van
Zyl had seemingly raised the fact that I had fallen
over a hose and hurt”
She claims that she told
Mr van Zyl it was the milk hose, however, he said it was a different hose.
May had a medical appointment with Dr Adhikary on 14 June 2022. She describes in
her affidavit the comments she made to Dr Adhikary.
She did not want a WorkCover
medical certificate because “there was seemingly a ‘taboo’
behind it and ‘being
May sought to explain the comment in Dr Adhikary’s notes, “Denies
any trauma of injury”, and the note she had
been experiencing pain in her
left arm for more than one year and it had worsened in the last six weeks. She
did so by references
in medical notes to her symptoms, but they all describe
left arm pain with a date of onset prior to May
Based on the differences
between notes, Ms May claimed that Dr Adhikary was not really listening to her
at the consultation. She
also said that Dr Adhikary described the wrong age
at which her father died from lung cancer.
affidavit then traverses more than a dozen medical appointments and interactions
Ms May had with Aurora employees and makes comment
on each of them.
May claims that she injured or aggravated her back on 26 March 2023 whilst
lifting a trailer at work with her “Bilateral
Hands” placed over her
“Bilateral Legs”.
the fifth attempt to lift the trailer she “felt a sharp, pulling sensation
in [her] neck” and felt “sharp and
paralysing pain emit throughout
the entirely (sic) of [her] Upper Left
She continued to
hold the trailer because she was concerned that if she let it go “it may
land on [her] Bilateral Feet and
either break a bone, or amputate
May reported the trailer lifting incident on 28 March 2023, the next day she
worked on after the trailer incident. On 3 April 2023,
she saw Dr Lopa and
had a text exchange with Amy Whitty from Aurora.
May attended the emergency department of the Mt Gambier Hospital on 8 April
2023. She stated that she was experiencing intense
left arm and neck pain. The
pain had worsened markedly that day. Ms May obtained a Work Capacity Certificate
which absented her from
work until 14 April 2023. Ms May saw Dr Wallingford on
that date and received a further certificate clearing her for modified duties
until 15 May 2023.
was another admission to the emergency department of the Mount Gambier Hospital
on 20 May 2023. Ms May felt nauseous and unwell
and had been vomiting and had
experienced bad headaches for three days prior.
May continues to have neck and left arm symptoms. She has been certified unfit
for work for some time.
her third affidavit, dated 29 October 2024, Ms May described how she came to
nominate 2 May 2022 as the date of her fall. She said
that when she saw Dr
Wallingford, he told her there was a note made by Dr Adhikary dated
14 June 2022 which mentions a discussion
with Ms May in which she said that
the symptoms in her left arm had worsened approximately six weeks prior to the
consultation. That
led to the estimated date of 2 May
...I remember there being discussion that the trailer incident was related to my
first injury, so [Dr Wallingford] backdated my Work
Capacity Certificate to
reflect this.
oral evidence Ms May said that Ms Mitchell worked about three shifts at Aurora
before she “signed
which I take her to
mean before Ms Mitchell became employed by Aurora. The issue is important
because one of Aurora’s witnesses,
Michelle van Wyk, a former employee,
gave evidence that Ms Mitchell did not work in any capacity until she formally
commenced employment
with Aurora on 16 May 2022, two weeks after 2 May
2022, the date on which Ms May claimed to have fallen.
asked to respond to Ms van Wyk’s comment that Ms van Wyk would have been
in big trouble if she had let Ms Michell work
on the farm prior to commencing
employment, this exchange
WITNESS: She – she broke rules when she was drunk at work all the time.
DR SALU: And did that impact, as you understood it, on her employment?
WITNESS: Yes.
cross-examination by the Corporation, Ms May was reminded of her answer that she
did not feel pain in her neck at the time of the
May 2022 fall. She was taken to
her affidavit in which she described pain moving up her arm and into her neck
during the morning
on which she had the
She said that was
something different. It was a pinched nerve sensation.
May said that she lost no time from work after the 2 May 2022 fall. By reference
to her medical notes, she did not consult a doctor
to a note of the Hawkins Medical Clinic dated 10 May 2022 which makes no
mention of a fall. She agreed
that was so. She also agreed that the first
mention of left arm pain at a consultation was on 14 June 2022 when she was
as having said the pain was present for more than a year. Ms May said
she was “100% sure” she did not tell Dr Adhikary
that she had
experienced pain in her arm for more than a
May suggested one reason why she may not have identified 2 May 2022 as the date
of a fall to Dr Adhikary was that she may have
been “put on
WorkCover”.
She then said
that she did not tell Dr Adhikary that her neck problems came on after the fall
because she did not want to lose her
Ms May was asked how
telling her doctor how she had hurt herself could cause her to lose her job. She
responded by saying that the
injury would be reported to work if she had
reported the injury to a doctor, and the doctor would want to put her on
WorkCover and
she would lose her job. After saying that she was not asked
whether she had suffered an injury or trauma, Ms May agreed that she
asked that and had answered no.
The answer was not consistent with Ms May’s affidavit where she deposed
that Dr Adhikary’s note stating she had denied
sustaining any trauma or
injury was incorrect.
May was asked to explain the comment in her affidavit that
Dr Adhikary’s notes were inconsistent with other medical notes.
said twice that she did not know what the inconsistencies
asked about the history that she gave to Benjamin Allen, a chiropractor, Ms May
denied telling Mr Allen that she had had left
arm pain and left arm pins and
needles for years as his notes
May told Dr Gulati on 1 November 2022 that she had left arm pain. She was asked
why she did not mention having a fall on 2 May
2022 in the consultation. She
again questioned the validity of the notes and said “I reckon half of
these notes are bullshit”.
It was put to Ms May that she had made up a story about how she came to have
neck pain. She responded by saying the Corporation had
gone behind her back to
get medical notes and then said four times: “You have done
May agreed that the certificate she gave to Aurora advising that she had a
restricted work capacity did not refer to any work injury.
She agreed it was not
until 20 December 2022 that she told a doctor she had sustained a work
This evidence
MR BIRCHALL: Why did you wait until the 20 of December 2022 to tell any of the
doctors that you’d seen since the 14 of June
2022 that you’d had a
work injury?
WITNESS: Because it was getting worse.
MR BIRCHALL: Why didn’t you just tell them? I tripped over at work.
WITNESS: Because I wanted to keep working.
MR BIRCHALL: And what, again - - -
WITNESS: My work – I absolutely loved my job.
MR BIRCHALL: And what was it about having a confidential appointment with your
doctor that would stop you from working?
WITNESS: Because it would stop me from working, you know?
MR BIRCHALL: Why?
WITNESS: Because they tried to put me on WorkCover before that. I needed to
MR BIRCHALL: Who’s going to put you on WorkCover if no one knows?
WITNESS: A doctor tried to.
MR BIRCHALL: Okay. You see?
WITNESS: And I rang Amy up to find out a day when I fell.
May was taken to an incident report form completed by Aurora for an incident at
5am on 20 July 2022 which states: “Employee
tripped over hose to vat
injured right knee”.
accepted the description of the incident was accurate but said that the time was
not correct. She then said that she “landed
on [her] all
It was put to Ms
May that in her first affidavit she had deposed that she did not fall fully but
landed on her right knee
“slightly”.
yes. It was then put to her that she did not see a doctor about her left arm
between 20 July 2022 and 1 November 2022. She
disagreed, but her counsel
accepted the proposition was
May was referred to a specialist at the Flinders Medical Centre on
20 December 2022, and that was the first time that she had told
that she had suffered a fall at
relation to the trailer incident, Ms May confirmed that it occurred on Sunday 26
March 2023. It was put to her that she did not
attend hospital until 8 April
2023. Ms May said that she kept working but did not want to accept the
proposition in full and asked
to see another certificate. She agreed that she
only attended hospital once after the trailer incident but did not accept that
was on 8 April. She stated that the date of her age was wrongly recorded on
the admission note. Eventually Ms May conceded that her
age was correctly
recorded and admitted that she did go to hospital on 8 April 2023. Next it was
put to her that she saw Dr Lopa
before then, on 3 April 2023. She disagreed
and said: “Youse have changed
She then agreed
that she saw a doctor on 3 April 2023 but denied that the reason for the
attendance was to get a referral to a neurosurgeon.
It was then put to her that
Dr Lopa mentioned a referral letter in his note. Ms May said the attendance was
because she had pain
down her left side and she had the referral letter
completed while she was there.
May agreed that her back was x-rayed at the Mount Gambier Hospital on 8 April
2023. She was also given a Work Capacity Certificate
covering her until 14 April
2023. She agreed that she saw Dr Wallingford on 14 April 2023 and his
note recorded that she hurt her
back at work on 26 March 2023. Ms May said
that was not correct. It was put to her that Dr Wallingford noted that he tested
limb to see if there was any altered sensation. She said that she did
not know what that meant. When questioned further about the
consultation she
said that she did not remember.
May agreed that the claim for compensation in this proceeding was submitted on
14 April 2023. She said that she had no recollection
of making a phone call to
make the claim with her friend Lisa present. Ms May stated that Dr
Wallingford lodged the claim for her.
When pressed further, she denied making a
phone call to a claims officer to report and submit a claim. She acknowledged
had made two claims for compensation previously. Ms May stated that she
could not recall making claims in 2001 and 2007 because she
was influenced by
drugs at the time. It was put to her that she had described both claims in her
affidavit. She then said that she
could not remember the exact day. Counsel put
to Ms May that she was not being asked to remember the exact day.
returning to ask Ms May what happened on 2 May 2022, counsel put to her that she
was not on the morning shift that day. Ms May
said that she did not work an
afternoon shift on the day she was injured and suggested that she may have
worked a morning and an
afternoon shift on the same day. Later she said that she
was injured on a morning shift and did not work an afternoon shift on the
when she was injured.
was put to Ms May that she invented Ms Mitchell being at work with her on 2 May
2022. She denied it. It was also put to Ms May
that no-one witnessed the fall.
She said that Ms Mitchell witnessed the fall. She was then taken to her first
affidavit where she
described the fall and its aftermath.
put to Ms May that her description of the incident conveys that she was on the
floor for some time before Ms Mitchell came
across her. Ms May said that Ms
Mitchell was in front of her and present when she fell and that she was showing
Ms Mitchell “how
to do the back
was put to Ms May that contrary to her affidavit, there was no toolbox meeting
in May 2022 but there was one in in August 2022.
It was put to her that she had
a fall at work on 20 July 2022 and it was discussed at a toolbox meeting on 24
August 2022. It was
suggested to her that her description of James Davey coming
across her after the fall and assisting her occurred on 20 July 2022.
not accept those propositions.
recording of a phone call between Ms May and a claims officer was played to Ms
May in full. She recognised her own voice, and that
of Lisa, and said that she
did recall the call and the conversation. Lisa volunteered that Ms May fell onto
her left side and immediately
felt pain in her elbow and neck. Ms May said that
she did not feel neck pain but acknowledged that Lisa said that in front of her
and said that she did not correct Lisa.
was put to Ms May that she did not fall at work on 2 May 2022 and that she had
invented a story about the incident. She disagreed.
for Aurora put to Ms May that on 2 May 2022 she clocked on at 12:09pm and
clocked off at 17:44pm. She said: “Well, anyone
can go in and change
That led to
questioning about how Ms May concluded that she was injured on 2 May 2022. She
said that she worked it out with the doctor
but could not remember the
doctor’s name.
said it may have been Dr Wallingford.
was put to Ms May that Ms Mitchell did not commence performing work for Aurora
until June 2022. Ms May disagreed and stated she
was training Ms Mitchell at the
beginning of May 2022. When asked how she was aware of that, Ms May said that
she knew it. Counsel
then asked, if Ms May knew that to be so, why did she
need to try to work out the date of the fall, firstly with Aurora, and then
Dr Wallingford.
May was asked who allowed Ms Mitchell to perform work at Aurora’s premises
before Ms Mitchell became employed by Aurora.
She said that it was Ms van Wyk.
This exchange
MR SWAN: You didn’t speak to your employer about taking Monique Mitchell
out there to work, did you?
WITNESS: I did speak to my employer.
MR SWAN: Well, on what basis?
WITNESS: What do you mean “what basis”?
MR SWAN: She wasn’t employed there. Monique Mitchell wasn’t employed
there. Why would she go out there?
WITNESS: Because I was training her up, because they were getting other workers.
They wanted other workers out there.
MR SWAN: But you don’t train workers up unless they are, in fact,
employed, do you?
WITNESS: Well, this is a different sort of, probably, dairy, the way we ran it.
We were running it. Us employees were running it,
you might as well say.
May was asked questions about a conversation she had with Mr van Zyl on 21
December 2022. She did not accept the version of the
conversation Mr van Zyl set
out in his affidavit. She was then taken to his email to Ms Whitty dated 21
December 2022 in which he
wrote that Ms May told him that day that a
“disc C5/C6 in her neck is causing compression on
It was put to Ms
May that she had a conversation with Mr van Zyl prior to Christmas 2022. She
maintained her position that she did
not and said: “It’s all –
repeated the last comment twice more.
re-examination Ms May disagreed with most of the detail described by Mr van Zyl
in his account of their 21 December 2022 discussion.
She said that she did not
recall the subject of disc compression being discussed.
her affidavit Ms Mitchell stated that she is Ms May’s daughter.
Mitchell stated that she commenced at Aurora in or around April 2022. She added
that she received a workplace induction on the
day she commenced. She stated
that she worked with her mother quite a bit in the early stages of working for
Mitchell deposed that she recalled being rostered to work with Ms May on 2
May 2022. She recalled Ms May going into another room
but said that she could
vaguely see her and saw that she tripped on the floor. Ms Mitchell started
to laugh until she saw her mother
crying. She recalled Mr Davey coming out of a
room soon after and assisted Ms May.
cross-examination, Ms Mitchell acknowledged that her contract of employment is
dated 16 May 2022. She said that she started to
She was asked about the timing of toolbox meetings. When told there was no
toolbox meeting in May
2022, Ms Mitchell said that it was possible her
mother’s fall was raised at a toolbox meeting on 24 August 2022. After
it was put to her that the date of Ms May’s fall may have been 20
July 2022. This exchange
MR SWAN: Thank you. And, Ms Mitchell, if we go back to page 169 (indistinct
words) of that book you’ve got – the first
page of your affidavit
– paragraph – sorry. See, at paragraph 5, it says –
At some stage in or around April 2022, I commenced employment with Aurora
But that’s not true, is it?
WITNESS: No.
MR SWAN: And you told us that you attended at the farm on occasions when your
mother needed help. That’s right?
WITNESS: Before - - -
MR SWAN: Sorry?
WITNESS: Before I started there, I did.
MR SWAN: Yes. You - - -
WITNESS: Yes.
MR SWAN: Yes. And you also say you were there on the day she was injured.
That’s correct?
WITNESS: Yes.
MR SWAN: But you didn’t bother to go and help her the next day.
WITNESS: No.
MR SWAN: You didn’t think she might need help the next day?
WITNESS: No – because I probably had something on.
MR SWAN: You probably had something on.
WITNESS: Yes.
MR SWAN: What did you have on?
WITNESS: I do have a daughter.
MR SWAN: Yes – and what did you have on?
WITNESS: Well, I can’t remember exactly, but I obviously would have had
something on.
pressed about her evidence that there was a toolbox meeting in May 2022, Ms
Mitchell said there were many toolbox meetings and
she did not remember back
Later when it was put
to Ms Mitchell that a fall her mother had on 20 July 2022 was discussed at a
toolbox meeting on 24 August 2022,
Ms Mitchell said that could have
happened but she was unsure and did not
She then agreed that she
could have attended the 24 August 2022 toolbox meeting and that could have been
the meeting where her mother’s
When taken to James
Davey’s evidence, Ms Mitchell said that Mr Davey was there when her mother
fell and she witnessed the fall.
When it was put to Ms Mitchell that date may have been 20 July 2022 she
said “I don’t know. I’m
Amos is Ms May’s son, He deposed that he was employed by Aurora in late
2021. Mr Amos also deposed that on 2 May 2022 he
went into the shed area at work
and saw his mother sitting on a chair and looking like she was in pain. She told
him that she had
just fallen over. He recalled her holding onto her left elbow.
Amos recalled a toolbox meeting at which his mother’s fall was discussed.
He thought it took place in or around May 2022.
Peter van Zyl addressed the
meeting and emphasised the importance of hanging up hoses rather than leaving
them lying on the floor.
cross-examination it was put to Mr Amos that he worked the afternoon shift on 2
May 2022. He said that was wrong because he was
working morning shift. He was
shown the roster and said that it looked different to what he saw. He observed
that it said “AM”,
which indicated the morning shift. It was put to
him the document showed that he commenced work at 12:35pm and stopped at 5:46pm.
He agreed that he would not commence work at 12:35pm when working morning shift.
Mr Amos then said that he may have got the date
Mr Amos agreed that the
document showed that both he and Ms May started work on 2 May 2022 between
12pm and 1pm, but he continued
to maintain that Ms Mitchell was at work on the
day Ms May had a fall because Ms Mitchell started performing work before
being employed.
That led to this passage after it was put to Ms Amos that Ms
Mitchell did not attend work on 2 May
HIS HONOUR: Just answer from your own understanding and any reasons you think
might support the answer that you’ve given earlier,
WITNESS: Well, I might have got the dates wrong. I’m not a hundred per
cent correct on the dates., but she was there when she
hurt herself.
MR BIRCHALL: She was there when who hurt herself?
WITNESS: When my mother hurt herself.
MR BIRCHALL: And it is possible that could have been 20 July 2022 when your
mother tripped over a hose and not 2 May 22?
WITNESS: Possibly.
cross-examination by Aurora, Mr Amos first said that he could remember the fall
taking place on a Monday but he repeated that he
may have the date wrong and
then said it may not have been a
Mr Amos explained
that he came up with the date 2 May 2022 by working out roughly when the fall
happened and settling on that
He agreed that he likely
went through the process of trying to work out when the fall occurred a few
weeks before 15 December 2023,
the date when he signed his affidavit.
Amos said that Ms Mitchell had a job “interview and then worked straight
He maintained
that she was not employed when she first performed work for Aurora.
Cross-examination finished in this
MR SWAN: Yes. Okay. I think you’ve been asked questions about 2 May 2022,
and you’ve agreed a number of things about
that. But if I put to you that
on 2 May 2022, Monique was certainly not at the dairy on that day, would you
agree with that?
WITNESS: No.
MR SWAN: Do you say she was there?
WITNESS: Yes.
MR SWAN: How do you say she was to you?
WITNESS: Because she was there when mum hurt herself.
MR SWAN: Yes. But you’ve agreed with Mr Birchall that you might have the
date wrong, that she hurt herself.
WITNESS: Yes.
MR SWAN: So let’s assume she hurt herself a couple of months later. That
is consistent with Monique not being there on 2 May,
WITNESS: Yes
MR SWAN: Yes. And so do you agree with me that she may not have been there, and
in fact, I put you, wasn’t there on 2 May?
WITNESS: I don’t believe [she] wasn’t, but she may not have been
Cassie Redding
Redding is employed by Aurora. In her first affidavit dated 15 December
2023, Ms Redding deposed that she told Ms May that positions
were available at
Aurora. After Ms May commenced employment with Aurora, Ms Redding gave her an
informal induction and overview of
the worksite.
Redding deposed that she recalled talking to Ms Mitchell on 3 May 2022 and Ms
Mitchell saying that she felt bad about laughing
at her mother when she had hurt
herself. Ms Redding also deposed that there was a toolbox meeting late in May
2022 at which Ms May’s
fall was discussed.
Redding had an incident with a trailer in early 2023. She went to move the
trailer which did not have a jockey wheel and felt a
twinge in her back.
a second affidavit dated 14 October 2024, Ms Redding joined issue with some of
the affidavit evidence of witnesses relied upon
by Aurora. Ms Redding also
qualified her original affidavit evidence that Ms May’s fall was on 2 May
With regard to Rebecca hurting herself at work, whether it happened on 2 May
2022 or 20 July 2022, all I can say is I know for a
fact that this did happen...
cross-examination it was put to Ms Redding that Ms Mitchell did not work on 3
May 2022. Ms Redding said that she was prepared to
admit that she was wrong
Later she agreed
that was the case with the date of the fall and the date of the toolbox meeting
at which the fall was discussed.
Redding agreed that the informal induction she gave Ms May was not required of
her in her role at the dairy. She agreed it was
not her role to perform
inductions.
Redding stated that Ms May loved her job and was a good worker. She said that Ms
May has found it very hard not being able to work.
She recounted helping Ms May
with some aspects of her work when Ms May was in pain. Ms Redding agreed that
could have been at the
end of 2022 and the beginning of 2023.
Redding was asked further about how she arrived at 3 May 2022 being the date of
her conversation with Ms Mitchell. She said that
she believed someone had asked
her whether she was at work with Ms Mitchell on that date and she had said
that she was there the
day after the fall and had the
conversation.
She agreed that it
could have been months later that the fall and the conversation took
re-examination Ms Redding was shown the roster. She asked why all the milking
was being done “AM”. She thought the
timing was odd because a drover
would need to round up the cows and bring them into the shed well before the
milking started.
Petrus (Peter) van Zyl
van Zyl is the Operations Manager of Aurora in South Australia. He commenced in
the role in April 2020. He deposed that Aurora
operates eight farms in the State
and that Ms May worked at Landour Park. All of the farms are located around
Mount Gambier.
van Zyl deposed that he did not recall attending a toolbox meeting at Landour
Park in late May 2022, nor did his records suggest
that he had. He did recall a
toolbox meeting on 24 August 2022 that he attended. He denied getting angry with
Ms May at the toolbox
meeting as she claimed. He said he was firm with everyone
at the meeting about telling them to roll up the hose and store it correctly
after use. He said that his firm demeanour was directed to everyone present at
the meeting, not just Ms May. He said the fall Ms
May had in July 2022 was
discussed at the 24 August 2022 meeting. He recalled having conversations in
late July 2022 about the fall
because it arose from a trip hazard and concerned
van Zyl deposed that he spoke to Sarel Potgieter about the fall and was advised
that it was not serious. Ms May iced her knee for
a while and returned to
was not until 9 November 2022 that Mr van Zyl heard further about the fall. He
received a text message from Mary Sgammini, Mr Potgieter’s
advising that Ms May had provided a medical certificate dated 8 November
2022 in relation to the fall. The certificate did
not refer to the fall. It
placed Ms May on light duties between 8 and 22 November 2022. A further
medical certificate was provided
by Ms May in December 2022. It provided
that she should remain on light duties until she recovered fully.
van Zyl and Ms May had a discussion on 20 December 2022. He describes the
conversation in detail in his affidavit. As already said,
Ms May denies
virtually all of his account. There is a note of the conversation made by Mr van
Zyl which is brief, but as noted earlier,
describes an issue with the C5/C6
level of Ms May’s spine.
van Zyl deposed that Ms May did not follow the procedure prescribed by Aurora
for reporting an injury.
20 December 2022 Mr van Zyl had a conversation with Ms Whitty who told him that
Ms May had asked what date she fell at work.
van Zyl did not remember Ms Mitchell starting with Aurora in early May 2022. He
checked and ascertained that her start date was
16 May 2022.
van Zyl arranged for Ms May to consult a physiotherapist at iCanPhysio to assess
her work capacity.
van Zyl deposed that neither he nor anyone in management at Aurora had any idea
that Ms May was in need of light duties from October
2022 as she deposed in
para. [136] of her first affidavit.
van Zyl deposed that he was frustrated when he saw that Ms May had attempted to
lift a trailer. He attended Landour Park on 29
March 2023 to discuss that with
her. He deposed that he asked Ms May why she lifted the trailer. She said that
no-one was around
to help her. He responded by saying that explanation was
bullshit. He said that the tone of his comment came from frustration and
exasperation.
Mr van Zyl set out the conversation he claims to have had with Ms May in
full in his affidavit, his handwritten note of the
conversation is very brief.
It does however mention “C5/C6 compression on
the end of his affidavit, Mr van Zyl disagreed with the May, Mitchell, Amos and
Redding affidavits in relation to there being a
fall on 2 May 2022, a discussion
with Ms Redding the next day and a toolbox meeting later in the same month.
oral evidence Mr van Zyl explained that the document which showed who worked on
2 May 2022 and the times they worked to and from
is an automated report. It is
based on clock-on and clock-off times, and if they are not entered, a manager
enters the times. Mr
van Zyl explained that his understanding was qualified by
him not using the system in his role. In cross-examination he explained
document is a timesheet, not a
van Zyl said that by reference to the timesheet, James Davey would have would
have brought cows to the milking area. In relation
to the other people mentioned
on the timesheet, he said that Bernard Diederiks and Jacob Pratt would have
turned on feed systems,
connected the milk vats and put filters in place. He
said that was a 15 to 20 minute job and that the first cow arrives within 10
minutes and the last cow within 35 minutes. He said that as soon as the
first cow arrives, it is connected to a machine and milking
van Zyl was challenged about the frequency of toolbox meetings. He agreed that
the records of them may not be accurate.
was put to Mr van Zyl that he had destroyed his notebook. He denied it. He said
that he made notes everywhere and could not find
a record of his note of toolbox
meeting attendances. Mr van Zyl was then asked whether he knew that Mr Potgieter
had tripped at work
and injured his ribs when he fell on his phone. He said he
was not aware of that.
van Zyl said that the note he made for the March 2023 injury was that it
occurred when Ms May was “lifting pump out of calf
When asked why
he made that note he said it was because that was what Ms May had told him.
It was put to him that he did not speak
with Ms May about the incident on
29 March 2023 because she was not at work that day. He agreed, based on the
timesheet, that Ms
May was not at work on that day. He said it would have been
one day in that week.
re-examination Mr van Zyl was asked about the suggestion that was put to him
there was a toolbox meeting at Landour Park farm on
22 June 2022. He said that
by reference to his diary, he had meetings with three managers on 22 June 2022
to work through their monthly
planning sheets. He also met with a fencing
contractor. He said that the note indicated that he had spent the whole of 22
at Kingsley farm.
James Davey
Davey is employed by Aurora as a senior farm hand. He is responsible for the
day-to-day operation of the Landour Park farm. In
May 2022 he was working as a
his affidavit, Mr Davey described his induction in detail and said that it was
very thorough.
Davey stated that he would often work with Josh Amos and do a lot of the droving
Davey recalled filling out an incident report for Ms May in late July or early
August 2022. He recalled it as the first incident
report he filled out for her
and the only one that involved a fall at work. Mr Davey recalled assisting her
after the fall, which
he said was on 20 July 2022. He said that Ms May made
no complaint of upper body pain but indicated that she had hurt her right
oral evidence Mr Davey disagreed that Ms Mitchell spent time at Landour Park
before she commenced working there to see whether
she liked it before she signed
He also disagreed that there
was an incident on or about 2 May 2022. He did not accept that he may have
failed to lodge an incident
report. He explained that an individual can log
their own incident report through their mobile phone or, if they prefer, Mr
could do it for them. That usually happens and he uses an iPad at work to
log incident reports made by others.
shown the time sheet for 20 July 2022, Mr Davey said that he would normally have
attended TAFE that day but he came into work
at 5:15am to cover for Ms May after
she hurt herself. He was paid by Aurora to attend TAFE so he usually did not
record time on TAFE
days. He explained that whilst his start time was recorded
as 5:15am, he would have been at work at about 2am because it was his
to attend work at that time on TAFE days during calving to check all was well.
Because he only stayed for a couple of hours,
he did not record that time. He
explained that on the day prior to giving evidence he had gone to Landour Park
for 20 minutes at
7pm to do a check and did not record his
Whitty is employed by Aurora as a Regional Administration Officer. Her affidavit
focussed on the induction process, the systems
used for various human resources
functions and toolbox meetings. She stated that the records showed there were
toolbox meetings at
Landour Park on 22 June 2022, 8 July 2022, and 29
August 2022.
Whitty deposed that she received no notification of any incident occurring to Ms
May on or about 2 May 2022 but there were records
of incidents on 20 July 2022
and 28 March 2023.
Whitty deposed that it was not until late 2022 that she understood that Ms May
claimed to have had an injury on 2 May 2022. She
received a text message from Ms
Sgammini on 9 November 2022 with an image of a medical certificate. Ms Whitty
asked Ms Sgammini whether
Ms May was hurt at work. The text message
response said “[w]ell she has arthritis in her neck but she says she
slipped in shed
and this flared it
further medical certificate dated 12 December 2022 was also
Ms Whitty described
other communications with and about Ms May. She deposed that Ms May did not tell
her about the diagnosis in the
Benson Radiology Report dated 15 June 2022, nor
did she request light duties at work until she provided the medical certificate
8 November 2022.
Ms Whitty was advised that Ms May had made a claim for compensation in April
2023, she was surprised to see that the claim asserted
Ms May had fallen on her
left side and left elbow causing neck pain because the incident report of the
fall said she had injured
her right knee and a diagram on the form contained a
marking on the right leg (and nowhere
cross-examination Ms Whitty said that the records of toolbox meetings she had
collated were records that had been logged into the
safety management system. Ms
Whitty may not attend a toolbox meeting.
taken to the records of the toolbox meetings Ms Whitty agreed with counsel that
there were gaps in the records, that is, months
where a meeting did not occur or
was not recorded and/or a record was not provided to her.
Whitty confirmed that there was no record of Ms May having sustained an injury
on or about 2 May 2022 in the relevant system records.
Whitty maintained the account in her affidavit that she was unaware Ms May was
asserting that she had sustained a work injury to
her neck and left shoulder
until 20 December 2022.
Trang Tran (Jenna Tran)
Tran is a Human Resources Business Partner employed by Aurora. Her affidavit
reiterates matters concerning Ms May’s employment
with Aurora described
elsewhere. The affidavit exhibits a large volume of documents.
cross-examination Ms Tran explained that she is not usually involved in workers
compensation issues. Ms Tran was asked whether
she had to deal with issues
concerning Michelle van Wyk. She said there were some mental health concerns in
relation to Ms van Wyk.
She was asked whether the issues related to alcohol and
she said that they did not. A series of questions were asked about Ms van
Ms Tran could not recall the detail of what happened and was not able to answer
the questions which appeared to be designed
to cast doubt about the character of
Ms van Wyk. When Ms Tran stated that Ms van Wyk had resigned, she was asked
whether her employment
had been terminated. Later, Ms Tran said that she
recalled there were performance concerns and mental health concerns in relation
to Ms van Wyk.
Tran stated that a work trial with Ms Mitchell should not have happened, and she
believed that it did not happen.
Tran was asked when Ms Mitchell ceased working for Aurora. In her affidavit she
said the date was 16 June 2023. She was shown an
employee separation certificate
dated 14 February 2023 which she had signed on 13 February 2023. The
certificate states that the
end date of employment was 1 January 2023.
Tran described the document Mr van Zyl had described as a timesheet as a roster
as it came from Deputy, a time and attendance software
Michelle van Wyk
van Wyk was employed by Aurora from 1 September 2020 to about 9 April 2023.
At the time of giving oral evidence by video link,
Ms van Wyk was working
as a fly-in fly-out dump truck operator for Thiess in the Western Australian
goldfields.
her affidavit, Ms van Wyk stated that Ms May was good to work with. She recalled
Ms May complaining to her about her neck and shoulder
at Landour Park. In oral
evidence Ms van Wyk explained that she left Landour Park on 30 May 2022 because
she was transferred back
to the neighbouring farm.
her affidavit, Ms van Wyk stated that she did not recall hearing about a fall of
the type Ms May described in May 2022 while she
was at Landour Park. She said if
there had been such a fall it would have been entered into the incident report
system. She said
Mr van Zyl was very strict about that.
van Wyk deposed that on 30 September 2024 she received a text message from Ms
May asking if they could talk. In the conversation
that followed, Ms May
described her claim to Ms van Wyk and said she needed evidence that her daughter
had started working at Landour
Park prior to 16 May 2022. There were further
texts as follows:
Beck, what dates do you want to confirm that Monique was at Landour?
Anything before the 16th of May 2022, cause she hadn't signed a contract yet but
was out there training with me.
van Wyk described the text messages exchanged between her and Ms May
verbatim in her affidavit. In the last such text, Ms van Wyk
last replied that
there was nothing about Ms Mitchell working at Landour Park before 16 May 2022
and wished Ms May all the best.
van Wyk looked back through her text messages to see if any of them suggested
that Ms Mitchell started training before she was
employed. Ms van Wyk found
a text from Ms May dated 28 April 2022 in which Ms May wrote that Ms
Mitchell was looking for work for
three days per week. After speaking with Mr
Potgieter, Ms van Wyk texted Ms May on 3 May 2022 and asked if Ms Mitchell was
interested in working on the farm. The response was positive.
of all relevant text message exchanges between Ms van Wyk and Ms May and Ms
Mitchell are exhibited to Ms van Wyk’s affidavit.
van Wyk maintained that Ms Mitchell did not work on the farm prior to 16 May
2022. She referred to Ms May’s texted comment
that Ms Mitchell had
prior experience in the work. Ms van Wyk pointed out that
Ms Mitchell’s comment that she was helping to
feed calves between 2
and 16 May 2022 did not make sense because there were no calves to feed at that
time of year. Calving did not
commence until later in the year.
van Wyk reiterated that the procedures and policies of Aurora would not have
permitted Ms Mitchell to perform work at Landour Park
prior to being
cross-examination Ms van Wyk remembered Mr Potgieter falling and injuring his
ribs. She said the fall took place in the dairy yard,
not in the dairy shed. She
disagreed with the proposition that by the end of May 2022 she was rarely at
Landour Park.
van Wyk was asked about mental health issues. She said she was suffering PTSD
from a traumatic marriage breakdown. She disagreed
that it affected her work and
that she was performance managed. She strongly disagreed that she was moved from
Landour Park as a
result. She denied turning up at work after having a few
drinks. She also denied that she had attendance issues. When the subject
mental state came up again, she explained that May 2022 was a few years after
the marriage breakdown but she thought of it
at the time of year. This exchange
DR SALU: One final question, and I’m obliged to put it. I suggest that
you’ve denied discussions with Rebecca May about
Monique coming on to the
dairy because you might need Aurora as a referee in the future. What do you say
WITNESS: Absolutely rubbish, because I am no longer in the dairy industry. I am
now in a totally different thing. I don’t need
Aurora Dairies.
her evidence Ms van Wyk recalled that she texted Mr Potgieter to advise him that
Ms Mitchell would be commencing her employment
with Aurora on 16 May 2022 so
payroll could be notified.
Medical evidence
Dr Ronald Wallingford
Ron Wallingford practices as a general practitioner at the Hawkins Clinic in
Mount Gambier. He produced two medical reports that
were admitted into
his first report, dated 4 December 2023, Dr Wallingford simply said he was
unable to help because the authority to release information
Ms May did not cover what was sought.
his second report, dated 16 January 2024, Dr Wallingford described chronic pain
associated with C6 and C7 nerve root compression
due to moderate severity
spondylosis of the C5/C6 and C6/C7 vertebral area. There was also a report of
headaches which correspond
to increased arm pain in 2023. Dr Wallingford stated
that the original presentation to him was 11 months after the stated date of
injury and he could not retroactively guess the impact and consequences of the
fall. He recorded that Ms May had no symptoms prior
to the fall. He thought
there was likely pre-existing spinal spondylosis. Dr Wallingford noted a history
of similar occasional shooting
pain down the left arm for more than one year
prior was given to Dr Adhikary. Dr Wallingford wrote that he saw Ms May for
after 26 March 2023. Radiculopathy was not found and he suggested that
the back be treated conservatively.
oral evidence Dr Wallingford confirmed that there was no record of Ms May
complaining of neck pain prior to June 2022. In cross-examination
he said that
Ms May’s presentation on 14 April 2023 was the first time he had seen her
He said that he did see her a week before
on 8 April 2023 at the Mount Gambier Hospital in relation to back pain. He
agreed that
the note he made was “Impression: mechanical back pain
secondary to back strain”.
He also agreed that the attendance on 14 April 2023 was primarily about back
pain although Ms May also raised her neck and arm pain
at that time.
Wallingford explained that the 2 May 2022 date of injury was arrived at because
Ms May said that her symptoms commenced 6 weeks
prior to her seeing Dr Adhikary
on 14 June 2022. He said the date could be plus or minus a few days from 2 May
2022 but did agree
that was the date Ms May described to him.
Wallingford agreed that the notes of Dr Adhikary and Mr Allen suggest that Ms
May did have neck symptoms prior to 2 May 2022. He
explained that when he said
otherwise, he meant consistent symptoms. He agreed that the effect of the notes
was that Ms May did have
symptoms consistent with a neck condition prior to 2
May 2022. He added that the prior symptoms were intermittent.
Associate Professor Andrew Zacest
Professor (AP) Zacest is a consultant neurosurgeon who provided a report dated
3 October 2024 in relation to Ms May. She
was referred to AP Zacest by Dr
Wallingford.
Zacest advised that the latest imaging of Ms May’s spine revealed maximal
foraminal stenosis at C5/6 and some at C6/7.
oral evidence AP Zacest said he assumed that Ms May’s neck and arm pain
worsened after the March 2023 injury. When the prior
history of left arm pain
was put to AP Zacest he said it was possible that what the medical imaging
revealed was a deteriorating
situation with the neck. He agreed that the
presentation may be purely degenerative and that such a scenario was equally as
as being a cause as the explanation given by Ms May. He also
agreed that the 2023 presentation was for a back injury.
was an objection to a question asked of AP Zacest. I accepted the evidence
and indicated that I would rule on the objection in these reasons.
The objection was to counsel for Ms May putting the March 2023
incident to
AP Zacest for the first time without first having sought his view in a report. I
allow the question because there was
limited time and opportunity to seek a
report. As will be seen, the assumptions that the question was based upon were
in any event.
Mr Paul Carney
Carney is a consultant neurosurgeon who has examined Ms May. In his 25 June 2024
report, Mr Carney wrote that Ms May described
sharp pain in the left side of her
neck, after the first fall, and persisting symptoms and altered sensation in the
left arm after
the March 2023 injury. Mr Carney considered that Ms May
sustained injuries on both dates. The injury was described as prolapse of
material into the foraminae.
Carney expressed concern about a possible bony abnormality affecting the C6
vertebra which might account for some of the symptoms.
oral evidence Mr Carney stated that he thought surgical intervention was
warranted. In cross-examination he was taken to the notes
of Dr Adhikary
and Mr Allen which suggest neck and neck related symptoms prior to 2 May 2022.
Mr Carney agreed that the findings
he viewed on the medical imaging could have
arisen from a cause other than the 2 May 2022 fall. He accepted that the Mount
Hospital discharge note suggested that the March 2023 injury Ms May
sought medical attention for was for her lower back, not her
neck. Mr Carney
also accepted that Dr Wallingford’s attendance note, made eight days
after the Mt Gambier Hospital visit, is
concerned with a back injury.
Mr Carney noted that the presentation to the Mount Gambier Hospital in
April 2023 included pain radiating
down the left leg, which was not part of her
presentation to him.
Associate Professor Brian Brophy
Brophy is a consultant neurosurgeon who prepared two reports in relation to Ms
his first report, dated 23 June 2023, AP Brophy set out Ms May’s history
of falling onto all fours, but more on the left
side, on 2 May 2022. He found
evidence of a compromised left C6 nerve root which was consistent with imaging
showing marked narrowing
of the C5/C6 foramen. Based on the history, AP Brophy
considered the fall appeared to have aggravated the C6 nerve root. He thought
C5/6 decompression and fusion should be considered.
a report dated 16 October 2023, AP Brophy reviewed some notes and records after
having been asked to do so. He noted Dr Adhikary’s
reference to pain in
the left arm for more than a year on 14 June 2022. Given that, he considered the
“incident of 2 May 2022
could only be seen at most as an aggravation of a
primarily degenerate
He considered that
any such aggravation should have settled within six months and the ongoing
problems, after that, would be attributable
to the underlying degenerative
oral evidence AP Brophy accepted that if there had been a permanent change in
capacity for work after the fall, that could point
to an aggravation of the
underlying degenerative condition.
submissions
for Ms May submitted that, contrary to the case of the Corporation and Aurora,
Ms May did not concoct a plan to claim compensation
for an incident which did
not happen so that the cost of the surgery she needs could be funded. Counsel
submitted that Dr Wallingford
told Ms May to claim
compensation.
explained the delay in making a claim was due to Ms May loving her job, not
wanting to make a claim and withholding that information
from doctors to not
jeopardise her employment because that is how she is
He submitted that Ms May
is not sophisticated and that she overstated some matters to make her point. The
comment was made in the
context of Ms May saying that some lies had been told
relation to the medical note in which Ms May said there was no trauma, counsel
submitted that she may have thought the arm pain
she had was due to striking her
elbow when she fell.
for Ms May submitted that the evidence of Ms Mitchell and Ms Redding
supports Ms May’s account. In comparison, he said
the evidence relied upon
by Aurora about toolbox meetings was unreliable. He said
Mr Potgieter’s fall was never the subject
of a toolbox meeting.
Mr van Zyl denied knowledge of any such injury. It followed that
Ms May’s fall in May 2022 may not have
been recorded.
was critical of the evidence of Mr van Zyl and Ms Tran. Mr van Zyl was unable to
produce his notes and Ms Tran’s affidavit
contained an acknowledged
for Ms May submitted that the March 2023 trailer lifting incident produced an
aggravation, exacerbation or deterioration of
the neck injury sustained on 2 May
2022. It was said that Dr Wallingford supported that view. Counsel submitted
ongoing incapacity
in relation to the neck resulted from the 2023 incident. That
was said to be supported by the note made on 14 April 2023.
Corporation’s submissions
written submissions, counsel for the Corporation submitted that the following
findings should be made:
incident, as described by the Applicant, as having occurred on 2 May 2022, never
incident, involving the Applicant tripping over a hose and grazing her right
knee, but suffering no other injury, occurred
on 20 July 2022.
incident, which involved the Applicant, did occur on 26 March 2022, but
only involved the Applicant receiving treatment for
her lumbar spine.
Applicant's symptoms of left C6 radiculopathy were pre-existing and symptomatic
well before 2 May 2022.
Applicant's symptoms of left C6 radiculopathy were not aggravated by any injury,
which the Applicant suffered during the
course of her employment with the Other
1.6. Around the
time of her GP appointment on 3 April 2023, the Applicant decided to make a
false claim about suffering a fall on
2 May 2022 (MN 14), so that the Applicant
would receive private neurosurgery as part of a workers compensation claim. This
having told Dr Lopa, on 3 April 2023, that her physiotherapist had
advised her to take “the surgical option” —
went through the chronology of events and submitted that Ms May’s
account is implausible. There is no record of Ms Mitchell
working at Aurora on
or around 2 May 2022. Ms May did not miss any time from work after the alleged
fall and did not seek any medical
attention for the fall. When she did next seek
medical attention, on 10 May 2022 in a tele-consultation, the consultation
mention the fall or a neck injury.
three lay witnesses called by Ms May all recanted their support for there being
a fall on 2 May 2022 while all the witnesses called
by Aurora continued to
maintain there was no incident on 2 May 2022.
submissions
for Aurora submitted that Ms May’s claim was concocted and the alleged May
2022 incident was a “complete
concoction”.
nothing to suggest that an incident happened and Ms May had already sought
medical advice about her neck and left arm symptoms.
Even if the incident
occurred as alleged, there is no evidence to suggest that it had any effect on
Ms May’s ability to work.
was submitted that Ms May cannot derive support from the evidence of Ms
Mitchell, Mr Amos and Ms Redding because they all said
that they may have their
dates wrong. To the extent that Ms Mitchell maintained that she witnessed a fall
in or about May 2022, counsel
submitted that Ms Mitchell was not present
and was put in the difficult position of trying to support her mother.
submitted that Ms van Wyk’s evidence should be accepted because she was
straightforward and had no reason to lie.
to the complaints made about the reliability of Aurora’s records, counsel
submitted that it does not affect the fundamentals
of the case or suggest that
there was a conspiracy to defeat a valid
Consideration
The 2022 incident
is not disputed that Ms May tripped and fell over a hose at work on 20 July
2022. If Ms May had thought the July fall happened
in May, that may explain the
differences between the parties, but it is not asserted there was any neck
injury in the July fall.
The factual disagreements in this case between Ms May,
and the Corporation and Aurora, go much further than mistaking the date on
an event occurred. Ms May contends there was a separate fall in May 2022. The
Corporation and Aurora submit that there was
no such fall.
Ms May and Ms Mitchell both maintain that that the fall occurred while Ms
Mitchell was working at Landour Park before being
employed by Aurora, on Ms
May’s case the fall must have occurred before 16 May 2022.
parties disagreed about the date or range of dates that should be considered in
trying to determine whether the fall occurred.
There were 10 business days
in May 2022 prior to 16 May 2022, Monday 2 May 2022 being the first of them.
Counsel for the Corporation
complained that the date on which Ms May alleged the
fall occurred changed during the life of the proceeding from 2 May 2022, to
or about 2 May 2022, to on a date prior to 16 May
The first variation, to on
or about 2 May 2022, was discussed when counsel for Ms May objected to some
questions in cross-examination
that were directed to 2 May 2022. He said that
Ms May’s evidence was that the fall occurred on or about 2 May
2022. Those words
were not used by Ms May, but she did say this in
cross-examination:
MR BIRCHALL: ... And by the first fall, you’re talking about the fall on 2
May ’22. Aren’t you?
WITNESS: Around that time, whenever it was. Yes.
MR BIRCHALL: Well, that’s what you mean by the first fall? Correct?
WITNESS: Yes.
stating that 2 May 2022 was the date of the fall in her first two affidavits, Ms
May deposed in her third affidavit that she
worked out the date at a
consultation with Dr Wallingford. At the consultation, Dr Wallingford told
Ms May about Dr Adhikary’s
note dated 14 June 2022, which records that her
left arm pain had worsened in the six weeks prior to the consultation. The
consultation
with Dr Adhikary was on 14 June 2022, six weeks and one day
after 2 May 2022. The note reads as
Pain in left arm
for more than a year
it was occasional shooting pain with tingling and numbness
tried to put up with it
for last 6 weeks symptoms getting worse
not getting any relief inspite [sic]of using Panadol and nurofen
using hot compression with no effect
Denies any trauma or injury
denies any chest pain/palpitation/Sob/headache/dizziness/blackouts
no migraine attack in last 6 months since she stopped taking depo-provera
Booked appointment with chiropractor next week
Injury Statement signed by Ms May on 28 April 2023 for the purposes of
presenting her compensation claim to the Corporation commences
in this way:
“Symptoms began on/around 02.05.2022. after a fall @
the words “on/around” support Ms May’s contention that she did
not intend to limit the date of injury to 2
May 2022, the words “after a
fall @ work” appear like they may have been added after the first part of
the entry was
made for two reasons. There is a full-stop after the date
01.05.2022 in a place where a full-stop is not needed if the other words
there originally and the words “after a fall” are written above the
words “@ work” and on a different
line to the rest of the entry. The
words look like they may have been fitted into what was written earlier.
parts of the Injury Statement do not assist Ms May’s case. She states that
she first attended the GP for treatment on
2 May 2022. There is no record of a
consultation on that day. In response to the question whether there were any
factors other than
work which had contributed to the injury the word
“no” is circled and the following is
handwritten:
the nerve impingement occurred only after the fall and the compression of my
elbow & shoulder into my neck.
I had no symptoms, pain or mobility issues or concerns prior to the incident
with the hose.
May’s history to Dr Adhikary on 14 June 2022 was that she had experienced
left arm pain for more than a year.
other important issues are Ms May’s failure to mention the fall to a
doctor for many months and her delay in making a claim
for compensation until 14
April 2023. Counsel for Ms May submitted that the delay in reporting the fall
was because Ms May loved
her job and was “entirely paranoid” about
lodging a claim for
compensation.
The submission was
based on Ms May’s evidence. She did not use the word paranoid but said she
was worried about losing her
job if she reported the injury. I accept that Ms
May enjoyed her job but not that she did not report the fall because she feared
she may lose her job. Ms May was asked why she would lose her job if she
reported the fall to a doctor. She said that if she told
a doctor she had been
injured at work, the doctor would be obliged to tell Aurora about the injury and
she would be obliged to make
a claim. The explanation does not make sense. Ms
May has made several claims for compensation in the past. The 20 July 2022 fall
was reported by her without any adverse consequences. Ms May took the rest of
the day off after the July 2022 fall. She lost no time
whatsoever to the alleged
fall of May 2022. When the July 2022 fall was discussed at a toolbox meeting, Ms
May spoke up about the
incident to the extent that she said Mr van Zyl became
annoyed at her. That behaviour is not consistent with an employee who is worried
Ms May did not explain why she belatedly mentioned the
alleged fall to Dr
Adhikary at a consultation on 20 December 2022.
May did not see a doctor after the alleged fall until 10 May 2022 when she
consulted Dr Amjad. The consultation note does not refer
to neck or left arm
symptoms nor does it mention a fall. Consultations in October and November 2022
do not mention a fall. When Ms
May consulted Dr Gulati and Dr Milne on 1 and 8
November 2022 respectively, each of them recorded neck and arm pain. The
consultation
with Dr Gulati recorded that Ms May raised a concern about the
associated pain as a
nerve damage in left arm
in lot of pain
had accident at 16 years of age
seeing a Chiropractor
keeping her awake at night
has tried Lyrica without any relief
deny use of any medications at the moment ( not taking any med out of her list
pins and needles also in hand
last weeks has worsened
no troubles with Rt side
also feels hand is getting weak
noted past history and medications
Milne made the following
necka nd [sic] arm pain
reduced rotation to left
reduced extension
grip strength 4/5 left hand 5/5 right
is affectign [sic] work - works at dairy for last 6 months
nil improvement with endep ir nsaids [sic]
for Ms May suggested that if she had hatched what he described as a
‘cunning plan’ to concoct an injury, as the
Corporation and Aurora
maintained, she would not have mentioned having a fall on 2 May 2022 because she
would receive weekly payments
for a longer period if the claim was based on the
2023 injury alone.
I suggested
to counsel that the submission assumed a level of understanding and
sophistication about claims which Ms May does not
describing how her pain developed on the day after the alleged fall in detail in
her first affidavit, Ms May’s evidence
was not clear. In her first affidavit, Ms May said that she had turned on the
milking hose in
a shed located within the dairy area and had turned to walk out
of the shed “back into the main area” when she tripped
and fell on
the milking hose.
She did not
state that Ms Mitchell was in the same area. In oral evidence Ms May said
that Ms Mitchell was in front of her and turned
to see her after the fall.
In her first affidavit, Ms Mitchell stated that she recalled Ms May “going
into another room inside
She stated that
“[w]hen mum was walking into this room, I could vaguely see her in my
peripheral vision and saw that she just
tripped on the
Contrary to Ms
Mitchell’s affidavit, Ms May’s affidavit states that she tripped on
the hose coming out of the room.
May and Ms Mitchell each deposed that there was a toolbox meeting in May 2022 at
which the subject of Ms May’s fall was raised.
Under cross-examination Ms
Mitchell said she that she did not remember the date of the meeting and agreed
that it could have been
in July or August
Mr Amos also volunteered
several times that he may have the date of Ms May’s fall wrong. The
evidence of Ms Mitchell and Mr
Amos does not support Ms May’s case as they
were anything but confident that the fall occurred on 2 May 2022 despite
to that in their affidavits. Ms Redding also said that she could
not be sure about the date of the fall and the toolbox meeting and
said the fall
could have been in July 2022.
May claimed that Mr Davey assisted her after the fall. Mr Davey denied that was
the case in relation to May 2022 but said that
he did assist Ms May after the 20
July 2022 fall. Mr Davey’s evidence was clear and concise and his
recollection of events
was very good. He impressed as someone who took his work
seriously. He attended at Landour Park at times without being rostered to
to see how things were going. He did not seek to be paid for such attendances. I
accept Mr Davey’s evidence and prefer
it to that of Ms May, Ms
Mitchell and Mr Amos on this issue. I am satisfied that Mr Amos was confusing or
conflating what occurred
in July 2022 when Ms May fell and Mr Davey assisted her
afterwards and lodged an incident report. I am satisfied that if Mr Davey
come across Ms May after a fall in May 2022, he would have assisted her and
would have completed an incident report.
are other issues with Ms May’s account. All the witnesses called by Aurora
gave evidence that Ms Mitchell did not perform
work for Aurora prior to her
commencing employment there on 16 May 2022. They also said that it was contrary
to company policy and
practice for someone to perform work for Aurora outside of
employment. It would be unusual for a national firm to allow someone to
it outside of employment and without any other written agreement. Doing so would
give rise to legal and reputational issues.
It was not suggested by Ms May or
any other witness that Aurora permitted anyone other than Ms Mitchell to
undertake a work trial
before commencing paid employment.
to Ms May’s attempt to discredit Ms van Wyk by asserting that she had a
problem with alcohol and “was drunk at
work all the
I accept Ms van
Wyk’s evidence. She was an impressive witness who had a good recall of
events. The text messages that passed
between her and Ms May, the
provenance of which was not challenged by Ms May, establish that Ms Mitchell was
not performing work
in any capacity for Aurora on 2 May 2022. It was not until 3
May 2022 that Ms van Wyk sent Ms May a text message to see if Ms Mitchell
still interested in working at Aurora as per their earlier exchange. That
evidence alone is enough to defeat the assertion that
a fall occurred on 2 May
2022. Ms May did not discover the text messages between her and Ms van Wyk
despite their obvious relevance.
accept Ms van Wyk’s evidence that Ms May told her that her neck and
shoulder had been sore for a while prior to May 2022.
The comment is consistent
with Ms May’s history to Dr Adhikary. Ms van Wyk commenced working at
Landour Park in February 2022
so the comment was likely made between February
and April 2022.
the extent that Ms Tran may have suggested that Ms van Wyk underwent performance
management, I do not accept that evidence in the
absence of documentary
corroboration. I accept Ms van Wyk’s evidence on the issue. Ms
Tran’s answers to questions on
this issue were tentative and defensive. Ms
Tran had been successfully challenged about the accuracy of some of her answers
the subject was raised. Ms Tran worked in Melbourne and had no day-to-day
involvement with Landour Park. It was apparent from her
evidence that she did
not appreciate what the day to day operation of Landour Park involved. I accept
Ms van Wyk’s evidence
that she was transferred to another Aurora farm at
the end of May 2022 and not pushed into leaving employment with Aurora as Ms May
implied. Ms May might have said what she did because Ms van Wyk ceased
working at Landour Park in May 2022. However, Ms van Wyk was
not dismissed. She
was transferred to run another Aurora farm. If she was drunk or drinking alcohol
at work or being performance
managed, it would be unusual to give her that
responsibility. Having heard Mr van Zyl give evidence, I doubt he would tolerate
of those behaviours. I am satisfied that Ms van Wyk was not demoted or
dismissed. To the extent of any conflict between the evidence
of Ms Tran and Ms
van Wyk, I prefer the evidence of Ms van Wyk. There is no support for Ms
May’s assertion that Ms van Wyk
attended work when drunk or that she drank
alcohol at work from any other witness. Ms Tran denied the assertion, and none
witnesses Ms May called, including her son and daughter, supported the
assertion. I find the assertion was invented by Ms May to
attempt to discredit
Ms van Wyk because her evidence was damaging to Ms May’s case.
for Ms May submitted that the lack of any evidence of a report of the fall and
injury sustained by Mr Potgieter indicated
that the shortcomings in
Aurora’s injury reporting system. Mr Potgieter was not called to give
evidence. It is not clear whether
his injury was recorded. It is clear that Mr
van Zyl did not know about Mr Potgieter’s injury, as counsel submitted,
is not surprising. Mr Potgieter may not have wanted to make a claim. Mr
van Zyl had oversight of all the rural properties operated
by Aurora in the
Mount Gambier region. He may not have been aware of the granular detail of what
took place at Landour Park.
was also submitted that Mr van Zyl had destroyed his notes of safety meetings.
Mr van Zyl said that he did not destroy his notebook.
When that was put to Mr
van Zyl he said there was no destruction and he did not have a notebook as such
but made instead made notes
everywhere”.
pointed out that Mr van Zyl’s affidavit described a notebook and that Mr
van Zyl had said that his note of the toolbox
meeting had been disposed of.
were parts of Mr van Zyl’s evidence that were based on surmise and
assumption. I formed the view that his note taking
was haphazard and incomplete.
Ms Tran’s evidence was also unsatisfactory in some respects as already
discussed. The evidence
of Mr Davey and Ms van Wyk was very good, and much
better than that of Ms May and Ms Mitchell. Mr Davey and Ms van Wyk
to day at Landour Park. Mr van Zyl and Ms Tran did not.
May’s complaints about the shortcomings in the evidence of some of the
witnesses called by Aurora would assume significance
if I had some confidence in
her evidence and the evidence of Ms Mitchell. For the reasons given, I do not
have that confidence and
am not satisfied that Ms May fell over a hose and
injured her neck or left arm on or about 2 May 2022 or on any other date.
was a fall in July 2022 but Ms May does not assert that it injured
her neck or left arm.
reject the evidence of Ms May and Ms Mitchell that Ms Mitchell was present at
the time of, or very soon after, the alleged fall
of May 2022. The Corporation
submitted that Ms May contacted Ms van Wyk about her record of events and made a
claim after Dr Han,
the Melbourne neurosurgeon that Ms May was referred to, told
her that he could not see her in his private practice because she had
insufficient health insurance. It is not necessary to make a finding that there
was collusion or concoction. There may be another
explanation for what occurred.
However, as collusion and concoction are possible explanations for what has
occurred, I will consider
the degree of satisfaction required to make findings
in a case like this having regard to
Briginshaw v
concerned an allegation of adultery made in a petition for divorce. The
Court explained that in some cases, while the civil standard
of proof applies, a
higher degree of satisfaction may exist in relation to making certain findings.
Neat Holdings Pty Ltd v Karajan Holdings Pty
the High Court
explained the
The ordinary standard of proof required of a party who bears the onus in civil
litigation in this country is proof on the balance
of probabilities. That
remains so even where the matter to be proved involves criminal conduct or
fraud. On the other hand, the strength
of the evidence necessary to establish a
fact or facts on the balance of probabilities may vary according to the nature
is sought to prove. Thus, authoritative statements have often been
made to the effect that clear or cogent or strict proof is necessary
‘where so serious a matter as fraud is to be
Statements to that
effect should not, however, be understood as directed to the standard of proof.
Rather, they should be understood
as merely reflecting a conventional perception
that members of our society do not ordinarily engage in fraudulent or criminal
and a judicial approach that a court should not lightly make a finding
that, on the balance of probabilities, a party to civil litigation
guilty of such conduct. (Most citations omitted)
evidence supports rejecting Ms May’s account that she injured her neck and
left arm in a fall at work in or around May 2022.
Ms May was an unreliable and
unsatisfactory witness who not infrequently appeared to invent answers and
maintain propositions that
were not tenable. It is clear that Ms May reported
neck and left arms symptoms prior to May 2022. However she claimed the medical
records were unreliable and had been tampered with. There is no basis for that
allegation. The far more likely explanation is that
her neck condition pre-dated
the alleged fall of May 2022 which I have found was the case. The instance where
her counsel conceded
a factual issue that she would not concede is another
example of her maintaining an untenable proposition.
following findings satisfy me to a standard higher than the balance of
probabilities that Ms May’s claim that she had a
fall at work on or about
2 May 2022 that caused injury to her neck and left arm should be
May had neck and left arm symptoms prior to May 2022. I reject
Ms May’s evidence that she did not report injuring her neck
a doctor for fear of losing her job for the reasons given above. That was an
invention. Ms May told Dr Adhikary about an
alleged fall on 20 December
2022 and her history to doctors in relation to the work injuries she had in
February and March 2023 show
she was not reluctant to report work injuries.
May did not mention injuring her neck or left arm from a fall in May 2022 to
anyone at Aurora other than her son and daughter and
potentially Ms Redding. The
three all admitted that they may be confused about dates. I find that
Ms Mitchell, Mr Amos and Ms Redding
all conflated what Ms May said about an
alleged fall in May 2022 with her July 2022 fall. The discrepancies between the
of Ms Mitchell and Ms May about the circumstances of the alleged fall
cast further doubt on their evidence.
before Ms May gave notice of the injury and made a claim, she asked Ms van Wyk
when Ms Mitchell commenced working for Aurora.
When the date Ms van Wyk provided
did not suit the date Ms May had arrived at with Dr Wallingford, Ms May told Ms
van Wyk that Ms
Mitchell performed unpaid work before commencing her
employment. Ms van Wyk disagreed. I accept the evidence of Mr Davey and
Wyk that Ms Mitchell did not commence performing any work for Aurora
on 2 May 2022 or on any date before her employment commenced
on 16 May 2022.
Ms May told Dr Adhikary on 14 June 2022 that there was no trauma or injury that
had caused her neck symptoms she was telling
The 26 March 2023 incident
for Ms May submitted there is no doubt that the trailer lifting incident of 26
March 2023 occurred. He appeared to accept
that the incident would assist Ms
May’s case if it materially aggravated the neck and left arm
which he said it did.
Counsel submitted that Ms May ended up attending hospital with her lower
back symptoms and with a flare up
of neck pain. It was submitted that Ms
May’s incapacity for work results from the second
Corporation submitted that the 26 March 2023 incident resulted in a temporary
injury to Ms May’s lower back and nothing
May reported the 26 March 2023 incident to Amy Whitty on 28 March 2023. In
the report Ms Whitty recorded that Ms May had done something
to her “left
shoulder neck area and now have pain and a shock sensation in that
On 20 February 2023
Ms May had reported to her GP that she worked on a farm and a calf had
headbutted her between her legs with a
slight graze being the
May’s consultation with Dr Lopa on 3 April 2023 records the presence of C6
radiculopathy and
-Experiencing
left sided neck pain [sic] along with left UL pain for couple of months
-Reported some tingling/numbness
-Also recently pain in left lower limb
-Had CT guided steroid injection at C5/6 3 mo back with some improvement
-Recently pain getting worse
-Ref was sent to Neurosurgeon in past however as didnt have private health
insurance couldnt see-> waiting for another one in
-Saw physiotherapist and was advised to take surgical opinion
8 April 2023 Ms May attended the Mount Gambier Hospital Emergency Department.
The principal diagnosis made was: “Sprain and
strain of lumbosacral
[joint] [ligament].”
PC, which I take to mean presenting complaint, was: “Lower back
Below that the
HOPC, which I take to mean history of presenting complaint, was stated to
Lifted heavy object ( Trailer ) on to the ute and experienced pain in the left
shoulder and back
Went to see the GP and took a few days off work
description of the radiology taken on 25 May 2023 follows the note. Presumably
that part of the entry was added to after the consultation.
May saw Dr Wallingford again on 14 April 2023. He recorded “chronic left
neck pain with radiculopathy” and “[a]cute
lumbo-sacral”.
May also lodged her claim for compensation on 14 April 2023.
May claims that her neck and left arm symptoms were aggravated in the 26 March
2023 incident. The Corporation contends otherwise
and that the claimed
aggravation is part of Ms May’s scheme to fund the neck surgery she
required by making the claim.
find that Ms May presented to doctors in April 2023 because of the lower back
strain she had on 26 March 2023. However, Ms May also
mentioned her neck and
left arm symptoms. It is possible that the lower back strain may have aggravated
the neck and left arm symptoms
but for the reasons that follow, I find that any
aggravation was temporary and does not produce any entitlement to any
compensation.
May’s cervical spine condition pre-existed her employment with Aurora. As
there was no fall and no work-related injury or
aggravation to the pre-existing
neck condition in or about May 2022, Ms May must prove that the March 2023
incident aggravated or
exacerbated her neck and left arm symptoms to an extent
that creates an entitlement to weekly payments.
May had been told that surgical intervention might be required to treat her neck
and left arm symptoms well before March 2023.
On 8 November 2022, Dr Milne
recorded that a corticosteroid injection should be tried. His note reads,
“if not improvingthen
[sic] neurosurgery review of cord compression +/-
disc extraction”.
12 December 2022 Dr Lopa wrote a referral letter to Dr Han, a Melbourne
neurosurgeon. On 20 December 2022 Ms May was teary during
her consultation with
Dr Adhikary when recounting her neck and left arm symptoms and the
difficulty they were causing her.
to the submission made on her behalf, Ms May had an incapacity for work by at
least the latter part of 2022, and quite possibly
prior to May 2022. Ms Redding
assisted Ms May with some of her tasks by late 2022. Ms May submitted
certificates stating she was
not fit for her normal duties in the latter part of
2022. Steroid injections and medication had failed to relieve the symptoms.
was under active consideration. Ms May was not fit to perform her normal
duties by no later than 1 November 2022.
May saw Dr Wallingford about the 26 March 2023 incident on 14 April 2023.
She stated that she was “coping ok”, but
over the weekend her pain
spontaneously increased.
find that the pain Dr Wallingford was describing in that section of his
note was Ms May’s lower back pain. The comments that
follow pertain to the
back. However, in the next paragraph, and commencing with “2)”,
Dr Wallingford describes continuing
neck pain and pins and
His impression of
the neck presentation was a flare up of C6 cervical pain with radiculopathy. He
advised that a repeat CT guided
nerve root injection should be performed and
that a neurosurgeon should conduct a review. He described contacting a claims
agent as the injury was “work cover
the extent that Dr Wallingford and Mr Carney may have suggested that the March
2023 incident gave rise to an incapacity for work
because it aggravated Ms
May’s underlying neck condition, they based that view on Ms May’s
history. For the reasons already
given, I am not prepared to rely on that
history. Both doctors were told, and accepted, that there had been a neck injury
2022 that was aggravated in March 2023. I have found that no neck injury
occurred in or around May 2022 and as said, the evidence
shows there was an
incapacity for work and a need for surgery before the March 2023 incident. I am
not satisfied that there was any
aggravation or exacerbation of Ms May’s
neck and left arm symptoms as a result of lifting a trailer in the course of her
on 26 March 2023.
make the following orders:
decision of the respondent dated 4 August 2023 rejecting the applicant’s
claim for compensation dated 14 April 2023 is confirmed.
parties have liberty to apply to seek any further order.
Exhibit T1, Trial Book (TB),
Affidavit of Rebecca May, 15 December 2023 [85] (First affidavit).
Ibid [92.1].
Tr 120, 33-45; Tr 121,
Ibid [93.1].
Ibid [93.2].
Ibid [112].
Ibid [117].
Ibid [118]-[119].
Ibid [189].
Ibid [191].
Ibid [193].
Exhibit A1, Affidavit of
Rebecca May, 29 October 2024 [10.1].
Tr 21, 35-38.
Tr 23, 36-40.
Tr 37, 21-41.
Tr 40, 23-42.
First affidavit [118].
Tr 54, 18-25.
Tr 70, 1-31.
Tr 75, 31-35.
Tr 76, 5-35.
First affidavit [128].
Tr 117, 12-44; Tr 118,
Tr 132, 37.
Tr 197, 42-45; Tr 198,
Tr 218, 24.
Tr 247, 40-45; Tr 248,
Tr 242, 27-28.
Tr 246, 38.
Tr 246, 40 – 247,
Tr 265, 21-22.
Tr 269, 6-19.
Tr 277, 24.
Tr 279, 22-45; Tr 280,
Exhibit A2, Affidavit of
Cassie Redding, 14 October 2024 [7].
Tr 324, 31-34.
Tr 345, 35-44.
TB, Affidavit of James
Davey, 20 March 2024 [6]-[11].
Tr 411, 36-39.
TB, Affidavit of Amy Whitty,
13 March 2024, annexure ALW-12, 406.
Ibid annexure ALW-13, 408.
Ibid 330 [70].
Ibid 333 [87] and annexure
ALW-9, 394.
Exhibit OP2, Affidavit of
Michelle van Wyk, 11 November 2024 [23]-[24].
Tr 510, 10-16.
Tr 291, 11-16.
Tr 560, 39-42; 561,
Tr 560, 18-22.
Tr 553, 4-5.
Tr 586, 25-32.
Tr 24, 25-32.
Exhibit R1, 5.
Tr 559, 36.
Exhibit R1, 7.
Tr 560, 24-42.
First affidavit [89].
TB, Affidavit of Monique
Mitchell, 15 December 2023 172 [23].
Tr 384, 40-45.
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
[1992] HCA 66
Ibid [2] per Mason CJ,
Brennan, Deane and Gaudron JJ.
Rejfek v McElroy
[1965] HCA 46
(1965) 112 CLR 517
Tr 577, 2-10.
Tr 577, 38-44.
Exhibit R1, 13.
Ibid 48-50 at 48.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (483 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter