URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAERDC/2025/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:57:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
REGIONAL BILLBOARD CO PTY LTD v COUNCIL ASSESSMENT PANEL AT RURAL CITY OF MURRAY BRIDGE [2025] SAERDC 19 (2 October 2025)
ENVIRONMENT, RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT COURT OF SOUTH
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
REGIONAL BILLBOARD CO PTY LTD v COUNCIL ASSESSMENT PANEL AT
RURAL CITY OF MURRAY BRIDGE
[2025] SAERDC 19
Judgment of Commissioner Dawson
2 October 2025
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING - PLANNING - DEVELOPMENT ASSESSMENT AND
Appeal against a decision of the Assessment Manager, affirmed on review to
the Council Assessment Panel at the Rural City of Murray
Bridge, to refuse
planning consent to an application for freestanding advertising. Size, scale
and nature of the proposed advertisement
and the resultant visual impact within
the streetscape and locality were considered. Policy relevant to advertising
within the Employment
Zone, various other zones and General Development Policy
section of the Planning and Design Code was considered.
Consideration given to the treatment of third-party advertising within the
Code and whether such forms of advertising differ in their
impact from
first-party advertisements. Question of whether advertising is a land use was
considered.
Held: Appeal dismissed. Visual impact of the proposal will be too great
within the locality, irrespective of the content of the advertisements.
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
and Design Code Version 2024.4 – 29/02/2024.
, referred to.
Pergolas of Distinction v Assessment Manager at the City of Charles Sturt
[2024] SAERDC 28
Geber Super Pty Ltd v Barossa Assessment Panel
[2023] SASC 154
Rymill Park Apartments Pty Ltd v Rymill House Foundation Pty
[2023] SASC 107
Vikhlyaev v City of West Torrens Assessment Manager
[2023] SAERDC 1
Keast v City of Marion
[1999] SAERDC 74
Centofanti Pty Ltd v City of Port Adelaide Enfield
[2009] SAERDC 8
of Gawler v Impact Investment Corporation Pty Ltd
[2007] SASC 356
Neon Ltd v West Torrens City Corporation
(1982) 29 SASR 260
Holdings Pty Ltd v Presiding Member of the Metro Inner-South Joint Development
Assessment Panel
[2023] WASAT 97
Keast v City of Salisbury
City of West Torrens v McDonald’s Properties (Australia) Pty
[1985] SASR 467
Adspace Group Pty Ltd v City of Marion
OOH! Media Assets Pty Ltd v City of Norwood, Payneham and St
[2018] SAERDC 20
, considered.
REGIONAL BILLBOARD CO PTY LTD v COUNCIL ASSESSMENT PANEL AT
RURAL CITY OF MURRAY BRIDGE
[2025] SAERDC 19
THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING JUDGMENT:
their name suggests Regional Billboard Co Pty Ltd (the
and manage third-party ‘billboard’ advertisements, primarily within
regional areas. They sought approval for
the installation of a freestanding
advertising hoarding at 211 Adelaide Road, on the south western approach into
Murray Bridge (the
The proposal was refused by the Assessment Manager of the Rural City of Murray
Bridge, which was subsequently affirmed upon review
by the Council Assessment
) and is now the subject of this
primary contention before the Court is the visual impact of the proposal.
Secondary considerations include the relevance and
impact of the proposed
third-party content of the advertisement and whether a third-party advertisement
is a separate and distinct
use of land.
size, nature and location of the proposed advertisement has been considered in
respect to its visibility, impact upon the locality
and potential to result in
clutter or untidiness. I have formed the view that regardless of the content,
the size and location of
the advertisement will visually dominant the locality.
On this basis it does not satisfy the relevant policy of the zone or the General
Development Policy Advertisements section and should be
Subject Land
Land is situated in the Employment Zone within the
Planning and Design
Land is a rectangular shaped allotment (except for a minor corner cutoff),
located on the north eastern corner of the intersection
of Adelaide Road and
Cynthia Court, Murray Bridge.
Land contains a single storey commercial building in the north western corner
abutting Cynthia Court with an open, informal car
park located in front of the
building, accessed from and abutting Adelaide Road. The Land is used as a bulky
goods outlet for the
display and sale of waterski and wakeboard equipment and
accessories.
Land is unfenced with minimal landscaping along a portion of the Cynthia Court
frontage forward of the building. Signage advertising
the bulky goods use is
located upon the parapet of the building facing Adelaide Road with additional
advertising/images covering
the front windows.
Mark Thomson and Mr Greg Vincent, both experienced planning consultants,
prepared written statements and gave oral evidence to
assist the Court. The
localities identified by both experts are similar, having been based
predominately on the visibility of the
proposed advertisement. Mr
Thomson’s locality extends approximately 300 metres to the east and west
along Adelaide Road, whilst
Mr Vincent’s extends only 215 metres to the
west. Mr Thomson’s locality also extends to the rear boundary of the
on the southern side of Adelaide Road, whilst Mr Vincent only
incorporated the front yards and façades of those properties.
the general extent of the locality detailed by Mr Vincent but would extend it
approximately 215 metres to the east (the
same as the western extent adopted by
Mr Vincent), noting that the minor differences between the two localities have
no material
impact on the matter.
noted by the experts the locality contains three areas of distinct character;
the commercial properties along the northern side
of Adelaide Road, the
predominately residential land uses along the southern side of the road and the
intervening landscaped open
space/drainage reserve between the primary portion
of Adelaide Road and the secondary ‘service’ road.
commercial area on the northern side of Adelaide Road consists of low scale
commercial buildings of lightweight construction.
The buildings are
predominantly setback from property boundaries and the road reserve with open
car parking located within the front
setbacks. The properties are generally used
for bulky goods land uses with examples of light industry and motor repair
Advertising is predominately applied to building façades,
particularly the front parapets, with some examples of freestanding
advertising
hoardings located forward of buildings.
residential area on the southern side of the locality consists of single storey
detached dwellings constructed on original allotments.
Tourist accommodation in
the form of a motel/motor lodge is located on the corner of Adelaide Road and
New Era Avenue.
Road is a state-maintained arterial road connecting the centre of Murray Bridge
to the east with the freeway to the west.
The Average Annual Daily Traffic
volumes are estimated at 14,100
The road reserve is
approximately 60 metres in width containing the two-lane arterial road, the
landscaped reserve (approximately
27.5 metres wide) and the two lane, locally
maintained service road.
Land and allotments on the northern side of Adelaide Road are located within the
Employment Zone, which extends into the centre
of the linear reserve. All the
properties on the southern side of Adelaide Road are located within the Suburban
Neighbourhood Zone.
Thomson formed the view that the locality, on average across its extent,
displayed a “
reasonably pleasant
did not assign an overall character to the locality on account of the level of
variance in amenity across the three distinct
areas that he had
identified.
concur with both experts that the level of amenity experienced across the
locality varies, with a greater level experienced within
the landscaped median
and residential area as opposed to the commercial strip and arterial road
portion of Adelaide Road. However,
I agree with Mr Thomson that the overall
character and level of amenity experienced within the locality can be distilled
separate character and experience of the component parts. Overall, I
find that the locality displays a medium level of amenity, influenced
ordered appearance and well-maintained nature of the landscaped median, but
tempered by the level of traffic upon Adelaide
Road and the average to
acceptable appearance of the commercial
properties.
Terminology
have considered the relevant terminology as defined within Section 3 of the
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
Advertising
hoarding is defined as a “
structure for the display of an advertisement
or advertisements
”. I have taken this term to entail the support
structure, in this instance being the two columns, and internal framing which
accommodates an advertisement.
Advertisement
is defined as an
“advertisement or sign that is visible from a street,
road or public place or by passengers carried on any form of public
. The Macquarie Dictionary defines advertisement in a
broader sense covering all forms of advertising being
“any device or
public announcement, as a printed notice in a newspaper, a commercial film on
television, a neon sign, etc.,
designed to attract public attention, bring in
custom, etc.”
definition of advertisement within the Act includes a sign. Whilst there is some
overlap in the general use of the terms advertisement
and sign, the common use
of sign, in my view, is not only to describe advertisements but also
directional, traffic and warning signs.
This is reflected in the Macquarie
Dictionary definition of a sign being
“an inscribed board, space, etc.,
serving for information, advertisement, warning, etc., on a building, along a
street, or the
Therefore signs may seek to promote a business or service, but they may also
serve a different purpose in directing or warning people,
and if freestanding
would generally incorporate the structure upon which they are affixed.
Advertisements
can promote services and products offered or sold by businesses on the site of
the advertisement, in which case they
are first-party advertisements. They can
also promote services and products to the public that are not available on the
site of the
advertisement, which are third-party advertisements.
Thomson used the term ‘billboard’ when referring to the proposal. He
defined a billboard as a large third-party advertisement
whereby there was a
commercial agreement to display the
advertisements.
is not a term that is defined within the Act or the Code or used within the Code
policy but would appear to be the most
apt description of the
The proposal
Appellant seeks to construct a freestanding advertising hoarding within the
south eastern corner of the Land adjoining the eastern
boundary and Adelaide
The hoarding will support two advertisements; a digital LED
display on the western face and a static display on the eastern face.
proposal consists of both an advertising hoarding and advertisements combined
within the one structure, for ease I will refer
to the proposed structure as
the digital and static advertising displays will be used to promote goods and
services not limited to those currently offered
upon the Land. As such both
proposed advertisements are third-party advertisements.
Sign has an overall height of 4.95 metres, a length of 8 metres and depth of 1.2
metres. The display faces on both sides measure
2 metres high and 8 metres wide
resulting in a display area of 16 square metres per side. A 950mm high skirting
board is located
underneath the display area on each side.
Appellant proposes several operational restrictions upon the use of the LED
screen/digital display including a minimum display
time for images, almost
instantaneous changing of images, limiting screen brightness and no animation or
the flashing or scrolling
Appellant contends that the proposal also seeks a partial change in use of the
Land, for that portion upon which the Sign is
to be located, from the existing
bulky goods use to advertisement, particularly third-party
advertisement.
The CAP refute
that the proposal includes a change in use on the basis that there is no
separate land use that can be attributed
advertisements.
Issues in dispute
primary dispute between the parties is the visual impact of the proposal.
Evidence was heard in relation to the size, location
and nature of the
advertising displays and the potential impact and level of prominence of the
Sign within the locality.
Appellant put to the Court that the locality was “
” and that the Sign, whilst it will be visible, would not be
visually dominant within such a setting, particularly when viewed
from the edges
of the locality identified by both
It was also contended
that the third-party nature of the advertising upon the Sign did not result in
any greater visual impact or
clutter but rather it would present as more
appealing and better maintained than other advertisements within the locality.
submitted that third-party advertisements were not precluded by the
policies within the Code.
CAP’s primary argument is that the Sign will be visually dominant on
account of its size, scale and digital format given
the character of the
locality. The CAP’s secondary argument is that third party advertisements
are not supported by the Code.
in relation to the illumination and general operation of the digital element of
the Sign, in relation to dwell time, automatic
shutdown etc. are not in
this basis the primary questions to be determined by the Court are whether the
Sign will be visually dominant and the potential
impact of the proposed
third-party advertisements.
Relevant Code Policy
have had regard to those Code policies identified within
Applicable Policies for Performance Assessed Development
of the Employment
Zone for the development of an
advertisement.
I have also had
regard to the Desired Outcomes (
) associated with the Performance
) identified within Table 3.
respect of policies not listed within Table 3, I have taken the approach
outlined within my judgement in
Pergolas of
Distinction v Assessment Manager at the City of Charles
This approach drew on
the judgement of his Honour Justice Blue in
Super Pty Ltd v Barossa Assessment Panel
. His Honour found that
the reference to
‘relevant provisions of the Planning Rules’
within Section 102(1)(a)(i) of the Act
‘plainly means all relevant
provisions and not merely those that might be produced by the PlanSA computer on
an enquiry under
In this matter
the polices referenced in
‘produced by the PlanSA
are contained in the Authority’s book of documents,
being the policies identified in Table 3 as the relevant policies for the
development of an advertisement on the
note is the absence of Employment Zone PO1.1 (under the heading
Land Use and
) from the policies listed within Table 3. The Appellant, in
arguing that the proposal constituted a partial change in use, put to
that the omission of PO 1.1 from Table 3 was an error given that
‘Advertisement’ is listed in the associated
Desired Performance
1.1 as a desired form of development in the
The CAP submitted that the
proposal did not constitute a change in use and the omission of PO 1.1 was a
deliberate decision made
by the drafters of the
the guidance in
I consider PO 1.1 to be a relevant policy within
the Code (along with the associated DPF) from which some guidance and context
be drawn within the assessment of the proposal.
established that the assessment of a performance assessed
development is to be undertaken against all relevant provisions within
there is still a need to interpret, balance and weigh the application of the
various policies within the assessment, as
identified by her Honour Justice
Rymill Park Apartments Pty Ltd v Rymill House Foundation Pty
regard to the nature and form of the development, the issues in dispute and the
evidence tendered, the following Code policies
are relevant to the assessment of
Desired Outcome (DO) 1
A diverse range of low-impact light industrial, commercial and business
activities that complement the role of other zones accommodating
significant
industrial, shopping and business activities.
Distinctive building, landscape and streetscape design to achieve high visual
and environmental amenity particularly along arterial
roads, zone boundaries and
public open spaces.
Performance Outcome (PO) 1.1
A range of employment-generating light industrial, service trade, motor
repair and other compatible businesses servicing the local
community that do not
produce emissions that would detrimentally affect local amenity.
Desired Performance Feature (DPF) 1.1
Development comprises one or more of the following:
a) Advertisement
b) Consulting room
c) Indoor recreation facility
d) Light industry
e) Motor repair station
g) Place of worship
h) Research facility
fuel outlet
j) Service trade premises
m) Telecommunications facility
n) Training facility
o) Warehouse.
Freestanding advertisements are not visually
dominant within the locality.
Freestanding advertisements:
a) do not exceed 6m in height above natural ground level
b) do not have a face that exceeds 8m
General Development Policies (
Advertisements
Advertisements and advertising hoardings are appropriate to context,
efficient and effective in communicating with the public, limited
in number to
avoid clutter, and do not create hazard.
Advertisements and/or advertising hoardings are of a scale and size
appropriate to the character of the locality.
Proliferation of advertisements is minimised to avoid visual clutter and
untidiness.
No more than one freestanding advertisement is displayed per occupancy.
Advertisements are limited to information relating to the lawful use of land
they are located on to assist in the ready identification
of the activity or
activities on the land and avoid unrelated content that contributes to visual
clutter and untidiness.
Advertisements contain information limited to a lawful existing or proposed
activity or activities on the same site as the advertisement.
considering the proposal against the relevant policies I have had regard to Part
1 of the Code which states that performance outcomes
designed to facilitate assessment
’. With respect to any DPF associated
with a PO, I have had regard to them as previously determined by this Court and
the Supreme
Court; not as policy against which a proposal is to be assessed but
as a guide to the construction of the associated
I note that Desired Outcomes are not policies against which a development is to
be assessed but may inform the
‘consideration of the relevance and
application of a performance outcome, or assist in assessing the merits of the
development
against the applicable performance outcomes
collectively’.
noted above the issues in dispute are focused on the visual impact of the Sign
and the impact, and treatment within the Code,
of third-party advertising. I
have considered the arguments presented by the parties as they relate to those
two topics.
Visual impact
assessing the potential visual impact of the Sign I have considered its overall
size, nature/digital format and proposed siting
upon the Land, along with the
nature and amenity of the locality.
Sign has an overall height of approximately 5 metres and a face area of
approximately 16 square metres on each side. Employment
Zone DPF 6.1 seeks that
freestanding advertisements do not exceed 6 metres in height and have a face
area not exceeding 8 square
metres. The proposal satisfies the DPF in respect of
the total height but exceeds the face area, which the experts agreed applied
individually to each side of the Sign.
CAP submitted that the sign was ‘
significantly in excess of the only
quantitative criteria in the Code
’, being double the area noted in the
The CAP noted the views of
Commissioner Rumsby in
Vikhlyaev v City of West Torrens Assessment
Vikhlyaev) where it was said that a
quantum departure from a numerical value in a DPF could be considered as a flag
to the relevant
Appellant noted that the numerical criteria within the DPF referenced in
was specific to the subject land of that appeal, being a
Technical and Numerical Variation (TNV), as opposed to the DPF in this matter
which applies to freestanding advertising in the Employment Zone across the
State. They also highlighted the Court of Appeal decision
Adelaide Hills
Council Assessment Manager v Parkins
[2023] SASCA 66
, determined after
which in their view espoused an approach whereby the DPF was
not disregarded but ultimately plays only a minor part in the assessment
the relevant PO.
have had regard to the quantitative criteria within DPF 6.1 and the exceedance
of the face area by the proposal. I concur with
the Appellant that ultimately
the assessment lies against the relevant PO, being PO 6.1 which seeks that
freestanding advertisements are not visually dominant within the
Appellant did not shy away from the fact that the Sign would be the largest
freestanding advertisement within the locality. It
was contended that it would
be comparable to the freestanding advertisement at 197-199 Adelaide Road,
approximately 145 metres to
the east, which was measured by Mr Vincent at 4.4
metres in height, with an area of approximately 13 square metres per side.
Appellant acknowledged that the purpose of any advertisement was to be seen and
whilst the Sign would be visible, they contend
that this was not the test. PO
6.1 specifically seeks to limit freestanding advertisements that are
visually dominant within the locality’.
This is clearly a
subjective test, one which the Appellant says the proposal satisfies based upon
Mr Vincent’s consideration
of the existing built form, signage and general
character of the locality.
experts agreed that the test was not whether the Sign was inconsistent with
other signage in the locality or was prominent or
noticeable, it is whether it
would be a dominant element of the
The nature of the
locality is an important aspect of the assessment and is given further
consideration below.
the physical size of the Sign, it will be the largest freestanding advertisement
within the locality, based on display
area. It will be shorter than the Repco
sign, approximately 25 metres to the east, which is approximately 6.5 metres in
height. The
Repco sign however has a significantly smaller display area than the
proposed Sign.
Sign also consists of a skirting board along the bottom edge of both display
areas, adding approximately 7 square metres (per
side) of additional structure.
Whilst the skirting board will be of a dark colour to reduce its visibility it
will add to the Sign’s
overall scale and visual impact.
Sign is 1200mm in depth to accommodate the LED display screen. This is not an
inconsequential amount and will increase its visual
impact, particularly when
viewed from an oblique angle and from directly in front of the Land. All
freestanding signs in the locality
are of a substantially narrower profile,
generally consisting of sheet metal signs or lightboxes and tubular metal
support framing.
Keast v City of Marion
(Keast) determined that the primary issue
when considering a freestanding third-party advertisement was the size, height,
of the advertisement.
Overall, the size of the Sign is clearly larger than the existing freestanding
advertisements within the locality. The width and
total display area, along with
the skirting board and depth of the Sign not only differ markedly from other
advertisements within
the locality but are of such a scale that the Sign will be
a prominent element within the streetscape.
the Sign is of a significant scale, consideration must be given to the nature of
the Sign, its siting upon the Land and the
character of the locality to
determine whether on balance it is visually dominant.
CAP contends that the nature of the Sign, consisting of an LED digital display
on the western face, will result in a greater
level of prominence and impact
than a non-digital display. Mr Thomson formed the view that the LED display is
likely to cause it to be more visually dominant than equivalent size
advertisement which is not
illuminated’
the limited number of illuminated freestanding signs in the locality, having
visited the Land and locality in the evening.
The parties agreed that the Sign
would be the first digital advertisement within the locality.
Appellant noted that several advertisements, including those upon building
façades, within the locality are floodlit in
a manner which makes them
prominent within the streetscape at night-time. The Appellant submitted that the
illuminance levels of
the LED component of the Sign are to be controlled and
automatically adjusted throughout the day and evening (no details were provided
in relation to the illumination of the static sign). On this basis they contend
that the proposal will have no greater impact than
other externally illuminated
advertisements. In relation to the illuminance of the Sign the Appellant
repeated their position that
attracting attention does not equate to visual
accept that the assessment sought by the Code policy is not whether a person
within the locality, or passing through it along Adelaide
Road, would simply
notice the Sign and its content. It is a higher bar than this - whether it is
visually dominant in one’s
experience of the locality. Whilst it will be
the first digital advertisement in the locality I am satisfied that the level of
illumination
emitted by the digital display will not of itself result in the
Sign being visually dominant within the locality, even at night-time.
the Appellant’s submission that it will not be any more prominent than
other uncontrolled illuminated advertisements
and building facades within the
building upon the Land and the two adjoining allotments to the east are setback
approximately 15 metres from the frontage to
Adelaide Road, with open car
parking areas between the frontage and the building line. Other buildings along
the northern side of
Adelaide Road to the east of the Land are located between 8
and 30 metres from the road frontage. Whilst a limited number of buildings
the northern side of Adelaide Road are set closer to the road boundary, the
majority are in line with the building upon the Land,
producing a relatively
consistent streetscape.
Development
forward of buildings consists of car parking/manoeuvring areas, limited
landscaping and signage in the form of permanent
freestanding advertisements or
moveable A-frame signs or flags.
open nature of the northern side of the road and the proposed siting of the Sign
abutting, and perpendicular to, the front boundary
will allow the Sign to be
viewed for some distance from the east and west along Adelaide Road. The
visibility to the west is further
increased on account of the Land being a
corner allotment, with the road reserve of Cynthia Court and three vacant
allotments (213
to 217 Adelaide Road) located to the west. Whilst the street
trees within the road reserve further to the west will screen some views
approach to the Land, road users will have an unrestricted view of the Sign for
at least 150 metres to the west of the Land.
Vincent submitted that the visibility and prominence of the Sign is reduced on
account of the backdrop of buildings that will
be viewed when approaching the
Sign from either direction.
Whilst I accept that this will be the case to some degree, the minor street and
vacant allotments to the west, the setback of the
building upon the Land and the
three adjoining allotments to the east, significantly reduce the extent of
buildings and structures
which form the backdrop to the Sign.
nature of the road reserve adjacent to the Land will result in the Sign abutting
the footpath and being approximately 8 metres
from the northern traffic lane.
The Employment Zone does not contain any specific setback requirements for
advertisements or advertising
hoardings. The Sign achieves the 600mm setback
from the roadway sought by GDP Advertisements DPF 5.5, which seeks to ensure
clearance from the carriageway for road user safety, as opposed to
limiting visual impact. Whilst the northern side of the road reserve
stobie poles with attached streetlights and electricity infrastructure, views of
the Sign will be relatively unrestricted,
with no street trees and limited
obstructions on adjacent land.
the above reasons I’ve assessed that the Sign will be highly visible and
prominent to users of Adelaide Road, the adjacent
footpath, and portions of the
central landscaped median.
The locality
Zone PO 6.1 in seeking that ‘
freestanding advertisements are not
visually dominant within the locality
’ requires consideration of the
existing character of the locality. Both experts agreed that the locality
consists of three
distinct elements being the commercial development along the
northern side of Adelaide Road, the landscaped central median and the
residential development and service road along the southern side.
Thomson sought guidance from Employment Zone DO 2 in his interpretation of PO
6.1. DO 2 seeks the achievement of ‘
high visual and environmental
amenity particularly along arterial roads, zone boundaries and public open
’. He noted that all three of these elements are present within
the locality, with Adelaide Road being an arterial road, the
boundary between
the Employment Zone and the Suburban Neighbourhood Zone running along the centre
of the road reserve and the public
open space within the median. On this basis
he opined that a ‘
greater importance on achieving high visual and
environmental amenity
’ was warranted in this
Thomson agreed under cross examination that the assessment of the visual impact
of the Sign needed to be tempered within the Employment
Zone given that DO 1 of
the zone seeks a range of industrial, commercial and business activities and the
inclusion of Advertisement
in the desired land uses listed within DPF
Mr Thomson also
acknowledged that several advertisements either applied to or painted upon
building façades within the locality
are greater in area that the
proposed Sign.
Vincent agreed under cross examination that the desire for a higher level of
visual amenity along arterial roads, zone boundaries
and public open space
expressed by DO 2 was primarily due to the greater visibility of these areas as
opposed to other portions of
A and A Centofanti Pty Ltd v City of Port Adelaide Enfield
(Centofanti) held that the construction of two substantial third-party
advertisements was appropriate given the location adjacent
major road in a General Industry Zone and in a locality of very low
agree with the experts that the northern side of Adelaide Road contains a
mixture of utilitarian, commercial buildings along with
various freestanding and
façade-based advertisements. I do not consider that the amenity or
character of the northern side
is as low as that described by the Court in
. There is a level of regularity and consistency of built form,
scale and siting along the streetscape which is bolstered by the well
maintained, high amenity landscaped central median, developed as an entry
statement into the centre of Murray Bridge.
I recognise that the Sign would sit alongside, and within the context of, the
commercial development and associated advertising
on the northern side of the
road, the scale of the Sign and its prominent location abutting the road reserve
and footpath is at odds
with the character of that portion of the locality. Most
advertisements within the locality are attached to the façades of
commercial buildings. They do not extend above the parapet or walls of the
buildings, so do not add to the bulk and scale of the
building itself.
Conversely, the freestanding nature, siting and scale of the Sign will result in
a visually dominant element, particularly
for users of Adelaide Road. As such
the scale and siting of the Sign is not considered to be appropriate to the
character of the
locality as sought by GDP Advertisements PO 1.5.
accept that the ‘
high level of visual amenity
’ sought along
arterial roads, zone boundaries and public open space by DO 2 is to be
considered within the context of the range
of industrial and commercial
development sought within the zone. Whilst the Sign is sufficiently removed from
the residential area
to the south, it will negatively impact on the visual
amenity of the arterial road and public open space elements of the locality.
this basis I do not consider that it achieves the policy intent for advertising
that is not visually dominant and is appropriate
to the character of the
locality, particularly when informed by the Desired Outcomes of the
nature of the Sign, being an LED display on one side and a static display on the
other, is not, of itself, considered to result
in unreasonable impacts within
the locality.
level of existing advertising, both freestanding and applied to commercial
buildings within the locality, is acknowledged. Whilst
advertising does form a
part of the character and streetscape of the northern side of Adelaide Road it
is not considered to be excessive.
size, scale and siting of the Sign will result in it being visually dominant
within the locality. The existing character and
level of amenity within the
locality is considered to be reasonable, lifted by the quality of the landscaped
open space but also
informed by the relatively consistent nature of the built
form and siting of development along the northern side of the road. The
is far from a ‘lost cause’, as was the case in
the Sign is too large and too prominently located. Whilst the scale and location
may assist in grabbing the public’s
attention, it does so to the detriment
of the locality, and to an extent that is not supported by the policies of the
Third-party advertising
above finding in relation to the visual impact of the Sign is not prefaced upon
or influenced by the third-party nature of the
advertising to be displayed upon
the Sign. I consider the size, scale and siting of the Sign will create a
visually dominant element
regardless of the content. Having determined this
however I have considered the arguments put to the Court in relation to the
third-party
nature of the advertising and the treatment of such within the
Treatment of third-party signage within the Code
Thomson reviewed the approach taken within the Code to third-party advertising
across various zones.
that the Employment Zone and the Strategic Employment Zone do not contain any
policy in relation to third-party advertising,
whereas numerous commercial type
zones contain specific policy seeking to restrict this form of advertising. The
other zones seek
that freestanding advertisements ‘
identify the
associated business(es)
’, i.e. they are first-party advertisements.
The absence of any such restriction on third-party advertising within the
Zone, as opposed to the approach taken within other zones, lead Mr
Thomson to conclude that, all things being equal, third-party
advertising was
more likely to be appropriate within the Employment Zone than in those
other zones’
for the CAP did not agree that a failure to discourage third-party advertising
could be construed as being supportive of
it in the Employment Zone and took the
view that the differences in the wording of policies across the zones was due to
styles of drafting.
They contend that irrespective of the absence of any specific policy within the
zone, the overarching restrictions on third-party
advertising contained within
GDP Advertisements PO 3.1 still
Advertisements PO 3.1 seeks that
advertisements are
limited to information relating to the lawful use of land they are located on to
assist in the ready identification
of the activity or activities on the land and
avoid unrelated content that contributes to visual clutter and
untidiness’
. DPF 3.1 suggests that PO 3.1 can be achieved by limiting
the content of advertisements to the lawful existing or proposed activity
activities on the same site as the advertisement.
CAP submitted that GDP Advertisements PO 3.1 speaks directly against third-party
advertisements and as it is a general policy
applicable across all zones there
is no need for zones to have duplicate policy restricting third-party
advertising.
They further
contend that should there have been a need to encourage or clarify the
suitability of third-party advertising within
a particular zone then this could
have been accommodated at a zone level, which would over-ride the General
Development Policies
of the Code.
CAP did not submit that the effect of GDP Advertisements PO 3.1 was to provide
an absolute restriction on third-party advertisements.
They submitted that to
determine where such advertisements may be appropriate, a relevant authority
must apply the ten criteria listed
as justification to depart from a clearly
expressed policy within the decision of the Full Court in
Town of Gawler v
Impact Investment Corporation Pty Ltd
Investments).
The CAP submitted
that the proposal does not satisfy the ten criteria and as such a departure from
the restriction on third-party
advertising within GDP Advertisements PO 3.1 is
not justified.
Appellant submitted that there is no need to apply the test within
Investments
, which on their submission is readily distinguished from the
present matter. The Appellant submitted that the relevant policy within
Impact Investments
was a Structure/Site Layout Plan specific to the
subject land in that matter, whereas GDP Advertisements PO 3.1 is a broad
policy. The Appellant opined that there was significant difficulty in
applying the 10 criteria in this matter given the broad nature
agree, and whilst the approach in
Impact Investments
is informative, the
GDP’s are general polices, which lack the direct and clear application of
the policy considered within
Impact Investments
planning policies within the former Development Plans across the metropolitan
area generally sought to direct third-party advertisements
away from some areas
and towards others.
The polices
were also silent in relation to third-party advertising in some
transitioning to a single Planning and Design Code the previous treatment and
guidance in respect to third-party advertisements,
particularly through their
designation as a form of non-complying development in various zones, has been
lost. Whilst Mr Thomson
identified some zones in the Code that seek to restrict
freestanding advertisements to those identifying associated business(es)
no restriction on advertising fixed to buildings or other structures) the Court
was not advised of any zones that contain any
explicate support for the
development of third-party advertisements.
third-party advertisements can arouse the ire of some communities, and town
planners, however they have long been a feature
of our modern world with a
commercial purpose and value to their operators and users. I accept the
Appellant’s submission that
had the Minister for Planning, and the State
Planning Commission sought to broadly restrict all third-party freestanding
advertisements,
then there are more effective options available within the Code
and Act to enact such an outcome than utilising a single policy in
the treatment of third-party advertisements throughout the Code, including the
terminology used, could benefit from further
review by the State Planning
Commission, I find that the absence of any guidance or differential treatment of
third-party advertisement
within the Employment Zone suggests that the
development of third-party advertisements may be appropriate, subject to the
satisfaction
of the matters relating to visual impact, distraction and clutter
outlined within the zone and the GDP Advertisements section.
the message matter?
Appellant contends that the assessment of the proposal is limited to whether the
size and nature of the Sign would result in
an unacceptable degree of visual
impact, clutter and untidiness within the relevant locality. It was submitted
that the content was
irrelevant given that the proposed digital display could
just as easily be used to advertise the business upon the Land as it could
third-party. In support of this position the Appellant noted the decision of
this Court in
where it was determined that ‘
the message is
not the issue’
, rather it was the size, height and appearance of the
proposed advertisement.
Thomson submitted that third-party advertisements tend to utilise
high-contrasting colours and greater levels of graphics/images
He took the view that
the visual impact of the proposed Sign was compounded in this instance by the
changing digital images which
would consistently draw and redraw people’s
attention, even regular users of the
He clarified that those
concerns were based on the manner in which third-party advertisements, including
the proposed Sign, were
conducted. Agreeing that ‘
it’s not what
it’s advertising, it’s how it
advertises’
Thomson expressed the view that the consistent scrolling of
advertisements/images would result in an increase in visual clutter
contrary to
GDP Advertisements PO’s 2.1, 2.2 and 3.1. Mr Vincent took the view that
the ability to advertise numerous businesses
or products upon the one
advertisement can reduce clutter.
GDP Advertisements PO 3.1 as seeking to
limit third-party advertisements to allow the public to easily identify the
activities on
a site and avoid visual clutter. An over proliferation of
first-party signage could result in visual clutter and untidiness to the
extent as an excess of third-party advertisements. In terms of visual clutter,
in each case it would be a matter of fact and
degree as to the impact of the
proposed advertisement, based predominately on its size, scale and location,
rather than content.
only qualification is that unlike first-party, third-party advertisements can
impact upon the public’s ability to readily
identify the activity or
activities on a site. This was identified in
where the Court
noted the following difference between third-party advertisements and those
directly related to activities on the
‘It is true that
signs that relate to the building to which they are attached or adjacent may
make more contribution to the
meaning or legibility of a locality than third
party signs of a generic nature, unrelated to that building or locality, and
therefore be said to make more contribution to enhancing the amenity and
appearance of an area’.
Claude Neon Ltd v West Torrens City Corporation
(Claude Neon)
that there is a difference between first and third-party advertisements when
observed by an onlooker.
Western Australia State Administrative Tribunal in
Major Holdings Pty Ltd v
Presiding Member of the Metro Inner-South Joint Development Assessment Panel
(Major Holdings)
came to a similar conclusion when considering an
application to remove a condition of approval to allow a digital sign to be used
for third-party advertising. The Tribunal found that the change to third-party
advertising ‘
may add to the cognitive load of motorists .... who are
trying to identify a particular place or property’
‘the function or purpose of site-specific signage is to identify the
location of businesses and provide essential information
services offered by those
businesses’.
The Tribunal found that the proposed change to the signage would
‘draw attention away from site-specific signage and, consequently, may
affect the function, viability or operation of businesses
in the Mixed Business
Ultimately the
Tribunal found that the proposed change to third-party advertising ‘
propagate unsolicited information which will add to the visual clutter of a
locality where there is already a large amount of
some instances there will be little to no difference between the impact of a
first or third-party advertisement. They may equally
be appropriate or
inappropriate on a given site or within a certain locality. The observable
difference being that third-party advertising
does have the ability to detract
from the perceptibility of the activity or activities on a site through the
display of unrelated
images/content in a way that draws attention away from
first-party signage identifying the site and the services offered upon it.
this instance the activities on the Land remain readily identifiable with
prominent signage affixed to the building, which would
generally remain
unobscured by the Sign. Whilst the Sign may draw the initial attention of road
users away from the business identification
signs, the open sightlines, setbacks
of buildings and low traffic speed allow sufficient time to observe all
advertising upon the
Land in this instance. This may not always be the case,
making it necessary to consider the potential for, and level of, distraction
visual clutter on a site and within the locality in each instance, as sought by
GDP Advertisements PO 3.1.
Appellant submitted that the proposal includes a partial change in use of the
Land to advertising. This is on account of the
Sign being used for the display
of third-party advertisements separately to, and independently of, the existing
bulky goods use of
the Land. Should the bulky goods use cease or change to
another use the Sign would continue to operate independently. Both Mr Thomson
and Mr Vincent, in their written and oral evidence, agreed that third-party
advertising is a land use. The CAP, through their Counsel,
submitted that an
advertisement is not a use of land and is
“simply an act or activity
that’s declared by the Regulations to be
development”
Appellant drew support from the decision in
v City of Salisbury
where Commissioner Wallman summarised the proposal for
third-party advertising in that instance as the “
construction of an
advertising hoarding and the use of land for the commencement of a display of
advertisements
Commissioner held that the commercial nature of the advertising was such that it
was a separate land use, with the display of
advertisements “
in planning legislation and the Development Plan as a land use activity in its
CAP cited the Supreme Court decision in the
Corporation of the
City of West Torrens v McDonald’s
Properties (Australia) Pty Ltd
in support of their submission, where a
freestanding McDonalds sign was not found to be a use of land, but rather the
erection of
a structure.
subject land in that matter however contained a McDonalds restaurant, thus the
proposed signage was connected to the activities
upon the land, a different
scenario to that before this Court.
Major Holdings
the WA State Administrative Tribunal found that
“third party advertising is an independent use because the advertising
of businesses or products that are not related to activities
carried out on the
subject land could not fairly be described as being subsidiary or incidental to
the predominant or primary use
of the land as a showroom/retail
the above judgements found third-party advertisements to be a use of land,
numerous judgements of this Court and the Supreme
Court have made no finding in
relation to use.
The primary
consideration within all these matters is overwhelmingly based on the size,
scale and impact of the advertisement. Ultimately
this is what I have had most
regard to in considering the proposal before the Court.
this matter the parties agreed that the impact of the question of land use upon
the assessment of the Sign is limited, being primarily
focused on whether
Employment Zone PO 1.1 and DPF 1.1 are considered, and the weight to be applied
to them within the assessment.
As previously noted, PO 1.1 is not included
within the policies listed in Table 3. The Appellant submitted that its omission
an error, with the CAP submitting that it was done with conscious
purpose and reflective of advertising not being a use of land.
noted above I have had regard to PO 1.1 in my consideration of the matter. I
have also had regard to the inclusion of ‘Advertisement’
envisaged forms of development listed within Zone DPF 1.1. A broad review of the
Code notes that Advertisement is listed
within DPF 1.1 of numerous rural,
commercial, employment and mixed-use zones. Some of those zones contain specific
policy seeking
to restrict freestanding advertisements to identifying associated
business(es), others do not. Some zones, such as the Urban Neighbourhood
list Advertisement in DPF 1.1 but contain no separate policy guidance on the
size, display area or content of advertisements.
The parties did not provide any
evidence or guidance to the Court in relation to the inclusion of Advertisement
in DPF 1.1 within
various zones and the presence/content of other zone policy
relating to advertisements. I can not find any correlation between the
variance in the treatment of advertisements in the Code may be attributed to its
definition within the Act. It is defined as
an advertisement or sign
that is visible from a street, road or public place or by passengers carried on
any form of public transport’.
It is inclusive of all forms of
advertising, both first and third-party.
Advertisement
is listed in DPF 1.1 for numerous zones that envisage some form of business or
activities that would benefit from,
or seek, signage to advertise the business,
services or products available from premises within that zone. Some of these
zones, such
as centre zones, may also attract higher levels of traffic and
members of the public which would make them desirable locations for
third-party
advertising. As such the inclusion of Advertisement in the DPF could equally
apply to advertising relevant to the commercial
uses in the zone or third-party
advertisements. For zones that contain further polices which seek to limit
advertising to the identification
of the associated business(es), the intent is
relatively clear. Within those zones that contain policies relating to
advertisements
but do not further seek to limit the content of the advertisement
I find that the inclusive definition of advertisement is such that
some support
for third-party advertisements may be read into these policies. This is a
different scenario to a zone that contains
no policy relevant to advertisements.
In such a situation an absence of policy can not be interpreted as being
supportive of third-party
advertising.
Act and Code would benefit from some clarity in relation to the definition of
advertisement and its broad inclusion of both first
and third-party content and
whether third-party advertisements should be treated differently and/or included
within the Land Use
Definitions in Part 7 of the Code.
for the CAP provided the Court with an extract from a draft of the
Assessment Improvements Code Amendment
’ currently being
undertaken by the State Planning
Commission.
The proposed changes
to GDP Advertisements PO 3.1 within the Code Amendment do not resolve the
matters outlined above.
Ultimately,
I have found that the size and location of the Sign will have a detrimental
impact upon the character and amenity of
the locality regardless of the content
and/or whether it is a partial change in use.
third-party advertisements may contain very similar images or content to signs
advertising a business upon a site, they are
perceived differently by the
public. They can distract and detract from the identification of activities upon
a site. Similarly,
they can result in clutter and untidiness through additional
signage, over and above directional signage and advertising for businesses
is no guidance or limitation on third-party advertisements within the policy of
the Employment Zone. Advertisements are listed
as an envisaged use within the
zone (Zone DPF 1.1). Whether this is limited to first-party advertisements or
extends to third-party
is unclear, although the definition of advertisement
would tend to an interpretation of inclusivity, but it remains that
advertisements
are clearly envisaged (through the guidance provided by Zone PO
6.1) within what is effectively a commercial zone.
I have not taken the view that third-party advertising is restricted by GDP
Advertisements PO 3.1 in the manner that the CAP has
submitted. The desire of
the PO to restrict third-party signage has been taken to relate to the level of
distraction, clutter and
untidiness, which have been considered above. In this
instance the extent of advertising within the locality and the relative
positioning
of the Sign to the road, the building upon the Land and adjoining
properties is such that it will not result in an unreasonable level
of clutter,
untidiness or distraction.
Consideration
has been given to the potential visual impact of the Sign upon the locality. The
applicable test is not whether the
Sign is merely visible, but whether it will
be ‘visually dominant’. I have formed the view that the size, scale
and location
of the Sign is such that it will be a visually dominant element
within the locality. On this basis it is my planning judgement that
it does not
warrant approval.
consideration has been given to the third-party nature of the content to be
displayed, I do not consider that this aspect
lends any support to the proposal
nor is it detrimental given the nature of the locality and zone
decision of the CAP to refuse Planning Consent is affirmed.
Described in Certificate of
Title Volume 5426 Folio 733 as Allotment 25 in Deposited Plan 6006.
Review of the assessment
manager’s decision to the assessment panel undertaken in accordance with
s202(1)(b)(i)(A)
Planning, Development and
Infrastructure Act 2016
. Dissatisfied with the outcome of the review the
Appellant appealed the decision of the assessment panel to the Court under
s202(1)(c).
The relevant version of the
Code, established under
Planning, Development and
Infrastructure Act 2016
Version 2024.4
– 29/02/2024.
This figure was provided by Mr
Vincent based on Department of Planning, Transport and Infrastructure data from
2021, see Exhibit
Exhibit R6, [6.10].
T37, line 17 to T38, line
Macquarie Dictionary Online;
app.macquariedictionary.com.au.
T82, lines 21 to 32.
T5, lines 14 to 24.
T143, line 3 and lines 13 to
Exhibit R1, pages 30 to
Pergolas of Distinction v
Assessment Manager at the City of Charles Sturt
[2024] SAERDC 28
Geber Super Pty Ltd v
Barossa Assessment Panel
[2023] SASC 154
, [117 – 125].
Ibid, [124].
Exhibit R1, pages 30 to
T136, lines 22 to 32.
T124, lines 36 to 37.
Rymill Park Apartments
Pty Ltd v Rymill House Foundation Pty Ltd
[2023] SASC 107
These policies do not
represent all of those that are relevant to the assessment. They are the
policies that have been referred to
by the parties in the matter and considered
to be critical to the resolution of the dispute before the Court.
Geber Super Pty Ltd v The
Barossa Assessment Panel
[2023] SASC 154
Part 1 of the Planning and
Design Code.
T112, lines 14 to 16 and
T130, lines 17 to 20.
Vikhlyaev v City of West
Torrens Assessment Manager
[2023] SAERDC 1
T138, lines 28 to 35 and
T139, line 33 to 37.
Mr Thomson at T78, line 30
to T39, line 9 and Mr Vincent at T51, lines 33-34.
v City of Marion
[1999] SAERDC 74
Exhibit R6, [8.18].
T50, lines 1 to 3.
Exhibit R6, [8.15].
T84, lines 6 to 26 and T84,
lines 32 to 36.
T89, line 30 to T90, line
T52, line 33 to T53, line
and A Centofanti Pty Ltd v City of Port Adelaide Enfield
[2009] SAERDC 8
Exhibit R6, pages 8 to
Ibid, [8.7].
T114, lines 28 to 32.
T115, lines 2 to 7.
T117, lines 1 to 9.
of Gawler v Impact Investment Corporation Pty Ltd
[2007] SASC 356
T152, lines 10 to 35.
Keast v City of Marion
[1999] SAERDC 74
A and A Centofanti Pty
Ltd v City of Port Adelaide Enfield
[2009] SAERDC 8
T145 line 8 to T146 line
v City of Marion
[1999] SAERDC 74
T103, lines 11 to 24.
T103, line 35 to T104, line
T104, lines 22 to 24.
and A Centofanti Pty Ltd v City of Port Adelaide Enfield
[2009] SAERDC 8
Claude Neon Ltd v West
Torrens City Corporation
(1982) 29 SASR 260
Holdings Pty Ltd v Presiding Member of the Metro Inner-South Joint Development
Assessment Panel
[2023] WASAT 97
Ibid, [95].
T122, lines 12 to 18.
v City of Salisbury
[1999] SAERDC 55
Ibid, [24] and [47].
of West Torrens v McDonald’s Properties (Australia) Pty Ltd
at (471 – 472).
Major Holdings Pty Ltd v
Presiding Member of the Metro Inner-South Joint Development Assessment Panel
[2023] WASAT 97
See for example
Claude Neon Ltd v West Torrens City Corporation
(1982) 29 SASR 260
, Keast v City of Marion
[1999] SAERDC 7
A Centofanti Pty Ltd v
City of Port Adelaide
[2009] SAERDC 8
Adspace Group Pty
Ltd v City of Marion
[2009] SAERDC 39
OOH! Media Assets Pty Ltd v City of Norwood,
Payneham and St Peters
[2018] SAERDC 20.
Claude Neon Ltd v West
Torrens City Corporation
(1982) 29 SASR 260
, at (262-263).
Exhibit R5.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (500 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter