URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCFC/2021/38.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
IN THE MATTER OF LISA JANE BARRETT (No 2) [2021] SASCFC 38 (20 September 2021)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Full Court)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
IN THE MATTER OF LISA JANE BARRETT (No 2)
[2021] SASCFC 38
Judgment of The Full Court
(The Honourable President Livesey, the Honourable Justice Blue and
the Honourable Justice Bleby)
20 September 2021
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES - LAWYERS - QUALIFICATIONS AND ADMISSION - OTHER
Application for restricted access orders in relation to certain documents and
parts of documents.
In support of her application for admission as a legal practitioner, the
applicant disclosed a number of documents to the Board of
Examiners and the
Court. Some of those documents contained confidential and personal information.
Restricted access orders over those
documents were previously granted on an
interim basis, pending the hearing of the application. At the hearing, the
applicant sought
restricted access orders in relation to certain of those
documents and parts of documents.
Held (by the Court):
1. The nature and notoriety of the events in the applicant’s history
support strongly the public interest in the transparency
of the Court’s
processes in considering and determining her application for admission. The
matters subjective to the applicant
that relate to those events are an integral
element of both the Board’s and the Court’s deliberations.
2. Subject to some specific matters, the restricted access orders are
3. The applicant is to file redacted versions of certain, identified
documents. Those documents will be received on an unrestricted
access basis. The
unredacted versions will be dealt with only on a court access basis.
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
Health and Community
Services Complaints Act 2004
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
r 32.2, referred to.
B, RD v Channel Seven Adelaide
[2008] SASC 282
(2008) 103 SASR 478
Re Harrison:
Application for Readmission
[2002] SASC 335
(2002) 84 SASR 120
Re JN Taylor Holdings Ltd
[2007] SASC 193
(2007) 62 ACSR 695
In Re Vadasz
(1988) 146 LSJS 455
the matter of Lisa Jane Barrett
[2021] SASCFC 37
In the Matter of Claire
[2015] SASCFC 20
Goldberg v Ng
[1995] HCA 39
(1995) 185 CLR 83
Attorney-General (NT) v Maurice
[1986] HCA 80
(1986) 161 CLR 475
, considered.
IN THE MATTER OF LISA JANE BARRETT (No 2)
Application for Admission: Livesey P, Blue and
On 3 September 2021, Lisa Jane Barrett (‘the
applicant’) was admitted as a barrister and solicitor of the Supreme Court
of South Australia by order of this Court, pursuant to
Practitioners Act 1981
2 At the hearing of the application, Mr Wells QC, on behalf of the
applicant, applied for the continuation of restricted access orders
in relation
to certain documents filed in this matter. These orders had previously been made
on an interim basis. Mr Wells QC further
applied for restricted access orders
in relation to other documents before the Court. The applications were made on
the ground that
the documents in question contain confidential information.
3 The various documents relate to the question of the fitness of the
applicant for admission as a legal practitioner. The issues
they address are
described briefly in the Court’s reasons for admitting the applicant as a
practitioner. Mr Wells QC acknowledged
that much of the information contained
in the documents produced in support of the application to the Board, and the
Reports and Recommendations, is already in the public domain. It
follows that there is no confidentiality to be maintained over
that information.
The focus of the application was those aspects of the material that Mr Wells QC
described as the applicant’s
own explanations, reflections and
submissions: that is, those matters arising in the context of the relevant
history which are subjective
to her. Some of these matters are undoubtedly quite
4 The application, as initially formulated, sought restricted access orders
over all materials filed in respect of the application
for admission, and
otherwise placed before the Court, on the basis that what was said to be
confidential could not be separated from
the information in the public domain.
The submission was that the objective matters and the record of the
applicant’s subjective
experience were intermixed.
5 Time constraints prevented completion of the hearing of that application
on 2 September 2021. When the hearing resumed on 3 September
2021, Mr Wells QC
recast the application, identifying only specific documents or parts of
documents sought to be redacted and made
subject to such an order.
General considerations
6 This Court is charged with the responsibility of admitting legal
practitioners, overseeing the conduct of legal practitioners and,
necessary, striking the names of legal practitioners from the roll. It is
required to determine whether a person is a ‘fit
and proper person’
to act as a legal practitioner in various contexts. These contexts include:
determining whether a person
should be admitted as a practitioner under
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
(SA), whether a practitioner’s
practising certificate should be suspended under
, whether the name of a
practitioner should be struck off the roll under
and whether a person whose
name has been struck off the roll should be readmitted as a legal practitioner
7 The question whether a person is or remains entitled to practise the law
is a matter of clear public interest.
8 It is generally in the public interest that proceedings be conducted in
public and be subject to public
This is particularly so
in the context of the exercise of this Court’s jurisdiction over legal
practitioners. In general, when
the Court determines that a practitioner’s
practising certificate should be suspended, a practitioner’s name should
struck off the roll, or a practitioner whose name has been struck off the
roll should be readmitted, those proceedings should be
conducted in public.
9 Mr Wells QC submitted initially that when the Court is considering an
application for initial admission as a legal practitioner,
the starting point is
that the application is premised on confidentiality. While the application as
recast on the second day of hearing
only sought redactions from the public
record of certain documents and passages in documents, it remains helpful on the
application
as recast to consider the extent to which obligations of confidence
intrude into the application process.
10 Rule 28 of the
Rules of the Legal Practitioners Education and
Admission Council 2018
, made pursuant to the
Legal Practitioners Act
(SA), provides:
In exercising any power, discretion or function granted by these rules,
LPEAC, the Board and the Law Society will have regard to guidelines
prepared by
the Law Admissions Consultative Committee contained in Appendix D.
11 Guideline 3, contained in Appendix D, sets out ‘relevant
principles’ that the Admitting Authority will apply when
determining
fitness for admission. These principles emphasise the onus on the applicant and
the honesty and candour with which the
applicant is expected to make disclosure,
as well as referring to the applicant’s present understanding and
estimation concerning
the applicant’s past conduct. Guideline 3(e) then
Any disclosure you make that may be relevant to whether you are currently
able to carry out the inherent requirements of practice
is confidential.
12 The Board is required to have regard to that assurance of
confidentiality. That assurance is not given as a
quid pro quo
applicant’s honesty and candour. Honesty and candour are expected in any
event. For the same reason,
Legal Practitioners Act
(SA), in the case of a show cause event as defined, place a duty to
disclose information on an applicant for a practising certificate
and a holder
of a practising certificate, respectively.
13 In the ordinary course, an applicant may expect that disclosures to the
Board will be kept confidential. However, the Guidelines
provide no absolute
assurance of confidentiality; nor could they. The matters disclosed to the
Board under this regime are likely
to be referred to in the Report and Reasons
of the Board.
14 Moreover, as occurred in this case, an applicant’s Originating
Application to the Court for admission as a legal practitioner
accompanied by an affidavit demonstrating the applicant’s eligibility for
admission. The process commenced by this
Originating Application is not
governed by the Guidelines. The assurance of confidentiality associated with
disclosures made to the
Board contained in the Guidelines, whilst demonstrative
of the public interest in the maintenance of that confidentiality, necessarily
becomes subject to other, competing public interests which inform the
Court’s treatment of that information.
15 Chief amongst these is the principle of open justice. The articulation
of this principle is
well-understood.
So too is the
framework for recognising an exception to the application of the principle,
specifically where the Court reasonably
believes a departure from open justice
to be necessary in order to serve the ends of
16 The principle does not apply differently where an originating application
of this kind is, in effect, of an
nature, that is, where the
applicant comes before the Court armed with a favourable report of the Board of
Examiners. In that case,
reasons for granting an application will usually not be
given, the matter not being contested. However, the Court is not prohibited
giving reasons on an application for admission.
17 The role of the Court in maintaining public confidence in the legal
profession will in some cases recommend that reasons be given
when discharging
its functions as the admitting authority. There are many instances of the Court
having done so on applications for
readmission.
A common reason for
this is that there is, on the public record, a case to answer as to whether the
applicant is a fit and proper
person. This might arise, for example, from a
previous decision of the Court removing the practitioner’s name from the
18 However, challenges to public confidence in the fitness and propriety of
a person to be admitted as a legal practitioner need
not only arise in
circumstances where that person’s name has previously been removed from
the roll. A concern may well arise
on account of some other aspect of a
person’s history. A simple example would be of a person previously
convicted of fraud
offences who applies for admission for the first time. The
criminal history is a matter of public record. The public interest in
openness of the Court’s processes in determining whether that applicant is
a fit and proper person is manifest.
19 Not all matters that raise questions about a person’s fitness for
admission as a legal practitioner are criminal in nature.
The applicant’s
disclosed history, which has attracted considerable public attention and
elements of which are the subject
of published Findings on Inquest by the State
Coroner, provide a case in point.
20 The nature and notoriety of the events in the applicant’s history
support strongly the public interest in the transparency
of this Court’s
processes in considering and determining her application for admission. The
matters subjective to the applicant,
to use that shorthand expression, are an
integral element of both the Board’s and this Court’s deliberations.
They inform
the question of the applicant’s present fitness and propriety
against the background of her personal history.
21 Public confidence in the legal profession requires, in these
circumstances, transparency in the admission process. There is an
public interest in the maintenance of confidentiality over matters disclosed
with an undertaking of confidence. However,
that undertaking could never be
absolute. In the present case, the balance of the public interest supports
strongly both the giving
of reasons by this Court on the application for
admission and, subject to some specific matters, revocation of the restricted
Specific redactions
22 The reformulated application sought specific redactions of documents or
parts of documents on a number of grounds. We address
each of the grounds
briefly, below. Following that, we set out the limited redactions we are
prepared to order in respect of the
Personal information
23 A number of redactions are sought on the basis that they contain personal
information relating either to the applicant or to third
parties and in respect
of which there is no public interest in their revelation. These extend to
financial and health circumstances
of the applicant, and personal details of
third parties.
24 We cannot be sure that some of the names and personal details of the
third parties identified are not in the public domain in
the context of the
matters considered on the application for admission. However, it appears that a
number of these individuals had
their identities protected in earlier
proceedings relating to the applicant. In any event, we consider that the public
interest would
not be served by the publication or republication of those
matters. Similarly, purely personal matters of the applicant will be
25 The application for redactions on the ground of personal information
extended to a psychological report about the applicant dated
21 September 2020,
prepared by Dr Jack White (‘the White report’). This report is
highly relevant to the application
for admission. It contains a great deal of
information relating to the applicant’s subjective experiences of the
matters otherwise
on the public record that are relevant to the application. In
our view, the public interest is not, on balance, served by maintenance
confidentiality over the White report. However, the report contains specific
reference to a matter personal to the applicant
which does not inform her
application for admission. We will order redaction of those passages in the
White report.
26 This conclusion extends to other documents that refer to the contents of
the White report and which, in turn, make reference to
that personal matter.
Letters from the Health and Community Services Complaints
Commissioner
27 These letters concern matters that are now on the public record.
However, they are marked ‘confidential’ and ‘not
release’. This expression of confidentiality is made in accordance with
the prohibition in
Health and Community Services Complaints Act
75—Preservation
of confidentiality
(1) A person must not record, disclose or use confidential information gained
by the person through involvement in the administration
of this Act, unless the
person does so—
(a) when necessary for the purposes of this Act; or
(b) when expressly authorised or required under this or another Act; or
(ba) when necessary for the purposes of a corresponding law; or
(c) when expressly authorised, in writing, by the person to whom it relates;
(d) when required to do so by a court or tribunal constituted by law;
(e) when expressly authorised or required under the regulations.
Maximum penalty: $5 000.
(2) For the purposes of this section, the following persons are involved in
the administration of this Act:
(a) the Commissioner;
(b) a conciliator;
(c) a professional mentor;
(d) another staff member;
(f) a member of a committee established under this Act.
(3) This section does not apply to the recording, disclosure or use of
statistical or other information that could not reasonably
be expected to lead
to the identification of a person.
28 The applicant provided these documents to the Board in support of her
application and in compliance with her obligation of disclosure.
Doing so did
not breach any obligation of confidentiality. The applicant is not a person
involved in the administration of the
Health and Community Services
Complaints Act 2004
(SA). The matters addressed in these letters are
relevant to her application for admission as a practitioner. There is no basis
for making a restricted access order in respect of these letters.
Correspondence marked ‘confidential’ or ‘without
29 These documents concern proceedings between the Midwifery Board of
Australia and the applicant. Their subject matter is in the
public domain.
Their disclosure to the Board by the applicant was appropriate. As with the
letters from the Health and Community
Services Complaints Commissioner, the
public interest does not support the maintenance of their confidentiality in
these proceedings.
Legal professional privilege
30 The affidavit of the applicant affirmed in support of her application for
admission recounts an event of obtaining legal advice
in relation to her work as
a ‘birth advocate’. It is uncontentious that the relevant passage
gives an account of legal
advice provided to the applicant, and that legal
professional privilege attached to that advice in the first instance. Mr Wells
QC submitted that insofar as the applicant’s disclosure of this advice in
her affidavit amounted to a waiver of privilege,
it was a waiver for a limited
purpose only, being the consideration by the Board and the Court of her
application.
31 Disclosure of the affidavit to the Court was necessary for the Court to
consider the application and the Board’s report
and recommendation. While
it may be correct to say that the waiver was for a limited purpose, that purpose
necessarily extended to
the Court’s processes, which are open until
ordered otherwise. The advice is recounted in the context of the applicant
her reaction to it and consequent actions.
32 That disclosure occurred against the background of the statement of
confidentiality in Guideline 3(e), set out above. The relevance
guideline in the present context is that as a background circumstance, it
supports the proposition that the necessary waiver
of legal professional
privilege was for a limited purpose only and was not an intentional general
While this intentional
waiver extended to facilitating disclosure to this Court, the processes of which
are generally open, it remained
for a limited purpose.
33 The question is then whether the circumstances of the disclosure should
impute a general waiver of legal professional privilege.
An imputed waiver will
occur when, by reason of some action on the part of the holder of the privilege,
it would be unfair to maintain
The affidavit being provided in support of an application for admission,
maintenance of the privilege more generally would not appear
to cause unfairness
in the sense in which this has been discussed in the authorities. For example,
there is no opposing litigant
who might be misled by a failure to disclose it
34 On the materials before the Court, it is clearly arguable that there has
been no general waiver of privilege. The Court gave
very little weight to the
reference to legal advice in the affidavit on the application for admission.
There is no countervailing
public interest in the reference to and discussion of
legal advice being disclosed openly, and any arguably remaining privilege then
being lost. The paragraph disclosing and discussing the legal advice the
applicant received will be redacted.
Restricted access orders and redactions
35 It follows that we decline to order the continuation of the restricted
access orders made pending the hearing of the application.
We revoke the
restricted access orders previously made by the Court in this matter, being:
Order 2 of 3
Orders 1, 2 and
3 of 28 October 2020; and
Order 1 of 24
36 For the reasons appearing above, we order the applicant to file redacted
versions of the documents identified below. These documents
will be received on
an unrestricted access basis. The Court will then receive those redacted
documents in evidence on the application.
37 The unredacted versions of those documents are to be dealt with only on a
court access basis within the meaning of rule 32.2 of
Uniform Civil Rules
38 Some documents the subject of the application are contained in the Case
Book, but have not been filed and consequently do not
have an FDN. The table
below identifies the documents by reference to the Case Book page (and FDN where
applicable) or, where a
document is not reproduced in the Case Book, FDN
Parts to be redacted
Originating Application (
Applicant’s address, phone number and email address
lines under heading
‘Applicant’s address’.
Affidavit of Lisa Jane Barrett affirmed 16 December 2019
Applicant’s address, phone number and email address
Applicant’s address on first line (commencing ‘I, Lisa Jane
Barrett...’)
Applicant’s address, phone number and email address
Applicant’s address on top right of the page
Applicant’s address on top right of the page
Applicant’s letter to the Board dated 10 February 2020
Applicant’s address on top right of the page
paragraph (commencing ‘I received...’):
sentences inclusive;
paragraph (commencing ‘I then received’).
Affidavit of Lisa Jane Barrett affirmed 25 September 2020 (
Address panel
Paragraphs [6] to [19] inclusive
Paragraph [67]
Paragraphs [81] to [83] inclusive
Paragraphs [85] to [86] inclusive
Paragraphs [88] to [94] inclusive
Paragraph [96]
Paragraph [101] to [102] inclusive
Paragraph [106]
Paragraphs [135] to [142] inclusive
Second Affidavit of Kylie Lauren Dunn affirmed on 25 September 2020
Paragraph [5]
Exhibit KLD-3: Paragraph numbered 26, headed ‘Other
Exhibit KLD-4: seventh line in box entitled ‘Assessment
Exhibit KLD-4: first paragraph (commencing, ‘She said
dot point, 2
sentence (commencing, ‘She said...’);
Last dot point,
sentence (commencing,
‘19-year-old...’)
Exhibit KLD-4: whole paragraph immediately under heading ‘2.4 Health
Exhibit KLD-4: first two sentences of final paragraph, commencing ‘Ms
Barrett reported that...’
Exhibit KLD-4: final sentence on page 371
Exhibit KLD-4: second paragraph, final sentence, commencing ‘Over
Affidavit of Janet Taylor dated 1 April 2021
Exhibit JT-1 (personal details and referees):
Whole of first
box on page 383 entitled ‘personal details’;
Whole of box on
page 385 entitled ‘emergency contact details’;
Whole of box on
page 386 entitled ‘referees’;
Whole of page
Fourth affidavit of Kylie Lauren Dunn dated 7 April 2021
Exhibit KLD-5:
Exhibit KLD-6:
paragraph, commencing ‘Lisa has...’
Submissions on behalf of Lisa Barrett
Paragraph 45, indented quote, third sentence, commencing ‘Over
Report of Master Bochner dated 23 July 2021
Exhibit LJB1:
Applicant’s
address, phone number and email address on page 430;
lines under heading ‘Applicant’s address’
on page 431;
Applicant’s
address, phone number and email address on page 432;
Applicant’s
address on first line (commencing ‘I, Lisa Jane Barrett...’) on page
Applicant’s address, phone number and email address
Exhibit LJB3, applicant’s address on top right of the page
Second Affidavit of Lisa Jane Barrett dated 16 June 2021
Address panel
Paragraph [16]
Parts to be redacted
Third Affidavit of Kylie Lauren Dunn affirmed on 12 October 2020
Paragraphs [8] to [16] inclusive
39 We grant liberty to apply within 14 days of publication of these reasons
to the parties for the purpose of rectifying this list
in accordance with these
reasons, in case any passage identifying personal information of the nature of
those redacted has been omitted
inadvertently, and for any incidental orders
necessary to give effect to these reasons.
In the matter of Lisa Jane
[2021] SASCFC 37.
B, RD v Channel Seven
[2008] SASC 282
(2008) 103 SASR 478
(Doyle CJ, White and Layton JJ
Re JN Taylor Holdings Ltd
[2007] SASC 193
(2007) 62 ACSR 695
(Debelle J).
Re JN Taylor Holdings
Ltd (In liq)
[2007] SASC 193
(2007) 62 ACSR 695
(Debelle J).
Re Harrison: Application
for Readmission
[2002] SASC 335
(2002) 84 SASR 120
In Re Vadasz
[1988] SASC 1044
(1988) 146 LSJS 455
In the Matter of Claire Amy Morel
[2015] SASCFC
Goldberg v Ng
[1995] HCA 39
(1995) 185 CLR 83
at 95 (Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ).
Goldberg v Ng
[1995] HCA 39
at 95-98 (Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ);
Attorney-General (NT) v
[1986] HCA 80
(1986) 161 CLR 475
at 481 (Gibbs CJ), 487-488 (Mason and Brennan
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (462 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter