URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAEOT/2014/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:56:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BAE SYSTEMS AUSTRALIA LTD, BAE SYSTEMS AUSTRALIA DEFENCE P/L & BAE SYSTEMS AUSTRALIA LOGISTICS P/L [2014] SAEOT 3 (29 August 2014)
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
(District Court Administrative and
Disciplinary Division)
to comply with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting
publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person
using material in the judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed
to the Registry of the Court in which it was generated.
In the Matter of AN APPLICATION
FOR EXEMPTION UNDER THE
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY ACT 1984
BAE SYSTEMS
AUSTRALIA LTD, BAE SYSTEMS AUSTRALIA DEFENCE P/L & BAE SYSTEMS AUSTRALIA
LOGISTICS P/L
[2014] SAEOT
Judgment of His
Honour Judge Costello, Member Ms A Bachmann and Member Mr R Altman
HUMAN RIGHTS -
DISCRIMINATION
Application by BAE Systems Australia Limited (BAE) for renewal of exemption,
previously granted, to enable it to discriminate on grounds
of nationality
– applications by BAE Systems Australia Defence Pty Ltd and BAE Systems
Australia Logistics Pty Ltd (wholly
owned subsidiaries of BAE) for grant of
exemptions to enable them to discriminate on same grounds –
applicants’ businesses
require them to have access to security sensitive
material controlled by the Government of USA – that Government insists
persons of proscribed nationalities, who may be employed by or wish to be
employed by the applicants, not have access to such material
exist for a renewal (in the case of BAE) and a grant of the exemptions in the
‘wider public interest’
– Exemptions granted on same terms and
conditions as the previous exemption granted to BAE.
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
, referred to.
Pulteney Grammar School v Equal Opportunity Tribunal & Ors
BAE Systems Australia Ltd
[2008] SAEOT 1
BAE Systems
Australia Limited
[2011] SAEOT 3
, considered.
BAE SYSTEMS
AUSTRALIA LTD, BAE SYSTEMS AUSTRALIA DEFENCE P/L & BAE SYSTEMS AUSTRALIA
LOGISTICS P/L
[2014] SAEOT
Introduction
20 July 2011 the Tribunal made an order that BAE Systems Australia Ltd
(‘BAE’) be granted an exemption for a further
period of three years
pursuant to
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
Act’) from the provisions of
of the Act to enable it to
discriminate in its employment practices with respect to persons of particular
nationalities on the same
terms and conditions as set out in paras 64-66 of the
Judgment of the Tribunal in Judgment No.
[2008] SAEOT 1.
17 June 2014 BAE applied pursuant to
of the Act for a
exemption previously granted to it for a further period of three years from
21 July 2014 on the same terms and conditions
as are referred to in
paragraph 1.
Systems Australia Defence Pty Ltd (‘BAE Defence’) and
BAE Systems Australia Logistics Pty Ltd (‘BAE Logistics’)
wholly owned subsidiaries of BAE.
17 June 2014 BAE Defence and BAE Logistics applied pursuant to
of the exemption previously granted to BAE for a period of
three years from 21 July 2014 on the same terms and conditions as are
referred to in paragraph 1.
BAE Defence and BAE Logistics are wholly owned subsidiaries of BAE they seek
separate exemptions because both companies employ
personnel in
South Australia. In addition, the exemption is sought to account for the
Export Administration Regulations of the United
States of America
(‘EAR’) which also can create a requirement to exclude persons from
work based on nationality.
9 July 2014 the Tribunal made an order granting interim exemptions to BAE, BAE
Defence and BAE Logistics for a period of two months
commencing on 21 July 2014
on the same terms and conditions as are referred to above.
The Legislative Scheme
Act relevantly provides:
52—Discrimination against applicants and
(1) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against a person on the
ground of race—
(a) in determining, or in the course of determining, who should be offered
employment; or
(b) in the terms or conditions on which employment is offered.
(2) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against an employee on the
ground of race—
(a) in the terms or conditions of employment; or
(b) by denying or limiting access to opportunities for promotion, transfer or
training, or to other benefits connected with employment;
(c) by dismissing the employee; or
(d) by segregating the employee from persons of other races; or
(e) by subjecting the employee to other detriment.
54—Discrimination against contract workers
(1) This section applies to a principal for whom work is done by persons
contract workers
) under a contract between the principal and another
where the contract workers are employed or engaged by a person other than the
(2) It is unlawful for a principal to enter into a contract or arrangement with
another for work to be performed by contract workers
under which a person is to
discriminate against a contract worker on the ground of race.
(3) It is unlawful for the principal to discriminate against a contract worker
on the ground of race—
(a) in the terms or conditions on which the contract worker is allowed to work;
(b) by not allowing the contract worker to work; or
(c) by denying or limiting access to a benefit connected with the employment or
position concerned; or
(d) by subjecting the contract worker to other detriment.
5—Interpretation
of a person means the nationality (current, past or
proposed), country of origin, colour or ancestry of the person.
92—The Tribunal may grant exemptions
(1) The Tribunal may, on application under this section, grant exemptions from a
provision of this Act in relation to—
(a) a person, or class of persons; or
(b) an activity, or class of activity; or
(c) circumstances of a specified nature.
(2) An exemption under this section—
(a) may be granted unconditionally or on conditions; and
(b) may be revoked by the Tribunal on breach of a condition; and
(c) subject to revocation, remains in force for a period, not exceeding three
years, determined by the Tribunal, but may be renewed
from time to time for a
further period, not exceeding three years, determined by the Tribunal.
(6) In determining an application under this section, the Tribunal
(a) have regard (where relevant) to the desirability of certain discriminatory
actions being permitted for the purpose of redressing
the effect of past
discrimination; and
(b) have regard to other factors that the Tribunal considers relevant.
we do not regard it as essential (in circumstances where a previously granted
exemption is being sought to be extended on the
same terms and conditions) to go
into the background of the application exhaustively, reference to it is
necessary in order to provide
a context to the application particularly where it
involves related entities making application for exemptions for the first
applications were supported, in part, by an affidavit from Stuart John Urquhart,
Chief Counsel for BAE, which relevantly provides:
business involves
(a) integrated system and support solutions across the command control
communications computers intelligence surveillance reconnaissance
warfare (C4ISREW), security and land forces domains and providing national
warehousing and distribution services to the
Australian defence Force through
its Land & Integrated Systems (L&IS) Business Unit;
(b) maritime construction and support services in defence and commercial markets
through its Maritime Business Unit; and
(c) aerospace and aviation support products and services for defence and
commercial customers through its Aerospace Business
operates its national warehousing and distribution line of business through BAE
Logistics and BAE Defence. L&IS operates
its other lines of business through
BAE Systems Australia. Maritime operates its lines of business through BAE
Defence. Aerospace
operates its lines of business through BAE Systems
order to perform its work, it is necessary for the BAE Group to have access to
and use certain:
(a) defence related security sensitive information,
(b) security classified information, technical data, equipment, goods and
services and;
(c) export-controlled defence articles, defence services and technical
law restricts access to material under the
Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation Act 1979
) (Australian Classified
Material). Under the ASIO Act, individuals must obtain personal security
clearances (known as ‘security
assessments’) (
Australian personal
Security Clearances
) before they are permitted access to and use of
Australian Classified Material. The Australian Personal Security Clearances are
by the Australian Government Security Vetting Agency (AGSVA),
Department of Defence. Australian Personal Security Clearances are
available to Australian citizens, and citizens of some other countries in
limited circumstances.
laws of the USA also impose export controls on the transfer of material under
Arms Export Control Act
22 USC § 2778 (2004) (USA) (
) and the associated International Traffic in Arms Regulations 22 CFR
§ 120 (2003) (USA) (
ITAR Material
). The export
controls include:
(a) a requirement, except as stated at paragraph 15.i.2.
below, that the nationality and place of birth of personal who will have
to ITAR Material be identified and disclosed; and
(b) restrictions on access to ITAR Material by persons of particular
nationalities or from particular countries of birth.
For the purposes of this affidavit I will distinguish between ITAR Material
which is classified by the USA in the interests of national
security (Classified
ITAR Material) and ITAR Material which is not so classified by the USA in the
interest of national security
(Unclassified ITAR
Defence Trade Controls Act 2012
implements some changes to the way in which Australian Classified Material and
ITAR Material is exported between Australia
and the USA, is unlikely to
substantially impact the restrictions outlined in paragraphs 10 and 11.
and subcontractors of the BAE Group located in, or who have dealings with, the
USA, are required to satisfy the ITAR requirements
before they can transfer ITAR
Material to and from the BAE Group. These export controls are in turn
transmitted to the BAE Group.
BAE Group is also required to observe the ITAR requirements as a condition of
the contracts it has entered into with the Australian
Defence Force and with
contractors to the Australian Defence Force located in the USA.
means that in order for the BAE Group to have access to the ITAR Material which
are essential for the conduct of its business,
it may need to comply with a
number of provisions, including:
§126.18 which allows BAE Group to make the determination of their employees
pursuant so §126.18(c)(1) & (2):
§126.18(c)(1)
allows access to Unclassified ITAR Material to any BAE Group employee who has an
Australian Personal Security Clearance.
§126.18(c)(2) places the ultimate responsibility on the BAE Group to
(a) screen its employees or contractors for substantive
proscribed countries set out in ITAR 126.1 when risk of diversion is the
determining factor and not country
of origin (birth) and (b) prohibit any
employee or contractor who has ‘substantive contact’ with a
proscribed country
from accessing Unclassified ITAR Material unless and until
specific approval is given for the individual to access Unclassified ITAR
§124.16 authorises access to Unclassified ITAR Material to those whose
Nationality (birth) is from NATO countries, European
Union countries, Australia,
Japan, New Zealand and Switzerland provided access is within those territories
or the USA.
§124.8(5) can authorise access to Unclassified and Classified ITAR
Material. Under longstanding USA regulatory practice
the nationalities of all
non USA foreign persons who will have access to Classified ITAR Material must be
established. When determining
nationality the country of origin or birth in
addition to citizenship is considered.
Department of Defence Security Clearance Clause (ADOD Clause). The USA has
concluded an arrangement with the Australian
Department of Defence, with respect
to access to Unclassified and Classified ITAR Material by dual nationals, which
allows access
to Unclassified and Classified ITAR Material to any BAE Group
employee who holds an ADOD clearance. Even though §126.18(c)(1)
paragraph 15.i.1 above) is similar to the ADOD clause (due to its authorisation
based on possessing an Australian Personal Security
Clearance), the ADOD clause
provides broader coverage such as coverage of embedded contractors and coverage
of classified transfers.
This exemption clause is only available to BAE Group
employees and contractors who do not hold nationality (country of
citizenship
or birth) of a country proscribed by ITAR
the provision of access to ITAR Unclassified Material, the BAE Group will, where
practical, seek authority for persons or contractors
under ITAR 126.18 based on
the relevant persons or contractors either having an Australian Personal
Security Clearance or by screening
the employee or contractor for substantive
Substantive
continuing contact with agents, brokers, and nationals of such countries,
continued demonstrated allegiance to such countries, maintenance of business
relationships with persons from such countries, maintenance
of a residence in
such countries, receiving salary or other continuing monetary compensation from
such countries, or acts otherwise
indicating a risk of diversion of ITAR
Materials to unauthorised persons, countries or users. Although nationality does
not, in and
of itself, prohibit access, an employee who has substantive contacts
with persons from countries listed in ITAR 126.1 is presumed
to raise a risk of
diversion, unless the USA determines otherwise. Under ITAR 126.18 the BAE Group
must maintain a technology security/clearance
plan that includes procedures for
screening employees or contractors for such substantive contacts and maintain
records of such screening
for five years.
it is impractical to seek authority for persons or contractors under ITAR
126.18, the BAE Group will be required to request
nationality and place of birth
information from the employee or contractor for the provision of ITAR
Unclassified Material.
For the provision of access to ITAR Classified
Material, the BAE Group will be required to request nationality and place of
information from the employee or contractor to assess if they are entitled
to have access pursuant to ITAR §124.16, ITAR §124.8(5)
or the ADOD
any of its employees or contractors who are required to work with ITAR
Materials, the BAE Group will therefore be required to:
(a) request nationality and place of birth information
from existing and potential employees and contractors;
(b) take a person’s nationality and place of birth into account when
determining who is to be offered employment or contract
work in areas requiring
access to ITAR Classified and Unclassified Material;
(c) impose limitations or prohibitions on persons of particular nationalities or
origins having access to such ITAR Classified and
Unclassified Material;
(d) disclose the nationalities and place of birth of employees and contractors
to the Australian Defence Force as well as the Government
of the USA and
customers and subcontractors located in the USA as required;
(e) for the purposes of ITAR 126.18(c)(2), request details from employees or
contractors of regular travel to restricted or prohibited
countries listed in
ITAR 126.1., recent or continuing contact with agents, brokers, and nationals of
such countries, continued demonstrated
allegiance to such countries, maintenance
of business relationships with persons from such countries, maintenance of a
in such countries, receiving salary or other continuing monetary
compensation from such countries, or acts otherwise indicating a
(f) take substantive contacts referred to in paragraph 18(e) above, into account
when determining who is to be offered employment
or contract work in areas
requiring access to ITAR Material;
(g) impose limitations or prohibitions on persons with substantive contacts
referred to in paragraph 18(e) above, having access to
such ITAR Material;
(h) disclose substantive contacts referred to in paragraph 18(e) above, to the
Government of the USA and customers and subcontractors
located in the USA as
(i) Identify through marking or labelling of employee and contractor
identification passes to reflect ITAR access authorisation
addition to ITAR, the laws of the USA impose export controls under the
Export Administration Regulations (EAR). Although most products
do not require an export licence, if an item is listed on the Commerce Control
List then an export licence is required.
In such circumstances the BAE Group
would be required to establish the nationality of its employees and contractors
to determine
eligibility for access. Nationality is determined by the last
country of permanent residence or citizenship.
ease of reference, I refer hereafter to ITAR and EAR affected activities as
being USA export controlled.
BAE Group’s business has broad benefits for the State of South Australia
and Australia more generally, which include the
(a) The BAE group contributes significantly to the South
Australian economy. As of 1 May 2014, it engaged approximately 1131 employees
and contractors in South Australia, and is currently working on numerous
contracts worth approximately $1.697 billion in total. The
South Australian
employees and contractors work at Edinburgh Parks, Mawson Lakes, Holden Hill,
Wingfield, DSTO Edinburgh Parks, RAAF
Base Edinburgh Parks, Adelaide Airport,
Warradale Barracks and Woodside Barracks.
(b) The BAE Group’s main customer is the Australian Defence Force. The BAE
Group’s operations contribute significantly
to Australia’s defence
capability as they allow the Australian Defence Force to access USA defence
technology which cannot
be obtained elsewhere.
(c) The BAE Group’s Australian headquarters are located at Edinburgh Parks
in South Australia and whilst the BAE Group’s
business is organised into
business units which are based on technology and capability rather than along
geographical boundaries,
it has a significant present in South Australia. The
BAE Group owns freehold premises at its Edinburgh Parks, Mawson Lakes and Holden
Hill sites. The BAE Group in October 2012 made an investment of approximately
$3.3 million at its facility at Edinburgh Parks for
the development of a large
titanium machining facility, to initially support the Joint Strike Fighter
program (JSF) with the potential
to support other engineering manufacturing
part of their applications, each of the applicants has undertaken to take all
reasonable steps
to minimise the
impact upon individuals of their compliance with their export and import
requirements.
Consequences if Exemptions not Granted
his affidavit Mr Urquhart asserts that if the exemptions are not granted it will
have the following consequences:
D1. Non-compliance with USA import and export
USA law it is unlawful to violate the terms and conditions of an export licence
or other approvals granted under the ITAR (22
CFR § 127.1 (2003)). Further,
USA companies are responsible for the acts of persons authorised to export
Controlled Defence
Articles (ITAR 22 CFR § 127.1(a)(4) (2003)). A USA
company could be subject to the following penalties for breaches of these
requirements:
(a) on conviction, fines of up to US $1 million or
imprisonment for not more than 10 years, or both, for each separate violation
22 CFR § 127.3 (2003)); Arms Export Control Act 22 USC § 2778(c)
(b) civil penalties of up to US $500,000 for each separate violation (ITAR 22
CFR § 127.10 (2003)); Arms Export Control Act
22 USC § 2778(e),
2780(k) (2004));
(c) debarment from further defence contracts and, in particular, the export of
Controlled Defence Articles (ITAR 22 CFR § 127.7
(d) loss of company security clearances and related defence contracts;
(e) probation periods and interim suspension orders;
(f) under EAR the BAE Group would be subject to both criminal and administrative
penalties and possible denial of expert privileges
for breaches of the
export controls binding on USA companies are in turn imposed on the BAE Group as
a condition of undertaking business relating
to or involving USA export
controlled Material, the BAE Group needs to be able to comply with the export
controls in its own right.
USA State Department of State has demonstrated a willingness to impose penalties
on non-American companies who breach ITAR requirements.
By way of example, BAE
Systems plc entered into a Consent Agreement with the United States Department
of State on 16 May 2011 whereby
it agreed, amongst other things, to pay in fines
and in remedial compliance measures an aggregate civil penalty of US$79 million
(US$10 million being suspended) in complete settlement of alleged civil
violations under the Arms Act and ITAR.
D2. Breach of current
the BAE Group does not comply with its obligations (and it is barred from
dealing with USA export controlled material) it will
be at risk of breaching its
current contracts with the Australian Defence Force and other customers.
consequences
may include termination of the contracts and the imposition of penalties upon
the BAE Group under the terms of the contracts.
D3. Consequences for the BAE Group’s
of the outcomes described in paragraphs 64 to 68 above would be fundamentally
detrimental to the BAE Group’s business in
particular, if any of the outcomes in paragraphs 64 to 68 above occurred, it is
likely that the BAE Group’s business operations
would be severely impacted
with an associated loss of employment, skills and expertise relevant to the
South Australian defence industry.
D4. Consequences for Australia’s defence
the BAE Group’s business is focused on entering into and carrying out
contracts with the Australian Government on behalf
of the Australian Defence
Force, the outcomes outlined in paragraphs 64 to 68 above could also compromise
the national interest by
limiting the BAE Group’s capacity to develop and
exploit technological goods and services which meet Australian defence needs
into the future.
the BAE Group cannot undertake this work, the Australian Government would need
to find other ways to have such projects completed.
For example, the projects
may need to be undertaken in the USA, at increased cost to Australian tax
have no reason to doubt the veracity of these asserted consequences.
summary, on the information presented to us and to previous divisions of this
Tribunal, we are satisfied that the renewal of an
exemption for BAE and the
grant of exemptions for BAE Systems Defence and BAE Systems Logistics will serve
the wider public interest
referred to by the Supreme Court in
Grammar School v Equal Opportunity Tribunal & Ors
[2007] SASC 308.
are further satisfied that to oblige BAE, BAE Systems Defence and BAE Systems
Logistics to comply, in all their employment practices,
with ss 52 and 54 of the
Act, is to impose on each of them obligations, which are much more than merely
inconvenient’
sense that there are no reasonably alternative means by which they can comply
with the Act
and still satisfy both the ITAR and EAR requirements.
Accordingly
we make an order pursuant to s 92 of the Act
exempting BAE, BAE Systems
Defence and BAE Systems Logistics from the provisions of ss 52 and 54 of the
to enable them and each of them to discriminate in their employment
practices with respect to persons of particular nationalities
on the same terms
and conditions as are set out in paras 64 to 66 inclusive of the judgment of the
Tribunal dated 21 January 2008,
bearing Judgment No
(2008) SAEOT 1
except that the reference therein to International Traffic in Arms Regulations
(ITAR) controlled material is amended to
add a reference to Export
Administration Regulations (EAR) controlled material and EAR controls. The
exemptions are granted for a
period of three years from the date of this
addition, BAE, BAE Systems Defence and BAE Systems Logistics are to report to
the Equal Opportunity Commissioner commencing from
31 December 2011 and
annually thereafter for the duration of the exemption period on their compliance
with the exemption requirements,
and changes in their procedures reflecting
amendments to the ITAR and EAR and how employees and contractors are affected in
the context
of the protections afforded by the
Summary of relevant BAE Group policies and
A. Equal Opportunity Exemption Standard
BAE Group’s Equal Opportunity Exemption Standard (
out the requirements which must be met in States and Territories where we sought
and were granted an Exemption, whenever a
person’s nationality or place of
birth is taken into account in making work-related decisions. In particular, it
(a) Current and prospective employees and contractors to
be notified about the BAE Group’s exemptions from anti-discrimination
legislation in various Australian States and Territories (State Exemptions), and
given a plain-English explanation about the potential
effects of the State
Exemption on them;
(b) Employees and contractors to be provided with an explanation of the reason
for their transfer if they need to be transferred
between projects, areas or
facilities on the grounds of nationality and that all reasonable steps are taken
to avoid harm or loss
as a result of such a transfer;
(c) The nationality-coding on company badges and security passes be done in a
way which does not reveal a person’s nationality
or reasons for their
level of access to Australian classified and/or ITAR Materials to a person
unfamiliar with the code;
(d) Information concerning security passes or badges, security clearance levels
and access to Australian Classified Material and
ITAR Material to be restricted
to the Company Secretary, Human Resources Manager and Manager of Security on a
strictly ‘need
to know’ basis; and
(e) Human Resources Managers of relevant jurisdictions must report on compliance
with the requirements of the exemptions to the BAE
Group’s legal
department.
B. Compliance Questionnaire
compliance questionnaire is completed by the human resources staff in each
Business Unit who are responsible for implementing the
Standard. This
questionnaire is designed to monitor compliance with the State Exemptions.
completed questionnaires are collated, recorded and maintained by the BAE
Group’s legal department.
C. Training of existing
Group has available to all employees a presentation that covers the following
(a) Requirements of the ITAR and DSM;
(b) Potential consequences to the BAE Group of breaches of the legislation,
especially the ITAR requirements;
(c) State Exemptions granted to the BAE Group in various Australian
and why they are
required by the BAE Group.
(d) What the State Exemptions permit in each jurisdiction and what is not
allowed; and
(e) Mandatory and voluntary requirements for compliance with State Exemption
requirements, audits and training.
The presentation slides can be accessed and viewed on the BAE Group’s
Equal Opportunity Exemptions intranet page by all employees
BAE Systems employees receive some form of Export Controls Training depending on
their level of involvement.
(a) Those employees who are not involved in the
import/export of goods from Australia will undertake Awareness Training.
(b) Those employees who are involved in the import/export of goods or managing
US Controlled Technology will undertake Enhanced Training
providing them with,
among other things, an understanding of the Australian equal opportunity
legislation and exemptions.
D. Engagement of new employees
BAE Group has implemented the following steps to ensure all new employees are
aware of the existence of the State Exemptions and
that they receive training
(a) All applications for employment BAE Group are
submitted online via the BAE Group’s Careers Page. ‘Your Job
has a link to information titled ‘Equal Opportunity
Exemptions what they mean to you’.
(b) The BAE Group’s requirement team uses a ‘Vacancy
Checklist’ when inducting new employees to the recruitment
checklist prompts the recruitment team member to enter into a discussion with
the applicant for a role regarding the State
Exemptions and directs the
recruitment team member to the various resources the BAE Group has available on
the topic, including the
intranet pages and the ITAR awareness
presentations.
(c) Any Business Unit of the BAE Group which has a vacancy and needs additional
staff is required to complete a ‘Recruitment
– Staff Requisition
Form’ and forward the form to the Human Resources department for
processing and actioning. In completing
the form, the Business Unit must
consider whether the proposed role will be affected by ITAR requirements and
provide specific details
of the ITAR requirements prior to submitting the form
to Human Resources for consideration in the recruitment process.
(d) Following receipt of the ‘Recruitment – Staff Requisition
Form’, the Human Resources department completes a
Brief’ form, which once again prompts the BAE Group to consider the ITAR
requirements that may affect the specific
role, by requiring details to be
provided as to the nature of any specific ITAR requirements affecting the
proposed role, including
details of any proscribed nationalities under ITAR
requirements.
(e) In interviewing applicants for positions, the Human Resources team uses an
‘Interview Rating Sheet’, which prompts
the interviewer to discuss
the ITAR and State Exemption requirements with the potential applicant, if such
requirements are relevant
for a particular role and to request nationality and
place of birth information from the potential employee if it is of significance
for the role. The questionnaire is the same for all positions across the BAE
(f) The recruitment team also uses an ‘Applicant Phone Screen form’,
which is in the initial phone interview which prompts
them to consider the ITAR
requirements that may affect the specific role.
(g) New Human Resources staff, particularly those in the recruitment team,
receive one-on-one training from the Recruitment Manager
on the ITAR and State
Exemption requirements.
E. Intranet Page
BAE Group’s intranet has a page specifically dedicated to informing
employees of the existence of the State Exemptions and
an explanation of why
they are necessary.
page links to the Standard, BAE Group presentations, copies of the State
Exemptions granted to the BAE Group entities, and links
to websites for state,
territory and federal anti-discrimination and human rights
commissions
The BAE Group comprises BAE,
BAE Defence and BAE Logistics.
A summary of the relevant BAE
Group policies and procedures is reproduced in Schedule A.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (183 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter