URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAEOT/2016/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:56:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
RAGLESS v STOKES [2016] SAEOT 2 (20 April 2016)
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
(District Court Administrative and
Disciplinary Division)
to comply with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting
publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person
using material in the judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed
to the Registry of the Court in which it was generated.
[2016] SAEOT
Judgment of Her
Honour Judge Cole
HUMAN RIGHTS -
DISCRIMINATION
Application by the respondent seeking an order that the proceedings be
dismissed on the basis that there is no likelihood of success.
Held: Pursuant to
section 96(2)(b)
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
proceedings are dismissed.
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
Francis v Christies Beach Medical Centre
[2013] SAEOT 1
& Anor v Pultney Grammar School
[2008] SAEOT 7
Ragless v The South
Australian Field & Game Association Southern Branch Inc
[2016] SASC 8
considered.
[2016] SAEOT
THE TRIBUNAL DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING JUDGMENT:
Mrs Ragless
made a complaint to the Commissioner for Equal Opportunity (“the
Commissioner”) in respect of the conduct
of Mr Stokes.
Mrs Ragless alleged that Mr Stokes’ conduct amounted to
victimisation of her, contrary to the provisions of
Equal Opportunity Act
(“the Act”). The Commissioner referred the complaint to
the Tribunal by letter dated 26 August 2015.
has now applied to have the matter dismissed or struck out on the basis that it
has no likelihood of success, and that no
evidence which could be adduced at
trial could change that.
provides, in s 96(2)(b):
(2) The Tribunal may, at any stage of proceedings under
(b) make an order dismissing the proceedings.
Victimisation under the Act
Act provides, in s 86:
unlawful for a person to commit an act of victimisation.
(2) For the
purposes of this section, a person commits an act of victimisation against
another person (the
) if he or she treats the victim
unfavourably on the ground that the victim has—
(a) brought
proceedings under this Act against a person; or
evidence or information in proceedings under this Act; or
allegations that the victim or some other person has been the subject of an act
that contravenes this Act; or
(d) reasonably
asserted the victim's right or the right of some other person to lodge a
complaint or take other proceedings under
this Act; or
(e) otherwise
done anything under or by reference to this Act,
or on the ground that he or she knows that the victim
intends to do any of those things, or suspects that the victim has done, or
intends to do, any of those things.
(3) Unfavourable treatment on the ground that a person—
(a) has made a
false allegation; or
(b) has not
acted in good faith,
does not constitute an act of
victimisation.
Act provides, in s 6(3):
(3) For the
purposes of this Act, a person (the
discriminator
) treats another
unfavourably on the basis of a particular attribute or circumstance if the
discriminator treats that other person
less favourably than in identical or
similar circumstances the discriminator treats, or would treat, a person who
does not have that
attribute or is not affected by that
circumstance.
person who has been the subject of victimisation within the meaning of the Act
may complain to the Commissioner pursuant to s 93
of the Act.
The Commissioner may then refer the complaint to this Tribunal under
her complaint of victimisation, Mrs Ragless relied in particular upon
s 86(2)(d) and (e) of the Act. In order to show that she
has been subject
to victimisation by Mr Stokes under s 86(2)(d) of the Act, Mrs Ragless
would need to prove that Mr Stokes had treated
her unfavourably, on the
ground that she has reasonably asserted her right, or someone else’s
right, to lodge a complaint or
to take other proceedings under the Act. In
order to show that she has been subject to victimisation by Mr Stokes under
s 86(2)(e),
Mrs Ragless would need to prove that she has done
something under the Act, or by reference to the Act, which has been the basis
some unfavourable treatment of her by Mr Stokes.
Mrs Ragless’ allegations of victimisation
Mrs Ragless
married Mr Steven Ragless in 1968. Mr Ragless was a member of the
South Australia Field and Game Association Southern
(“SAFGA”) for many years until 27 October 2012.
Mrs Ragless has never been a member of SAFGA and has never
held a firearms
licence. She did, however, participate in the social activities of SAFGA in her
capacity as Mr Ragless’ wife.
She also assisted with the publication
and distribution of a newsletter and with catering. Mrs Ragless’
complaints about
victimisation revolve around events which occurred in the
context of Mr Ragless’ membership of SAFGA and the cessation of that
membership.
basis for Mrs Ragless’ complaint was set out in her complaint to the
Commissioner, in further and better particulars in
the Tribunal and in an
outline of argument. By the time of the hearing of the application to dismiss
or strike out Mrs Ragless’
complaint, Mrs Ragless had settled
upon eight incidents of alleged victimisation upon which she sought to rely for
the purposes of
her complaint. For the purpose of determining the application
to dismiss or strike out her complaint, I have not heard any evidence
any findings of fact. I have simply relied upon the facts alleged by
Mrs Ragless, assuming, for the purposes of deciding
the application, that
she would be able to establish those facts to the requisite standard of proof.
will consider Mrs Ragless’ allegations on an incident by incident
basis, and then as a whole.
The incidents
had a friendship with Mr Greg Dawes, who was also a member of SAFGA.
Mrs Ragless alleged that, in June 2012, a “difference
regarding the future of Southern
adversely affected
the friendship between Mr Ragless and Mr Dawes. Mr Ragless came
to believe that Mr Dawes was spreading rumours
he was having another nervous breakdown (Mr Ragless had, in fact, had what
Mrs Ragless refers to as
a nervous breakdown in 2008). Mrs Ragless
had a telephone conversation with Mr Dawes in which she informed
Mr Dawes that her husband
was well and noted that Mr Dawes had been
talking about her husband behind his back. Mrs Ragless, in her outline of
submissions,
characterised this phone call as an assertion by her of
Mr Ragless’ right to lodge a claim of discrimination on the basis of
unfair and unfavourable treatment because of a past
disability.
Mrs Ragless were to prove the facts she alleges in relation to this ground
of her complaint, it has no prospect of success
as an allegation of
victimisation at all, much less an allegation of victimisation against
Mr Stokes. Mrs Ragless was not treated
unfavourably. She did not, in
fact, assert any right of her husband’s on her account of the conversation
with Mr Dawes. She
did not do anything else by reference to the Act.
Mr Stokes is not said to have been involved in either the telephone
conversation
or in any unfavourable treatment based on the telephone
conversation
Mrs Ragless’ complaint cannot succeed in relation to the first
alleged incident.
election of officeholders of SAFGA. Mrs Ragless’ outline
submissions says that Mr Ragless had sent letters to the committee members
saying that he intended to stand for both the position
of Branch Secretary, an
office which was, at that time, held by Mr Peter Perry, and the position of
President, which was, at that
time, held by Mr Greg Dawes.
Mrs Ragless said that Mr Stokes telephoned Mr Ragless and told
Mr Ragless that he, Mr Stokes, would
withdraw financial support for
the club “and send us broke” if Mr Ragless “tried to
stand up” against Mr
Perry, Mr Dawes and
Following that
telephone call, Mr Ragless lost sleep and became anxious about the
consequences of his plans upon his family. Mr
Ragless and Mrs Ragless
discussed the matter, and agreed that Mr Ragless would not run for
Mrs Ragless characterised these events in the following
At this point I asserted Steve’s right to
challenge these people that were discriminating against Steve and taking his
issue and twisting it out of
The reference to “his previous issue” is a reference to what
Mrs Ragless refers to as Mr Ragless’ nervous breakdown.
Again, these allegations do not amount to allegations of victimisation of
Mrs Ragless by Mr Stokes. Mr Stokes did not treat
Mrs Ragless
unfavourably. Mrs Ragless did not assert her right or
anyone else’s right to lodge a complaint or to take other proceedings
under the Act. She did not do anything else by reference to the Act.
Mrs Ragless’
third allegation of victimisation relates to a two day event at Birdwood which
occurred during the controversy
holders of SAFGA. Mrs Ragless, in her outline, said that she was helping
in the kitchen
at the event when she:
called Greg Dawes outside and discussed the whole issue
with him. Greg started to tell me Steve was unstable and when I told him
this was not true and was not the first issue of uncontrolled bullying and abuse
from Peter Perry and Steve was concerned that
he would snap and shoot
Mrs Ragless asserted, in her outline:
This was the third instance of me asserting
Steve’s right to complain about unfair treatment based on the perception
recurrence of a previous
There are several possible interpretations of this allegation. None of them
are capable of amounting to the victimisation of Mrs
Mr Stokes. Mr Stokes was not even involved in the conversation. No
unfavourable treatment of Mrs Ragless by Mr Stokes
is alleged to have
resulted from her conversation with Mr Dawes.
Mrs Ragless’
fourth allegation was as follows:
On Wednesday the following week Ray Pash who was
Assistant Secretary rang to say that the Secretary Darian Stringer had reported
the Police that Steve had a Bi Polar condition and was unsafe.
I spoke in length to Ray Pash who confirmed the President and the Secretary were
acting outside the constitution with illegal and
immoral intent.[sic]
I attended the State Council meeting on 10/11/12 with Steve and found a hostile
environment with Mr Dawes and Mr Stokes intimidating
the State Council
members and
Mrs Ragless characterised this as “an assertion of Steve’s
right to lodge a complaint about his treatment that was based
on a false report
to the Firearms Branch claiming a Bi Polar
condition.”
I reject that
characterisation. The facts alleged do not constitute the victimisation of
Mrs Ragless by Mr Stokes under the Act.
Mrs Ragless’
fifth allegation was:
When Bryan Stokes sent out defaming documentation to all
members in the State I was contacted by many members and their partners who
could not understand the basis of this unprecedented deceit and bullying and
were intimidated by threats of legal action.
Myself and my son and daughter knew the truth and we all supported Steve’s
claim that his previous nervous breakdown was being
used against
Mrs Ragless did not allege that the “defaming documentation”
was about her. The clear inference was that it related to
Mr Ragless, rather
than Mrs Ragless. The elements of victimisation cannot be made out on
these facts. In addition, the assertion
of one’s own or another
person’s right to lodge a complaint or to take proceedings under the Act
must be more than a
state of knowledge. Some positive act of assertion is
required. The fifth incident does not appear to have related to the Act at
sixth incident alleged by Mrs Ragless was as follows:
I was not aware that my daughter Hayley had
independently contacted Mr Bryan Stokes confirming her support following his
assassination mail out until the discovery process in
Mr Stokes’ Supreme Court defamation action against Steve.
When I was aware of the letter to Mr Stokes from Hayley I also sent an
Neither of these emails were answered but they were both in effect assertions of
Steve’s right to claim
discrimination.
Again, I determine that these events do not amount to victimisation of
Mrs Ragless by Mr Stokes.
seventh incident alleged by Mrs Ragless was her attendance at a
conciliation meeting with SAFGA at the Equal Opportunity Commission.
the basis of the description of these events put forward by her,
Mrs Ragless’ attendance at that meeting did not
constitute or result
in victimisation of her by Mr Stokes. I also note that the Act, in
s 95(9), provides:
(9) Evidence of anything said or done in the course of
conciliation proceedings is not admissible in proceedings under this Act or
other Act or law.
eighth incident alleged by Mrs Ragless was:
In June 2014 I also sent an email to Mr Bryan
Stokes complaining of Steve’s treatment and the victimization war being
by him and his
Once again, by itself, this does not amount to an allegation of victimisation
under the Act. There is no relevant assertion or action
by reference to the Act
by Mrs Ragless and no resultant unfavourable treatment by Mr Stokes of
Mrs Ragless.
Mrs Ragless
argued that she had been the subject of victimisation under s 86(2)(d) and
(e) of the Act. None of the eight incidents
put forward by Mrs Ragless,
taken separately, constitutes victimisation under the Act. Mrs Ragless
summarised the grounds for her
assertion of victimisation in the following
Prior to Steve’s illegal expulsion from SAFGA I
enjoyed the social status, support and respect from members afforded to the
spouse of a Life Member of SAFGA. If I agreed with the view of Mr Stokes I
would still be enjoying those
Ragless v The South Australian Field & Game Association Southern Branch
Vanstone J found
that Mr Ragless resigned from SAFGA by letter dated 27 October 2012.
In any event, on her own case, Mrs Ragless’
ability to experience the
activities of SAFGA, given that she has never been a member, was entirely
dependent upon Mr Ragless’
membership. It did not relate to whether
or not she agreed with Mr Stokes on any issue.
Mrs Ragless
further submitted:
Prior to my assertion that Steve had been the victim of
discrimination I enjoyed the respect and company of members of the South
Field and Game Association. Following my assertion of my
husband’s rights I was our vehicle was [sic] searched by the Police
were evicted from the Monarto property by the Murray Bridge police on the
direction of Mr Bryan Stokes and in front of many
members, some I had known
for twenty three
do not doubt that Mrs Ragless has been fully supportive of Mr Ragless.
However, nothing that she has put forward amounts to a relevant
assertion or
action by reference to the Act such as to bring her conduct within
s 86(2)(d) or (e) of the Act. In addition, even
if some of her thoughts,
conversations or emails could be characterised as assertions under the Act, no
basis for attributing the
content of those thoughts, conversations or emails as
a motivating force for Mr Stokes has been provided by Mrs Ragless. On
basis of the allegations put forward in the documents provided by
Mrs Ragless to the Tribunal, and her submissions, I determine that
no likelihood of success in her action alleging victimisation against her by
Mr Stokes. This is so whether the alleged incidents
are considered
separately or together. It is so, having regard to all that Mrs Ragless
has put to the Tribunal, and taking into
consideration whether any evidence
which Mrs Ragless could adduce could improve the likelihood of success of
the complaint.
Mrs Ragless
also asserted that Mr Stokes had discriminated against her, contrary to the
Act. Neither her documents nor her submissions
disclose any conduct on the part
of Mr Stokes which could constitute unlawful discrimination under the Act.
Mrs Ragless has no likelihood
of success on this basis either.
to s 96(2)(b), there will be an order that the proceedings are
Pazios & Anor v Pultney
Grammar Schoo
[2008] SAEOT 7
Francis v Christies Beach Medical
[2013] SAEOT 1
Plaintiff's Outline of
Submissions for a Hearing on 11/2/16, para 18.
Plaintiff's Outline of
Submissions for a Hearing on 11/2/16, para 21.
Plaintiff's Outline of
Sunmissions for a Hearing on 11/2/16, para 26.
Plaintiff's Outline of
Submissions for a Hearing on 11/2/16, para 29.
Plaintiff's Outline of
Submissions for a Hearing on 11/2/16, para 32.
Plaintiff's Outline of
Submissions for a Hearing on 11/2/16, para 33.
Plaintiff's Outline of
Submissions for a Hearing on 11/2/16, paras 35-37.
Plaintiff's Outline of
Submissions for a Hearing on 11/2/16, para 38.
Plaintiff's Outline of
Submissions for a Hearing on 11/2/16, paras 39-40.
Plaintiff's Outline of
Submissions for a Hearing on 11/2/16, paras 41-43.
Plaintiff's Outline of
Submissions for a Hearing on 11/2/16, para 46.
Plaintiff's Outline of
Submissions for a Hearing on 11/2/16, para 16.4.
[2016] SASC 8.
Plaintiff's Outline of
Submissions for a Hearing on 11/2/16, para 16.5.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (184 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter