URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SADC/2025/106.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:55:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v MSP (No 2) [2025] SADC 106 (15 August 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
R v MSP (No 2)
[2025] SADC 106
Reasons for the Verdicts of his
Honour Judge Handshin
15 August 2025
CRIMINAL LAW - PARTICULAR OFFENCES - OFFENCES AGAINST THE PERSON - SEXUAL
The accused is charged with seven counts of unlawful sexual intercourse with
a person under 17. The complainant was, at all material
accused’s foster-sister. She was placed with the accused’s family in
1999 when she was aged 13 and remained
living with the accused’s family
until mid 2002, when she was 16 years old. The complainant gave evidence that
she was moved
to the accused’s family because her previous foster family
physically abused her, including the mother, JN. After the move
accused’s family home, the complainant alleged that from mid 2000, the
accused embarked on a sexual relationship with
her involving acts of digital
penetration, fellatio and penis vagina intercourse, and which persisted until
2002 when the complainant
left the residence. The accused was aged between 25
and 27/28 throughout the period of alleged offending. The complainant gave
of a number of specific episodes of alleged abuse, and said that sexual
activity between her and the accused otherwise took place
in the accused's
bedroom on an almost nightly basis, without being detected by the
accused’s parents. The complainant gave
evidence that sexual activity
between her and the accused was facilitated by their bedrooms being next to each
other on the first
floor of the residence.
The accused did not give evidence in his defence but called eight witnesses,
a number of whom gave evidence that contradicted the
complainant’s account
on important topics, including the complainant’s relationship with her
previous foster family,
which bedroom the complainant slept in after her
relocation to the accused’s family home and the extent of the
complainant’s
role on the accused’s family farm, the latter two
being central features of the complainant’s allegations against the
accused. It was further agreed between the parties that on multiple occasions
between 1999 and 2008, the complainant had made false
allegations to her
biological mother that she had sex with another foster brother prior to being
relocated to the accused’s
family home. In the course of her evidence, the
complainant adamantly denied making such allegations. The prosecution accepted
the complainant’s denials were knowingly untruthful.
Held: although aspects of the complainant’s account about the charged
and uncharged acts appeared persuasive and internally
consistent, the
complainant’s evidence about key features of her allegations against the
accused and important matters of background
was contradicted by witnesses whose
evidence could not be rejected. In particular, evidence that left open as a
reasonable possibility
that the complainant did not in fact occupy a bedroom
next to the accused’s created significant problems for the integrity
the prosecution case. Moreover, the complainant’s evidence about having
been abused by her previous foster family was inconsistent
with letters she had
written to the family and with evidence given by the mother of the family, which
could not be discounted. The
lies told by the complainant to her biological
mother about sex with a previous foster brother and what the prosecution
to be her false denials in court to having made such allegations in the
past, was a further cause to doubt the credibility and reliability
complainant’s account.
The accused is not guilty of all charges.
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Evidence Act
(2)(a), referred to.
R v Dookheea
[2017] HCA 36
(2017) 262 CLR 402
Gately v The Queen
Brown v The King
[2025] SASCA 40
[2025] SADC
Morton (a pseudonym) v The King
[2025] SASCA 29
Nieterink v The
(1999) 76 SASR 56
Liberato v The Queen
[1985] HCA 66
(1985) 159 CLR 507
De Silva v The Queen
[2019] HCA 48
(2019) 268 CLR 57
JGS v The Queen
(2014) 118 SASR 382
[2019] SASCFC
Angus (a pseudonym) v The King
[2024] SASCA 101
Bates v The
[2023] SASCA 65
R v MSP (No 2)
[2025] SADC 106
accused, who I will from time to time refer to as ‘MSP’, is charged
on Information dated 31 January 2018 with seven
counts of unlawful sexual
intercourse with a person over the age of 12 and under the age of 17.
Information is in the following terms:
First Count
Statement of Offence
Unlawful Sexual Intercourse.
(Section 49(3)
Criminal Law Consolidation
Particulars of Offence
[MSP] between the 4
day of October 1999 and the 24
day of May 2001 at Coomandook, had sexual intercourse with [AW] a person of or
above the age of 12 years and under the age of 17
years, by inserting a finger
into her vagina.
Second Count
Statement of Offence
Unlawful Sexual Intercourse. (Ibid).
Particulars of Offence
[MSP] between the 4
day of October 1999 and the 24
day of May 2001 at Coomandook, had sexual intercourse with [AW] a person of or
above the age of 12 years and under the age of 17
years, by inserting his penis
into her vagina.
Third Count
Statement of Offence
Unlawful Sexual Intercourse. (Ibid).
Particulars of Offence
[MSP] between the 4
day of October 1999 and the 24
day of May 2001 at Coomandook, had sexual intercourse with [AW] a person of or
above the age of 12 years and under the age of 17
years, by inserting his penis
into her vagina.
Fourth Count
Statement of Offence
Unlawful Sexual Intercourse. (Ibid).
Particulars of Offence
[MSP] between the 23
day of May 2000 and the 24
of May 2001 at Coomandook, had sexual intercourse with [AW] a person of or above
the age of 12 years and under the age of 17
years, by causing her to perform an
act of fellatio upon him.
Fifth Count
Statement of Offence
Unlawful Sexual Intercourse. (Ibid).
Particulars of Offence
[MSP] between the 23
day of May 2000 and the 24
of May 2001 at Coomandook, had sexual intercourse with [AW] a person of or above
the age of 12 years and under the age of 17
years, by inserting his penis into
her vagina.
Sixth Count
Statement of Offence
Unlawful Sexual Intercourse. (Ibid).
Particulars of Offence
[MSP] between the 23
day of May 2000 and the 15
of June 2002 at Coomandook, had sexual intercourse with [AW] a person of or
above the age of 12 years and under the age of 17
years, by inserting his penis
into her vagina.
Seventh Count
Statement of Offence
Unlawful Sexual Intercourse. (Ibid).
Particulars of Offence
[MSP] between the 23
day of May 2000 and the 15
of June 2002 at Coomandook, had sexual intercourse with [AW] a person of or
above the age of 12 years and under the age of 17
years, by inserting his penis
into her vagina.
accused pleaded not guilty to the charges and elected to be tried by a judge
sitting without a jury.
Overview of the prosecution case
complainant (who I will sometimes refer to as ‘AW’) was, at all
relevant times, the accused’s foster sister.
She lived with the accused
and his family on their Coomandook farm (the farm) from 1999 to mid 2002 when
she was aged between 13
the complainant first moved into the farm, her older half-sister, J, was living
with the accused and his family. J remained
living at the farm for around 7-8
months before moving out in mid-2000 shortly after her 19
the farm, she occupied a down-stairs bedroom
not far from the master bedroom.
After the complainant commenced her placement at the farm, she occupied a spare
bedroom on the first
floor of the homestead that was adjacent to the
accused’s bedroom. There is a conflict in the evidence as to whether the
complainant
was re-located to the spare down-stairs bedroom after J left. This
issue assumed considerable importance at trial because of the
nature of some of
the complainant’s allegations.
upstairs bedrooms of the house were accessed by an internal timber staircase
positioned in the lounge / dining area. At the top
of the staircase was a small
landing. The door to the accused’s bedroom at the top of the staircase was
visible from the bottom
of the staircase and, in particular, from a sofa on
which the accused’s parents would often sit whilst watching television.
With a turn of the head, a person sitting on the sofa at the bottom of the
staircase would be able to see up to the accused’s
bedroom door. The
flooring in the upstairs area of the house was comprised of timber boards that
would creak when walked upon and
as they expanded and contracted throughout the
prosecution case is that from around mid-2000, after J left the farm, the
accused commenced a sexual relationship with the complainant.
The complainant
was then 13 or 14 years of age; the accused was 25 years of age. The sexual
relationship commenced one night out
of the blue when, having had no real
relationship or interactions with the complainant beforehand, the accused
entered her bedroom
where the complainant was in bed but not asleep and asked if
she wanted to be touched. Thinking that the accused was offering to
console her
because she had been lonely and upset after moving to the farm, the complainant
agreed, expecting the accused to hug
her. However, on the prosecution case, the
accused put his hand under the complainant’s blanket and began rubbing her
The accused then told the complainant to join him in his bedroom which she
did. After some time in the accused’s bedroom, the
prosecution case is
that the accused digitally penetrated the complainant (count 1) and then engaged
in penis vagina sexual intercourse
with her (count 2). The accused is alleged to
have told the complainant not to tell anyone about what had happened,
threatening to
shoot her and then himself if she did. On the prosecution case,
the accused kept a .22 calibre rifle behind his bedroom door.
alleged commission of counts 1 and 2 marked the commencement of a sexual
relationship between the accused and the complainant
involving sexual
intercourse in the accused’s bedroom on an almost nightly basis that, on
the prosecution case, continued for
almost two years without detection. The
complainant gave evidence that sex regularly took place at 8:30pm, when the
television show
‘Law & Order’ would air. The accused’s
mother would leave the sofa at the bottom of the stairs to make herself
coffee. This was the complainant’s ‘cue’ to sneak across the
landing at the top of the stairs and into
the accused’s bedroom, where
sexual intercourse would occur. Sometimes the accused’s mother would not
watch Law &
Order and would instead play cards on the computer in the home
office located on the ground floor. The complainant would hear the
clicking of
the computer mouse and, knowing that the accused’s mother was not in the
lounge room, would creep across the timber
flooring and into the accused’s
4 was alleged to have taken place an indeterminate amount of time after counts 1
and 2 and involved the accused returning to
the house in an upset state and
retreating to his bedroom. The complainant had been sitting with the
accused’s father in the
lounge room at the time the accused returned home
and had a discussion with the accused’s father about the accused’s
appearance. The accused’s father walked out of the house and the
complainant went up to see the accused who, on the prosecution
case, was sitting
on his bed with the barrel of his rifle in his mouth. After some discussion, the
accused is alleged to have asked
the complainant to perform oral sex on him
which she did.
3 allegedly occurred the night after count 4 and involved an act of penis vagina
sexual intercourse. The complainant gave evidence
that the television show the
‘X-Files’ was playing on the television in the accused’s room
on this particular occasion.
By this point in time, the complainant considered
herself to be in a romantic relationship with the accused.
5 was another episode of penis vagina sex allegedly taking place in the
accused’s bedroom. The complainant gave evidence
that this was the first
occasion on which she had sex with the accused whilst positioned on top of him,
which caused an injury to
her vagina.
6 concerns an allegation that the accused had sexual intercourse with the
complainant in the cabin of a Volvo truck that had
been acquired by the
accused’s parents for transporting grain. The prosecution case was that
the complainant had been in the
truck with the accused who wanted to see if she
could ‘double declutch’ and split shift the gears. After some
instruction,
the complainant was able to drive the truck prompting the accused
to tell her he was proud of her. They then had sex in the back
of the cabin. The
complainant was unable to say precisely when this incident occurred but she
thought it was around harvest time.
However, other evidence put before me, and
agreed facts, indicates that the Volvo truck was not acquired until April 2002
complainant was not present for the 2002 harvest at the end of the year
as she had left the farm by then.
7 involves an alleged act of penis vagina sex in a harvester being driven by the
accused. The complainant thought this incident
incident, which would place it in the harvest of 2002 by which time the
complainant had already left the farm.
prosecution case is that after assisting the accused with harvesting duties by
driving a tractor and a chaser-bin, the accused
told the complainant to get into
the harvester with him. After finishing harvesting, the accused undid his pants.
The complainant
masturbated him and then sat atop him, facing away from him.
Sexual intercourse took place with the complainant in this position.
complainant left the farm in June 2002 in the context of disciplinary troubles
at school and conflict with the accused’s
mother. The prosecution case is
that the accused thereafter took unsuccessful steps to try and have the
complainant live with him,
which the prosecution contend was demonstrative of
his romantic interest in her.
prosecution bears the onus of proving the guilt of the accused. The standard of
proof is beyond reasonable doubt. The accused
is not required to prove anything.
He is presumed innocent of the charges unless and until the prosecution proves
each element of
the offences charged beyond reasonable doubt. In this respect, I
keep in mind the comments of the High Court in
R v Dookheea
[2017] HCA 36
concerning the standard of proof:
...being satisfied
of guilt beyond reasonable doubt does not simply mean concluding that the
accused may have committed the offence
charged or even that it is more likely
than not that the accused committed the offence charged. What is required is a
much higher
standard of satisfaction, the highest known to the law: proof beyond
reasonable doubt.
is a corollary of the prosecution’s burden of proof that if, having
considered all of the evidence, I am unsure where the
truth lies in relation to
a charge, my verdict must be not guilty.
the question for me is not whether I prefer the evidence of the complainant to
the evidence given by defence
I cannot resolve the
issues in dispute by making a choice as between the conflicting bodies of
The accused may be found
guilty if, and only if, I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the
prosecution have proved each and
every element of the offence under
consideration.
the finder of fact, it is necessary for me to make an assessment of the
truthfulness and reliability of the witnesses who gave
evidence. It is of course
my prerogative to accept or reject all or parts of a witness’ evidence.
the conclusion of the prosecution case, the accused indicated that he would not
give but would call evidence in his defence. It
was the accused’s right
not to give evidence and I draw no adverse inference from the exercise of his
right. I have not used
his silence as a make weight or to fill any gaps or
deficiencies in the prosecution case. To do otherwise would be to undermine the
accused’s right to silence. Plainly enough, the fact that the accused
elected not to give evidence does not alter the burden
of proof which remains
fixed on the prosecution; nor does it affect the weight that must be given to
the presumption of innocence.
by calling other witnesses as part of the defence case, the accused did not
assume any burden. I will evaluate the evidence
of the defence witnesses in the
same way I will evaluate the evidence of the complainant.
deciding whether an offence has been proved beyond reasonable doubt, I must have
regard to the whole of the relevant and admissible
evidence on that charge. This
will require me to evaluate any inconsistencies in the evidence of the
complainant or as between her
evidence and other evidence that is before me,
together with any other shortcomings in the prosecution evidence which bear upon
discharge of its burden. The significance of any asserted inconsistencies or
other shortcomings in the evidence going to a particular
count are to be
evaluated collectively and not compartmentalised. I indicate that I have taken
this approach when considering the
evidence of all witnesses.
considering the evidence and whether I am satisfied to the criminal standard of
the elements of the offences, I have brought an
open and unprejudiced mind to
bear. I remind myself of the importance of making a decision without sympathy,
prejudice or fear.
must give each of the charges the accused faces separate consideration by
reference only to the evidence admissible in support
of a particular charge. The
charges do not rise or fall together. My verdict in relation to any one charge
cannot dictate my verdict
in relation to the other charges.
the course of final submissions, the prosecutor, Ms N Moore, submitted that the
evidence of each count was cross-admissible in
relation to each other count for
classic non-propensity purposes,
namely to provide important explanatory context for the charged acts including:
- to explain
that counts 3 to 7 did not ‘come out of the blue’, but represented
ongoing incidents as part of the sexual
relationship, the commencement of which
was demarcated by the alleged commission of counts 1 and 2;
- to assist in
informing any criticism of shortcomings in, or confusion related to, the
complainant’s account as to some counts
(because of the alleged commission
of a multiplicity of offences);
- to assist in
explaining why the complainant continued to acquiesce in or submit to ongoing
sexual activity and to help understand
why she made no complaint about the
accused’s conduct;
- to assist in
explaining how the accused may have come to feel sufficiently confident to
maintain a sexual relationship with the
complainant over an extended period of
applied the test for admission prescribed by
s 34P(2)(a)
and (3) of the
Evidence Act 1929
(SA) (Evidence Act)
I am satisfied that evidence
of each count is cross-admissible for these purposes, and senior counsel for the
accused did not suggest
to the contrary.
are the only uses that can be made of the evidence of each count, if I accept
it, as to each other count. The evidence cannot
be used to reason that, if the
accused engaged in one or more sexual acts with the complainant, he was a bad
person or the sort of
person more likely to have committed another charged act
or acts. Nor can my satisfaction as to any charged act, be used as a substitute
for proof beyond reasonable doubt of any other charged act or acts.
Forensic disadvantage
say something now about the significant forensic disadvantage that I consider
the accused confronts in defending allegations which
date back more than two
decades. Whilst
Evidence Act
has no application to trials
before a judge sitting without a
the principles enshrined in
emanate from the common law’s recognition of the impact of delay on
an accused’s ability to test and challenge a prosecution
case and to
marshal evidence relevant to his or her defence of a criminal charge. It will be
appropriate for a judge sitting without
a jury to apply these principles when
evaluating whether the prosecution has met its burden of proof in circumstances
would otherwise apply.
is apparent from the brief chronology set out earlier, that the allegations
against the accused date back to 2000-2002. The complainant
gave evidence, and
was cross-examined, in 2018 and
significant forensic disadvantage to the accused has a number of dimensions. For
one, the lengthy passage of time may have impacted
upon the accused’s
memory of the relevant events and surrounding circumstances and hence impaired
his capacity to instruct
his lawyers and test the evidence of the complainant in
particular. Had the trial (by which I include the trials at which recorded
evidence was taken) been conducted more proximately to the alleged events, the
accused may have been able to give or lead evidence
as to his whereabouts or
movements on a particular occasion, or who he might have been with, which might
have revealed inconsistencies
related to or implausible aspects of the
prosecution case. The accused may have been in a position to marshal documentary
evidence in support of his defence of the charges.
addition, the accused’s father, TP, passed away in
and it can be inferred that
there are other witnesses who, but for the passage of time, may have been in a
position to give evidence
relevant to the defence case including what I will
refer to later as the ‘circumcision’ conversation. TP was,
potentially,
a very important witness having regard to the complainant’s
allegations concerning count 4 in particular; her evidence about
how much of the
alleged offending took place in the accused’s bedroom; the work that the
complainant performed on the farm
which was said to have given rise to the
opportunity for the commission of counts 6 and 7; the circumstances and timing
of the acquisition
of the Volvo truck (a matter that was the subject of
evidence) and whether gear shifts in that truck required double declutching
passage of time may have also impacted the memory of the
complainant.
The complainant may
have become convinced that a particular event or incident took place even though
it did not or may have forgotten
or misremembered details that would be to the
benefit of or otherwise significant to the defence case. There were numerous
during the course of the complainant’s evidence where she was,
for example, unable to remember when certain incidents were
alleged to have
taken place, which, had they been identified with more precision, might have
given rise to an opportunity for the
accused to demonstrate that the incident
could not have occurred when or in the circumstances described by the
complainant. The loss
of the forensic tools available to the accused to test and
challenge the evidence of the complainant on account of the passage of
in turn have impaired his ability to demonstrate the unreliability or lack of
credibility in the complainant’s evidence.
Accordingly,
I am satisfied that the effluxion of time since the commission of the alleged
offences has resulted in a significant
forensic disadvantage to the accused that
I will bring to account when scrutinising the prosecution evidence.
Elements of the offences
each charge, the prosecution must prove that the accused had sexual intercourse
with the complainant when she was over 12 but
under 17 years of age. Sexual
intercourse is defined to include penetration of the labia majora by any part of
the body of another
person and fellatio.
is no defence to a charge of unlawful sexual
intercourse.
was no dispute between the parties that if the charged acts were proved beyond
reasonable doubt, the elements of the offences
would be made out. The only issue
at trial was whether the prosecution had proved that the accused engaged in the
conduct alleged.
proceedings have a protracted and unfortunate history, which is discussed in my
reasons for granting a conditional stay of
and which it is not
necessary to now repeat in any detail, save to explain why the evidence was put
before me in the way it was.
trial was the eighth trial of the charges.
prosecution did not call any witnesses at this trial. Instead, it relied on the
recording of evidence previously given by the
complainant and the exhibits
tendered during previous trials which were put before me by consent, with their
original exhibit numbers,
in a trial book marked P1A. Accordingly, where
reference is made to exhibit numbers throughout the course of my reasons, I am
to the original exhibit numbers given to various documents at previous
trials, noting that each of those exhibits formed part of
P1A before me.
Additional exhibits tendered during this trial were given exhibit numbers
following on from the original exhibit
noted, evidence given by the complainant at earlier trials in 2018 and 2021 was
recorded pursuant to
Evidence Act
and was played before me
pursuant to
Evidence Act
In accordance with the
reasons of the High Court in
Gately v The Queen
(2007) 232 CLR 238
the observations of Livesey P in
Brown v The King
[2025] SASCA 40
I marked for identification the discs containing the audio
visual records of the complainant’s evidence instead of receiving
exhibits. Transcripts of the complainant’s recorded evidence were received
as aides (MFIP14, MFIP15 and
have not allowed the fact that the complainant’s evidence was put before
me by way of the playing of recordings to influence
the weight I have given to
her evidence, nor do I draw any adverse inference against the accused because
the evidence was put before
me in this way.
the purpose of hearing the application for a temporary stay, I became aware of
the fact that some of the previous trials miscarried
and that there was a
successful appeal against convictions. I have not allowed the fact that this was
not the first trial of the
charges to influence my approach to the evidence or
the findings I make. I do not draw any inference adverse to the accused from
fact that he has previously been convicted of the charges. To the extent that I
remain uninformed about why there have been 7
previous trials, I do not
speculate about the reasons there have been so many previous trials of the
The evidence of the complainant
complainant was born on 24 May 1986. At the time of her recorded evidence, she
was 32 and 35 years old.
The complainant’s time with
the N family
complainant had a difficult upbringing. She was placed in foster care from a
very young age together with one of her younger
first permanent foster placement the complainant had was with the N family: JoN
and JN and their three children, one of whom
I will refer to as LN. The
complainant lived with the N family between July 1990 and October 1999, at which
point she moved in with
the accused’s family at
Coomandook.
She was then 13
years of age.
was 12 or 13 years old at the time the complainant began living with the N
complainant gave evidence that she was subjected to violence by both JoN and JN
during her time living with the Ns. She described
JoN as a violent alcoholic.
She said that she and her sister, T, fought with each other on an almost daily
basis and that she ultimately
went to stay with the accused’s family
because she ‘had had enough of being beaten up by my foster father at the
cross-examination, the complainant said that whilst the suggested reason for her
leaving the N family was that she and T were
not getting along with each other,
that was not the real reason for her
The complainant accepted
that she fought terribly with her sister over the nine years she lived with the
N family and that they would
‘beat each other up’. The complainant
rejected the suggestion that the N family arranged for the complainant to be
out of a fear that she would hurt her sister. She
no, no, the foster father was an alcoholic and he used to beat us up and I'd had
enough on it because he pushed my sister into
the bath, she hit her head on the
tiles on the wall on the other side of that bath because she wet her bed. He
rubbed her nose in
it, I'd had enough, I'd stand there and try to defend my
sister, I felt sick watching that. All right, so I said to them 'I've had
enough'. I went down to the phone box down in the main street, I rang up the
child abuse report line because I'd had enough of him
beating us up and rubbing
her face in her wet bed because she had a bed wetting problem and I was sick of
seeing that, and so I rang
up about it and when the police came out, out there
everyone knows everyone, it is a small country town, everyone knows everyone.
The police knew the foster carers. So they turned around and said 'You don't
want to make lies about these people' blah, blah, blah.
They left us there and
when they left I still did not want to stay there. I pressed the issue that I
wanted to leave, I'd had enough.
you. Have you finished.
Elaborating
on the circumstances in which the move came about, the complainant said later
cross-examination:
so that I'm clear, just so that you've got the opportunity to answer this, at no
time did [JoN] ever beat you while you were
living there.
had a good time living with that family, didn't you.
were good times but there were also hard times too.
were a loving caring couple to you, both [JN] and [JoN], weren't they.
Far from it.
what you thought of them, that is that they were lovely to you.
what I think they are?
they created a good family environment for you.
say, do you, that [JN] beat you as well.
never beat you.
was kind and patient with you, wasn't she.
reason that you left their care is because of the continual violence that you
perpetrated on your sister [T], do you agree with
are, in effect, saying to the jury that you left because of your claim of them
abusing you, is that right.
I didn't want to be there anymore and [JN] made the call, she told me to sleep
told me to sleep on it.
did and then the next morning she was on the phone to them, because she asked me
if I still wanted to leave and I said 'Yes'
and she asked me where I think I'm
going to go and I said 'I don't care, as long as I'm not here, I don't care
where I go'. She rang
up, I went in my room, I didn't hear the conversation,
what was said, I went to my room.
so I'm clear with you, the reason that you left wasn't because of a decision of
yours, it was a decision made by [JoN] and [JN]
because of their concern that
you were going to harm [T].
[T] might harm you.
and I were both as bad as each other. I'm not saying that we gave it to them
easy, but at the same time I'm not saying they're
innocent in all of this
were concerned that the two of you might end up seriously hurting each other and
that's why you needed to be separated, that's
the truth, isn't it.
think that we needed to be separated, but that's not how it came to be at that
was never, ever a case of you wanting to leave because of this claim of yours
that they were beating you.
you say that again?
didn't leave because of any perception on your part that you were being
a question.
didn't leave -
never beat you ever, either of them.
you - sorry I'll just ask you a few more questions about when you were at the
[N’s], do you agree that you used to steal
you agree that you used to lie to them.
further cross-examination on this topic, the complainant reiterated that JoN was
an alcoholic who used to beat her and her sister.
complainant accepted that there were good times when she lived with the Ns but
also ‘hard times’ and she denied that
JoN and JN were a loving,
caring couple to her and that they created a good family environment.
complainant maintained that JN also beat her and rejected the suggestion that JN
was a kind and patient foster mother to
complainant acknowledged that she used to lie to the Ns and steal from
complainant agreed that her first born child, who I will refer to as AB, went to
live with the N family from the time he was
very young and that he had continued
to live with them ‘ever since’. She agreed AB had taken the
the context of her evidence about the nature of the household environment during
the time she lived with the N family and her
allegations of physical abuse, the
complainant was cross-examined about a number of letters she had written. The
first, D10, was
a letter the complainant wrote to her son AB, then living with
the N family, on 10 October 2004:
Hi sweetie, how are you? I hope that you are well and going great. Mummy is
doing really well. I love you lots darling & I miss
you dearly.
You are a beautiful little boy, whom I am really proud to call my son.
Your Great Uncle loves you very much also and says to say ‘hello’
I do have some good news for you [AB]. And that news is that you have a baby
brother/sister on the way! :)
Mum has sorted out her head now so hopefully you will be home soon.
You have a good home at the moment though so I know you will be well looked
after until that time when you come home to mummy.
Well Id better send this off to you now, also because the sooner I send it
– the sooner you get it...
Lots & Lots of Love,
From Mummy xxx
P.S – Mummy loves you very, very much – Don’t ever doubt
being taken through the contents of the letter, and in particular the
characterisation of the N household as a ‘good
be well ‘looked after’, the complainant maintained that JoN and JN
had ‘regularly’
beaten her as a
The complainant said
however that JN was ‘not as bad’ as JoN in this respect, as JoN
would get drunk and impatient and
With further
testing of her evidence on this point, the complainant said JN would go
‘overboard with her
punishments’.
complainant was asked whether she continued to refer to JN as ‘mum’
after leaving the N family. She said she could
not remember but it was possible
she did. She denied having fond memories of her time with the N family or
thinking that JN was a
good foster mother to her. She rejected the suggestion
that she wanted to return to live with the N family after she left; that she
missed the environment; that she loved the N family and missed them
complainant was subsequently cross-examined on a further letter (D11) she agreed
she had written, this time to JN on an unknown
date, but which must have been
some time after AB’s birth:
Just a quick note 2 let you know that my new Phone no. is: [suppressed].
How are you all going? Im doin really well now & Im getting my life back
on track but still getting a little stressed out now
& again but I have
learned to keep myself under control now, which is good.
Im on the waiting list for housing at the Housing Trust & Centacare so
hopefully a house should come up within the next couple
I read the emails between Dad & [T] –
Interesting!
Shows the low-life person that he really is I think! :)
Please say hi 2 dad, [T] & [AB] for me & send them all of my
No-one could ever mother me the way you ever have, I just wanted you 2 know
that you mean the world to me & that I love you as
much as I would if you
were my ‘biological’ mum.
I love you all very much & miss you all dearly.
All my love as always,
P.S – I was just wondering if I could stay for a weekend as Im missing
the family environment with you all? Think about it then
msg me or something.
complainant was taxed at some length on some of the expressions she had used in
this letter. As to calling JN ‘mum’,
she said that she had been
brought up to do so. She said the reference to someone being a ‘low
life’ was a reference
to her biological father; not JoN who she had asked
JN to say ‘hi’ to for her. After being taken to those parts of the
letter in which she wrote that ‘no one could ever mother me the way you
ever have’; that she loved JN ‘as much
as I would if you were my
biological mum’; and that she wanted to stay with the Ns for a weekend as
she was missing the family
environment with them, it was again put to the
complainant that JN never beat her. The complainant adhered to her evidence that
complainant agreed that the N family’s youngest son, LN, lived at the
house during her placement, until leaving around
1997 after he completed high
school. The complainant was asked whether she had any sort of sexual
relationship with LN. This passage
of the complainant’s cross-examination
is important and I set it out in
respect to [LN], you never had any sort of sexual relationship with him, did
was never any sex between you and [LN] -
never happened.
mother is [DB], isn't she.
sorry. That's a yes.
your biological mother.
told her on a number of occasions, didn't you, that you were having sex with the
[N]' son, [LN].
said that to her in about 1999, didn't you.
you said that to her again in 2002, didn't you.
It never happened.
never happened.
I know that it never happened, but you said to your mum that it did, didn't
said specifically to your mum that you had had sex with [LN] -
didn't you.
you can be shown this document. I want you to read that document. You've read
the document.
read that document, do you agree that you told your mum that you had had sex
with the [N]' son, [LN].
you agree that you told her that in about 1999.
you agree that you said to your mother that it was a mutual thing.
that you were not upset by it but you were just telling your mum about it.
you told your mum that you had had sex with [LN], that would not be true, would
told her that -
you had said to your mum that 'I had sex with [LN]', that wouldn't be true,
according to you.
you had said that to your mum, that would be a lie to your mother.
you said it to her, you would be lying to her about having had sex with your
foster brother.
that's exactly what you did do, you did tell your mother that, didn't you.
document which senior counsel for the applicant put to the complainant during
the above exchange is D12 – a record prepared
by a social worker, Ms
Kenny, who had dealings with the complainant during her placements. D12
Nature-Record of Contact
T/c to [DB] to see how things are going.
Re [AW] telling her of having sex with Ns’ son [LN]. [DB] said [AW]
first told her about this 3 years ago, then mentioned it
again last year. Then
recently mentioned it again. [AW] had said that it was “a mutual
thing” and just mentioned it
again “by way of information”,
not because she was upset by it.
to the provenance of D12, its compilation and significance, the following facts
were agreed between the parties in D13:
R v [MSP] – Agreed
Kenny was employed by the Department of Human Services in South Australia
the Department
’) from 1985 until November 2003.
Kenny was a qualified social worker and worked in a number of offices in the
metropolitan area.
Kenny met [AW] when she was still in placement with the N family in
Kenny was the Ns’ foster support person, but she did not have direct
[AW] went to live with the [Ps], Jean Kenny became her case worker ([AW] was
around 13 or 14 years old).
[AW’s] case worker Ms Kenny was responsible for overseeing [AW’s]
Department keep records in relation to children they care for during their
placements.
Kenny would make notes soon after she had contact with anyone who was involved
in [AW’s] life.
of the Department.
is important that conversations that include complaints of a sexual nature are
accurately recorded. Ms Kenny understood the importance
of keeping accurate
records for the Department about children the Department cared for.
D12 described as a ‘continuation sheet’ is a typed record of a
telephone conversation between Ms Kenny and [DB]
on 13 August 2002 about
called to give evidence, [DB] would say that she contacted the Department of
Human Services on 13 August 2002 and relayed to Ms
Kenny what [AW] had told [DB]
by Ms Kenny shortly after the conversation she
had with [DB].
conversation she had with [DB].
parties also agreed the following further facts which set out the evidence that
the complainant’s mother, DB, would have
given about these out of court
statements made by the complainant, had she been called to give
called to give evidence, [DB] would say the following:
[AW] was about 11 or 12 [AW] told [DB] that [LN] was having sex with her. [DB]
recalls this because she remembers [AW] spelling
out that word rather than
saying it. [AW] said S E X, [AW] told her it was a secret.
told [DB] again about [LN] having sex with her. This was when [AW] went to live
with [DB] in Queensland. [AW] was about 16
years old at the time.
last time [AW] told [DB] about her having sex with [LN] was in or around August
2008 at the Modbury Hospital. [AW] was 22 years
can be seen, the combined effect of D12, D13 and P18 is essentially two fold:
first, if the agreed facts are accepted, the complainant
made false allegations
to her mother about having some form of sexual interactions with LN – a
former foster brother; secondly,
the complainant either lied during her evidence
when she denied having previously told her mother about sex with LN or
alternatively
simply forgot that she made such allegations against LN on a
number of occasions. As will be seen, the prosecution ultimately conceded
in light of the complainant’s adamant denials of having made the
allegations, I should proceed on the basis that the
complainant lied during her
evidence but there is, it is submitted, a good reason why she may have done so.
I will return to this
issue later in my reasons.
re-examination, the complainant again confirmed that there was no sexual contact
between her and LN and that she had never made
a statement to police to that
said that the violence she was subjected to by JN involved, by way of example,
being ‘whacked...over the face and head
a lot’ and the use of a
steel ruler to ‘crack us over the
would occur in response to something that had
to the placement of her son AB with the N family and the letters D10 and D11,
the complainant said that JN had told her that if
the complainant asked
‘welfare’ to place AB with the N family, JN would allow the
complainant to see him whenever she
complainant explained that her letter to AB (D10) was intended to let him know
that she thought about him and had not abandoned
with the accused’s family
5 October 1999, the complainant commenced her placement with the accused’s
family, who I will refer to hereafter as the
P family. She remained living with
the P family until 15 June 2002.
The P family consisted of TP, AP and their son, the accused, who was 25 years
old when the complainant moved in.
P family lived on a large farming property where they grew crops and had
The residence itself
was two storey.
the complainant moved in with the P family, her older half-sister J was already
living with them.
her move, the complainant began attending the Coomandook Area School. She was
then in year 7. She remained enrolled at
the school until she was
The complainant said she was
a disruptive, hyperactive and argumentative
Relationships
within the household
complainant gave evidence that she liked the Ps when she first moved in. She
said they were ‘nice’, ‘welcoming’
She initially
got along well with J. She did not get along well with the accused, who she
thought was rude and arrogant and made
She did not speak
with the accused.
complainant thought that J left the farm the year after she moved
By that stage, the
complainant’s relationship with J had become ‘argumentative. [J]
would get me in trouble. She would
set up situations to get me in trouble and
she would say that she was the princess and the daughter that [the P family]
never had’.
complainant thought the accused lived on the farm the entire time she resided
allocation of bedrooms
reference to P2 and P3, the complainant said she occupied the upstairs bedroom
next to the accused’s bedroom for the entire
time she resided with the P
family. Photograph 10 of P3 shows the accused’s doorway at the top of the
stairs. For reasons that
will become apparent, this is important because it
demonstrates that the doorway to the accused’s bedroom was visible from
the lounge room downstairs. It can also be seen from the photographs that the
stairs and the upstairs floor were timber.
the complainant’s placement, the accused had a single bed in his bedroom
and not the double or queen bed seen in photographs
11 and 12 of
There was a television on a
small set of drawers at the end of the
complainant was unsure whether the bed shown in photographs 13 and 14 of P3,
which depict her bedroom, was the bed she had during
her time at the farm. The
desk and chest of drawers were not in the room at the time, nor was there a
television or a rug on the
and AP slept in the main downstairs bedroom. Photographs of the house show that
an internal staircase in the main lounge room
of the house where the television
was provided access to the upstairs
The complainant said
that, at the time she lived with the P family, the television was positioned to
the right hand side of the fireplace
visible in photograph 5 (as one looks at
the photograph). There was a sofa where the television is, as depicted in
photograph 5,
and another sofa in the area of the bottom of the staircase,
essentially separating the lounge and dining
complainant said that photograph 9 of P3 showed J’s bedroom during the
time she lived on the farm, albeit without the
After J left, her
bedroom was used as a spare room, according to the complainant. As will be seen
in due course, the complainant’s
evidence on this topic was inconsistent
with evidence given by AP that after J left the farm, the complainant was
re-located to J’s
bedroom on the ground floor.
complainant rejected the suggestion that after J moved out, she was relocated to
the downstairs bedroom, and maintained that
the upstairs bedroom to which I have
referred remained hers throughout the time she lived on the
to the view to the accused’s bedroom door, the complainant agreed that
photograph 10 showed what anyone sitting on the sofa
at the bottom of the stairs
would be able to see.
complainant agreed that to get from her room to the accused’s required her
to move across the landing at the top of the
She also agreed that the
timber flooring upstairs could creak and groan as people moved about and with
expansion due to weather.
disagreed with the suggestion that the accused moved out of the farm in around
February / March
on the farm
complainant gave evidence that she worked on the farm. She said she ‘would
drive the chaser bin, move augers, move field
A chaser bin is a
piece of farming equipment used in conjunction with a tractor to collect reaped
crops directly from a harvester
during the harvesting process. Once full, the
chaser bin would deposit harvested grain in field bins located around the
The complainant described in some detail the manner in which a chaser
bin was used on the
complainant also assisted in moving sheep between paddocks and performed an
activity described as ‘stone rolling’,
which involved the use of a
roller to crush up stones in a paddock to help promote crop growth.
complainant said there was not generally any specific routine for the work she
did on the farm but during harvest time, that
changed and ‘cleaning out
the machinery and driving the chaser bin, moving augers, field bins, that type
of thing was reasonably
routine, given the type of
cross-examination, the complainant said that either the accused or TP would ask
for her help on the farm.
said harvest would occur towards the end of the year, around December, and the
start of the following year. Sometimes harvest
would be pushed to February or
March depending on weather.
was put to the complainant that as a result of spending a number of years on the
farm, she became familiar with the machinery
that was used during harvest. She
She also agreed that the
header or harvester would remain in the shed from roughly January through to
November (presumably depending
on when harvest was concluded and
commenced).
The complainant
disagreed that she could access the machinery whenever she
complainant agreed that during harvest, TP and the accused would from time to
time work into the early hours of the
She agreed there was
‘a point’ during harvest where chaser bin drivers were employed, but
she could not remember their
She did not remember a
chaser bin driver staying in the
The complainant
maintained that there were times when she would drive the chaser bin, subject to
school commitments.
it was suggested to the complainant that it was unlikely that she drove the
chaser bin because of the need for the chaser bin
to be driven at a speed that
matched that of the harvester, the complainant said ‘that is why they got
me to do it because
I was the one that was most perfect with
The complainant
agreed that the equipment used in harvesting was expensive equipment and that
the chaser bin had to be driven within
very close proximity to the harvester.
The complainant rejected the suggestion that she did not drive the chaser
complainant said that her relationship with the accused, as I have previously
described it, remained that way until he began
abusing her not long after J
first time anything happened with the accused was ‘late at night, everyone
was in bed and [the accused] came into my room.’
The complainant was in
bed. She thought the accused had picked up on the fact that she was not having a
very good time living at
the farm; that she was lonely and upset and he asked
her if she wanted to be touched to which she responded ‘yes’ because
she understood the accused to be asking her for permission to give her a
However, the accused then
approached her bed and put his hand underneath the blanket and began rubbing her
leg over the top of her
clothes. His hand moved close to her ‘private
area’. She pushed the blanket back and sat up. The accused told her to
into his room and she did, assuming they were going to watch television. She was
told to be quiet as they walked across the floorboards.
in the bedroom, the accused pulled the blanket on his bed back and the
complainant laid down. They watched television for a
short time before the
accused turned towards her and began rubbing her leg again ‘closer to her
private area’. The accused
then removed her pants and told her that she
could not tell anybody. He then digitally penetrated her vagina with a finger
1), asking her if that had ever happened before. The complainant lied,
telling him ‘my ex foster-brother, one of his
complainant’s evidence was that she thought she was telling the accused
what he wanted to hear at the time.
accused then put his hand up the complainant’s top and was touching her
breasts. He removed his boxer shorts, returned
to bed, got on top of the
complainant and had penis vagina sex with her (count 2), ejaculating on her
stomach. The complainant was
scared and was trying to control her body shaking.
She said it felt as if sex continued for a long time because it was
Thereafter,
the complainant returned to her room. She wiped her stomach with a corner of the
blanket on her bed.
asked whether there was any conversation with the accused ‘at this
time’, the complainant said the accused remarked
that if she told anyone
what had happened, he would shoot her and kill himself. She said further the
accused had a .22 calibre rifle
behind the door of his bedroom.
complainant agreed in cross-examination that J left sometime in 2000, around
seven or eight months after the complainant
She also agreed that
the first episode of sex occurred after J had left and essentially ‘out of
the blue’ and in the
context of her having had no relationship with the
complainant said there had been no prior flirting between her and the
rejected the suggestion the accused never engaged in sexual activity with
She also rejected the
suggestion that firearms on the property were kept in a locked cabinet in one of
following facts concerning firearms were agreed between the
the period when [AW] was in long term foster care placement with [AP] and [TP],
the holder of a firearms licence; and
the registered owner of the following four firearms which were kept at
[suppressed] Parkin Hall Road, Coomandook:
Telly .177 air rifle
Lithgow .22 calibre bolt action rifle
sturm Ruger & Co .22 calibre self loading rifle
Sportco 12 gauge single barrel shot gun.
13 August 2015, [TP] was still the holder of a firearms licence and was still
the registered owner of the four firearms described
in paragraph 14 above.
13 August 2015, police officers located a locked gun safe in a work shed at the
property at [suppressed] Parkin Hall Road, Coomandook
and inside the gun safe,
police officers located the four firearms described in paragraph 14
Uncharged acts
the events of this particular night, the complainant said that she was a bit
‘freaked out’ but thought the accused
did like her after all.
between them subsequently became commonplace. On an almost nightly basis, the
complainant would sneak into the accused’s
bedroom when the television
show Law & Order came on at around 8:30pm. At that time, AP would go into
the kitchen to make herself
a cup of tea and TP would either be positioned in
the lounge room such as to be unable to see up the staircase or would otherwise
complainant described Law & Order coming on as her cue to go into the
accused’s room to have
Sex would generally take
place with the accused on top of the complainant. The accused would ejaculate on
the complainant’s
cross-examination, the complainant said that sexual activity with the accused
would happen almost daily and at roughly the same
time, when Law & Order
would come on. She said that ‘as soon as you hear that noise’, that
was the ‘cue’.
At this time, AP would get up off the sofa positioned
at the bottom of the stairs and go and make herself a tea or coffee in the
kitchen. The complainant would then sneak into the accused’s room after
peaking around the corner to see if AP was on the
There were no occasions
when the complainant would sneak out of her room and see AP on the sofa at the
bottom of the stairs.
complainant agreed that AP had issues sleeping and would go into the study of a
nighttime to play cards on the computer. When
asked how she would know where AP
was, the complainant said she could hear the ‘mouse’
and that the lino
flooring downstairs would make a noise as AP moved across
As I understood her
evidence, the complainant also suggested that sometimes, instead of watching Law
& Order, AP would use the
computer in the
complainant said further that she would open her door slightly to get a sense of
where AP was before crossing the landing into
the accused’s
She would also listen
for whether TP was snoring on the
in cross examination whether anyone ever saw her going into the accused’s
room, the complainant said that there was one
occasion when she was discovered
in the accused’s
say that basically after that at 8.30 every night when Law & Order chimed on
you two would have sex basically every day for the next two years
when I'd go into his room to, yes.
go into his room to, yes.
night at 8.30 for two years.
what you would have the jury believe.
much every night, yes.
once did anyone see you go to his room.
actually I was seen in his room one night.
seen by his mother in his room one night at about 10 o'clock.
having sex.
we were clothed but it was about to go to that but you can hear when someone,
like, starts walking up the steps and I didn't know
what to do, whether I was
meant to hide in his cupboard or if I was meant to hide or something and he told
me to stay there and he
told his mother that I was talking to him.
that's at, what, 10 o'clock at night.
think so. I could be wrong on the time. I know it was late that night.
what, you had gone in there at 8.30, had you.
don't know. I know it was late at that particular time so, yes, I was caught in
it was put to the complainant that someone sitting downstairs would be able to
hear movement on the first floor because of the
floorboards, the complainant
said that she learnt which floorboards were
However, she agreed that
if a person was walking normally upstairs, that could be heard by someone who
was downstairs. She said that
a person ‘creeping’ around upstairs
could not be heard
and that, in
any event, any creaking that was heard by someone downstairs might have been
thought nothing more than the expansion
or contraction of the timber flooring
with weather.
re-examination, the complainant said that the occasion when AP found her in the
accused’s room was after the sexual relationship
between the accused and
the complainant was on foot.
Upon observing the complainant and the accused sitting on the bed, AP’s
‘face sort of changed a little bit’ and
the complainant was told to
get back into her bed.
evidence of uncharged sexual activity between the complainant and the accused
was relied upon by the prosecution for the same
non-propensity uses which I have
earlier referred to,
accordance with
Nieterink v The Queen
(1999) 76 SASR 56.
Again, senior
counsel for the accused did not dispute the admissibility of the evidence for
these purposes.
Accordingly,
if I were to accept the evidence of the complainant that she engaged in
uncharged sexual intercourse with the accused
on a regular basis, this may help
me to understand the setting and nature of the interpersonal relationship
between the complainant
and the accused within which the charged acts were
allegedly committed; that the charged acts (with the exception of counts 1 and
2) did not ‘come out of the blue’ but, rather, formed part of what
became a protracted and illicit sexual relationship
between the accused and
complainant; may lend plausibility to the complainant’s account by
explaining how it was that she came
to acquiesce in or submit to sexual activity
with the accused and why she made no complaint about his alleged conduct at the
remind myself that these are the only permissible uses of the evidence of
uncharged sexual activity and that I must not use the
evidence to reason that
the accused had a sexual interest in the complainant or that the accused had a
propensity to engage in sexual
activity with the complainant or a more general
propensity to commit crimes of this description. I must not reason that, if I
the accused engaged in uncharged sexual activity with the complainant, he
is the ‘sort of person’ more likely to have
committed the charged
acts. Of course, even if I were satisfied that the accused engaged in uncharged
sexual activity with the complainant,
that does not relieve the prosecution of
the burden of satisfying me beyond reasonable doubt as to the commission of the
acts. I cannot substitute my satisfaction for the commission of any
uncharged acts with proof beyond reasonable doubt of a charged
act or acts.
Circumcision and fertility
complainant described the accused’s penis as
circumcised.
said he never wore a condom when engaging in sexual intercourse with
cross-examination, the complainant agreed that she was the mother of eight
children, one of whom sadly passed away. The complainant
fell pregnant with her
first child when she was 17, a matter said by the defence to be demonstrative of
her fertility in close proximity
to the time throughout which the accused was
engaging in regular unprotected sex with
respect to the complainant’s knowledge of the accused being circumcised
– a fact agreed by the
– it was suggested
to her that she acquired this information as a result of a conversation with
gave evidence to the prosecutor that [MSP] was circumcised, is that the
I suggest to you that there was an occasion when you were living at the
[P]’s house where you were sitting at the kitchen
table with [AP],
[AP]’s mother-in-law and her sister [MB]. Do you remember an occasion
where you were sitting around the table
with those women.
I assist you by saying that was an occasion where at school on that day you had
been given a sex education class; you have no
recollection at all.
I suggest to you that sitting at the table with these ladies, you told them that
you had just participated in a sex education
class at school.
I suggest that you said to them that you were taught how to roll a condom out on
didn't even do that at school.
got no recollection of this.
I suggest that after you said words to the effect of being taught or shown how
to roll a condom out on a banana, that you followed
it up with words to the
effect of 'The teachers said that male circumcision is no longer necessary and
it wasn't done any more',
and I take it you've got no recollection of such a
conversation.
I suggest to you that [AP] told you about her nursing experience at the McLaren
Vale District Soldiers Memorial Hospital in the
didn't know she worked in a hospital.
did she give you a couple of examples about what happened to elderly men where
they had not been circumcised and their foreskin
had become infected.
got no recollection of such a conversation -
I understand your evidence, is that right.
I suggest that at the conclusion of [AP] telling you that, she told you that
they were the reasons why none of her sons remained
uncircumcised.
simply can't recall a conversation so you're unable to say either way whether
such a conversation -
never took place.
you saying such a conversation never took place.
are you saying you simply can't recall such a conversation.
don't remember any conversation like that taking place.
you take it one step further and say that no such conversation ever
don't believe it did.
complainant said the next specific incident of sex with the accused she could
recall took place after school one day. She was
in the lounge room with TP when
the accused came inside with bloodshot eyes, looking upset. The accused looked
at the complainant
and went upstairs to his bedroom, leaving the door just
slightly ajar.
complainant asked TP what was wrong with the accused. TP replied that he did not
know and then left the house to do something
outside. The complainant went up to
the accused’s bedroom and peeked in through the ajar door. She saw the
accused sitting
on his bed with the barrel of the rifle he kept behind his door
in his mouth. The complainant said she could remember thinking ‘I
14, how am I meant to talk someone out of suicide. I can remember his finger
being on the
accused told the complainant he had split up with his girlfriend who, according
to the complainant, he had only been with for
spoke with the accused but could not remember what she said. She could not
remember how it came about,
but the rifle was placed on the bed and the accused
undid his pants and asked her to give him oral sex. The complainant described
what happened as a bit of a blur but said the accused came to be laying down on
the bed and she performed oral sex on him for the
first time (count 4). The
accused ejaculated in her
complainant did not go into the accused’s bedroom that night, as she
usually did, which she said she thought was ‘odd’,
but she did go
into his bedroom the following night at
cross-examination, it was put to the complainant that, given the circumstances
in which the accused entered the house, he must
have thought that TP was still
in or around the house when he asked the complainant to perform oral sex on him.
The effect of the
complainant’s evidence seems to be that it would have
been apparent to the accused that TP was unhappy and had walked
was put to the complainant that her account was a fabrication. She
the complainant went to the accused’s bedroom the night after she
performed oral sex on him, she recalled the show ‘the
playing on the television in his bedroom.
accused removed his boxer shorts and the complainant’s pants. He digitally
penetrated her vagina with a finger (uncharged)
and then got on top of her and
engaged in penis vagina sex with her and ejaculated on her stomach (count
complainant said that, at this point in time, she saw herself as being in a
relationship with the accused and she felt ‘pushed
out a bit’ by the
accused having a girlfriend in the lead up to counts 3 and
5 concerned an episode of sexual intercourse that took place with the
complainant positioned on top of the accused. This occurred
at 8:30pm one night
after the complainant had gone into the accused’s room. She said there was
a partially pornographic SBS
movie on the accused’s television.
accused put his hands up the complainant’s top prompting her to ask if her
boobs were too small to which the accused replied
‘no any more than a
handful is a waste’.
The accused guided the complainant on top of him and had sexual intercourse with
accused ejaculated but the complainant could not recall where other than to say
it was not inside her.
complainant described this episode of sex as tearing her vagina because she had
not had sex in this position
previously.
She said she did
not say anything to the accused during sex because ‘with the age
difference I felt as though he was in
complainant was unable to say whether this incident occurred before or after the
occasion on which she performed oral sex on
complainant said that, apart from the accused’s bedroom, sex took place in
a Volvo F12 truck at a location she identified
by reference to map C of
complainant was unable to say when the Ps acquired this particular truck. She
said that she was out in the truck with the accused
who wanted to see if she
could double declutch and split shift the gears – a process the
complainant described in
The accused explained
to the complainant what was required and the complainant was able to
successfully double declutch, which surprised
the accused who called it a
complainant had never driven a vehicle like the Volvo before but had driven
another truck (referred to as the DAF truck) that
driving the truck for a short time, the complainant brought the truck to a stop.
The accused told her he was proud of her and
put his hand on her leg saying what
a good job she had done. He moved into the back of the cabin of the truck and
sat on the bed.
complainant followed him as she thought they were in a ‘pretty, somewhat
serious’ relationship, and they engaged
in penis vagina sex (count 6) with
the complainant on her back. The accused ejaculated on the complainant’s
stomach, who wiped
down her stomach using her
complainant said this episode of intercourse took place not long after the Volvo
was acquired.
seen, AP gave evidence as part of the defence case that the Volvo was only
acquired in April 2002 – not long before
the complainant left the
cross-examination, the complainant said that the accused had told her that
shifting gears in the Volvo required the driver to
double declutch. It was put
to her that double declutching was not necessary in the Volvo. The complainant
responded: ‘It’s
what he told me to do and I wouldn’t know
am I meant to
complainant said she did not know whether the Volvo truck had a synchro-mesh
gear box that did not require double
declutching.
complainant said further that she thought this particular incident occurred
around harvest time because she did not remember
it being cold. She agreed that
harvest time was not April or
She agreed she was only
living on the farm for the 2000 and 2001
pressed as to when the incident might have occurred, the complainant said she
could not say whether it was in 2002 or how old
She said however that
the truck was purchased during the time she lived on the farm and she believed
she was ‘older’
and possibly closer to 15 or 16.
was suggested to the complainant that the Volvo truck did not arrive on the farm
until April 2002 which meant it was not around
during any of the harvests for
which the complainant was living at the property, to which she responded
‘what month did I leave’
and ‘nah I’m sure it was there
longer than that’.
complainant said she was ‘sure’ the Volvo was on the farm for the
2001 harvest.
re-examination, the complainant said that there was another truck on the farm,
referred to as the DAF truck, before the Volvo
was acquired. The complainant
spent time in the DAF truck and also drove
She believed the DAF
truck required double
declutching.
parties agreed a number of facts relating to the
Volvo Prime Mover
from the Registrar of Motor Vehicles indicate that [TP] purchased and registered
a Volvo Prime Mover Registration Number WHZ
082 (as shown in Exhibit P4) on 6
April 2002.
from the Registrar of Motor Vehicles indicate that the previous owner of the
Volvo Prime Mover Registration Number WHZ 082
was Teamcorp Pty Ltd. The
registration of the vehicle expired 23 March 2002.
Photographs
of the Volvo are produced at exhibit P4. These photos were taken by police who
attended at [suppressed] Parkin Hall Road
in Coomandook, South Australia on 13
August 2015.
gave evidence about the acquisition of the Volvo truck which I will set out in
more detail later in these reasons. The effect
of her evidence was that the
agreement to purchase the truck was made in March 2002 but possession was not
taken until sometime around
6 April 2002, consistently with the invoice D22 and
the agreed facts.
last charged act about which the complainant gave evidence was said to have
taken place in a header during harvest time when
the complainant had been
driving the chaser bin in a paddock towards the middle of map C of
In her evidence in chief,
the complainant initially said that she thought this incident occurred after the
incident in the Volvo
truck but she could not be
complainant said that she and the accused were close to finishing off the
paddock when he told her to get into the header as
the chaser bin would not be
needed for the last bit of harvesting. The complainant got into the header with
the accused and they
harvested the remainder of the paddock. The complainant sat
on a makeshift seat next to the
they had finished, the accused undid the blue Hard Yakka pants he was wearing.
The complainant masturbated the accused (uncharged)
and then got on top of the
accused facing away from him. The accused had penis vagina sex with the
complainant in that position.
The accused ejaculated but the complainant was
unable to say where.
this was the last specific incident about which the complainant gave evidence,
she said that her sexual relationship with
the accused continued until she left
cross-examination, the complainant confirmed that she ‘thought’ the
harvester incident occurred after count 6 but
she could have been
She said that she had
probably driven the chaser bin during two harvests she was present for, not
including the 1999
complainant disagreed with the proposition that she had never driven the tractor
with the chaser bin attached. She was firm that
she had, commenting ‘I
thought I did pretty good. I didn’t spill grain so I must have been doing
something right’.
said she did not require much instruction to learn how to operate the tractor
with the chaser bin,
commenting:
lot. It's a rabbit and a turtle, fast and slow, it's not hard, rabbit and a
turtle - tortoise - there's a picture of a rabbit
and a turtle, fast and
not much teaching how to drive the tractor, that's right.
need much teaching to pull the chaser bin around the paddock and support the
jumped in and keep it near turtle and don't hit the harvester, is that what you
are saying.
maintain the same speed as the harvester because otherwise when the grain comes
out if you're going too fast or too slow grain's
going to go all over the floor,
complainant accepted that there was ‘a harvest’ when others were
employed to drive the chaser bin but reiterated
her evidence that she operated
the chaser bin as well.
could not remember whether the chaser bin drivers stayed overnight at the
‘vaguely’ remembered the name ‘NB’ but did not recall
him staying in the house during a harvest that
he worked as the chaser bin
driver. She rejected the suggestion that NB stayed in the spare room upstairs,
reaffirming that was her
bedroom throughout her time living at the
re-examination, the complainant said the accused taught her how to operate the
tractor and chaser bin. All that was required,
she said, was to monitor the
throttle of the tractor to maintain a consistent speed with the harvester and to
operate the foot brake.
The complainant had experience driving manual vehicles
and another tractor on the farm before operating the chaser
complainant said she and the accused were flirtatious throughout the sexual
relationship and she was surprised that was ‘not
school and the farm
complainant said she left school because she was having disciplinary issues and
was ultimately suspended in circumstances she
said involved her standing up for
herself after being told off for yawning. The complainant explained: ‘I
really started to
get quite defensive about it because [the teacher] was so
angry with me like “I’ll let you have it”’. The
complainant was sent to the front office and told she could leave the school or
she was otherwise going to be expelled. The complainant’s
response was
‘They wouldn’t have one over me, I quit. They’re not expelling
me, I quit’.
complainant also described the circumstances in which she left the farm. She
said that one of the trucks had become bogged in
a paddock and the accused was
trying to recover it. The complainant went over to him and they were talking
not be living at the farm anymore. The accused
‘kept saying his phone number, his mobile phone number to me over and over
over again until it stuck...so we could catch up in the future when we
complainant said that the accused seemed upset she was leaving ‘in a way
that you would be upset if your partner was to
She said further
that AP was upset with her because she got caught out smoking, which it seems AP
was unhappy with because she was
leaving the farm, the complainant stayed with a friend for a short time before
relocating to Queensland to live with her mother.
She remained with her mother
for six weeks.
complainant was unable to remember whether she had any phone contact with the
accused whilst she was living with her
complainant returned to South Australia after her time in Queensland but had no
further contact with the
number of documents prepared by Department for Child Protection staff who had
dealings with the complainant, the accused or AP
in the period leading up to the
complainant leaving the farm were tendered by
Nature of Contact and Summary
T/c from [AP]
[AP] and [TP] will be going away for a fortnight from 22
[AW]’s friend’s mother [JL] might be prepared to have her.
Discussion around whether [AW] could stay home with [MSP]
who is 28. I said I am
not keen on this, even though I have no concerns about [MSP]. It would be too
easy for [AW] to set him up.
Nature of Contact and Summary
T/c to [MSP]
Long discussion. [MSP] agrees that it is best for [AW] not to be at home
while [AP] and [TP] are away. Agreed I will tell [AW] that
she can’t stay
at home with [MSP] because it is against the Dept’s principles for a
teenage girl to be cared for by a
single young man. Agreed [AW] can telephone
[MSP] while she is staying with the [L] family, as long as it is OK by
Nature-Record of Contact
T/c from [Brown] (school)
[AW] has been suspended for 2 days after misbehaving “severely”
in class. If she reoffends it’s 5 days suspension.
[Brown] keen for us to
activate school to work transition next term, via workskill. Re careers week
last week of term: [Brown] concerned
that if [AW] is down in town when the
school kids are, she will cause problems for other kids.
[Brown] wants me to telephone [AP] to tell her about the latest
suspension.
Nature-Record of Contact
T/c to [AP] re the above. [AP]’s response was “Well she can
pack her bags then”. I asked if she was serious, and
she confirmed that
she was. I advised [AP] that I would look for alternate accommodation of [AW]
immediately but that it could take
a few days.
Nature-Record of Contact
20/6 to 1/7/02
Phone calls and discussions with various people about travel and other
plans for [AW]. [AW] was suspended from school again. Decision
consultation with [DB] that [AW] should leave for Mackay on Monday
July (a week earlier than anticipated). [AW] left [JL]’s
June and was taken by worker (JK) to stay with
[JN]’s parents [B] and [TM] at Plympton.
The [M]’s put her on the plane on 1/7.
Nature-Record of Contact
[DB] left message to say [AW] had arrived safely.
Nature-Record of Contact
T/c from [MSP], 27, son of [AP] and [TP]. [MSP] not living at home any more
and would be prepared for [AW] to come and live with him
if she comes back from
Queensland. I advised [MSP] that the Dept would not consider this to be in
[AW]’s best interests. Long
discussion during which it became clear the
[MSP] is angry at his mother’s decision to end [AW]’s placement. I
[MSP] talk this through with his parents.
is an agreed fact that the complainant’s placement with the Ps concluded
on 15 June 2022.
cross-examination, the complainant was asked whether, having been told she was
leaving the house by AP, she threatened to destroy
I suggest to you that when you were told that you were leaving the house by
[AP], you said to her words to the effect that you
will destroy her and her
absolutely not.
you made up these allegations against [MSP] in order to get revenge on [AP] for
throwing you out of the house in June 2002.
defence case
defence called eight witnesses, a number of whom gave evidence about the
accused’s character. It is unnecessary to set
out the evidence of the
character witnesses in any detail. It is sufficient for me to say that their
evidence was to the effect that
the accused had, and retains, a good reputation
amongst those who know him for honesty and
He was variously
described as a helpful, quiet and calm
He is not known to be
someone prone to acts of violence,
(physical or
emotional) or intimidation,
which the defence say is relevant in particular to the plausibility of some
aspects of the complainant’s account which involved
the accused
threatening to shoot her or himself.
who had the opportunity to observe the accused in the company of the foster
children who stayed at the farm considered him
to interact with them in an
appropriate manner.
was an agreed fact that the accused has no prior
convictions.
proper use of good character evidence in circumstances where an accused has
neither given evidence nor an account to police is
to factor it into an
assessment of whether the prosecution has proved its case beyond reasonable
The good character of
the accused is relevant to the plausibility of the complainant’s
allegations, including those aspects
of her allegations that suggest he engaged
in serious and threatening behaviour with a firearm.
course, people do commit crimes for the first time and evidence of previous good
character cannot prevail against evidence of
guilt which I find to be convincing
and persuasive to the criminal standard.
The evidence of
is the accused’s mother. She gave evidence about what might be described
as the family’s general chronology, as well
as living arrangements at the
farm both before and after the complainant’s arrival.
was a trained nurse.
married her husband, TP, in
had three sons, D (born in 1969), G (born in 1971) and the accused (born in
AP described the
accused as a ‘very quiet, inward, unassuming
person...’.
their marriage, TP and AP ran a dairy farm at Mount Barker.
1994, they purchased the property at Parkin Hall Road, Coomandook. At that time,
only the accused remained living at
three or four years later, TP and AP acquired additional property on Buccleuch
South Road, Coomandook (Buccleuch). They subsequently
leased two more properties
in the Coomandook area.
Parkin Hall Road and Buccleuch properties were cropping and livestock
properties. At Parkin Hall Road, wheat, barley, canola,
and at one stage peas,
were grown. The leased properties were used for
It appears from D21
and the evidence of AP that the Buccleuch property and the leased properties
were some distance from the Parkin
Hall Road property. This meant that when
farming activities needed to be carried out on them, machinery and equipment had
to be transported
by road to those
properties.
were generally sown when wet weather set in, ideally around April-May, and
harvested following maturity and the onset of warm
weather between late November
and mid-January. Of course, late rain could delay harvesting because wet crops
cannot be harvested
and wet grain cannot be
said that harvesting was a very time consuming process and would often see work
being carried out until the early hours of the
around March 1999, the accused left Australia on an agricultural exchange
program. He spent much of 1999 in Denmark, returning
in around November.
accused, his father and AP all worked the Coomandook properties, with AP being
responsible for book work and finances as well
as being something of a
self-described ‘gopher’ from time to
Foster children
P’s had a number of foster children during their time at Coomandook,
commencing with the complainant’s half-sister,
J began living with the Ps
in 1996 and left shortly after her 19
birthday in May 2000 –
probably in June.
complainant commenced living with the Ps in October
She initially got on
well with J but that changed over time as the complainant became jealous of J
who, according to AP, she believed
had ‘pride of place in our home rather
described the complainant as a talkative and extroverted person ‘who
needed to be the centre of attention, no matter how
she got that
attention’.
said that the complainant exhibited behavioural difficulties at the Coomandook
Area School, which became more prominent over
cross examination, it was suggested to AP that she did not have a great deal of
positive feeling towards the complainant. AP said
that was not entirely correct
as ‘you can’t dislike somebody who is mentally ill. That’s
counterproductive’.
agreed that she considered J like a daughter and that the complainant had become
jealous of J after some time living at the
Tension had developed
between J and the
complainant.
Parkin Hall Road house
moving into the Parkin Hall Road house, the Ps undertook some renovations
however the first floor was already constructed.
AP said that the first floor
had timber flooring throughout. The stairs were a timber construction with a
carpet runner.
reference to P3, AP explained some differences between the layout of the house
as depicted in the photographs taken in 2015 and
when the complainant resided
with the Ps.
to the lounge room, AP explained there was a sofa where the television could be
seen in exhibit P3, photograph 5, that faced the
opposite wall along which there
was another sofa. The television was in fact positioned in the corner of the
room to the right of
the fireplace as one looks at photograph 5. When watching
television together, TP and AP would sit on the sofa that was positioned
the television is shown in photograph 5. TP would sit closest to the fireplace
and AP next to him.
position, if AP looked to the right, she would be able to see directly up the
stairs to the first floor with the view depicted
by photograph 10 of
She said further that
when in the lounge room, movement in the upstairs bedrooms could be heard. She
said ‘you could hear footsteps
and the boards creaked’. She also
thought the house might have creaked during periods of contraction or expansion
of the timber.
did not think it was possible to hear people moving around the house on the
ground floor from the first floor because the ground
floor had a concrete
sub-floor and was
said that when the complainant first arrived at the Ps she occupied the spare
bedroom on the first floor.
This was consistent with the complainant’s evidence. However, AP said that
once J departed in around June 2000, the complainant
was moved to the spare
bedroom on the ground floor where she remained throughout her tenure with the
It will be remembered
that the complainant’s evidence was that she remained in the upstairs
bedroom adjacent the accused’s
bedroom for the duration of her stay and it
was essentially the co-location of the bedrooms that facilitated her sneaking
accused’s room on an almost nightly basis to engage in sexual
intercourse with him.
cross-examination, AP maintained that the complainant was re-located to the
spare, ground floor bedroom, after J left the farm
because she felt better able
to control the complainant and her activities in the downstairs bedroom. AP said
she ‘felt safer’
with the complainant downstairs, remarking that the
complainant was a volatile person with a temper; would break things; was not
reliable and, inferentially, was suspected of stealing things from AP’s
AP agreed that she
had said during a trial in November 2018 that with J initially being in the
downstairs bedroom, the complainant
‘went upstairs for a couple of
weeks’ ‘but then moved back
downstairs’.
a further exchange in relation to evidence previously given by AP on the topic
of bedrooms:
do you agree that in the course of evidence in February of 2019, you in fact
agreed that [J] had gone upstairs, [J] was in the
upstairs bedroom, not the
downstairs bedroom when [AW] was there.
used to go from one bedroom to another with one another. That didn't mean they
slept in those bedrooms. They slept in their own
rooms but they were often doing
whatever teenage girls do in the bedrooms, one or other bedroom.
were questions in regards who would sleep where because you're aware that you
know it's an issue as to where [AW] was sleeping,
- if you look at [AW’s] evidence, you will find that she said nothing
happened before [J] left. So I don't know what you're
getting at.
last part of the answer extracted above, prompted questioning from counsel about
the extent of AP’s knowledge of the case
against her son:
talked about the evidence in this case with your son, haven't you.
read affidavits in the case.
talked about what evidence has been called in the previous trials in this case
with your son, haven't you.
tailored your evidence on where [AW] slept overnight in order to meet the facts
of the prosecution case, haven't you.
have not. I have definitely not lied to the court.
also said that before the complainant began living at the farm, J
‘oscillated between bedrooms’ and was free to use
downstairs or upstairs spare room as she
can be seen from exhibit P1 that if the complainant was relocated to the spare
bedroom on the ground floor after J’s departure,
she would have needed to
walk past the sofa where TP and AP sat of a nighttime in order to make her way
up the stairs and into the
accused’s bedroom. Equally importantly, because
the accused’s bedroom door is at the top of the stairs and visible from
where the sofa was positioned, AP at least would have been able to see the
complainant enter the accused’s bedroom.
AP’s evidence as to the complainant’s relocation after J’s
departure is a reasonable possibility, it creates
significant issues for the
plausibility of the complainant’s account.
and the purchase of the chaser bin and yellow Volvo
gave evidence about the harvesting method used at the Coomandook properties. In
the early years, harvested grain would be conveyed
by the header to field bins
around the properties and then transferred to a truck for delivery to
This process involved
a disruption to the harvesting activities of the header whilst it transported
harvest grain to field bins,
so in 2000, a chaser bin was purchased. The chaser
bin was operated by a tractor that would be driven alongside the header so that
harvested grain could be deposited directly into the chaser bin. The tractor and
its attached chaser bin needed to be driven at the
same speed as the header and
obviously enough care had to be taken to avoid a collision between the two
pieces of machinery which
operated in close proximity to each
benefit of the chaser bin was that the header could harvest continuously without
the need for interruption to convey harvested
grain to field bins. That became
the job of the chaser bin
who would either
deposit grain from the chaser bin into field bins or, if the grain truck was
available, directly into the truck
for transportation to the
said that in the years 1999 to 2002, the accused would drive the header. The Ps
engaged others on a seasonal basis to help with
harvest. In particular, a nephew
of AP – NB – was retained to drive the chaser bin for the year 2000
harvest. When not
working, NB slept at the Parkin Hall Road property in the
spare upstairs bedroom.
the 2001 harvest, NB was again engaged as the chaser bin operator. Another
person, AS, also operated the chaser bin because neither
NB nor AS were able to
do so on a full time basis.
AS stayed at the Parkin Hall Road property ‘a few nights’ during
this period, and slept
‘upstairs’.
said that during harvesting activities, she did not see the complainant
operating the chaser
gave evidence that the yellow Volvo truck which is at the heart of the
complainant’s allegations relating to count 6 was
purchased by the Ps in
March 2002, but delivery was not taken until later in April 2002. That was to
allow the previous owner of
the truck to complete an outstanding
accused moved out of the Parkin Hall Road property and into the Buccleuch
property around the time that the Volvo was
Thereafter, the
accused would sleep at the Buccleuch house.
cross examination, AP agreed that harvesting of their 4,500 odd acres could take
anything from 30 to 45 days subject to
to the Volvo, AP said in cross examination that after full payment was made on 6
April 2002, the Ps took possession of the truck
but it was then driven to Port
Victoria to have a Hastings bin built and subsequently had hydraulics fitted in
Adelaide. She thought
the truck would not have been back on the farm until the
end of April / mid-May 2002 and it would have probably remained in a shed
July unless used to take seed to the air
agreed that the complainant would have been around for two harvests where the
chaser bin was used – the 2000 and 2001
AP said the
complainant barely went outside the house after first arriving in October 1999
and did not participate in that year’s
harvest ‘but the next
harvest, she did’,
although for ‘99% of it she was at
school...’.
however that Christmas school holidays at the time ran from the week before
Christmas through to the end of
in her cross examination, AP agreed that when harvesting activities were
conducted at any of the other three properties owned
or leased by the Ps, she
did not remain on-site at all times, but would visit the harvesting sites from
time to time to take food
to the workers or when parts were needed. She agreed
further that she said during a trial in this Court in November 2018 that when
farm workers would come inside they would say ‘For heaven’s sake,
why don’t you get rid of this kid. We can’t
do anything because
she’s always in the
AP said however
that the complainant was not always outside but was quite often an annoyance
when ‘they were trying to achieve
something’.
on the years 1999 to 2002, AP said her nightly routine involved sitting down to
watch television at around 8:30pm, when
the show Law & Order came on.
Although she was a tea and coffee drinker at that time, AP said (contrary to the
complainant’s
evidence) that she would not drink tea or coffee after
around 4pm.
said the complainant’s bedtime throughout the duration of her stay at the
reference to the complainant’s allegations relating to count 4, AP said
that there were guns on the farm but they were
kept in a gun safe in a workshop
around 50 metres from the residence. Guns were not permitted inside the house.
AP was the superintendent
of the combination lock to the gun safe and did not
give the combination to the accused. She only gave the combination to her
when she became ill in 2001. AP said this protocol was adopted because
she had a particular aversion to
Curiously, she did
however permit NB to keep his guns in the house when he would visit, provided
they were always with
cross examination, AP said that the four firearms kept in the gun safe had been
inherited. She said ‘I don’t know
why we bothered to keep
agreed that she understood that when renewing a firearms licence, it was
necessary to justify the need for a
recalled only two occasions on which one of the firearms was used and that was
to euthanize injured sheep. The complainant was
not present for this exercise
and AP did not think that the complainant would have seen the rifles stored in
the gun safe. She said
however that the complainant would have seen NB’s
rifle, which was exactly the same as one of the rifles owned by the
Circumcision
gave evidence that the complainant came home from school one afternoon speaking
AP’s sister-in-law and
mother-in-law were visiting. AP thought the complainant had raised this to shock
her 84 year old mother
According to AP, the
complainant went on to talk about circumcision and explained that the teacher
had said that circumcision was
not necessary, which prompted AP to tell the
complainant about an experience she had as a nurse where a 67 year old man had
circumcised. She also told the complainant that her children were
circumcised ‘because that was [reinforcing] my opinion that
necessary’.
topic was revisited in
cross-examination:
mean no disrespect, I'll call it the circumcision discussion. That story is a
complete lie, isn't it.
for heaven's sake, no, it is not a lie.
isn't it the case, when you've recounted that story before, you also told [AW],
not just that your own boys were circumcised,
but that your husband wasn't
circumcised.
correct, I did.
me again with why it was important that you disclosed such personal details to a
girl who must have been under the age of about
I was offended by the attitude of a teacher telling a child in sex education
that it was not necessary to circumcise.
the need for the personal details.
it was relevant to her at the time, she needed to understand why I felt that
tell her about your son being circumcised.
not? I mean, I had the opinion that it was necessary, I needed to demonstrate to
her that I had carried out that thinking.
why did you need to demonstrate it to her, why was it so important.
when I was nursing, I watched a 67-year-old man cry after circumcision because
he had - the foreskin had stopped him urinating
correctly and he had to be
circumcised and that poor man laid in that bed and cried, and that had a marked
impression on me. It was
downright sad and should never have happened.
me to understand, help us to understand that telling that story about the
elderly man would have reinforced your point without
the need for giving
personal details about the male members of your family, wouldn't it.
she would have asked whether they were, I don't know, I cannot tell you.
story is as improbable as it is untrue, isn't it.
it is not improbable -
OBJECTION: MR HENCHLIFFE
MR HENCHLIFFE: It's not a proper question.
HIS HONOUR: I think it's a matter for submission.
MR HENCHLIFFE: One is a submission and then there is a question.
HIS HONOUR: The first part submission, Ms Moore, second part
untrue and you've made it up.
is not untrue. In fact, my sister-in-law and probably even my mother-in-law, who
will turn 107 in a couple of days, can still
tell you about it. It is not a
I'm going to suggest to you you've come here to give evidence to assist your
son, knowing important features of the evidence having
discussed them with
need to answer that question please, [AP].
do I answer something that I have gone over and over and over and over again? It
is fact, it is true.
Observations of the accused and
complainant
did not observe any flirtatious behaviour between her son and the complainant.
She saw their interactions as consistent with a
‘brother-sister
relationship’. She said there was never an occasion where she found the
complainant in the accused’s
complainant leaves the Ps’ farm – motive to lie
2002, the relationship between AP and the complainant appears to have become
fractious. The complainant was having disciplinary
troubles at school and was
suspended and AP was having difficulties dealing with her. The complainant
refused to get an education
which AP considered essential for foster
said there came a point essentially where she had a ‘gutful’ and
made contact with the social worker who had oversight
or responsibility for the
complainant, Ms Kenny. Ms Kenny told AP that arrangements would be made for the
complainant to be relocated
but it would take
AP’s evidence on
this topic was consistent with the 12 June 2002 file note (forming part of P19)
which recorded Ms Kenny advising
AP that it would take a few days for new
accommodation to be arranged for AW.
did not immediately tell the complainant that she was going to be leaving as she
‘didn’t want the animosity’
so she refrained from informing
her until a couple of days before the move. In the context of the complainant
mentioning something
won’t be here’. Nothing further was said at that time, but the
complainant
later had the following exchange with
what was said next if - anything you can recall.
at that stage. Later on, she told me she'd get me for what I had done and when I
said 'Very smart, [AW]. How are you going
to do that?', the answer was 'I can
because I'm a girl'.
she said that, where were you.
at the base of the stairs.
how long was that before - that she left the house.
was the day she left.
with the question of motive more generally, in cross-examination, AP agreed that
she had positive feelings towards her
son and wanted to support
re-examination, the following exchange occurred:
was put to you that you've come here to lie. Was that your purpose in giving
hardly think so.
you told us the truth.
have told you the truth and I -
you aware that would be a serious crime for you to lie in court.
I'm fully aware of that.
you done that.
is a cousin of the accused.
the time of giving evidence, NB was a paramedic with the South Australia
Ambulance Service.
gave evidence about work he performed on the farm during the 2000 and 2001
harvests, when he was engaged to drive the chaser bin
which had been purchased
by the Ps in 2000. He stayed on the farm when working throughout these harvests
and occupied the spare bedroom
at the top of the stairs.
said that he assisted with the 2000 harvest over a period of ‘a couple of
months’, which involved around 40 days of
work at the Parkin Hall Road
property and the other P
properties.
to commencing work, NB was instructed by the accused about driving the tractor
that towed the chaser bin. He described the
process of learning to drive the
particular tractor used for this purpose as a difficult one because of the
‘crab steer’
functionality which made learning to manoeuvre the
vehicle challenging.
received instruction from the accused over a number of days until he was
confident driving.
described driving the chaser bin in the harvesting process as a ‘precision
skill’ as it had to be driven ‘alongside
a very big harvester or
header’ so as to align the chaser bin with the auger of the harvester
during the grain transfer process,
which took place whilst both vehicles were
moving. He said he did many ‘dry runs’ with the accused to
we could align ourselves and do it properly’.
said that adjustments to the speed and line of the tractor would need to be made
on the fly to accommodate the movements of the
harvester or obstructions in
operation of the tractor required use of foot pedals, the hand throttle and gear
the holder of a medium-rigid heavy vehicle licence, NB was licensed to drive the
tractor and its chaser bin on public
He agreed in cross
examination that, to his knowledge, no licence was required to drive a farm
vehicle on private
stayed at the farm whilst working and would sleep in the bedroom to the left of
the stairs on the first floor – that is,
the bedroom that the complainant
said she occupied during her time at the P
cross-examination, NB said that when he was taught by the accused to drive the
tractor on the farm, he already had experience
driving trucks and tractors on
his family’s own
agreed that when driving the tractor and chaser bin during harvesting that the
speed of travel was determined by the speed at
which the harvester was being
driven. He acknowledged that the ‘hare’ and ‘turtle’
symbols were used in conjunction
with throttle levers in tractors to indicate
2001, NB’s friend, AS, assisted with the harvest as NB was unable to do
NB said AS was
the ‘predominant driver’ but he filled in when AS had other
commitments.
estimated that he worked 15-20 days during the 2001 harvest.
again stayed overnight in the bedroom on the first floor to the left of the
NB’s evidence
was firm and clear: he only ever slept in the spare bedroom at the top of the
described the first floor of the house as ‘very noisy’ and said that
‘...it creaks every single step you take
to the point that at night-time
you’d be very reluctant to go and get a glass of water or walk downstairs
for a wee for fear
of waking the whole house
cross-examination, NB said he had stayed at the farm prior to the harvests he
worked and would often sleep in a swag
was put to NB that he might be mistaken about the bedroom he occupied when
staying at the farm to which he responded: ‘No,
absolutely not. I’ve
never slept in any other room in that
complainant
said that the complainant slept in the bedroom downstairs during the harvests he
said that did not observe anything unusual as between the accused and the
complainant during his time staying at the
never saw the complainant driving the tractor or pulling a chaser bin at harvest
said that he took his Ruger 1022 LR self-loading rifle with him when working the
harvests. He occasionally took the rifle inside
the residence to clean it or
when preparing to go shooting. When the rifle was kept inside, it was
‘probably’ stored
under his bed. The rifle was otherwise with him or
locked in his car.
cross-examination, NB agreed that his rifle was kept in an ‘opaque’
fabric carry case. He said however that he would
have had the rifle ‘out
quite a lot’ when the complainant was at the house. He would also
occasionally take the rifle
in the tractor with him during harvesting
activities.
said that taking the rifle into the house with him was not something he raised
with TP or AP in advance or for which he sought
permission. He said further that
there would have been occasions where he left the rifle in the upstairs bedroom
unattended.
I have said earlier, JN and JoN were foster parents to the complainant and her
younger sister T for around 8 years, before the
complainant was re-located to
the Ps. The Ns also fostered the complainant’s first child, AB, when he
was a baby. The complainant
gave birth to AB when she was 17.
said that during the time the complainant lived with the N family, she did not
beat the complainant and she did not consider her
husband to have a drinking
problem or to be an
said that the complainant was placed with the Ps after she and her husband asked
for the complainant and T to be separated. Thereafter,
the Ns would take T to
visit the complainant at the Ps and would take the complainant with them to
different places.
cross-examination, JN said that prior to attending court to give evidence, she
was not aware that the complainant had alleged
that she was beaten by her. She
agreed that when the complainant was moved to the Ps’ house, there had
been mutual violence
between the complainant and her sister, T, and the
relocation was intended to avoid further violence between
denied disciplining the children using a metal ruler and denied striking the
complainant with a wooden spoon. She did recount
an episode during which, in
frustration, she hit a bench with a wooden spoon which caused the spoon to
break. She said this was because
of the behaviour of the complainant and T and
that after the spoon was broken ‘we all
gave evidence that she and her husband began caring for AB when he was just 5
days old. They invited the complainant to live with
them and ‘learn how to
look after him’ which she did for a couple of days before again leaving.
JN denied that there
came a time where she precluded the complainant from seeing
AB and said further that there were many occasions where she took AB
complainant so that she might see
do not propose to repeat at length the addresses of counsel. I will endeavour to
summarise only the main points they each advanced.
I have however carefully read
the transcript of counsel’s addresses since hearing them on Monday, 5 May
N Moore, who appeared for the prosecution with Mr J Powell, commenced her
address by acknowledging that the prosecution case depended
entirely on
acceptance of the credibility and reliability of the complainant’s
Moore accepted that the effect of D12, D13 and P18, in light of the
complainant’s evidence in cross-examination, was that
she had told lies to
her mother about engaging in sexual activity with LN. Ms Moore said further that
when the complainant gave evidence
denying having made those statements, that
too was a lie. Ms Moore abandoned any suggestion that the complainant may have
forgotten making false allegations about LN to her mother. Rather, she
accepted that the complainant had been deliberately untruthful
in court when
cross-examined on this topic. Ms Moore submitted however that the
complainant’s in court lies in fact supported
her credibility because they
demonstrated that she was unwilling to repeat in court a false allegation she
had previously made out
Moore argued that the false allegations made by the complainant to her mother
were lacking in detail and were ‘off the cuff’
remarks that the
complainant never pursued further.
significance of the lies to assessment of the complainant’s credibility
were, it was submitted, to be understood in the
context of the
complainant’s unfortunate personal history, including being placed in
foster care from a very young age.
Moore also emphasised the time at which the false allegations were made. Exhibit
D12 recorded an allegation made to the complainant’s
mother in 1999 and
again in 2001. Ms Moore pointed out that in 1999, the complainant – on her
evidence – no longer wanted
to live with the Ns. The repetition of the
allegation in 2002 shortly before D12 was composed (in August 2002) might, it
was suggested,
reflect that the complainant did not want to be returned to the
Ns after her placement with the Ps concluded. Of course, these explanations
the false allegations – which again were not advanced by the complainant
– could not logically explain the making
of the allegations in 2001 and
again in 2008.
Moore submitted that, notwithstanding the complainant’s lies on this
topic, it remained open to me to accept her evidence
in relation to the charged
acts which she characterised as detailed, compelling and comprised of unusual
facts and circumstances
suggesting it was both credible and reliable. Ms Moore
pointed to the complainant’s evidence about feeling lonely and upset
she first moved to the Ps, and the disparity in the treatment of the complainant
and J as setting the context within which the
complainant described the abuse
commencing after J had left the house.
Moore highlighted the complainant’s comments to the accused on the
occasion the subject of count 1, during which she spontaneously
made up a story
that she had engaged in such activities with others, as indicative of the
genuineness of her account. Ms Moore said
that the complainant’s evidence
had the ‘ring
of truth’ to it. She advanced the same submission with
respect to the complainant’s evidence about count 4 and how she
herself as a 14 year old, what was she to say to an adult who was threatening to
commit suicide? Ms Moore described such
details as ‘resplendent of a true
account...’.
complainant’s evidence in relation to counts 6 and 7 was also said to be
embedded with esoteric details about the operation
of the Volvo truck and the
tractor and chaser bin which was incompatible with the allegations being a
product of fabrication.
was further placed on exhibit P19, a series of entries in what is described as a
‘continuation sheet’ kept by
Family and Youth Services in relation
to the complainant. In particular, Ms Moore submitted that the entry of 9 July
2002 in which
the accused offered for the complainant to live with him in the
event she returned from Queensland, and which came on the back of
discussion in February 2002 between Ms Kenny and the accused to the effect that
it would not be appropriate for the complainant
to be at home with the accused
whilst his parents were away, demonstrated the accused’s ‘close
relationship’ with
the complainant. This was said to
‘dovetail’ with the complainant’s evidence that when she left
the Ps, the accused
repeated his mobile phone number to her over and over again
so as to embed it in her memory.
respect to the evidence of JN, Ms Moore submitted that the episode that involved
JN breaking a wooden spoon on a bench in frustration
tended to indicate that
‘all was not entirely right in the home’ which was, in a sense,
unsurprising because, as the
complainant explained, she did not ‘give it
to them easy’. Ms Moore’s overarching submission was that the
relating to the living conditions at the Ns, and who was right about
them, which may in any event be a matter of perception, would
not assist me in
resolving the central issues in dispute.
Moore argued that the letters written by the complainant to her son AB and to
JN, in which she spoke positively about the Ns,
did not undermine her evidence
of the alleged sexual abuse by the accused and were explained by the
complainant’s evidence
that ‘if she didn’t write them in a
particular way...there would be
consequences’.
Moore characterised the complainant’s evidence that the accused was
circumcised, which is an agreed fact, as demonstrating
esoteric knowledge on her
part that could only have been obtained through non-innocent means. Ms Moore
suggested that AP’s
evidence about the conversation she had with the
complainant about sex education that led to AP revealing that her sons were
circumcised,
and so providing an alternative explanation for the
complainant’s knowledge, was as improbable as it was untruthful.
Ms Moore submitted that the complainant’s evidence about driving the Volvo
truck and the tractor and chaser bin was
so specific as to be indicative of a
genuinely recalled memory which in turn supported the complainant’s
evidence about the
commission of counts 6 and 7 in the circumstances she
Henchliffe KC, who appeared for the accused, commenced his address by submitting
that there was nothing in the complainant’s
account that would give me
sufficient confidence to conclude that the charges had been proved beyond
reasonable doubt.
acknowledging that I would not necessarily need to resolve the conflict in the
evidence of the complainant and JN as to
the living conditions at the N’s,
Mr Henchliffe argued that the complainant’s evidence about her time with
and being subjected to beatings, was inconsistent with the fact that
her sister T remained living with the Ns until she was 17; continued
the Ns. It was submitted that the letters
the complainant had written to AB and
JN (D10 and D11) were inherently incompatible with the complainant’s
evidence about being
beaten by the Ns or, at the very least, showed the
complainant’s capacity for deception.
Henchliffe added that, on the complainant’s account, it was she who
decided to leave the Ns’ house when aged 13, which
would portray her as
someone prepared to stand up for herself, in contrast to her evidence about her
reaction to events at the Ps.
The complainant’s behaviour at Coomandook
Area School, including that which ultimately saw the imposition of the
that resulted in her leaving the Ps, showed that she was far from
timid and was accustomed to standing up for herself, which rendered
acquiescence and submission in the alleged abuse implausible.
Henchliffe described the complainant as having an ‘extroverted’ and
‘defiant’ personality when younger
which he said sat with AP’s
evidence about the threatening remark made by the complainant when she was told
she would be leaving
Henchliffe then turned to the lies told by the complainant in relation to LN on
four occasions, namely, in 1999, 2001, 2002 and
2008. He submitted that not only
did the complainant lie to her mother when making the allegations; she lied in
court when she denied
making the allegations to her mother. Mr Henchliffe argued
that the complainant’s denials in court of having made the allegations
against LN could not be attributed to forgetfulness. He submitted that the
prosecution’s hypothesis as to the explanation for
the complainant lying
in court was speculative and that she may well have lied because she knew that
revealing she had made false
allegations of a similar kind to those she makes
against the accused would reflect poorly on her credibility as a witness. Mr
pointed out that at the time the complainant denied making the
allegations to her mother, she could not have known that the defence
establish that she did in fact make the allegations.
Henchliffe put that irrespective of the explanation, the nature and
circumstances in which the lies were told is devastating to
complainant’s credibility.
to AP’s evidence about the ‘circumcision conversation’, Mr
Henchliffe submitted that it was neither improbable
nor fanciful. He submitted
that whilst it might have been thought unusual if the older women at the house
had initiated conversation
with the complainant about the topic, AP’s
evidence made it clear that it was the complainant who raised the issue and
comments were merely responsive. Mr Henchliffe argued that AP’s
reference to her sons was simply an example to illustrate the
strength of her
views on the topic. He said further that, putting the conversation to one side,
the complainant’s evidence
little weight because it was equally consistent with her making an educated
was half as likely to be correct as it was incorrect and that, in any
event, before the evidence could be used as demonstrative of
esoteric knowledge,
it would be necessary for the prosecution to exclude the possibility of innocent
observation, given the complainant
lived with the accused for more than 2 years.
Henchliffe then analysed the complainant’s evidence about the
‘pattern’ of alleged abuse, which she said occurred
on an almost
nightly basis when AP would sit down to watch the show ‘Law &
Order’. Mr Henchliffe made the following
points about this aspect of the
complainant’s evidence:
was a paucity of detail concerning the sexual activity which the complainant
alleged occurred on a nightly basis and the circumstances
in which it took
was improbable that the complainant could have snuck into the accused’s
room without detection on an almost nightly basis
for such an extended period of
time when, in order to get to the accused’s bedroom even if she was
occupying the spare room
upstairs, she would have to traverse the landing at the
top of the stairs which, together with the accused’s bedroom door,
visible to AP from where she sat to watch television.
evidence was that the upstairs floorboards were ‘creaky’ such that
any movement from the complainant’s room
to the accused’s room was
likely to rouse attention.
complainant’s evidence that AP would get up and make a coffee or tea when
Law & Order came on such that she would miss
the start of the program, was
counter-intuitive given her interest in the program.
Henchliffe then dealt with the evidence relating to each count. I summarise his
key contentions:
1 and 2: the complainant’s account that the accused did not speak with
her; had no relationship with her; and was rude
and arrogant was incongruous
with her suggestion that, out of the blue one evening and without any
‘testing of the waters’,
he would take the drastic risk of digitally
penetrating her and then engaging in penile vaginal sexual intercourse with her
not knowing
what her response might be (but bearing in mind the evidence about
the complainant’s general disposition and assertiveness),
particularly
with TP and AP in the house (albeit, on the complainant’s evidence, in bed
asleep). Mr Henchliffe also criticised
the complainant’s evidence that,
thereafter, the accused – who had a .22 calibre rifle behind his door
– threatened
to kill her and himself, arguing that it was contrary to the
evidence of the accused’s good character and hence implausible.
4: the scenario described by the complainant, which involved the accused being
suicidal after breaking up with his girlfriend
of one week was again
incompatible with the evidence about the accused’s general disposition
given by those who know him. The
complainant’s inability to remember what
she said to the accused and the absence of detail about the mechanics of the
interaction
betray her evidence as an ‘invention’. Reliance was also
placed on AP’s evidence concerning the storage of firearms
at the property
which rendered it unlikely that the accused would have had a rifle in his room.
3: again, the absence of any meaningful detail and the description of the sexual
activity at a level of abstraction means there
is nothing intrinsically
believable about the complainant’s account. Mr Henchliffe put further that
if the complainant believed
she was in a relationship with the accused at that
point, her suggestion that she only ‘felt a bit pushed out’ by the
accused having commenced a relationship with another, did not sit well.
5: Mr Henchliffe drew attention to the complainant’s inability to recall
where the accused ejaculated, submitting ‘One
wonders how she can remember
it happened at all if she doesn’t know where it went. How does she know he
ejaculated? It’s
strange that she can even say “yes, he did”,
is certain about that, but then doesn’t know where’.
6: the Volvo truck was registered on 6 April 2002, consistently with the
notation on the invoice D22, which meant the truck
was not in the possession of
the Ps for any longer than 2 months before the complainant left the property.
When asked in cross examination
if she agreed that the Volvo did not arrive
until April 2002, the complainant responded ‘what month did I
leave?’, which
Mr Henchliffe characterised as a calculated response to
ensure the complainant did not ‘trip herself up’ on the timeline.
it was, the complainant’s evidence that she drove the truck during harvest
time could not be right, Mr Henchliffe submitted,
as it had been objectively
demonstrated that the first harvest the truck would have been present for was
the 2022 harvest and the
complainant had left the Ps by then.
7: the complainant said that she thought the incident in the header happened
after the incident in the truck and at the end
of a day of reaping which, again,
could not be right because that would place the incident in the harvest of 2002,
by which time
the complainant was no longer living at the Ps. Mr Henchliffe
submitted that when counsel tried to pin down the timing of this alleged
incident in cross-examination, the complainant said she could not be sure of
when it happened. Mr Henchliffe also challenged the
complainant’s evidence
evidence of NB about
the training he went through to learn how to operate the
tractor and chaser bin in conjunction with the header. It will also be
that NB was the holder of a medium-rigid heavy vehicle licence at the
time and therefore had some experience driving large vehicles.
uncontested evidence was that he and his friend AS were essentially employed as
chaser bin drivers for the 2000 and 2001
harvests which made it unlikely the
complainant undertook this work. Mr Henchliffe submitted that insofar as the
complainant was
able to describe the harvesting process, that was something she
would have observed during her time on the farm, such that her ability
explain the process lent no real support to her suggestion that she in fact
drove the chaser bin.
Henchliffe submitted that the continuation sheets (P19) were consistent with the
complainant wanting to stay with the accused,
rather than the accused revealing
an interest in having the complainant stay with him. He argued that the entry
recording that the
accused was prepared for the complainant to live with him if
she returned from Queensland spoke to nothing more than his concern
her foster-brother and did not demonstrate the existence of a romantic
relationship between them.
Henchliffe drew attention to a number of discrete aspects of the
complainant’s evidence which he submitted were curious.
The first related
to the complainant’s evidence that she was seen in the accused’s
room by his mother on one occasion
at around 10pm. Mr Henchliffe submitted that
when challenged about the timing of this discovery, the complainant began to
‘backtrack’,
having realised that, on her account, that would mean
that she had been in the room for an hour and a half given the usual course
events was that she would go to the accused’s room at 8:30pm.
Mr Henchliffe pointed to the complainant’s evidence that the accused
‘started coming to my room’ when Law
& Order started which, it
was submitted, contradicted the complainant’s evidence that it was always
her going to the accused’s
Henchliffe contrasted the evidence of the complainant about where she slept,
including during harvests, with the evidence of AP
and NB. As to AP’s
spontaneous assertion during her evidence that she was aware of the
complainant’s account, Mr Henchliffe
suggested it was of no real moment
and she maintained she was telling the truth about who occupied which bedroom.
Mr Henchliffe put
further that it would be a ‘remarkable
coincidence’ if NB’s evidence about which bedroom he stayed in
harvests he worked, happened to align with AP’s evidence unless
it was the truth of the situation. Mr Henchliffe submitted
that if NB’s
evidence were reasonably possibly true, it would make no sense for the
complainant to have moved out of her bedroom
and into the downstairs bedroom
just for those periods that NB stayed at the house.
Henchliffe submitted that if the evidence of AP and NB about bedrooms was
reasonably possibly true, the complainant’s allegations
work’ and ‘must all have been an
invention’.
Mr Henchliffe submitted it was improbable that the complainant, an apparently
fertile woman with numerous children, never fell
pregnant to the accused if he
was engaging in regular, unprotected sex with her for such a lengthy period.
As to the complainant’s evidence that the accused lived on the farm for
the duration of her stay with the Ps, her evidence
was in conflict with
AP’s evidence which was that the accused moved out of the farmhouse at
around the time the Volvo truck
was acquired in March / April 2002. Mr
Henchliffe said further that it was illogical that the accused would have sought
his mobile phone number into the complainant in a paddock
instead of during an episode of the almost nightly sexual activity she
was taking place. Mr Henchliffe submitted that a conversation in the
circumstances described by the complainant would only
be necessary if the
accused had already moved out of the farmhouse.
Henchliffe then targeted the complainant’s suggestion that the accused was
‘upset’ during this conversation
in what she said was ‘a way
that you would be upset if your partner was to leave home’. Mr Henchliffe
characterised this
aspect of the complainant’s evidence as ‘over
egging her story’ and an attempt to ‘self-corroborate the fact
there being a
relationship’.
Henchliffe concluded his address by observing that there were ‘red flags
everywhere’ and that the complainant had
been shown to have a dishonest
and manipulative disposition. He submitted that her evidence was unsupported and
in fact contrary
to the evidence of JN, AP and NB and that the complainant had
been shown to have told serious lies about sexual intercourse with
LN; driving
the chaser bin; seeing a rifle in the accused’s room and which bedroom she
claimed to have occupied during her
time at the Ps. Viewed in the context of the
unchallenged evidence of the accused’s good character, Mr Henchliffe
that the prosecution had failed to prove its case.
Analysis and findings
The complainant
found aspects of the complainant’s evidence to be quite compelling. In
numerous respects, the complainant presented as a
genuine and credible witness.
For the most part, she presented as very frank and straight-forward. She gave
detailed evidence about
the abuse she allegedly suffered and her evidence in
chief was quite persuasive.
complainant’s demeanour changed substantially whilst under
cross-examination. From time to time, she was unresponsive,
argumentative and
occasionally obstructive. That is somewhat unsurprising given the complainant
was subjected to a protracted and
pressing cross-examination that challenged the
truthfulness of her account in almost every respect.
there were aspects of the complainant’s evidence that require close
analysis, particularly having regard to the evidence
of AP, NB and JN. Her
evidence was in direct conflict with the evidence of those witnesses in a number
Alleged abuse when living with the Ns
will be remembered that the complainant’s evidence about the circumstances
in which she came to be placed with the accused’s
family was that she had
been subjected to physical and verbal abuse by her previous foster parents, JoN
complainant was cross-examined at length about the letters she wrote to her son
AB, care of the N family, and to JN. In her letter
to her son of 10 October
2004, the complainant described the N home as a ‘good home’, which
seems an inapposite description
having regard to the complainant’s claims
of maltreatment.
in her letter to JN, which she introduced by referring to JN as
‘mum’, the complainant spoke in affectionate terms
Indeed, as to JN, the complainant wrote that ‘no-one could ever mother me
the way you ever have’; that
JN meant ‘the world to [her]’;
and that she loved JN ‘as much as I would if you were my biological
She also inquired
is very difficult to reconcile the terms of the letter with the experiences the
complainant claimed to have when living with the
N family. I accept of course
that interpersonal relationships of the kind the complainant had with her then
foster family are complex
and that there could be many reasons for the apparent
tension between the complainant’s narrative of her time living with the
and the manner of her expression. Nonetheless, I find the letter to be
strikingly inconsistent with the complainant’s evidence
that she was
beaten or physically abused by both JoN and JN.
also found it curious that the complainant would have been willing to have her
son AB placed with the Ns if she had experienced
the level of abuse she detailed
in her evidence. However, I consider this of less significance given the
complainant’s age
at the time the arrangements were made in respect of AB.
gave evidence as part of the defence case. She denied that she had ever beaten
the complainant.
came across as a genuine and truthful witness. I did not doubt her evidence that
she had not been physically abusive to the complainant.
combined effect of the letters written by the complainant and JN’s account
cause me to doubt this aspect of the complainant’s
evidence. I do not
think that the conflict between the evidence of the complainant and JN on this
topic can be attributed to misperception
or honest but unreliable recollection.
The complainant was adamant about what she had gone through at the N’s
house; yet a
contemporaneous insight into her mindset towards the N family
belies that history of alleged abuse.
have had careful regard to the submissions of Ms Moore about the important
context for these interactions supplied by the complainant’s
sympathetic
personal history. I acknowledge further that one must be careful not to evaluate
the evidence on the basis of assumptions
complainant’s position should be expected to act. That is particularly so
when it comes to what is
said to be inconsistent conduct occurring whilst a
person is in the grip of an abusive situation. That, however, was not the
the complainant was in at the time she wrote the letters.
do not overlook the complainant’s evidence that the letters were written
in a particular way to avoid ‘consequences’.
I also keep in mind
that the complainant’s son was living with the Ns at the time the letters
were written and that the complainant
may have felt indebted to them on this
account or otherwise not wanted to create friction that might have had an effect
on the disposition
of the Ns towards AB.
concern that the complainant’s account about her experience with the Ns
was, on the face of the letters written by her and
JN’s evidence,
doubtful, is by no means fatal to a favourable assessment of the
complainant’s credibility and reliability
as to the charged acts, but it
is a matter that must be borne in mind.
False allegations
relating to LN and the lie in court
turn then to the complainant’s allegations concerning LN.
effect of the agreed facts D13 and P18 and exhibit D12 is that, on multiple
occasions when aged between 11 or 12 and 22, the
complainant told her mother
that she had engaged in sexual activity with LN. The complainant accepted in her
evidence that any such
statement was a lie because she did not, in fact, have
any sexual interactions with LN.
is of course a matter for me to determine whether I accept the agreed facts. The
position of the parties does not bind me, however
there is no reason for me not
to accept the agreed facts.
find that the complainant told her mother in 1999 or thereabouts (when aged
around 12), 2001 (when aged around 13/14), 2002 (when
aged around 16) and 2008
(when aged around 22) that sexual activity had taken place with
I find that these
allegations were, on the complainant’s own evidence, untrue.
prosecution also conceded that the complainant’s denial in the course of
her evidence of having made those statements to
her mother was a lie that could
not be explained by an imperfect memory because of the vehemence and confidence
with which she had
rejected having made the disclosures. The prosecution argued
however that the complainant’s lie in court was in fact to her
could be understood as reflecting an unwillingness to perpetuate the original
lie by acknowledging the statements were
Notwithstanding
the prosecution’s concession, I have independently considered whether the
complainant’s denial might
be attributable to oversight or lack of recall.
If the statements had only been made to DB when the complainant was a young
adolescent,
I would have been inclined to the view that the complainant’s
denial in court of having made the allegations was not dishonest
but rather a
product of forgetfulness. The difficulty however is that the complainant
repeated the false allegations to her mother
when she was around 16 years of age
and when she was in her early 20’s. I find it difficult to accept that the
complainant
may have simply forgotten about making such serious allegations when
she was in her mid-teens and early adulthood. It is also fair
to describe the
complainant’s response to questioning on this topic in cross-examination
as a vehement denial. The way she
answered questions about this issue did not
leave a great deal of room to conclude that she may have simply been mistaken or
regard to the prosecution’s concession; the manner in which the
complainant responded to this topic in cross-examination
and the repetition of
the allegations when she was in her mid-teens and early adulthood, I find that
the complainant’s evidence
that she did not make such allegations to her
mother was untruthful.
I find the prosecution’s suggested explanation for the telling of the lie
in court unconvincing. For one, the suggested
explanation was not supported by
evidence from the complainant who of course denied making the original
statements. In any event,
the submission suggests that the complainant made a
conscious decision to lie on her oath in court in preference to acknowledging
that she had made false allegations out of court to her mother when much
younger. It is difficult to see how that could possibly
be seen as reflecting
favourably on the complainant’s credibility.
telling of lies by the complainant to her biological mother about sexual
activity with LN could well have been capable of a convincing
explanation. The
complainant was young when she originally made the false allegations and the
subsequent repetition of that lie could
well have been explicable on the basis
of what appears to have been a challenging upbringing for the complainant, who
into foster care from a very young age, and perhaps a need for
attention or comfort from her biological mother. There may have been
things occurring in the complainant’s life when the disclosures were made
again in her mid-teens and early adulthood.
For example, the disclosure made
when the complainant was around 16 must have been in relatively close proximity
to the complainant
being removed from the Ps’ care, which may well have
been a challenging time for her. Even leaving aside her allegations of
within the foster environment, it is not difficult to understand the impact the
complainant’s early life experiences
may have had on her.
Conversely,
it cannot be overlooked that the lies were repeated when the complainant was
aged 16 and then again in her early 20’s.
As such, the false allegations
were repeated at a time when the complainant may well have been expected to have
a deeper understanding
of the wrongfulness and significance of making the
statements.
things are, there is no explanation for the original telling of the lies and the
lie in court.
significance of the false disclosures is amplified by the fact that they alleged
sexual misconduct by a former foster-brother,
and hence bear some correspondence
with the complainant’s allegations against the accused.
significant as the false allegations are, particularly without an explanation
from the complainant, I am more troubled by what
is conceded by the prosecution
to be the complainant’s dishonest denial in court about having made the
disclosures.
the prosecution’s submission, the complainant may have made a conscious
decision, on her oath, to deny making the false
allegations in order to guard
against them being aired in a forum such as a courtroom. Even if that were
thought to be a commendable
reason to not want to acknowledge the original
making of the false allegations, it would still reflect a willingness to conceal
truth from the court. Without more, that is a serious blemish on a
witness’ credibility.
back, and bearing in mind the matters advanced by the prosecution in defence of
the complainant’s missteps, I, again,
would not have been prepared to
conclude that, by itself, this unfortunate aspect of the complainant’s
account was terminal
to the prosecution case. It does however demand a critical
examination of other aspects of the complainant’s account. The making
false allegations of sexual misconduct by another foster-brother is highly
material to my assessment of the credibility and reliability
complainant’s allegations about the accused.
The bedroom
complainant’s evidence that she occupied the upstairs bedroom for the
entirety of her time at the farmhouse is also somewhat
problematic. As I will
explain in due course, the evidence of NB, which I accept without qualification,
was that for the two harvests
that he worked, he stayed in the upstairs bedroom
next to the accused. It is highly unlikely that the complainant – a
resident in the house – would have been moved to the downstairs
bedroom just to accommodate NB for reasonably short periods.
Nor was there any
real reason for NB to be hosted in the upstairs bedroom, if that was in fact the
complainant’s room. For
example, there was no ensuite attached to the room
that might be thought to afford a visitor a greater degree of privacy. Accepting
NB’s evidence, as I do, means that the complainant was at least mistaken
of her placement with
evidence of AP that the complainant stayed in the downstairs bedroom after J
left the farm is also in direct conflict with the
complainant’s evidence.
The co-location of the complainant’s bedroom and the accused’s
bedroom is plainly a critical
feature of the prosecution case because it
facilitated what the complainant described as almost nightly sexual activity.
The complainant
was adamant that she occupied the upstairs bedroom; AP was
adamant that the complainant occupied the downstairs bedroom, in which
would have been necessary for the complainant to walk through the living room
where AP and TP would sit in the evenings
to watch television, to access the
stairs to the accused’s bedroom.
will be seen, I am ultimately unable to reject AP’s evidence on this topic
as not reasonably possibly true given it enjoys
some support from NB’s
evidence and bearing in mind other shortcomings in the complainant’s
The charged and uncharged acts
I have said, I found much of the complainant’s evidence about the charged
acts themselves to be, on the face of it, consistent
and quite persuasive. Her
evidence in chief was particularly impressive. However, there are some aspects
of the complainant’s
narrative of sexual acts with the accused, or
features of her account closely associated with them, that warrant careful
consideration.
the suggestion that the complainant had no real relationship with the accused
after she commenced living with the Ps yet,
on the prosecution case, he embarked
on what was extremely risky and brazen sexual conduct, with his parents in the
house, is somewhat
curious. I do not consider this a significant issue, but it
is a slightly unusual feature of the way the complainant describes the
commencement of sexual abuse.
the complainant’s evidence that the accused threatened her with a rifle
and had a rifle in his bedroom on the occasion
the subject of count 4, is in
conflict with the evidence of the accused’s character generally and with
AP’s evidence
nature of the farming properties that the Ps operated, I would find it
unsurprising if the accused had access to a rifle from time to time. I am
sceptical about AP’s evidence that she, and only
she, had the code to the
gun safe because of her aversion to firearms. Her evidence to this effect was
also inconsistent with the
evidence of NB that he would routinely have his rifle
inside the house when he stayed at the farm and would simply store it under
bed. I find it curious that he would have been permitted to do so given
AP’s apparent stance on firearms. Whilst the agreed
facts that, during a
police search of the farm house in 2015, firearms were found in a locked gun
safe in the shed, lends some support
to AP’s evidence on this topic, there
is, to my mind, a tension between her evidence and the evidence of NB on this
there is the complainant’s evidence that the accused had her perform oral
sex on him in circumstances where he would
have known that his father was in the
living room just moments before. It will be recalled that the complainant said,
the accused entered the house in an apparently distressed state, TP
left the house and the accused may have heard him depart. Nonetheless,
complainant’s account puts TP in the immediate vicinity of the house at
the time of the alleged commission of count 4.
The risk of detection was
therefore quite significant if this incident occurred in the manner described by
the complainant. Again,
however, I do not consider this to be a significant
issue in its own right as it is well recognised that sexual abuse often takes
place in risky and brazen circumstances.
the complainant’s evidence about count 6 and the Volvo truck is difficult
to reconcile with objective evidence establishing
the timing of the acquisition
of the truck and its first use. The invoice, D20, in combination with AP’s
evidence about the
purchase of the truck, indicates that the Ps did not take
possession until early April 2002. A number of modifications were then
the truck. The complainant thought that the truck was on site for the 2001
harvest and that she drove it around harvest time.
The preponderance of the
evidence however favours the proposition that the Volvo was not on site until
April 2002 at the earliest
and the complainant had left the farm by the 2002
harvest. It is possible that the complainant was mistaken about having driven
truck around harvest time; it is possible she drove the truck at sometime
between, say, late April / early May 2002 and her departure
from the property
around 15 June 2002, but that was not the complainant’s evidence. She did
however express uncertainty about
when the truck was acquired.
the complainant had not alleged that a charged act of sexual intercourse took
place in the Volvo, any mistake by her about having
driven the truck and when
she did so, might well be of minor moment. However, the complainant alleges that
the accused had sex with
her in the truck in the context of teaching her how to
double declutch the gears around harvest time, and the weight of the evidence
to the effect that the complainant was not living at the farm at harvest time
after the Volvo was purchased.
the complainant thought that count 7, which allegedly took place in a harvester,
occurred after count 6. For the same reasons
I have set out above, this poses a
timeline problem because it tends to suggest that the incident took place in the
2002 harvest,
by which time the complainant was no longer living with the Ps.
further difficulty with the complainant’s account as to count 7 is that
she said the offence was committed in the context
of her having assisted the
accused with harvesting activities by driving the chaser bin. As I have said, I
accept the evidence of
NB that he was retained as a chaser bin driver during the
2000 and 2001 harvests, the latter of which he worked together with AS.
unlikely that the Ps would have engaged one or both of NB and AS as chaser bin
operators but then had the complainant assist
the accused in that capacity. It
is of course possible that the complainant was needed to ‘fill in’
for NB or AS or that,
perhaps, there was some residual harvesting to be attended
to after they had completed their retainers.
and perhaps more fundamentally, the complainant’s evidence that she was
required to drive the chaser bin because she
did it most
‘perfectly’, gave me reason to pause. I accept that it is not
uncommon for children who have grown up on
their family’s farm to assist
in farming operations from time to time, potentially from a very young age. I
accept that the
complainant spent a number of years at the farm and may have
become familiar with various farming activities and could physically
have driven
the tractor and chaser bin. However, the evidence of NB, who had experience
driving tractors and trucks in the early
2000’s, was that learning to
operate the tractor that pulled the chaser bin was not entirely straightforward
and driving the
chaser bin in tandem with the harvester was a ‘precision
skill’ that required the driver to align the chaser bin with
the auger of
the harvester and to maintain consistent speed with the harvester. He described
doing many ‘dry runs’ with
the accused to make sure they could align
the vehicles during harvesting.
do not doubt that, with sufficient training, a person of the complainant’s
age would have been capable of fulfilling the
role of chaser bin operator, but
it does strike me as an activity that required some finesse and driving
experience.
again, even accepting NB’s evidence, as I do, about the challenges
associated with driving the tractor and chaser bin,
would not cause me to reject
the complainant’s evidence out of hand. It is, however, just another area
in which there is, at
some level at least, a conflict or tension between the
complainant’s evidence and other evidence that I accept.
the complainant’s evidence was that sexual intercourse took place in the
accused’s bedroom on an almost nightly
basis for what must have been close
to two years, without detection. Given the layout of the house and the seemingly
uncontroversial
evidence that AP and TP would sit in the living room in the
evenings (at least on most nights) to watch television, it seems unlikely
could have continued with such frequency for such a long period without arousing
suspicion. It is of course possible; but it
was, on the complainant’s
account, exceedingly risky abuse to engage in on a nightly basis. Moreover, if
the complainant was
able to hear AP ‘clicking’ the computer mouse in
the study downstairs, it is difficult to understand how the complainant
to navigate the creaky landing at the top of the stairs without arousing
suspicion, noting her evidence that she effectively
learnt which floorboards she
could step on without them creaking.
this analysis, I have not overlooked the complainant’s evidence that there
was one occasion when AP discovered the complainant
in the accused’s
bedroom at around 10pm one evening, however, that evidence, which the
complainant did not give in examination
in chief, struck me as being a somewhat
opportunistic response to the line of questioning being pursued by counsel which
was clearly
designed to highlight the implausibility of such activities
occurring for years without being noticed by other members of the household.
Henchliffe’s allied point was that it was improbable that the complainant,
who he suggested was a fertile woman with a number
of children and who was
pregnant at or around the time she left the Ps, would not have become pregnant
to the accused as a result
of such sustained sexual abuse. I do not think that
any such general proposition can be meritoriously stated. True it is that, on
the prosecution case, the accused was taking a not insignificant risk by having
unprotected sex with the complainant for such a long
time; but the
complainant’s evidence was clear that, insofar as she could recall, the
accused did not ejaculate inside her.
Contrastingly,
the prosecution emphasise that the file note (forming part of P19) from 9 July
2002 demonstrates that the accused
had a close relationship with the
complainant, such that he was willing to accommodate her after he moved out of
the homestead. It
is, to my mind, odd that the accused would have offered to
accommodate the complainant in the circumstances. She was then 16 years
he was 27. On the other hand, the accused had been living with the complainant
for a number of years and there is some force
in Mr Henchliffe’s
suggestion that it would be incautious to reason that this was anything other
than an indication of brotherly
support. However, in my view, the
accused’s invitation to take the complainant in does provide
support for the existence of a ‘close relationship’ between the two.
the complainant’s evidence that she asked herself what, as a 14 year old,
she was supposed to do or say when she
entered the accused’s room on the
occasion of count 4 and found him with the barrel of a rifle in his mouth,
seemed a detail
unlikely to be contrived.
complainant’s evidence that the accused was circumcised, which is an
agreed fact, does not, in my view, advance the prosecution
case very far and
cannot be described as esoteric knowledge. Any guess had a fifty percent chance
of being correct and the complainant
did spend a number of years living in the
house with the accused. The possibility of innocent observation would need to be
before I would be prepared to treat the evidence as being probative of
the complainant having had sexual contact with the accused.
was an impressive witness. He was straightforward and responsive to questions.
He had what appeared to me to be a genuineness
to his demeanour whilst giving
evidence. He had an apparently good recollection of the significant matters
but appropriately acknowledged matters in respect
of which his memory was limited.
substance of NB’s evidence was internally consistent and accorded with
common sense.
considered him to be a reliable and credible historian and it was not suggested
to him during cross examination that his evidence
was untruthful.
only aspect of his evidence that was in fact challenged (although not to suggest
he was lying
) concerned the
bedroom in which he said he slept during the time he spent at the Parkin Hall
Road property during the 2000 and 2001
harvests. His evidence that he slept in
the upstairs bedroom was challenged on the basis that he may have been mistaken.
NB was clear
and firm in his evidence that that was the only bedroom he slept in
accept NB’s evidence. Accordingly, I find that during the 2000 and 2001
harvests when he was retained as the chaser bin operator,
he slept in the second
upstairs bedroom. This means that the complainant, throughout these periods at
least, could not have slept
in that room.
is not fatal to the prosecution case by itself because of the limited periods
during which NB stayed at the farm. However, the
complainant did not suggest
that she was relocated to the downstairs bedroom even for a short time. Her
evidence was clear. She remained
in the upstairs bedroom adjacent to the
accused’s bedroom for the duration of her time on the farm. NB’s
evidence establishes
that could not have been the case, at least during the two
harvests that he worked.
evidence lends support to aspects of AP’s evidence about the occupation of
bedrooms. My acceptance of his evidence
has influenced my preparedness to accept
AP’s evidence that the complainant was relocated to J’s room
following her departure
as reasonably possibly true.
also accept NB’s evidence that he did not see the complainant driving the
tractor and / or chaser bin during the harvests
he worked at the farm, although
that does not exclude that she may well have done so on other occasions. NB was
only on the farm
for parts of the 2000 and 2001 harvests.
was also a reasonably experienced heavy vehicle operator at the time. He holds a
medium-rigid heavy vehicle licence and had driven
tractors and trucks before
working the harvests in 2000 and 2001. His evidence that some finesse was
required to operate the tractor
and chaser bin in uniformity with the harvester
also appeals to common sense. I accept his evidence that a period of training
required to develop a cohesive operation with the accused as the driver of
the header.
accept NB’s evidence that he took a rifle to the farm when working the
harvests and that he occasionally took the rifle inside
to clean it or when
preparing to go shooting. I accept his evidence that he would store the rifle
under the bed and that he also
had the rifle out of its case from time to time
when the complainant was living on the farm.
will be seen, there is, to my mind, a tension between his evidence on this topic
and AP’s stated aversion to firearms. There
is a contradiction in
AP’s claim that she strictly regulated access to the Ps’ firearms,
including by being the only
person with the gun safe combination, yet allowed
NB, who would have been around 19 or 20 years old at the time, to take his rifle
into the house.
the main, AP presented as a clear and responsive witness. She appeared to be a
reliable historian. With one or two exceptions,
her evidence in chief was, in my
assessment, logical and coherent.
was however clear from the manner in which AP gave evidence and some of her
answers that she is not fond of the complainant. She
made various remarks
throughout the course of giving evidence that might have been thought directed
towards criticising or denigrating
complainant.
I considered
some of her remarks about the complainant to be quite gratuitous and
unnecessary.
also found that AP was occasionally quite oppositional during cross-examination.
[AW] was - between October of 1999 and July of 2002.
not recall, he's had various girlfriends, but I do not recall.
was living at home between those two dates, which I have mentioned, do you
you've spent a lot of time thinking about that period of time, because you've
been able to give us evidence about things that
happened in that time, haven't
had to think about it because you have made me.
thinking back on it did he have a girlfriend at this time.
cannot recall. How many times do I answer the same question?
said he had a number of girlfriends, were they local girls.
he had a Danish one that I remember. He's had a Chinese one. He was married to a
initially proclaiming that she was unable to recall whether her son had a
girlfriend during the time the complainant resided
at the farm and questioning
‘how many times’ she needed to answer the same question, when the
question was asked again
a short time later, AP said she did in fact recall the
accused going out to meet a girlfriend during the time the complainant lived
This is just one
example of the way in which AP’s demeanour changed quite substantially
whilst under cross-examination.
I said when remarking on the complainant’s presentation as a witness, I
acknowledge that witnesses respond differently to
the process of
cross-examination. Some become defensive or evasive; others became loquacious;
others still become very clipped or
economical in their responses. Giving
evidence is a stressful exercise and that may be thought all the more the case
when a parent
is giving important evidence in relation to allegations against
their child.
remind myself that it is often incautious to read too much into a witness’
demeanour when giving evidence for these, and
other, reasons. Nonetheless, I am
entitled to take into account demeanour when considering whether I accept the
evidence of a witness
as credible or reliable.
have carefully considered AP’s presentation as a witness in conjunction
with the substance of her evidence in evaluating
whether, and to what extent, I
can accept her account as credible and reliable.
have also taken into account that AP is clearly aware of the evidence that the
complainant has given; has read the disclosed affidavits
and has spoken with her
son about evidence called at previous trials of the charges. AP’s frank
acknowledgment of these matters
both promotes and undermines her credibility and
reliability.
transparency suggests candour; but the fact that she is familiar with the
evidence to an extent not comprehensively explored
in her cross-examination does
give rise to the theoretical risk that her recollection has been contaminated or
influenced by what
she knows and / or that her evidence has been shaped to
provide an answer to aspects of the complainant’s allegations. In
particular,
AP is clearly aware of the forensic significance of which room was
occupied by the complainant during her stay.
have considered carefully whether AP’s evidence that the complainant was
moved into J’s room after J departed might
be the product of conscious or
subconscious contamination or concoction. Were it not for NB’s evidence,
that may well pose
a more difficult issue for me to resolve. Equally, however,
AP acknowledged that her nightly routine involved sitting down at 8:30pm
watch Law & Order and if her evidence was a contrivance, it might be asked
why she would lend support to such a key element
of the complainant’s
was also unimpressed by AP’s evidence about the ‘circumcision’
conversation which, to me, seemed highly implausible.
It is difficult to
understand that a person in AP’s position would have told the complainant
– a teenage foster daughter
– that her sons and husband were
circumcised. The revelation of such private details was completely unnecessary
AP’s ostensible aim of explaining to the complainant the
benefits of circumcision by reference to her nursing experience. I
considered whether this too was an attempt to meet an aspect of the
complainant’s allegations, namely, that the accused
was circumcised.
is, in addition, AP’s evidence about the firearms to consider. It struck
me as somewhat implausible that, on a farming
property where there may from time
to time be problems with pest control, that AP would be the only person to have
the combination
to the gun safe. NB’s evidence also suggested a far less
stringent approach to gun safety and AP agreed that she allowed NB
to have his
guns in the house, provided they were in his possession.
evidence about a conversation she had with the complainant after the complainant
was told she would be leaving, during
which the complainant said
‘she’d get [AP] for what [she] had done’ and that she could
because she was ‘a
girl’, also had an air of unreality to it.
have also taken into account AP’s relationship with the accused and what
must be, quite naturally, her desire to assist him
and do everything she can to
avoid her son being convicted of serious criminal offences.
the other hand, and as I have said, AP’s evidence about bedrooms enjoys
some support from NB’s evidence that he stayed
in the spare room upstairs
during the 2000 and 2001 harvests. Whilst that would only account for a small
portion of the time the
complainant lived on the farm, common sense suggests it
is unlikely that the complainant was moved from that room to the downstairs
bedroom just for those periods. It would make much more sense for NB to have had
made available to him a room that was not occupied
by a permanent resident of
the house. At the very least, I have not heard any evidence that would suggest a
particular reason to
re-locate the complainant from the upstairs bedroom to the
downstairs bedroom to accommodate a guest.
consider AP’s evidence about the limited role the complainant played on
the farm to be supported by NB’s evidence about
his role as a chaser bin
driver during the 2000 and 2001 harvests and the intricacies of operating the
chaser bin in tandem with
the harvester.
AP’s evidence about the acquisition of the Volvo truck accorded with the
documentary evidence, and her evidence about
additional work being undertaken on
the truck before it was re-located to the farm, tends to suggest that the truck
was really not
present at the farm until quite close to the complainant’s
departure date. Whilst the complainant was obviously familiar with
the chronology surrounding its acquisition seems to discount the possibility
that the complainant could have driven it
at around harvest time.
do not think that the suggested inconsistency between AP’s evidence that
the complainant was at school for ‘99% of’
the harvests and evidence
she gave at a previous trial that some workers had told her ‘why
don’t you get rid of this
kid. We can’t do anything because
she’s always in the way’ to be particularly informative and, in any
prior statement is evidence which goes only to AP’s credit or
reliability, if anything, and is not evidence of the fact that
the complainant
was ‘always in the way’ during farming operations.
have reflected at length on these aspects of AP’s evidence and her
evidence more generally.
the matters to which I have referred give me some pause, I am left in a position
of being unable to exclude important aspects
of AP’s account as not
reasonably possibly true.
generally accept AP’s evidence about matters of chronology and the
operation of the farm. In this respect, she was an impeccable
historian with an
impressive memory for detail. I accept her evidence that she did not see the
complainant operating the chaser bin
and that NB and AS were engaged as chaser
bin drivers for two harvests.
accept AP’s evidence about the purchase of the Volvo and subsequent work
done to it. I find that the Volvo was not at the
farm for any continuous period
until late April / early May 2002.’
also accept AP’s evidence that the accused moved to the Buccleuch house at
around this time. AP’s evidence in this
respect gains some support from
the file note of 9 July 2002
(part of P19) in which the accused advised Ms Kenny that he was no longer living
at the farm.
accept AP’s evidence that she would watch Law & Order on a nightly
basis, which was consistent with the complainant’s
Importantly,
and having had the opportunity to observe AP give evidence, I am unable to
discount her evidence as to who occupied
which bedroom as not reasonably
possibly true. AP was adamant that the complainant moved into J’s bedroom
after J departed
the farm. Importantly, her evidence in this respect was
consistent with that given by NB about who occupied which bedroom on those
occasions that he stayed at the farm during harvesting.
not an indispensable intermediate fact, the complainant’s occupation of
the upstairs bedroom was so central to her
allegations, that my inability to
exclude AP and NB’s evidence on this topic as not reasonably possibly true
is problematic.
Indeed, it is difficult to see how the complainant’s
allegations can be reconstructed once it is accepted to be a reasonable
possibility that she occupied the downstairs bedroom. The co-location of the
complainant’s bedroom to the accused’s bedroom
was integral to the
fabric of the complainant’s account. It was the co-location of the
bedrooms that facilitated nightly sexual
activity taking place without
detection. If it is reasonably possible that the complainant in fact stayed in
the downstairs bedroom,
she would have had to pass through the lounge room in
order to get to the accused’s bedroom. The suggestion that sexual activity
continued for two or so years undetected in those circumstances is all but
unsustainable.
struck me as a sincere and honest witness.
evidence was brief and neither counsel raised with her the complainant’s
allegations against her husband. However, she
was asked whether she had beaten
the complainant during her placement, to which JN responded ‘definitely
but did not seem
visibly distressed or concerned about the nature of the question.
In cross-examination, JN said that before coming to court on the day she gave
her evidence, she had not heard of any allegation
that she had beaten the
complainant.
have considered whether JN’s subdued response to a question of that kind
being asked of her might suggest, contrary to her
evidence, that she was aware
of that allegation before giving evidence and hence was not taken by surprise
when the question was
JN presented with a calm disposition more generally and I am not able to read
anything into her reaction.
denied hitting any children in her care and denied using a wooden spoon to
reprimand a child. She acknowledged breaking a wooden
spoon after striking a
benchtop with it but denied striking the complainant with a metal ruler.
JN’s evidence on these topics
is indirectly supported by the letters
written by the complainant, which I have earlier discussed, and the
complainant’s willingness
to have her son, AB, live with the Ns.
accept the evidence of JN. I find that she did not strike the complainant with a
metal ruler or ‘beat’ her. I have
already indicated how these
matters impact on my assessment of the complainant’s credibility and
reliability.
I found aspects of the complainant’s evidence to be quite persuasive and
coherent, there are a number of significant
problems in her account that leave
me with a doubt about her evidence as to the charged and uncharged acts.
particular, I cannot rationalise JN’s evidence and D10 and D11, with the
complainant’s evidence about her time with
may be that her experience during that placement was imperfect, but I cannot
accept that she would have written letters in the
terms she did if she had
indeed been subjected to the horrendous experiences she claimed. As I have just
mentioned, I also accept
JN’s evidence. I am unable to sweep aside the
complainant’s evidence on this topic. It has influenced my assessment of
her evidence.
am also unable to ignore the false allegations made about LN and what the
prosecution conceded to be the complainant’s lie
in court when she denied
making those allegations. For whatever reason, the complainant made a conscious
decision not to acknowledge
that she had previously made allegations against
another of her foster-brothers. If there was a good explanation for making false
allegations in the first place, or for why the complainant refused to
acknowledge making them during previous trials, I remain uninformed
too has had a significant influence on my assessment of the complainant’s
were, additionally, various aspects of the complainant’s narrative of the
charged acts or uncharged sexual activity which
leave me questioning the
credibility and reliability of her account. The tension arising from her
evidence relating to counts 6 and
7, and the evidence of NB, AP and the
documentary evidence, serves as an illustration. Of course, my assessment of the
complainant’s
evidence must also take into account what I have found to be
the significant forensic disadvantage faced by the accused in defending
allegations.
Compounding
these matters is the evidence of AP and NB. As I have said, I was impressed with
the evidence of NB and although I have
reservations about some aspects of
AP’s account, I am unable to exclude her evidence about the complainant
occupying the downstairs
bedroom as not reasonably possibly true.
that conclusion is reached, the cogency of the prosecution case is substantially
am unable to accept the complainant’s account of the charged and uncharged
acts as credible and reliable, beyond reasonable
doubt. In arriving at this
conclusion I have had regard to all aspects of the complainant’s evidence;
its positive attributes
and the shortcomings I have discussed. Ultimately, I
find myself in a position where the combined weight of the infirmities in the
complainant’s account, together with the contradictory defence evidence
which I accept, means I am unable to act on the complainant’s
a consequence I am unable to find the elements of the offences proved beyond
reasonable doubt.
find the accused not guilty of all counts on the Information.
Liberato v The Queen
[1985] HCA 66
(1985) 159 CLR 507
De Silva v The Queen
[2019] HCA 48
(2019) 268 CLR 57
(2019) 94 ALJR 100
, [10]-[11].
Nieterink v The Queen
(1999) 76 SASR 56.
JGS v The Queen
(2014) 118 SASR 382
, [21]-[22];
[2019] SASCFC 19
Angus (a pseudonym) v The King
[2024] SASCA
, [45]-[46].
P20, [21]-[23].
I make it plain that the only
relevant disadvantage in this respect is that experienced by the accused on
account of the lack of
precision in the evidence of the complainant as to some
matters of timing or other contextual details for example:
Bates v The King
[2023] SASCA 65
, [55]-[60].
Criminal Law Consolidation
[2025] SADC
MFIP7-MFIP10.
I will refer to passages
from MFIP14, MFIP15 and MFID24 only by reference to ‘Tx’ where
‘x’ is the page
number of those exhibits. To avoid confusion, I will
refer to passages of the trial transcript before me using the acronym
T29-30; P20, [8].
The circumstances in which
the agreed facts D13 and P18 came to be agreed at previous trials and at this
trial, are set out in my
earlier reasons dealing with an application for a
conditional stay:
[2025] SADC 40.
T87, 118-119.
Paragraph [26] of my
reasons above.
T51-52, 54.
The location of the
‘x’ marked by the complainant was not visible on the copy of P1
provided to me.
See photos 5 and 6 of
P20, [12]-[14].
TT161 (GH); TT163 (BL); TT165 (AL); TT168-169 (TU).
TT62, 64 (EB); T158-159
(TC); TT161 (GH); T163 (BL); TT165 (AL); TT168 (TU).
TT63 (EB); TT72 (AP);
TT158, 159 (TX); TT168 (TU).
TT62, 63 (EB).
pseudonym) v The King
[2025] SASCA 29
, [4], [26]-[27].
TT82-83; 103-104.
D22; TT92-94.
D12, D13, P18.
For example, T75, 91-92,
102, 115, 121.
Other examples can be
found at T127-129.
Admissible as a business
record pursuant to
Evidence Act
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (921 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter