URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASC/2025/177.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:05:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SHAHIN v CITY OF BURNSIDE [2025] SASC 177 (22 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
SHAHIN v CITY OF BURNSIDE
[2025] SASC 177
Decision of the Honourable
Associate Justice Bochner
22 October 2025
PROCEDURE - CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS - DISCOVERY
AND INTERROGATORIES - DISCOVERY AND INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS
- PRODUCTION AND
INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS - GROUNDS FOR RESISTING PRODUCTION - PRIVILEGE
PROCEDURE - CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS - DISCOVERY
AND INTERROGATORIES - DISCOVERY AND INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS
- PRODUCTION AND
INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS - GROUNDS FOR RESISTING PRODUCTION - PRIVILEGE - CLIENT
LEGAL PRIVILEGE - WAIVER OF PRIVILEGE
Waiver of legal professional privilege.
Kadlunga Proprietors & Ors v Electricity Trust of South Australia
(1985) 39 SASR 410
Mann v Carnell
[1999] HCA 66
(1999) 201 CLR 1
(Holdings) Pty Ltd v Intertan Inc
[2003] FCA 384
(2003) 127 FCR 499
Esso Australia
Resources Pty Ltd v BHP Billiton Petroleum (Bass Strait) Pty Ltd
[2007] VSCA
Johnstone, McGee & Gandy Pty Ltd v Hockey Tasmania Incorporated
[2012] TASSC 12
Elders Forestry Ltd v Bosi Security Services Ltd & Ors
[2010] SASC 226
Glenn Anthony Crisp as liquidator of ACN 069 895
585 Pty Ltd (In liquidation) v ACN 069 859 585 Pty Ltd (In liquidation) &
[2012] FCA 148
Nicolau v Truman Facilities Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWSC
, considered.
SHAHIN v CITY OF BURNSIDE
[2025] SASC
applicant in this action seeks damages which are directly referable to the legal
fees that he incurred in bringing two claims
against his neighbours, Mr and Mrs
Raedel. I will refer to this litigation jointly as “the Raedel
action”. I have described
the litigation between the applicant and Mr and
Mrs Raedel and the basis for this action in the reasons that I published on 14
2024. I will not repeat these details here.
dispute has now arisen between the parties as to the discoverability of the
applicant’s lawyers’ files from the Raedel
action. The applicant
has discovered them in a generic fashion and has claimed legal professional
privilege over them. This has
given rise to two questions: the first, whether
each document must be individually described by way of a Kadlunga list; and the
whether the applicant has waived privilege over them.
first question can be answered very quickly.
1985, it has been established practice in South Australia to provide a list,
when requested, describing documents over which
legal professional privilege is
claimed. It was held in the case of
Kadlunga Proprietors & Ors v
Electricity Trust of South Australia &
that the description of
such documents should be sufficient to identify each document and the basis on
which the privilege is claimed.
White J said:
The subject of
discovery involves two separate concepts, that of identification and that of
description. Date may relate to either
The purpose of identification is not in dispute: it is to permit a court to
order, or the party seeking discovery to request, production
of particular
identifiable documents in a list in case of a later dispute about the claim,
e.g. Document 16 dated 15th June, 1980
in Bundle IS, &c. What is in issue
is the adequacy of the description.
The party seeking discovery is bound by the description of documents given in
his opponent's affidavit or list. He cannot challenge
the bona fides or truth
of that description. In this sense the party seeking discovery is entirely in
the hands of the other as
to the latter's proper categorisation of a document as
a privileged document. In this sense the discovery procedure should not be
contentious. And any dispute about the correct categorisation of a document
must ordinarily be left to the trial.
However, it is entirely proper for the party seeking discovery to challenge
the ground upon which privilege is claimed for any particular
document, and to
question, at the discovery stage, whether that particular document as described
could qualify for protection upon
that ground. ... Accordingly it is both
necessary and desirable that the description of a particular document for which
is claimed should be sufficient to disclose quite readily (without
disclosing contents) whether or not it is in fact a document to
which the head
of privilege relied upon can
requirement did not change with the commencement of the
Uniform Civil Rules
. The relevant rule is UCR 73.3, which
73.3—Form and content
of list of documents
(1) This rule applies unless the Court otherwise orders or the parties
unanimously otherwise agree.
(2) A list of documents must, subject to subrules (3), (4) and (5)—
(a) list each discoverable document in the person’s possession, custody or
power in respect of which no claim of privilege
(b) list each discoverable document
in the person’s possession,
custody or power in respect of which a claim of privilege is made, identifying
the nature of the
privilege and ground on which it is claimed and describing the
document in sufficient detail that it can be identified and the fact
privileged is apparent from its description; and
(c) list each discoverable document that was in the person’s possession,
custody or power, describing it in sufficient detail
that it can be identified
and identifying when it left the person’s possession custody or power,
where it went and where it
is now believed to be.
(3) A document need not be discovered in a list of documents if—
(a) it is a copy of a document that has been discovered and there is no
evidentiary significance in the fact or content of the copy;
(b) it is a communication or record of a communication between parties
(personally or by their lawyers) after institution of the
proceeding; or
(c) it has been filed in the proceeding.
(4) A list of documents may list a bundle of documents as a single item
(a) it comprises a physical or electronic file of documents that was kept as a
file before, or other than for the purpose of, the
proceeding; or
(b) the documents are of a homogenous character.
(5) A privileged document need not be discovered separately if it is
encompassed by a generic description of—
(a) communications and records of communications between a person and the
person’s lawyer for the dominant purpose of legal
advice or representation
in the proceeding;
(b) drafts of documents prepared for the dominant purpose of legal advice or
representation in the proceeding; or
(c) opinions or advices of counsel.
(6) Unless the Court otherwise orders or the parties unanimously otherwise
agree, a list of documents must be in the appropriate prescribed
separate list of documents.
Prescribed forms—
Form 73A List of Documents – Physical Protocol
Form 73B List of Documents – Simple Electronic Protocol
Form 73C List of Documents – Complex Electronic Protocol
(7) A list of documents must number sequentially each document in the list.
(8) Each discovered document in the person’s possession, custody or
power must be marked with the corresponding number.
(9) Subject to subrules (4) and (5), a list of documents must list documents
in chronological order and undated documents must be
placed in the best
approximation of their chronological order.
(10) A person filing a list of documents must, by the person’s
solicitor if represented or by the person if not represented,
certify the list
of documents in accordance with the prescribed form.
(11) Unless the Court otherwise orders or the parties unanimously otherwise
agree, a list of documents must be prepared in accordance
with the physical
for which legal professional privilege is claimed need not be individually
identified if they fall within three generic
descriptions, as set out in UCR
73.3(5). Two of those three specifically provide that, to fall within the
generic description, they
must have been prepared “in the
proceeding”. The third category does not contain such a limitation.
Whether the same
limitation extends to the third category by necessary
implication is not a matter that I will consider in these reasons, as it has
been argued by the parties.
use of the definite article in the phrase “in the proceeding”
indicates that the generic description is available
only to documents which have
been prepared in the action in which discovery is being made. It does not
extend the generic description
to documents prepared in other proceedings. If
this was the intention of the rule, then the indefinite article, as in the
“in a proceeding” would have been used. I consider that, if
a party wishes to claim legal professional privilege over
documents which were
prepared in another action, those documents must be specifically described, as
required by
leads to the conclusion that the applicant is in default of his discovery
obligation.
second question requires more detailed consideration.
respondent says that the applicant has waived legal professional privilege over
the files relating to the Raedel action by the
very nature of the action that he
has brought. It says that waiver has occurred because the applicant has put in
issue his state
of mind about his rights and his consequent need to commence the
Raedel action. The damages sought are directly reflective of the
legal costs
that he incurred in that action, and which are not recoverable from the Raedels.
I note that the legal costs that the
applicant incurred in the Raedel action are
high, in excess of $1,300,000. While taxation of those costs has not concluded,
likely that the unrecoverable portion will be substantial.
its submissions, both written and oral, the respondent set out at length the
paragraphs of the Statement of Claim – Revision
(“the statement of
claim”) on which it relies in support of its claim of waiver. I will not
recite them in full, but
give the following examples.
[49] of the statement of claim, the applicant alleges that representatives of
the respondent made representations to the applicant’s
then lawyer. He
pleads that the respondent’s representatives knew that the lawyer was
meeting with them on behalf of the applicant
and that the lawyer would report
the conversation to the applicant who would rely on the representations made in
that conversation.
He then pleads
that he did in fact believe and rely on the representations made, which led him
to commence the District Court action
and the ERD Court action against the
setting out allegations about the respondent’s negligent failure to act,
the applicant goes on to plead that he was unable
to protect himself from the
consequences of the Council’s want of reasonable care: he was reliant on
the respondent properly
carrying out its duties in relation to the approval of
the Raedels’ development applications. The respondent failed to take
steps in relation to the Raedels’ breach of the planning requirements
relating to the retaining wall.
a result, the applicant was “forced to issue
proceedings”.
respondent says that this pleading (among others) and his claim for recoupment
of his legal costs as damages, calls into question
the entire conduct of the
Raedel action, including:
The conduct of
his lawyers in conveying the respondent’s representations to him;
The advice given
by his lawyers about those representations and the options available to
applicant’s own understanding of the development process that had occurred
with respect to the retaining wall and whether
a cause of action was created
that he could pursue; and
Whether it would
have been more advantageous to bring only one action rather than
respondent says that the effect of the applicant’s statement of claim is
to put the conduct of his lawyers and his interactions
with him in the centre of
this action. The pleading directly raises the applicant’s state of mind
and the reasons for the
decisions that he made. The legal advice given to him
by his lawyers in this regard must be highly relevant to those matters, and
pleading as he has, he has waived privilege over the files relating to the
Raedel action.
note that the respondent puts in issue the representations made by its
representatives to the applicant’s lawyers and says
that the applicant
took the action that he took on the basis of expert legal advice, rather than
reliance on the matters told to
his lawyers by representatives of the
respondent. In fact, it denies the reasonableness of any reliance on the
representations said
to have been made by its representatives in the
circumstances in which they were made. It further pleads, amongst other things,
that the legal costs incurred by the applicant were unreasonable and excessive
and were incurred voluntarily with the benefit of
legal advice, including advice
applicant says that the respondent has mischaracterised the case that he brings.
He says that it is a case of negligent misstatement
by the respondent: the
respondent made representations to the applicant, which he acted upon. The
representations were in fact wrong.
The applicant relied on those
representations, not on legal advice, in taking the steps that he took. He
makes no claim that he
relied on legal advice and the statement of claim makes
no express reference to legal advice, nor is there an implicit assertion
legal advice was obtained.
applicant says that his legal files created for the purpose of the Raedel action
are protected by legal professional privilege.
Mere relevance does not lead to
waiver of these documents. Nor is the question whether he has put his state of
mind in issue.
Rather, the question is whether the contents of privileged
communications have been put in issue, and whether there is an inconsistency
between the maintenance of the privilege and the claim itself. While legal
advice may have affected his state of mind, that advice
remains protected by
legal professional privilege. The applicant does not plead any reliance on
legal advice, only on the representations
made by the respondent’s
representatives.
Both parties relied on the leading authority on
Mann v Carnell
support of their arguments. In that case, the majority said:
At common law, a person who would otherwise be entitled to the benefit of
legal professional privilege may waive the privilege. It
has been observed that
"waiver" is a vague term, used in many senses, and that it often requires
further definition according to
the context. Legal professional privilege
exists to protect the confidentiality of communications between lawyer and
is the client who is entitled to the benefit of such
confidentiality, and who may relinquish that entitlement. It is inconsistency
between the conduct of the client and maintenance of the confidentiality which
effects a waiver of the privilege. Examples include
disclosure by a client of
the client's version of a communication with a lawyer, which entitles the lawyer
to give his or her account
of the communication, or the institution of
proceedings for professional negligence against a lawyer, in which the lawyer's
as to advice given to the client will be received.
Waiver may be express or implied. Disputes as to implied waiver usually
arise from the need to decide whether particular conduct
is inconsistent with
the maintenance of the confidentiality which the privilege is intended to
protect. When an affirmative answer
is given to such a question, it is
sometimes said that waiver is "imputed by operation of law". This means that
the law recognises
the inconsistency and determines its consequences, even
though such consequences may not reflect the subjective intention of the
who has lost the privilege. Thus, in Benecke v National Australia Bank, the
client was held to have waived privilege by giving
evidence, in legal
proceedings, concerning her instructions to a barrister in related proceedings,
even though she apparently believed
she could prevent the barrister from giving
the barrister's version of those instructions. She did not subjectively intend
the privilege. She may not even have turned her mind to the
question. However, her intentional act was inconsistent with the maintenance
the confidentiality of the communication. What brings about the waiver is the
inconsistency, which the courts, where necessary
informed by considerations of
fairness, perceive, between the conduct of the client and maintenance of the
confidentiality; not some
overriding principle of fairness operating at
(Footnotes omitted)
difference between the parties is whether the applicant’s conduct is
inconsistent with the maintenance of privilege. In
DSE (Holdings) Pty Ltd v
Intertan Inc
, Allsop J (as
he then was) explained the principle arising from
Mann v Carnell
following way:
Waiver at common law occurs where the party entitled
to the privilege performs an act which is inconsistent with the maintenance of
the confidentiality, assessment of such inconsistency being informed, where
necessary, by considerations of fairness; though the
assessment is not by
reference to some overriding principle of fairness operating at large: Mann v
Carnell, supra at [29].
went on to say:
A pleading of state of mind is raised. It is accepted that there are opened
for scrutiny by that pleading confidential and privilege
communications
materially affecting or contributing to that state of mind. The inconsistent
act is the propounding of the issue
which, it is accepted, opens up, or makes
relevant, in the sense discussed by the majority in Telstra, an examination of
the confidential
communication.
... The inconsistency or unfairness arises from the putting in issue of a
state of mind and maintaining confidence in communications
which were relevant
to the formation of that state of mind. (Or, putting the matter as I would
prefer to put it – the inconsistency
or unfairness arises from laying open
to scrutiny the communication and maintaining confidence in the
communication.)
respondent says that the bringing of this claim expressly lays open an
examination of the applicant’s conduct of the Raedel
action. The damages
sought are specifically and solely referable to the legal costs incurred in
those actions; this must give rise
to an entitlement to examine the manner in
which the Raedel action was conducted to test whether the costs were reasonably
This includes examining the advice that the applicant received from
his advisers.
respondent relies on the case of
Esso Australia Resources Pty Ltd v BHP
Billiton Petroleum (Bass Strait) Pty
In that case, the
parties were undertaking a joint enterprise at a facility which was owned
jointly by them but operated by Esso.
The agreement between them specifically
addressed how expenditure was to be dealt with; in particular, it provided that
expenditure
was to be shared jointly unless it related to loss or damage caused
by the gross negligence or wilful misconduct of Esso. Following
an explosion
and fire at the facility, “Esso claimed reimbursement of half of its legal
costs associated with the explosion
and fire, including the costs of defending
itself at the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the event and of defending itself
the criminal charges and civil claims arising from
The legal fees
claimed were in the millions of dollars. BHP refused to pay half of the legal
fees on the basis that the loss was
caused by (among other things) Esso’s
gross negligence. Esso claimed privilege over the documents related to its
reimbursement of its legal costs. The Court said:
view, his Honour correctly treated the case as calling for an orthodox
application of the principles clearly enunciated in
, the issue which his Honour had to decide was whether
Esso’s conduct in pleading its claim for reimbursement of legal costs
inconsistent with the maintenance of confidentiality in documents relevant to
that claim. If it was, privilege had been waived.
If it was not, there was no
waiver. Either way, no question of ‘election’ arose.
That a party may waive privilege by the mere institution of proceedings is
not in doubt. The second of two examples of implied waiver
given by the High
was that of a client instituting proceedings against a
lawyer for professional negligence. By that conduct, the client waives
and the lawyer can give evidence as to advice given to the client.
The case cited in
Lillicrap v Nalder & Son (a
, in which Dillon LJ adopted the following formulation of the scope of
the implied waiver:
A client who sues his solicitor invites the court to adjudicate the
dispute and thereby ... waives privilege and confidence
to the extent that
is necessary to
enable the court to do so fully and fairly
in accordance
with the law including the law of evidence.
Russell LJ proposed the following test:
... [B]y bringing civil proceedings against his solicitor, a client
impliedly waives privilege
in respect of all matters which are relevant to
the suit he pursues and, most particularly, where the disclosure of privileged
is required
to enable justice to be done
It could hardly be doubted that disclosure of Esso’s privileged
documents is required ‘to enable justice to be done’
between itself
and Esso. In its written submissions before the primary judge, Esso
acknowledged that in order to succeed on its
counterclaim it would need to prove
in respect of each ‘claimed expenditure’ on legal costs that it was
(a) incurred as a result of the Longford incident;
(b) made ‘for the joint undertaking’ within the meaning of the
operating agreement;
(c) reasonably incurred; and
(d) not incurred as a result of Esso’s gross negligence.
Improbably, however, senior counsel for Esso declined to concede before us
that he would, at trial, need to tender at least some of
the privileged
documents in order to prove Esso’s case for reimbursement. He even
refused to concede that counsel for BHP
would be entitled to inspect the
privileged documents in order to be able to test – and contest – the
reimbursement claim.
It would not, he argued, be unfair to deny BHP that
opportunity. It is self-evident, in our view, that it would be grossly unfair.
As the High Court made clear in
, the application of the
inconsistency test should “where necessary [be] informed by considerations
of fairness”.
In our view, the position here is relevantly similar to that in
. In particulars filed in the tax appeal proceeding, the Commissioner
said that he had taken into account matters in the privileged
documents in
coming to the impugned assessment decision. In doing this, the Full Court said,
the Commissioner did more than concede
the relevance of the privileged
documents; he put their contents in issue. He ‘[laid] open the privileged
documents to scrutiny’.
Esso’s counterclaim puts in issue whether its expenditure on legal
costs fell within the operating agreement and that, in turn,
depends on the
nature and purpose of the legal work which occasioned the payments. The
documents in question are plainly relevant
to these issues. By making its claim
for reimbursement, Esso made an assertion about the
documents. Esso thereby laid the documents open to scrutiny. It would plainly
be inconsistent for it now to maintain a claim
for confidentiality in respect of
them, even if we accepted the possibility that Esso might choose not to rely on
the documents in
proceeding.
(Footnotes omitted)
respondent says that this case is directly analogous to the circumstances of
this matter. It further relies on
Johnstone, McGee & Gandy Pty Ltd v
Hockey Tasmania
Incorporated
, where Blow J
(as he then was) said:
A client who is entitled to claim legal
professional privilege is taken to have impliedly waived that privilege if the
client engages
in conduct which is inconsistent with the maintenance of
confidentiality:
Mann v Carnell
[1999] HCA 66
(1999) 201 CLR 1
at par[28]. When a
claim is made in an action for the reimbursement of costs payable to a
solicitor, and the reasonableness or otherwise
of the solicitor's charges is an
issue in the action, the pursuit of that claim is inconsistent with the
maintenance of the confidentiality
of solicitor/client communication protected
by legal professional privilege. In
Esso Australia Resources Pty Ltd v BHP
Billiton Petroleum (Bass Strait) Pty Ltd
[2007] VSCA 224
, Esso was pursuing
a contractual claim for the reimbursement of certain legal costs. In order for
its claim to succeed, it needed
to establish the purpose for which the costs
were incurred, and that they were reasonably incurred. The Victorian Court of
held that the making of the claim laid the privileged documents open to
scrutiny, and that it would be inconsistent for Esso to maintain
a claim for
confidentiality in respect of them. On that basis, it held that Esso had
impliedly waived privilege.
If Hockey Tasmania were pursuing its damages claim in respect of legal costs,
however misconceived, I would have no hesitation in
holding that it was no
longer entitled to claim privilege in respect of documents relevant to the
quantum or reasonableness of such
costs. But the damages claim in respect of
legal costs was made by mistake, and has been abandoned. In the words of Allsop
is now no forensic unfairness in allowing Hockey Tasmania's claim to
proceed without disclosure of the communications in question.
In my view the
making and abandonment of a misconceived claim is not inconsistent with the
maintenance of the confidentiality of
solicitor/client communications which
legal professional privilege exists to protect, at least when the abandonment
occurs before
the completion of the discovery process. The position would be
different if a misconceived claim had been made and not abandoned
when the time
came for a court to determine a disputed privilege claim. But that is not the
case here. In the present circumstances,
I consider that there has not been an
implied waiver of privilege.
applicant, on the other hand, relies on the case of
Elders Forestry Ltd v
Bosi Security Services Ltd & Ors (No
In this matter, the
parties were in dispute over who had rights of ownership of shares in a joint
venture company. It was the defendant
who asserted legal professional privilege
over documents which record legal advice about the terms of the
shareholders’ deed.
Kourakis J (as he then was) explained the principle
arising from
Mann v Carnell
in the following terms:
Mann v Carnell
, the High Court held by majority that legal professional
privilege is waived by the conduct of a person entitled to the benefit of
privilege which is inconsistent with the maintenance of the confidentiality the
privilege entails. The privilege is a common
law privilege and for that reason
inconsistency is the touchstone for waiver; considerations of fairness may
inform the question
as to whether the conduct is inconsistent but is not, as
might be the case in equity, a central consideration. The test of inconsistency
emphasises the purpose for which the privilege exists. In my respectful
opinion, even though McHugh J was in dissent in
, the general
principle that the operation of the privilege should generally be confined to
that which is necessary for its rationales
to be achieved should also inform the
question of whether there has been conduct inconsistent with maintenance of the
(Footnotes omitted)
After a review of the authorities, he went on to say:
Plainly, in this case BOSI does not rely on the advice to establish a claim,
nor does it depend on the advice to show that it has
a particular character, for
example that it was negligent. However, a real question arises as to whether or
not there is an analogy
in this case with undue influence cases. In my view,
the observation of Jordan CJ on the waiver of privilege in undue influence
cases is, with respect, sound for the following reason. The mere fact that
legal advice was obtained on a document is a fact on
which an inference, and
probably a conclusion, can be drawn that the transaction was entered into
voluntarily and with a full appreciation
of its terms. If a party persists in a
plea of undue influence where the pleading or the evidence shows that legal
advice was obtained
on the transaction prior to the party binding herself or
himself to it, the party must necessarily allege some deficiency in the
advice. It is for that reason that maintaining a claim to legal professional
privilege over the communications is inconsistent
with that party’s case.
The same cannot be said with respect to advice about the meaning of the terms of
a transaction on
which a party consults a solicitor. The Court in
emphasised that the decision of the majority in
expressly made reference to the importance of the legal advice given in that
case in assessing “the quality of the party’s
assent to a
transaction”. In particular, the Full Court went on:
As their Honours made clear, however, when they spoke of a communication
‘material to the formation of that state of mind’,
they did not
intend to say that privilege would be waived in relation to advice that may only
have played a part in the formation
of a state of mind relevant to an issue in
the proceedings: see
at 167. Their conclusion that BT waived
privilege turned entirely on the particular nature of the case, especially
BT’s pleadings.
(Footnotes omitted)
applicant says, similarly, the pleadings in this matter do not raise as an issue
the content or nature of the legal advice he
received for the purpose of the
Raedel action. He expressly seeks to distinguish
on the basis that
he relied only on the representations made by the respondent and nothing
applicant relies on
Glenn Anthony Crisp as liquidator of ACN 069 895 585 Pty
Ltd (In liquidation) v ACN 069 859 585 Pty Ltd (In liquidation) &
In this case, which
dealt with the remuneration of a liquidator, Jessup J confined
its facts and said:
The proceeding as such is not concerned with the
contents of the documents over which privilege would lie as such. For example,
question whether it was reasonable for the plaintiff to obtain, and to pay
for, legal advice at a particular point does not necessarily
put in issue the
nature of the advice received. It may be that IAL would want to test the
question of the necessity of obtaining
advice by reference to observations, for
example, which appear in the advice as given, but the content of the advice
would not be
regarded as an integer of the plaintiff’s case. It would not
be that case, as such, which involved a laying open to scrutiny
That is not to say that there may not be instances – perhaps many
instances – in the various documents over which a privilege
claim has been
made by the plaintiff where it could be demonstrated, by reference to what is
known about the document and the circumstances
surrounding its creation, that
the claim had been waived. However, IAL’s case on the present occasion
specifically eschewed
any suggestion that the court should approach its present
interlocutory application on a document by document basis. It was submitted
that the very nature of the plaintiff’s claim for remuneration and
expenses involved a waiver of all legal professional privilege
otherwise lie. To take such an approach would, in my view, be inconsistent
. The relevance of documents to an assertion made or a
proposition advanced in a particular proceeding is not, of itself, sufficient
give rise to a waiver of the kind presently under discussion. The assertion or
proposition must be such as puts in issue the
contents of the documents as such.
Quite clearly, the plaintiff has not yet taken that step in the present
He further relies on
Nicolau v Truman Facilities Pty
In this case, Hidden J
Drawing upon
Mann v Carnell
, the crucial question is whether the
plaintiffs' pursuit of their claim, in which there is a live issue as to
causation, is inconsistent
with the maintenance of the confidentiality of their
communications with Diamond Conway in the Loucas
proceedings.
note that in that case, the defendant accepted that the legal costs incurred by
plaintiff were reasonably incurred.
consider that this is a case, like
, where the applicant’s
claim against the respondent is inconsistent with the maintenance of the
confidentiality of the documents
created in the course of the Raedel action.
Despite the applicant’s very careful attempt not to raise the question of
legal advice that he received, it is clear from the statement of claim that
the applicant had retained lawyers and acted through
them from at least May
2014. In particular, the meeting at which the respondent’s
representatives are said to have made the
misrepresentations was with the
applicant’s lawyer; at the very least, given the dispute as to the nature
of the representation
actually made, the maintenance of confidentiality over the
communications between the applicant and his lawyer about those representations
is inconsistent with the applicant’s conduct in bringing this action which
is based on those very representations.
say that this action is not about legal advice, but is, rather, about the
representations made by the respondent is over-simplifying
the matter. The
entire action is based on representations made to the applicant’s lawyer
and the consequences that flowed.
The content of the representations is
disputed by the respondent as is the reasonableness of reliance on those
representations in
the circumstances in which they were made. The only way that
this defence can be tested is by examination of the communications
that passed
between the applicant and his lawyers on the subject.
applicant’s plea that he was “forced” to bring the Raedel
action also puts in issue the advice that he received.
The respondent
specifically puts this plea in issue and is entitled to test it.
that the entirety of the applicant’s claim is for the recovery of legal
costs that are not covered by the costs orders
in his favour, I consider that
the applicant has (perhaps inadvertently) put in issue the advice that he
received on the question
of legal costs and their recoverability. This is
particularly in light of the respondent’s plea of voluntary assumption of
risk. While I accept that the respondent cannot unilaterally raise issues that
would lead to the waiver of privilege by the applicant,
this is not such a
situation. The applicant has expressly put in issue the recoverability of his
legal costs and the respondent
is entitled to explore the advice that he
received in this regard.
consider that the case of
is not relevant to this action. The
question of a liquidator’s remuneration (or, indeed, a taxation of legal
costs) is in
no way similar to an action brought to recover legal costs as
damages. As in
, I find that, by bringing the claim for
reimbursement of his legal costs, the applicant has made an assertion about the
and the manner in which those costs were incurred. It would be
inconsistent to allow him to maintain confidentiality over the very
that will allow him to make out (or conversely, the respondent to impugn) his
note that, in oral submissions, counsel for the applicant said that the
applicant would provide all documents relating to quantum
once the taxation of
costs was complete. He said:
Yes. I mean, it will be what was put
before the court for adjudication, the result of the adjudication, my
client’s legal bills
to make up the amount that was claimed in the
statement of claim.
seems to me, however, that this is only part of the story. It may be that the
applicant’s lawyers misunderstood the representation
made by the
respondent, or conveyed it erroneously to the applicant, or indeed, advised the
applicant not to proceed with the Raedel
action because of the costs that would
be incurred. While these questions do not go to the Raedels’ liability to
the applicant,
they clearly go to the respondent’s. I consider that the
applicant has put in issue, and the respondent is entitled to inspect,
documents which led to the applicant’s decision to commence the Raedel
action and then to prosecute it in the way that
he did, including advice about
the representation made by the respondent.
applicant relied on the case of
Elders Forestry Ltd
. I have already set
out the following words from the decision of Kourakis J, but it is worth setting
them out again:
If a party persists in a plea of undue influence
where the pleading or the evidence shows that legal advice was obtained on the
transaction
prior to the party binding herself or himself to it, the party must
necessarily allege some deficiency in the legal advice. It is
for that reason
that maintaining a claim to legal professional privilege over the communications
is inconsistent with that party’s
this is not a case of undue influence, it is clear that there is a close
analogy. The applicant makes a plea of reliance on
a misrepresentation, where
it is apparent that the representation was made, not to him, but to his lawyers,
who then advised him
professional privilege over these communications is inconsistent with the claim
the applicant now pursues.
applicant must file a further list of documents which complies with the
requirements of
. It is not possible to say at this stage
whether privilege has been waived with respect to entirety of the
applicant’s files.
However, I expect the applicant to make discovery in
Schedule 1 of his revised list all documents which fall within the documents
that are described in these reasons, and for the balance of the files to be
disclosed in Schedule 2 with a description of each document
which is sufficient
to identify it and the basis on which privilege is
(1985) 39 SASR 410.
Ibid, [51.3].
Ibid, [52] – [59].
Ibid, [67.3].
Ibid, [70.3].
[1999] HCA 66
(1999) 201 CLR 1.
Ibid, [28] – [29].
[2003] FCA 384
(2003) 127 FCR 499.
Ibid, [12].
Ibid, [126] –
[2007] VSCA 224.
Ibid, [13] –
[2012] TASSC 12.
Ibid, [22] –
[2010] SASC 226.
Ibid, [13].
Ibid, [22].
[2012] FCA 148.
Ibid, [9] – [10].
[2014] NSWSC 1459.
Ibid, [32].
[2010] SASC 226
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (397 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter