URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/sa/SACorCResp/2023/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 17:11:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CHILCOTT, Zhane Andrew Keith - Inquest Number 10/2021 (1298/2016), Responses [2023] SACorCResp 3 (6 April 2023)
Chilcott, Zhane Andrew Keith (Coroner Whittle)
Recommendation 1
A risk register be
established which records all acts or threats of self-harm by a child under the
guardianship of the Chief Executive.
There should be appropriate information
sharing arrangements in place in relation to this risk register for all agencies
deal with a child under the guardianship of the Minister including DCP,
CAMHS, CPS, DECD and SAPOL. The risk register in relation
to each child should
be reviewed at regular intervals by an appropriately qualified professional with
the ability to assess when
a child may require closer assessment of suicidality
and/or more intensive therapeutic treatment.
Responses from the Department for Child Protection and the Department for
Health and Wellbeing
recommendation requires further consideration.
The Department
for Child Protection is committed to therapeutic and trauma-informed practice. A
range of safeguarding and risk management
measures have been established since
2016, which offer services and supports for children and young people at risk,
DCP will continue
to explore opportunities for further improvement.
A risk register
of self-harm incidents reviewed in isolation of a deep understanding of a child
or young person’s circumstances
may not be the most effective way to
achieve the intended outcomes.
Government also has strong mechanisms for interagency collaboration focusing on
the health and wellbeing of individual children
and young people to ensure
resources across the public sector are directed to areas of greatest
In recognition
of the importance of ongoing risk management and safeguarding of children and
young people in care, a review of the
Department for Child Protection’s
incident management system commenced in February 2019. A number of changes have
implemented including the publication of new and updated guidance in
relation to incidents in residential care, the establishment
of the Significant
Incident Reporting Unit, and the introduction of mandatory training related to
significant incident reporting.
In July 2023,
the Department for Child Protection’s Manual of Practice was updated to
incorporate additional guidance on responding
to children and young people at
risk of self-harm and suicide.
Recommendation 2
- CAMHS should review its policies and training
regarding referrals, against the background of Zhane having not been referred,
ensure that cases requiring review are not missed.
recommendation is accepted.
Progress has
been made on the implementation of this recommendation.
developed a standalone triage service named CONNECT. All children and young
people under the care of Department for Child
Protection (DCP) are referred to
the CAMHS Specialist Guardianship team via CAMHS CONNECT.
Referrals for
early in-care children and young people are streamed to the collaborative
Interagency Therapeutic Needs Panel (ITNP)
meetings between CAMHS, DCP and the
Department for Education (DFE). This provides an overarching review of the needs
of the young
people and ensures they are directed to the right service, in
accordance with their needs.
Young people who
have been in DCP care for extended periods will be referred to CAMHS if
required. Where appropriate, a referral to
another, more clinically appropriate
service, will be identified through the triage process.
Recommendation 3
- A review be undertaken of services available through
CAMHS to children in state care, that the adequacy or otherwise of those
be assessed and that the necessary funding to enable provision of
adequate services be determined.
Recommendation 4
- Implementation of recommendation 3 should include a
scrutiny of the adequacy of funding for the Child and Adolescent Mental Health
Response to both
3 and 4. This recommendation is accepted.
Various actions
have been implemented or are in progress in response to these two
recommendations.
CAMHS has a
dedicated Guardianship Service of 2.6 full time equivalent staff for children in
state care, and all children/young people,
including those in state care, can
access CAMHS through their local community clinic or acute services.
A strategic
review of CAMHS is in progress, which includes services provided to children in
state care.
SA Health is
working with all agencies to co-design a state-wide Child Protection Service
Model of Care that incorporates the provision
of therapeutic services for
children and young people in care in relation to CAMHS service
Recommendation 7
- There be a review of the payments made to family-based
foster carers with a view to increasing the availability of family-based
placements for children under guardianship of the Chief Executive.
recommendation is accepted in principle.
Recognising the
increasing costs of caring for children and young people, the 2023-24 State
Budget included a 4.8% indexation for
carer payments for all family based carers
and a $50 fortnightly increase for general foster and kinship carers per child
under, which represents an additional $32 million to foster and
kinship carers over the next four years. Further, an extra $4 million has been
committed to increase the number of kinship care assessments
undertaken.
These additional
financial commitments recognise the vital role carers play in supporting
vulnerable children and young people.
The Department
for Child Protection is committed to growing family-based care and will continue
to explore additional supports for
carers, including exploring opportunities to
improve the existing carer payment system. This work will also be guided by the
established Carer Council, recommendations of Dr Fiona Arney’s
December 2022 report on the Independent Inquiry into Foster
and Kinship Care in
South Australia and ongoing consultation with the carers.
Recommendation 8
- That the Department provide an initial psychological
consultation for any child who is due to give evidence as an alleged victim,
once the matter is listed for trial. The Department should inform the Witness
Assistance Service at the ODPP who that psychologist
is and ensure that the ODPP
is properly informed about that child’s circumstances and any particular
concerns there may be
surrounding that child giving evidence as an alleged
recommendations are accepted in principle.
The Department
for Child Protection is committed to ensuring that children and young people are
provided with necessary supports prior
to giving evidence in Court. The question
of whether a child should receive therapeutic or specialist support at a
particular point
in time and the type of that support is entirely child-specific
and is considered by the care team.
If a child or
young person does not already have a therapist, where a witness assistance
officer has not been allocated or in circumstances
where additional support may
be required, the child or young person’s case worker will consult with the
Department’s
Psychological Services regarding the child or young
person’s needs.
The Department
for Child Protection’s Manual of Practice will be updated to reflect this
requirement and ensure that, in consultation
with carers, children or young
people who are due to give evidence as an alleged victim are appropriately
The Department
for Child Protection consulted with the Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions (ODPP) in June 2023 to discuss
and progress this
recommendation.
Recommendation 9
- Each child under the guardianship of the Chief
Executive must have their contact with biological family considered in detail in
a meaningful way at least once every 12 months. This should include a
consideration of contact with all siblings and biological parents.
The relevant
considerations should be documented in detail each year in the child’s
Annual Review and saved on C3MS.
recommendation is accepted.
Children and
Young People (Safety) Act 2017
(the CYPS Act), which was not in effect when
Zhane was in care or at the time of his death, requires that all children and
people in care must have a case plan which includes a part setting out
Protection Act 1993 - which has been repealed, did not include a legislative
requirement for case planning; this
was undertaken as a matter of policy.
arrangements are reviewed as part of the child or young person’s regular
case plan review. Case plans are reviewed and
updated when circumstances change
that impact the child or young person’s needs and/or where the case
direction changes. At
a minimum, case plans for children under long term
guardianship must be reviewed at least six monthly.
The CYPS Act
requires the circumstances of a child or young person subject to a long- term
guardianship order to be reviewed at least
once a year. The annual review
includes a review of the child or young person’s
to inform the actions and outcomes for the child or
young person’s next
case plan. The child or young person’s case plan and annual review are
saved into the Department
for Child Protection’s Connected Client and Case
Management System (C3MS).
The Department
for Child Protection’s Manual of Practice contains additional guidance on
supporting children and young people
to develop and maintain family and
community connections through contact arrangements and encourages workers to
consider the role
of contact arrangements in keeping Aboriginal children and
young people connected to their culture, community and Country in accordance
with the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Child Placement
Recommendation 9.1
- A RATSIO (Recognised Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Organisation), as defined in, and gazetted pursuant to,
Children and Young People (Safety) Act
(2017) that is culturally
connected to each Aboriginal child should be appointed for all such children at
the point of intake into
the child protection system.
Recommendation 9.2
- The Department should implement a policy to ensure
timely and proper consultation with a RATSIO, as required by
subsection 12(3)(c)
Children and Young People (Safety) Act
(2017) where practicable, before
all placement decisions are made.
Recommendation 9.3
- In reporting the extent to which such children and
young people have access to a case worker, community, relative or other person
from the same Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander community as the child or
young person, in compliance with
Section 156
(1)(a)(iii) of the
Children and
Young People (Safety) Act
(2017), the Department should specify the number of
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander children who have contact with a case
community, relative or other person from the same Aboriginal or Torres
Strait Islander community as the child or young person.
recommendations are accepted in principle.
Australian Government recognises the importance of delivering on its commitments
under the National Partnership Agreement
on Closing the Gap and the Aboriginal
Action Plan for the National Framework for Protecting Australia’s Children
Safe and Supported.
The Department
for Child Protection is also committed to acting in accordance with the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Child
Placement Principle (ATSICPP).
It is noted that
these recommendations (8.1-8.3) are specific to provisions contained in the
Children and Young People (Safety) Act 2017
(CYPS Act). The Department’s
current legislative reform work, which follows the recent review of that Act, is
contemplating
how to better embed the ATSICPP in legislation and practice, as
well as to progress the national priorities of delegated decision-making
Aboriginal organisations, investment in Aboriginal-led service delivery and
support of a culturally competent workforce.
These efforts
will be supported by the new South Australian Peak Body for Aboriginal Children
and Young People, which will commence
in mid-2024, and ongoing engagement with
Aboriginal organisations, communities, families and children and young people.
Further guidance
will also be provided by Commissioner Lawrie’s ongoing
Inquiry into the removal and placement of Aboriginal children and young
Department’s Manual of Practice also contains comprehensive guidance to
reinforce the need for consultations with RATSIO’s
to occur, where
practicable, before placing an Aboriginal child or young person. The process for
undertaking a consultation pursuant
to section 12(3)(c) of the CYPS Act is
outlined under its own key step in the Manual of Practice.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter