URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWLRP/2010/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Torrens Transit v WorkCover [2010] SAWLRP 8 (28 October 2010)
[2010] SAWLRP 8
WORKCOVER LEVY REVIEW PANEL
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
TORRENS TRANSIT
SERVICES (NORTH) PTY LTD
(Employer No. E20576009)
(Applicant)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION
OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
REASONS FOR RULING
PUBLISHED 28
Application for review -- assessment of levy by WorkCover on particular
workplaces previously operated by another contractor -- preparation
documents -- no explicit process of discovery provided in review process --
President of Panel invested with powers of
authorised officer -- rôle of
confidentiality provisions of Act -- procedural fairness -- hearing rule --
right of party to
know case against it -- confidentiality provision a penal
provision -- persons obtaining information in the course of carrying out
functions in, or related to, the administration, operation or enforcement of the
Act --information provided in return or in response
to a request for information
under the Act -- commercial or trading operations -- physical or mental
condition or personal circumstances
or affairs of a worker or other person --
consent of the person to whom the information relates or who furnished the
information
-- disclosure required by a court or tribunal constituted by law --
statistical information -- historical information no longer of
sensitivity --
disclosure in the course of official duties -- official duties of the Panel --
discretion to be used when disclosing
material in course of official duties --
‘without prejudice’ privilege -- legal professional privilege in
relation to
legal advice sought and then summarised to employer by officer of
Corporation -- Panel not bound by rules of evidence --
sections 67
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Cases referred to:
SouthLink v. WorkCover
[2009] SASC 175
WorkCover v. BHP; Jagermann v. WorkCover
[1999] SASC
(1999) 73 SASR 393
; 202 LSJS 343
International Financial Trust v. NSW Crime Commission
[2009] HCA 49
Kioa v. West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
Totani v. State of SA
[2009] SASC 301
(2009) 105 SASR
Coulls v. WorkCover
[2001] SAIRComm 11
FAI General Insurance v. WorkCover
[1998] FCA 1438
Potter v. WorkCover
[2004] AIRC 214
WorkCover and Southcorp v. Bagnall
[1996] SAWCAT 185
Triance v. State Transport Authority
(1992) 167 LSJS
R. v. Lavender
[2005] HCA 37
(2005) 222 CLR 67
79 ALJR 1337
Concrete Constructions v. Nelson
[1990] HCA 17
169 CLR 594
Twist v. Randwick Municipal Council
[1976] HCA 58
(1976) 136 CLR 106
Annetts v. McCann
[1990] HCA 57
(1990) 170 CLR 596
Australian Rail Tram & Bus Industry Union v. Torrens Transit
[2000] FCA 1683
(2000) 105 FCR 88
Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations v. Gribbles
[2005] HCA 9
(2005) 222 CLR 194
Markovic v. WorkCover
[1992] SAWCAT 5
(1992) 4 WCATR 1
Falland v. Symbion Health
[2010] SASC 119
Edgar v. Noirama (Hungry Jack’s Marion)
SAIRComm 54
Esso Australia Resources v. Commissioner of Taxation
[1999] HCA 67
(1999) 201 CLR 49
168 ALR 123
74 ALJR 339
Mann v. Carnell
[1999] HCA 66
(1999) 201 CLR 1
74 ALJR 378
Yokogawa Australia v. Alstom Power
[2009] SASC 377
Appearances:
Mr S.J. Dowd of counsel for the applicant employer.
C.M. Beames of counsel for the respondent WorkCover.
REASONS FOR RULING
Introduction
In the late 1990s, it was decided to
contract out the Adelaide metropolitan bus routes formerly operated by
TransAdelaide. In April
2000, the routes commenced to be operated by Serco
(Australia) Pty Ltd, SouthLink Pty Ltd and Torrens Transit Services (North) Pty
Ltd. The initial contracts expired in 2005, and the contract held by Serco was
not renewed. Some of the routes previously operated
by Serco were awarded to
SouthLink, and others to Torrens Transit, with the result that Torrens Transit
became, apparently, Adelaide’s
largest bus
As a result of taking on the
additional routes, Torrens Transit took over depots at Morphettville and St
Agnes, from which Serco had
previously operated, as well as establishing a new
depot at a "greenfield site" at
So much may be gleaned from the
public record.
Controversy developed between
Torrens Transit and the WorkCover Corporation of South Australia ("WorkCover" or
"the Corporation")
over the levies to be paid in respect of the Morphettville,
St Agnes and Edinburgh depots. When claims histories were factored into
rates, WorkCover sought to charge Torrens Transit a supplementary levy in
respect of the Morphettville location, while granting
a nominal remission of
levy in respect of St Agnes, and charging the industry base rate in respect of
Edinburgh for which there was,
by definition, no prior claims history. Torrens
Transit argued that the highly favourable discounts it had been receiving on its
other locations, presumably by reason of favourable claims histories there,
should have been applied to all three
As a result, it lodged an
application, dated 9 June 2005, pursuant to
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
("the Act"), seeking a review of
the decision to the above effect embodied in correspondence from WorkCover dated
17 May 2005.
, at the relevant
time, provided as follows:
Review of levy, penalty interest or
(1) Where an employer considers that a decision of the
Corporation as to--
the fixing or assessment of a levy;
the imposition of penalty interest or a fine;
the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead
to the imposition of a supplementary levy,
is unreasonable, the Board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a levy,
penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined
by the Board, by the Board itself, or by a committee or
person to whom the Board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the Board has an
absolute discretion as to whether
it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the Board may--
alter a levy or an assessment;
quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
quash or vary a condition imposed by the Corporation.
(5) An application under this section for review of a decision of the
Corporation--
must, if the decision relates to a class of employer, be made
within four months after notice of the decision was given;
must, if the decision relates to an individual employer, be made
within two months after the employer was given notice of the decision,
the Board (or its delegate) allows an extension of time for making the
application.
This Panel is the Board’s delegate
under the section: see the
WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002
amended (refer to
South Australian Government Gazette
, 29 October 2009 at
p.4977 for the current version).
considerable amount of time has elapsed since the application for review was
lodged. The main reason for this is that SouthLink
also came into dispute with
WorkCover in relation to the levies for depots from which it came to operate,
which had also been operated
previously by Serco. SouthLink also lodged
applications for review, but additionally sought judicial review of
WorkCover’s
decisions in the Supreme Court of South
By request of each bus company,
and WorkCover, consideration of the applications for review lodged by both
SouthLink and Torrens Transit
was deferred pending an outcome of the Supreme
Court proceedings. This came in June 2009:
SouthLink v. WorkCover
[2009] SASC 175
, and did indeed resolve the dispute between those parties to the
extent that SouthLink’s applications before the Panel were
withdrawn in May 2010.
The expectation of
the parties to the present proceedings was that the Supreme Court’s
decision would either completely resolve
these proceedings also, or at least
considerably refine and limit the issues. The latter may be the case (I do not
know at this stage)
but the proceedings are still on foot. On the way to
preparing a book (or books) of documents for the Panel, the parties have
encountered
further differences and now seek my ruling on somewhat novel (at
least, for this Panel) points.
The issues between the
agreed that the material sought by the applicant employer in this matter,
Torrens Transit, could be summarised as documents
concerning:
the registration of Serco
(Australia) Pty Ltd (Serco) as an employer under the
Workers Rehabilitation
and Compensation Act 1986
history of Serco;
measures taken by Serco
to reduce the incidence of work related
the incidence or costs of claims
for compensable disabilities suffered by Serco’s
the rehabilitation facilities or
services for disabled workers provided by
Serco’s practices as to the
retention, employment or re-employment [of] disabled
any other matter that the
Corporation treated as relevant in making the decision subject to the
together with legal advice obtained by the Corporation
and referred to in a letter from [Ms] Cheryl Milburn of the Corporation to
Applicant dated 11 July 2005.
It will be noted that items (c) to (f)
closely parallel the wording of various paragraphs of
section 67(1)
provision under which supplementary levies are imposed and remissions granted
under the Act. However, items (c) and (e) were
expressly abandoned at the outset
of the argument before me.
Both counsel had
to those outlines. I am indebted
to both of them for their clear and detailed
exposition.
It was acknowledged by both
parties that there is no explicit process of discovery of documents in
proceedings before this Panel.
There is no such provision in
as set out above, and there is none in the
WorkCover Levy Review
Determination 2002
, except for an indirect provision to which I shall
return. The scope of the
WorkCover Levy Review Determination
is, of course, necessarily limited by the scope of the
Nor are there any common law rules
processes familiar in
the ordinary courts arise by and large under rules of
court authorised by statute (e.g., Chapter 7, Part 3 of the
Supreme Court
Civil Rules 2006
, made under
Supreme Court Act
; Chapter 7, Part 3 of the
District Court Civil Rules 2006
District Court Act 1991
; rule 22 of the
Workers Compensation Tribunal Rules 2009
, made under section 88E of the
Act) and in the absence of such statutory authority such processes would not
WorkCover Levy Review
Determination 2002
, at clause 9, the President of the Panel is invested with
the powers of an authorised officer under section 110 of the Act, and operating
units of the Corporation and its agents are directed by the Board to comply as
though they were subject to section 110. It is not
necessary to set out the
terms of section 110, about which there was no debate, because both parties
seemed content to accept, as
am I, that as a result of clause 9 I have power to
require production (to me) of the documents sought by the applicant. The
for debate was whether I should exercise this power and, if I did, what
I could or should then do with the documents thus
Contentions of the parties
Mr Dowd, for
the applicant, outlined the powers conferred on the President of the Panel as an
authorised person under section 110
and emphasised the breadth of those powers
by reference to
WorkCover v. BHP; Jagermann v. WorkCover
(1999) 73 SASR 393
; 202 LSJS 343. He particularly referred to the
words of the Chief Justice in paragraph [23]:
"I accept that the
powers conferred are to be interpreted bearing in mind that they impinge upon
important common law rights and
liberties. But in my opinion the conferral of
the powers for the purposes of the Act is a clear indication that the powers can
used to assist in the execution of powers conferred by and duties imposed by
particular provisions of the Act, as distinct from matters
that might be said to
be done in the execution of the more general objects of the Act. In my opinion
the presumption against interference
with common law rights and freedom is
displaced by the clear terms of s110(1), and the presumption does not require or
powers conferred to be read as available only in the limited
circumstances suggested [by BHP]."
Mr Dowd also suggested that powers arose
by implication from the delegation in clause 3 of functions conferred upon the
Board under
section 72, which he submitted must necessarily include "powers
necessary for, or incidental to, the performance of its functions"
Corporation Act 1994
section 14).
In order for either the Board or the
Panel to be able to properly review the Corporation’s decision, he
contended, it needs
to have all of the relevant material before it. If the
review was carried out by the Board itself, the Board would have those powers;
therefore, the Panel, when conducting reviews in accordance with the delegation,
must have the same powers.
Mr Dowd noted
that WorkCover’s reconsideration letter dated 24 June 2005 showed
inescapably that the material sought by the
applicant is relevant to the review,
and it is worth quoting part of that document to illustrate the
"Under the WorkCover Scheme business locations are
allocated an industry classification levy rate that may be adjusted by a bonus
or penalty depending on the claims experience of the business.
"To ensure that levy rates for business continue irrespective of any changes
to the ownership or structure of the business claims
experiences and bonuses and
penalties are automatically transferred between owners and, if the structure of
a business changes, the
history follows. WorkCover calls this feature of the
bonus and penalty scheme the Principle of Succession. It also ensures that
are treated fairly and penalties cannot be avoided.
"Around 90% of employers in the bonus and penalty scheme have discounted levy
rates because of low claims costs. On most occasions,
any new employer will
therefore inherit a WorkCover rate that is lower than their industry rate.
"Any prospective employer, as part of the due diligence process, should ask
the current employer to supply information on the claims
and remuneration
history of the business. If the business has relatively high claims costs, the
costs of the work related injuries
and the effect on WorkCover levy rates should
be analysed and allowed for in any valuation of the business.
"Small businesses valued at less than $200,000 (excluding the value of any
land or buildings) are required by the
Land and Business (Sale and Conveyancing)
to include a WorkCover Statement in any contract for sale.
"In this case, the claims experience and remuneration history of Serco, the
prior bus operator at the two locations, has been correctly
transferred to the
new operator. A [X%] penalty applies for 2005-06 to the Morphettville location
and a [Y%] bonus to St Agnes.
"Under the bonus and penalty scheme new start
up businesses or business previously managed by an exempt employer (who carry
own liabilities) are not subject to a bonus or penalty until such time as
a claims and remuneration history over two financial years
has developed. ...
The levy rates for [the applicant] have been calculated correctly."
Mr Dowd contended that the applicant was
entitled to see the material on which those assertions were based to satisfy
itself whether
the levy for the applicant had, indeed, been "calculated
correctly". He noted that clause 8 of the
WorkCover Levy Review Determination
directed the Panel to observe the principles of natural justice, which
he said should result in the disclosure of any documents upon
which WorkCover
relied in the making of the reviewable decision. The direction in the same
clause that the Panel act according to
equity, good conscience and the
substantial merits of the case should strengthen that conclusion, he
Mr Beames’ principal point
was that section 112 of the Act served as an insuperable barrier to the
disclosures sought by the
applicant. To properly understand this submission, it
is necessary to set out subsections (1) and (2) of that
Confidentiality to be maintained
(1) A person must not disclose information (except as permitted
by subsection (2)) if--
the person obtained the information in the course of carrying out
functions in, or related to, the administration, operation or enforcement
this Act; and
the information is--
(i) about commercial or trading operations; or
(ii) about the physical or mental condition, or the personal circumstances or
affairs, of a worker or other person; or
(iii) information provided in a return or in response to a request for
information under this Act.
Maximum penalty: $5 000. ...
(2) A disclosure of information is permitted if it is--
a disclosure in the course of official duties; or
a disclosure of statistical information; or
a disclosure made with the consent of the person to whom the
information relates, or who furnished the information; or
a disclosure made to a corresponding workers compensation
authority in accordance with an arrangement entered into under
a disclosure authorised or required under any other Act or law;
a disclosure required by a court or tribunal constituted by law,
or before a review authority; or
a disclosure to the Corporation or a self-insured employer;
a disclosure to a disabled worker's employer in accordance with
this Act; or
a disclosure made under the authorisation of the Minister;
a disclosure authorised by regulation.
Mr Beames referred back to the passage I
have quoted at [
, in which the Chief Justice referred to the purposes for which
material may be gathered under section 110. This did not, he contended,
the purpose of providing the information to a third party as it was proposed I
He argued that the material
sought by the applicant potentially fell within all three paragraphs of section
, and that none of the exceptions in subsection (2) was
applicable.
Mr Dowd argued that the
material was not protected by subsection (1) and, if it was, it fell within one
of the exceptions contained
in subsection
Debate centred on the meaning of
"commercial or trading operations" in subsection (1)
(i), and the
I note at this point that these
contentions relate primarily to the items (a) to (g) referred to at
] above. Disclosure of the advice
referred to by Ms Milburn turned on distinct arguments going to questions of
legal professional
privilege, which I will deal with separately
Procedural fairness: the hearing rule
I commence by observing that there must
obviously be a preference in proceedings of this sort for a situation where full
disclosure is possible. This follows from the importance of the
"hearing rule" (
audi alteram partem
) as a component of procedural
fairness, which was explained recently by Heydon J in
International
Financial Trust v. NSW Crime Commission
[2009] HCA 49
[141]-[145]:
"One of the primary principles on which the judicial
process in this country operates is the principle that before any judicial
is made which has substantive consequences there generally should be a
‘hearing’. A hearing takes place before a judge
at a time and place
of which the moving party has given notice to the defending party. At it both
parties have an opportunity to
tender evidence relating to, and advance
arguments in favour of, the particular orders they ask for. This aspect of the
natural justice pervades Australian procedural law. It has several
justifications, and their force is so great that exceptions to
the hearing rule
in judicial proceedings are very narrow.
"One justification is that the forensic system employed in the courts of this
country in civil proceedings for remedies having substantive
consequences is
adversarial.
Ex hypothesi
, it is not possible for a court to operate an
adversarial system without the court having the evidence and arguments which
each adversary
wants to have considered. If the hearing rule were different, the
system would be internally contradictory.
"Another justification is that to act only on the version advanced by one
adversary is to risk reaching unsound conclusions, and thus
to risk both
injustice and inefficiency. Experience teaches that commonly one story is good
only until another is told. Where a judge
hears one side but not the other
before deciding, even if the side heard acts in the utmost good faith and makes
full disclosure
of all that that side sees as relevant, there may be
considerations which that side had not entertained and facts which that side
not know which, if brought to the attention of the judge, would cause a
difference in the outcome.
"‘The person most likely to have thought of cogent considerations, and
to know the relevant facts, is the person whose interests
are in jeopardy, that
is the party opposing the decision. Therefore we shall avoid bad decisions best
if we ensure that each potential
decision, before it is finally decided, is
exposed to what is likely to be the strongest possible criticism of it.’
The Principles of Politics
(1966), at 132.)
"Thus, hearing both sides before deciding tends to quell controversies and
discontents. As Megarry J said in
John v. Rees
[1970] Ch 345
402 (a case concerning the suspension by a national political party of one of
its branches):
"‘It may be that there are some who would decry the importance which
the courts attach to the observance of the rules of natural
justice. "When
something is obvious", they may say, "why force everybody to go through the
tiresome waste of time involved in framing
charges and giving an opportunity to
be heard? The result is obvious from the start." Those who take this view do
not, I think, do
themselves justice. As everybody who has anything to do with
the law well knows, the path of the law is strewn with examples of open
cases which, somehow, were not; of unanswerable charges which, in the event,
were completely answered; of inexplicable conduct
which was fully explained; of
fixed and unalterable determinations that, by discussion, suffered a
"Of the last sentence Lord Hoffmann has observed (
Secretary of State
for the Home Department v AF (No 3)
[2009] UKHL 28
[2009] 3 WLR 74
[2009] UKHL 28
[2009] 3 All ER 643
at 670): ‘Most lawyers will have heard or
read of or even experienced such cases but most will also know how rare they
Usually, if evidence appears to an experienced tribunal to be irrefutable,
it is not refuted.’ Perhaps both Megarry J and Lord
Hoffmann are guilty of
a little exaggeration. But even if Lord Hoffmann’s reasoning is completely
correct, it does not destroy
Megarry J’s point.
"A further justification for the practice of hearing both sides is that it
respects human dignity and individuality. ‘[S]ince
men can talk, they
should be allowed to, and not just bundled about like chessmen.’ (Lucas,
at 269). ‘[W]e think we owe
it to a man as a human being to engage in
argument with him, and allow him to engage in argument with us, rather than take
status as a rational agent, able to appreciate the rationale
of our decisions
"Finally, there is what has been called an ‘argument from Political
Liberty’ (Lucas, at 270):
"‘[E]ach man ought himself to have some say of his own in his own
future, and ... each man ought to count, to count as being
himself, and not
merely as one instance among many of the human species. We therefore think each
man ought to be able to instruct
his own counsel (or appear in person) to
represent his own views, not merely those views which a benevolent authority
him to hold. ... [O]n a matter on which he is likely to have very
strong wishes, namely where a decision (judicial or administrative)
is in danger
of being taken adversely to his interests, he should have a chartered right of
having a say, that is, the authority
has a duty to hear him.’
Thus Megarry J also said in
John v. Rees
with any knowledge of human nature who pause to think for a moment [are not]
likely to underestimate the feelings
of resentment of those who find that a
decision against them has been made without their being afforded any opportunity
to influence
the course of events.’" (
Some footnotes
These observations are not confined to
cases involving serious organised crime or national security. It includes the
imposition and
adjustment of statutory levies by an administrative authority.
Mason J made this clear in
Kioa v. West
[1985] HCA 81
"It is a fundamental rule of the common law
doctrine of natural justice expressed in traditional terms that, generally
speaking, when
an order is to be made which will deprive a person of some right
or interest or the legitimate expectation of a benefit, he is entitled
the case sought to be made against him and to be given an opportunity of
replying to it (
Twist v. Randwick Municipal Council
[1976] HCA 58
(1976) 136 CLR 106
, at p 109;
Salemi v. MacKellar (No. 2)
(1977) 137 CLR 396
, at p 419;
Reg. v. MacKellar; ex parte
[1977] HCA 35
(1977) 137 CLR 461
, at p 476;
Tasmanian Racing and Gaming Commission
[1977] HCA 39
(1977) 137 CLR 487
, at pp 498-499;
FAI Insurances Ltd. v. Winneke
[1982] HCA 26
(1982) 151 CLR 342
, at pp 360, 376-377;
Annamunthodo v. Oilfields
Workers’ Trade Union
[1961] AC 945).
The reference to ‘right
or interest’ in this formulation must be understood as relating to
personal liberty, status,
preservation of livelihood and reputation, as well as
to proprietary rights and interests."
A similar point was made by Bleby J in
the recent case of
Totani v. State of SA
[2009] SASC 301; (2009)
105 SASR 244
at [160]-161]:
"At this point it is necessary to restate a fundamental proposition
relating to the right of a person to a fair trial in a court of
law. That is
that a person is entitled to be informed of the case that is put against that
person, of the evidence which, in a forensic
contest, will have to be met and
answered, and that the person is to be afforded an opportunity to answer that
case. As Lord Hope
of Craighead said in the recent case of Secretary of State
for the Home Department v. AF (No 3)
[2009] UKHL 28
"‘The principle that the accused has a right to know what is being
alleged against him has a long pedigree. As Lord Scott of
Foscote observed in A
v. Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2004] UKHL 56
[2005] 2 AC 68
[155], a denunciation on grounds that are not disclosed is the stuff of
nightmares. The rule of law in a democratic society does
not tolerate such
behaviour. The fundamental principle is that everyone is entitled to the
disclosure of sufficient material to enable
him to answer effectively the case
that is made against him. The domestic and European authorities on which this
proposition rests
were referred to by Lord Bingham in Roberts v. Parole Board
[2005] UKHL 45;
[2005] 2 AC 738
, [16]-[17]. In Secretary of State for the Home
Department v. MB
[2007] UKHL 46
[2008] 1 AC 440
, [30], he drew attention to
McLachlin CJ’s observation for the Supreme Court of Canada in Charkaoui v.
Canada (Minister of
Citizenship and Immigration)
[2007] 1 SCR 350
[53], that a person whose liberty is in jeopardy must know the case he has to
meet, and to Hamdi v Rumsfeld
[2004] USSC 2730
(2004), 533, where it was declared by
O’Connor J for the majority in the US Supreme Court that for more than a
century it has
been clear that parties whose rights are to be affected are
entitled to be heard and that in order that they may enjoy that right
first be notified.’
"As appears from that passage, the requirement is fundamental to the
rule of law. It applies not only to a person whose liberty is
in jeopardy but to
anyone whose rights may be affected."
Confidentiality
under section 112
Is section 112 an obstacle to proper
disclosure in the present case? For such an important section of the Act, there
is surprisingly
little reference to it in the decided cases, and none of those
few cases, as far as I can discover, venture into analysis of the
key terms of
it (see, for example,
Coulls v. WorkCover
[2001] SAIRComm 11
FAI General Insurance v. WorkCover
[1998] FCA 1438
v. WorkCover
[2004] AIRC 214
WorkCover and Southcorp v.
[1996] SAWCAT 185
Triance v. State Transport
(1992) 167 LSJS 375).
And, it must be said, many of the key
terms are undefined, vague and, taken literally, tend to produce results that
may seem draconian.
For example, disclosure is prohibited if a person has
obtained information in the course of carrying out functions in, or related
the administration, operation or enforcement of the Act, including anything
appearing in a return required under the Act. Seemingly,
it does not matter if
the information is otherwise freely available, say, on the website of the
company concerned or in its published
annual report. Information which may come
into the hands of a person in the ways envisaged by the section may be as
innocuous as
the corporate name and registered address of an employer -- which,
of course, corporate law requires be public. It is hard to detect
the advantage
to public policy in making it an offence to divulge such particulars merely
because they have been included in a statutory
return, yet this conclusion is
difficult to escape.
The section is a
penal provision (with a significant financial penalty for contravention) and
must therefore be construed strictly
logical, therefore, to examine exactly what it does prohibit, and in what
circumstances the exceptions may apply.
hardly seems controversial that the officers of WorkCover with custody of the
material sought by the applicant answer the description
of "person[s] [who]
obtained the information in the course of carrying out functions in, or related
to, the administration, operation
or enforcement of this Act." So, for that
matter, would I, should I require protected material to be furnished to
The description of the protected
information is three-pronged, and the prongs are alternatives; that is to say,
information that satisfies
any one of the alternatives is protected. As
suggested by Mr Beames, who argued that the information sought by the employer
within all three paragraphs of subsection (1)
, a given piece
of information may often satisfy more than one test. The widest of the
alternatives seems to be the third, "information
provided in a return or in
response to a request for information under this Act." "Return" is not defined,
but there seems no reason
to confine it to the returns required by section 69 of
the Act, despite that being the only place in the Act where one of the many
forms that may need to be completed by an employer under the Act is explicitly
described as a "return". Given that the expression
is coupled with "or
[information provided] in response to a request for information under this Act",
it is apparent that information
provided by way of any of the forms prescribed
by or under the Act, or outside of any form, nor necessarily in written form, is
to be protected. This leads to the odd result I have referred to above,
of quite innocuous information that might otherwise be widely
available being
protected simply because it has been included in a return, but it is difficult
to see how this conclusion may be
"Commercial or trading operations"
is another term that is not defined. It occurred to me that the term is very
similar to the term
"in trade or commerce" that has been much litigated, in
particular, in the context of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
. In fact, as I
will suggest, it is difficult to see a useful distinction between the two
expressions. The High Court has held that
"it is well established that the words
‘trade’ and ‘commerce’, when used in the context of
s.51(i) of the
Constitution
, are not terms of art but are terms of common
knowledge of the widest import":
Concrete Constructions v. Nelson
[1990] HCA 17
(1990) 169 CLR 594
, at [6]. However:
"As a matter
of language, a prohibition against engaging in conduct ‘in trade or
commerce’ can be construed as encompassing
conduct in the course of the
myriad of activities which are not, of their nature, of a trading or commercial
character but which
are undertaken in the course of, or an incidental to, the
carrying on of an overall trading or commercial business. If the words
trade or commerce’ in s.52 [of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
construed in that sense, the provisions of the section would extend, for
example, to a case where the misleading or deceptive
conduct was a failure by a
driver to give the correct handsignal when driving a truck in the course of a
corporation’s haulage
business. It would also extend to a case, such as
the present, where the alleged misleading or deceptive conduct consisted of the
giving of inaccurate information by one employee to another in the course of
carrying on the building activities of a commercial
builder. Alternatively, the
reference to conduct ‘in trade or commerce in
can be construed as
referring only to conduct which is itself an aspect or element of activities or
transactions which, of their
nature, bear a trading or commercial character."
The Court’s conclusion was that
the latter approach was to be preferred and that statements made merely in the
course of the
employment relationship were incidental to trade or commerce,
rather than "in" it. Significantly, the case was itself, in effect,
workers’ compensation case, in the sense that the worker had been seeking
compensation for personal injuries sustained in
employment. It is difficult to
see how the same analysis does not apply to the expression "commercial or
trading operations"; in
my respectful opinion, the word "operations" serves to
confine the apparent width of "commerce" and "trade" in the same way as "in".
The use of the word "operations" tends to focus on the external business affairs
of an employer, rather than internal activities
that might be essential to the
conduct of a commercial transaction but are only incidental to them as a means,
not an end in themselves.
It is unclear to
me the extent to which the applicant seeks information relating to "the physical
or mental condition, or the personal
circumstances or affairs, of a worker or
other person". This is clearly a reference to
details of named
or identifiable persons. Presumably, the applicant already has, or has access
to, any such information relating
to those of Serco’s workers subsequently
employed by it, as in other cases coming before the Panel where the medical
etc., of particular workers of the particular employer is in issue.
In fact, the letter to the applicant dated 5 August 2005 and
signed by Mr
Batchelor, which was tendered at the hearing, contains attachments (one of which
appears to be one of the assessments
sought to be reviewed in this matter)
detailing injury costs relating to a large number of workers at the two former
Serco depots
injured as far back as 2002: this would appear to relate to injured
workers taken over by the applicant whose disabilities arose
during their
service with Serco. Therefore, it seems fair to conclude that the applicant does
indeed already have that information
and I would need to be convinced that
information relating to other named or identifiable individual workers would be
relevant to
these proceedings.
envisage how any relevant information of the categories sought by the applicant
would be caught by the restriction contemplated
by sub-paragraph
However, I think I must conclude that
most or all of the information sought is protected by virtue of sub-paragraph
I turn to the exceptions contained
in sub-section (2) of
section 112.
As indicated above, argument was centred on
of sub-section (2). I was
somewhat surprised that paragraph
(consent of the person to whom the
information relates, or who furnished the information) had not arisen, and when
I enquired it
emerged that neither party had sought the consent of Serco for the
information to be disclosed. In the usual situation where WorkCover’s
"succession rules" are in play, one employer has purchased a business from the
other, and it would be expected that the sales agreement
would cover the
furnishing of relevant information, perhaps as a matter of due diligence.
Additionally, certain disclosures would
in many circumstances have been required
Land and Business (Sale and Conveyancing) Regulations 1995
superseded by the
Land and Business (Sale and Conveyancing) Regulations
). However, the present applicant did not take over the two former Serco
depots pursuant to the sale of a business, but as a consequence
of winning a
tender from the government -- a matter that might, when this application is
eventually heard by the Panel, need to be
considered as to the reasonableness of
the invocation of the succession rules at all. Consequently, the
applicant’s dealings
with Serco were limited. But I would be surprised if
there were no dealings at all. The applicant apparently took over a substantial
proportion of Serco’s workforce at the two depots, and the Panel will
certainly want to know in due course about any contractual
arrangements between
Serco and the applicant in relation to that, and it would be appropriate for
documents relating to the applicant’s
acquisition of the workforce (and/or
any other tangible or intangible assets formerly employed by Serco) to be
included in the book
of documents. It is surprising that any such arrangements
did not extend to the applicant’s access to necessary information
the workforce, such as that now sought. And even if Serco were contacted now, it
is not unknown for employers, even those in
competition with each other (which
Serco and the applicant seemingly no longer are), to co-operate with each other
on such matters
as those now before the Panel. It is disappointing that neither
party to these proceedings seems to have made any attempt to ascertain
Serco’s attitude to the proposed disclosures; this ruling may have been
rendered unnecessary.
The subject of
(a disclosure required by a court or tribunal constituted
by law, or before a review authority) arose from a question posed by me.
Panel is certainly a "court" for the purposes of the
Evidence Act 1929
which defines the term in
includes a tribunal, authority or person invested by law with judicial or
quasi-judicial powers, or with authority to make any inquiry
or to receive
evidence ...
However, there is no suggestion that this definition has wider application
than that Act.
The word "tribunal" in section 112 of
the Act, however, is not capitalised (and in any case, the Workers Compensation
Tribunal, the
only "Tribunal" created under the Act, is embraced by the term
"review authority"). While the word "tribunal" does not appear in
the name of
the Panel, one would have thought that the Panel fell within the common
conception of a small-‘t’ tribunal.
The primary definition in the
Macquarie ABC Dictionary
(2003) is "a body set up to investigate and
resolve disputes".
The New Oxford Dictionary of English
(1998) defines a
tribunal as "a body established to settle certain types of dispute". Both have
"a court of justice" as a secondary
definition, but this Panel certainly fits
both primary definitions. Is the Panel "constituted by law"? Section 72
explicitly contemplates
the exercise of the powers under that section by a
delegate. The Panel is not created directly by the statute, but it is
constituted
by the Board of WorkCover under that power expressly conferred by
section 72 of the Act and the further power conferred by
WorkCover Corporation Act 1994
, which arguably results in it being
"constituted by law". However, neither party to these proceedings was prepared
to argue this
way. It must be acknowledged that the Panel is a mere
administrative tribunal (but there’s that word again), and its
constitution
under an instrument of delegation by the Board might more aptly be
expressed as "constituted
law" than "
law". I therefore
think it is a question that I should not decide in the absence of an affirmative
argument being advanced by a party,
and I therefore leave it open until another
appropriate occasion arises.
contended that much of the material sought could be described as "statistical
information". Mr Beames argued that material
referring to a single (known)
employer went beyond this. Again, an expression is used that is vague and
undefined. However, Mr Beames
contended, and I am inclined to agree, that the
statistical information contemplated by paragraph
of subsection (2)
would be aggregated over several, or all, employers, and would be anonymous. The
reason I am inclined to agree
is that if that were not so, the exception for
"statistical information" would be so wide that the rest of the section might
little work to do. It cannot be, for example, that anything relating to a
number is "statistical information" permitted to be disclosed,
despite the other
provisions of the section.
Mr Dowd also
contended that the information sought, by definition going back before 2005 and
relating to an employer who not only
no longer conducts bus operations in this
state but no longer seems to have any presence in this state at all, is hardly
at this stage. I might agree, but section 112 does not seem to leave
any room for discretion to be exercised on that basis. From
the point of view of
a purposive approach to statutory interpretation, it may well be arguable that
it could not have been Parliament’s
intention to guard historical,
non-sensitive material in this way, but I am unable to discern any ambiguity in
the language of the
section to which a purposive approach could be applied. One
cannot simply decide to read a statute as saying something other than
unambiguously does say because the result seems inconvenient, or even draconian.
Interpretive choice can only arise from
an ambiguity that admits more than one
possible interpretation, and I cannot find this here. With the deepest respect,
I do not think
that submission can advance the applicant’s
Finally, paragraph
subsection (2) permits "a disclosure in the course of official duties". Mr
Beames for WorkCover asserted that it was no one’s
official duty to make
the disclosure sought. Perhaps not, if it is put that way, but what are the
official duties of this Panel as
delegate of the Board, exercising its functions
under section 72? They include, surely, even construed quite narrowly, doing
between the parties to disputes, including (crucially, in my opinion)
according procedural fairness to those parties. This would
be so even if the
WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002
did not express it in clause
Twist v. Randwick Municipal Council
Annetts v. McCann
[1990] HCA 57
(1990) 170 CLR
I doubt it can follow that it is the duty of the Panel to withhold
important evidence, on the basis of which a substantial supplementary
(which WorkCover even calls a "penalty") has been assessed, from the employer
against whom the assessment has been
It may be doubted that it is my
official duty, as such, to disclose this material to the applicant, but if I am
correct in characterising
the Panel’s duties as I have done above, then
the requirements of procedural fairness will render a disclosure by me of
requisitioned by me under section 110 as being
in the course of
those official duties.
Having come to that
conclusion, I think it is incumbent on me to use the utmost care in deciding
exactly what material I requisition
under section 110 and disclose to the
applicant. For example, it would seem fairly obvious that any material showing
the names of
workers who were
subsequently employed by the applicant
should be produced with those names blacked out. Further, material should only
be requisitioned
in this way if it is strictly relevant to the issues in dispute
in the present proceedings. I should not lend my powers to a fishing
expedition.
For example, I do not see the relevance of the
levy history of
Serco being produced. It should be sufficient for the purposes of this matter if
portions of the annual levy notices
showing the rates and adjustments relevant
to the two locations subsequently taken over by the applicant are produced. This
I anticipate, include schedules showing the names and claims costs of
injured workers employed by Serco, and it is in this connection
that I direct
that the names of workers not subsequently employed by the applicant be blacked
out. It is the numbers and costs that
will be relevant, as far as I can see.
In terms of Serco’s practices as to
the retention, employment or re-employment of disabled workers, it will probably
be sufficient
for WorkCover to indicate what material of that nature it took
into account when adjusting Serco’s levies, and to what extent
were adjusted as a consequence; if no such adjustments were made, a statement to
that effect will be sufficient. If such
material does in fact exist, I should
like to know what documentation is available on this topic before I order it to
be produced.
I presume that it will relate primarily to section 58B and 58C. I
do not think it would be appropriate or necessary to have all section
files (if any) relating to Serco before the Panel or, indeed, divulged to the
applicant on the basis of a fishing expedition.
However, if such matters have
affected the levy payable at either of the contentious depots, they may be
relevant to these proceedings.
If documentation is voluminous, I would ask
WorkCover to prepare a list of relevant documents on this topic or, if it is
more convenient,
a summary of activity by WorkCover in relation to practices
that have affected the levies one way or the other. Again, the names
not subsequently employed by the applicant should be omitted or blacked
I do think it is fair and reasonable
that the applicant, and this Panel, have the opportunity to peruse and, to the
extent that it
can, verify, the historical material on which the levy situation
developed that the Corporation now seeks to transfer to the applicant.
this as an integral part of being notified of the case it has to meet in these
proceedings. At the same time, it must be acknowledged
that there is a need to
do this sensitively and selectively, only to the minimum extent necessary. Any
objection by, to borrow the
words of section 112(2)
, the person to
whom the information relates or who furnished the information, should certainly
carry weight. In the present circumstances,
where Serco is no longer operating
buses in this state and seems no longer even to have a presence in this state,
this seems unlikely
I am unable
to see the relevance to these proceedings of the details of the original
registration of Serco. There may be room for
an argument that a certificate of
registration under section 59 should be treated as a public document (but the
section does not
even provide for the issue of a certificate); however, it is
common ground between the parties, as far as I can see, that Serco was
registered employer, and formal proof of it is
unnecessary.
The levy history of Serco will
sufficiently evidence registration in any event.
These documents should also be sufficient
to evidence the incidence or costs of claims for compensable disabilities
suffered by Serco’s
merely add that, to a considerable extent, the observations I have made above
to the officers of WorkCover
dealing with these matters. As the cases make clear,
public official
with statutory power "to destroy, defeat or prejudice a person’s rights,
interests or legitimate expectations"
is bound to exercise that power in
accordance with the rules of natural justice: see the opening lines of
Annetts v. McCann
. There may be issues of degree, the obligation
being greater in the case of a dispute resolution body than, perhaps, in the
of an administrative decision-maker at first instance. It seems
incontestable, however, that WorkCover officers’ "official
duties" would
also include the duty to disclose to a levy-payer -- in particular, a payer of a
discretionary supplementary levy,
and in particular where a request has been
made or an application for review lodged -- reasonable information as a matter
of procedural
fairness as to the matters taken into account in the calculation
of the levy, including matters relating to adjustments imposed on
levy-payers, if those matters are being taken into account in relation to the
liability of the current levy-payer. It is
certainly part of their official
duties, as I think they have always accepted, to disclose otherwise protected
information to the
Panel in connection with a review being conducted under
section 72, with or without a formal requisition under section
Ms Milburn’s "without prejudice"
In a letter dated 11 July 2005, Ms C.
Milburn, then Manager, Section 58B/C Unit of WorkCover, wrote to Mr Lamont of
the applicant:
"I undertook during our conversation to send you
an outline of the key aspects of our legal advice that led us to believe there
potentially a transmission of business and therefore a sufficient connection
for WorkCover to be able to reasonably request you provide
a number of
Serco’s injured bus drivers with partial or full employment."
This was followed by a page and a half of what appears to be a paraphrasing
or summary of a written legal opinion, including references
Rail Tram & Bus Industry Union v. Torrens Transit Services
(2000) 109 FCR 303
, at [74] and [75] and
Minister for Employment
and Workplace Relations v. Gribbles Radiology
[2005] HCA 9
The letter was marked "Without prejudice" and headed "Transmission of
business – employers and their role in providing injured
workers with
suitable employment".
It will be immediately obvious from that
heading that the subject of the letter, befitting Ms Milburn’s position,
was the placement
of partially incapacitated workers in suitable employment
pursuant to section 58B of the Act. It was not about the present matter.
not aware whether Ms Milburn ever purported to impose a supplement under section
of the Act in respect of an alleged failure to comply with
section 58B obligations. No application to review any such decision appears
be before the Panel. However, the issue referred to by Ms Milburn, the question
of whether it could fairly be said there was a
"transmission of business" from
Serco to the applicant, is central to the present proceedings, and it is safe to
assume that the
advice was relevant to both Ms Milburn’s activities and
the decision under review in the present
proceedings.
Mr Beames quite properly
objected to Ms Milburn’s letter being referred to at all, since it was
marked "Without prejudice".
Mr Dowd acknowledged that the advice referred to in
the letter was subject to legal professional privilege, and thus
exempt from production under section 110(3)
of the Act, but
contended that the privilege had been
In dealing with this matter, it is
important to remember that the Panel is not bound by the rules of evidence:
clause 8(2) of the
WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002
Nevertheless, as Judge McCusker DP said in relation to an equivalent provision
of the Act in
Markovic v. WorkCover
[1992] SAWCAT 5
"It is one thing to say that
the rules of evidence do not apply. It is, on the other hand, erroneous to say
they should be strictly
ignored. They provide helpful and considered ways that
have, by experience, proved suitable for determining facts."
I therefore propose to consider these issues in accordance with the rules of
evidence as I understand them, and then turn to consider
what I should actually
do in the circumstances of this case.
that there are two separate issues to be dealt with: the effect of the "without
prejudice" marking on Ms Milburn’s
letter, and the privilege attaching to
the advice itself. Mr Beames would say (and did) that if Ms Milburn’s
"without prejudice"
is effective and her letter is inadmissible, the second
question does not arise, I suppose because the existence of the advice would
be known (the submission only says "this should be the end of the matter"
without explaining why or giving any authority). But
of course the applicant
does know of it, because "without prejudice" or not, it has been told of it, and
this is not easily undone.
Mr Beames also says that the advice is fully set out
in Ms Milburn’s letter and nothing would be added by releasing the advice
itself; but if that is so, it is difficult to comprehend why WorkCover objects
so strongly to releasing the advice.
On the other
hand, it is also difficult to discern why the applicant is so keen to see it:
from a combination of Ms Milburn’s
letter and WorkCover’s subsequent
actions, it is perfectly plain what the tenor of that advice must have been. The
can, and clearly has, taken its own legal advice on the same matters,
and will see in full what WorkCover’s legal position
is when that is put
in submissions to the Panel at the final hearing of the application for review,
at which time it will, of course,
have the full opportunity to put its views in
response. I can only add that, should either party feel taken by surprise in any
by any matter raised, it can rely on the Panel to extend a reasonable
opportunity to lodge a supplementary written submission afterwards,
should time
be necessary to research a matter in respect of which it has been
The law regarding what has
become known as "without prejudice privilege" is conveniently summarised in the
recent case of
Falland v. Symbion Health
[2010] SASC 119
J, who said at [8]–[12]:
"The underlying purpose of without prejudice privilege is to encourage
negotiated settlements as between parties. In the leading case
of Field v.
Commissioner for Railways for New South Wales
[1957] HCA 92
(1957) 99 CLR 285
at 291, Dixon CJ, Webb, Kitto and Taylor JJ said:
"‘As a matter of policy the law has long excluded from evidence
admissions by words or conduct made by parties in the course
of negotiations to
settle litigation. The purpose is to enable parties engaged in an attempt to
compromise litigation to communicate
with one another freely and without the
embarrassment which the liability of their communications to be put in evidence
subsequently
might impose upon them. The law relieves them of this embarrassment
so that their negotiations to avoid litigation or to settle it
unhampered.’
"This sentiment is echoed in the judgment of Griffiths LJ in Rush &
Tompkins v. Greater London Council
[1988] UKHL 7
[1989] AC 1280
, at 1299, his
Lordship describing the basis of the privilege as ‘founded on the public
policy of encouraging litigants to settle
their differences rather than litigate
them to a finish.’ Consequently, as the Court of Appeal in Unilever Plc v.
[1999] EWCA Civ 3027
; [2001] 1 All ER 783;
[2000] 1 WLR
at 2448, concluded, the protection of admissions against interest is the
most important practical effect of the privilege.
"As the Court of Appeal noted, the privilege is founded partly in
public policy and partly in the agreement of the parties. Consequently,
parties can agree, either expressly or by implication, on what is to be
protected under the privilege. However, the words ‘without
prejudice’ in a communication cannot be used indiscriminately as a cloak
over communications and documents where the privilege
is not appropriate. The
net cast by without prejudice privilege is not without bounds:
"‘This form of privilege, however, is directed against the
admission in evidence of express or implied admissions. It covers
admissions by
words or conduct. For example, neither party can use the readiness of the other
to negotiate as an implied admission.
It is not concerned with objective facts
which may be ascertained during the course of negotiations. These may be proved
evidence. But it is concerned with the use of the negotiations or what
is said in the course of them as evidence by way of admission.’
Commissioner for Railways at 291-2).
"It is also clear that without prejudice privilege is not merely
restricted to documents explicitly marked as such. Nor is it restricted
to admissions against interest. To attempt to dissect out particular admissions
from communications would not only be practically
difficult but contrary to the
public policy of enabling the parties to ‘speak freely about all issues in
the litigation both
factual and legal when seeking compromise and, for the
purpose of establishing a basis of compromise, admitting certain facts.’
(Rush & Tompkins at 1300. See also Unilever v. Procter & Gamble at
"What is clear, therefore, is that without prejudice privilege is
directed at communications between the parties, primarily in the
admissions, although not necessarily limited to that. The underlying principle
behind the privilege is to ensure that any
admissions or communications directed
at settling a matter do not prejudice either party should such an admission, for
example, be
admitted into evidence in any eventual trial." (Some footnotes
Dowd also referred to the judgment in
Edgar v. Noirama (Hungry
Jack’s Marion)
[2000] SAIRComm 54
, where Judge McCusker DP wrote
at [12]–[13]:
"I refer to the precise description of the
rule expressed by Hill J in
Quad Consulting v. Bleakley
(1990) 98 ALR 659
"‘It is clear enough law that whether negotiations are within the
concept of the privilege, that is to say "without prejudice",
depends not on
whether the parties have so labelled them, but upon the intentions of the
parties to be ascertained from the nature
of discussions or negotiations between
Davies and Davies v. Nyland and O’Neil
(1975) 10 SASR
Bentley v. Nelson
[1963] WAR 89.
where the parties have not expressed the communication as being "without
prejudice", privilege will nevertheless attach
to communications between them
which are genuine negotiations with the intent to compromise an existing
Rodgers v. Rodgers
[1964] HCA 25
(1964) 114 CLR 608
Tompkins Ltd v. Greater London Council
; [1989] AC 1292 at 1299-300.’
Davies’ Case
(above cited) Wells J explained the true
nature of that rule (89–90). It does not protect admissions which are
divorced from
a settlement proposal.
Wigmore on Evidence
3rd ed vol 4, at
26, is quoted by the learned Judge:--
a concession which is
hypothetical or conditional only can never be interpreted as an
representing the party’s actual belief, and therefore cannot be an
admission; and, conversely, an unconditional assertion
is receivable, without
any regard to the circumstances which accompany it.’"
Mr Dowd kindly tendered a copy of
Rush & Tompkins
. I think it is sufficiently dealt with in the
passages above and I need not analyse it
Mr Dowd argued that the letter
written by Ms Milburn was not written in the course of a negotiation, so the
label "without prejudice"
has no work to do. I am not sure that I can agree that
the letter was not written in the course of negotiations; certainly, it contains
no offer of settlement, but it is clearly intended to explain, and moreover,
persuade the applicant to accept, WorkCover’s
point of view in the dispute
that was developing. I would have thought that was the kind of communication
that would often be part
of a negotiating process, but I do not think it is
necessary to decide that question for the simple reason that the letter is
to that explanatory and persuasive process, and is quite devoid of any
statements against interest, much less admissions, of the
kind sought to be
protected by without prejudice privilege. There is nothing in the letter that
should cause WorkCover any embarrassment
or prejudice in the context of these or
any other proceedings, and in my respectful opinion, the attachment to it of the
label "without
prejudice" was quite superfluous. I can see no reason to exclude
Ms Milburn’s letter on the basis of without prejudice
The legal advice referred to in Ms
Milburn’s letter
The outline of argument of WorkCover, in
dealing with the legal advice itself, did not refer to legal professional
privilege at all,
confining itself to asserting that Ms Milburn’s letter
was "without prejudice" and this should be the end of the matter regarding
underlying request for the advice itself. It added a rejection of an assertion
by the applicant that Ms Milburn’s letter
was "an intimidatory tactic" --
which I do not need to deal with -- and a submission that the advice was not
relevant to the decision
under review.
Dowd dealt with the matter as though the issue was legal professional privilege,
and given the restriction in section 110 already
referred to, it is convenient
to deal with that issue briefly.
Esso Australia Resources v. Commissioner of Taxation
(1999) 201 CLR 49
168 ALR 123
74 ALJR 339
, at [35], the majority (Gleeson
CJ, Gaudron and Gummow JJ) summarised the common law of legal professional
"Legal professional privilege (or client legal
privilege) protects the confidentiality of certain communications made in
with giving or obtaining legal advice or the provision of legal
services, including representation in proceedings in a court. In
the ordinary
course of events, citizens engage in many confidential communications, including
communications with professional advisers,
which are not protected from
compulsory disclosure. The rationale of the privilege has been explained in a
number of cases, including
Baker v. Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
Grant v. Downs
[1976] HCA 63
itself. The privilege exists to serve the public interest in the
administration of justice by encouraging full and frank disclosure
by clients to
their lawyers. In
Waterford v. The Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(1987) 163 CLR 54
at 64-65, Mason and Wilson JJ explained that legal
professional privilege is itself the product of a balancing exercise between
public interests and that, given the application of the privilege, no
further balancing exercise is required. As Deane J expressed
Baker v. Campbell
at 114, a person should be entitled to seek and
obtain legal advice in the conduct of his or her affairs, and legal assistance
and for the purposes of the conduct of actual or anticipated litigation,
without the apprehension of being prejudiced by subsequent
disclosure of the
communication. The obvious tension between this policy and the desirability, in
the interests of justice, of obtaining
the fullest possible access to the facts
relevant to the issues in a case lies at the heart of the problem of the scope
of the privilege.
Where the privilege applies, it inhibits or prevents access to
potentially relevant information. The party denied access might be
an opposing
litigant, a prosecutor, an accused in a criminal trial, or an investigating
authority. For the law, in the interests
of the administration of justice, to
deny access to relevant information, involves a balancing of competing
considerations." (
Some footnotes omitted
In that case, contrary to previous
understandings, it was decided that the balance lay with a test of dominant
purpose, rather than
sole purpose. I have little hesitation in finding on the
basis of the description of the advice contained in Ms Milburn’s letter
that the advice was obtained for the dominant purpose of litigation then
reasonably in contemplation. It is not necessary that I
know how long before the
date of Ms Milburn’s letter the legal advice was prepared, for the purpose
of identifying the state
of play at that time. From the time the imposition of
the relevant adjustments under section 67 was first contemplated, it would
reasonably have been anticipated that a challenge by the present applicant would
likely follow. It does not matter that the most
likely venue for such a
challenge may have been this Panel: privilege is not confined to court
litigation, as noted by the majority
(Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, Gummow and Callinan
Mann v. Carnell
[1999] HCA 66
(1999) 201 CLR 1
74 ALJR 378
"The circumstances in which legal
professional privilege may apply are not limited to the adducing of evidence in
the course of a
hearing in a court. The privilege may be invoked, and its
application may be of importance, in pre-trial proceedings such as the
and inspection of documents. Documents may be discoverable even though they may
not be admissible in evidence. Their importance
may be, for example, that they
indicate a useful line of investigation, or that they contain information which
could affect the manner
in which a party may decide to conduct proceedings.
Furthermore, in
Baker v. Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
(1983) 153 CLR 52
at 115-116, this Court held that the application of legal professional privilege
is not confined to judicial or quasi-judicial proceedings.
"‘Once one recognizes that the principle underlying legal
professional privilege is that a person should be entitled to seek
legal advice without the apprehension of being prejudiced by subsequent
disclosure of confidential communications and
that the privilege is not confined
to such communications as are made in the course of or in anticipation of
litigation but extends
generally to confidential communications of a
professional nature between a person and his lawyer made for the purpose of
or giving legal advice, common sense points to a conclusion that the
principle should not be seen as restricted to compulsory disclosure
course of such proceedings.’" (
Some footnotes omitted
However, privilege may be waived, either
expressly or by conduct. A convenient summary may be found in the judgment of
Duggan J (Sulan
and Kourakis JJ agreeing) in
Yokogawa Australia v. Alstom
[2009] SASC 377
"It is well established at common law that legal professional privilege
may be waived by implication. The circumstances in which such
a waiver can arise
were referred to by the majority of the High Court in Mann v. Carnell
(1999) 201 CLR 1.
Their Honours said at [28]:
"‘At common law, a person who would otherwise be entitled to the
benefit of legal professional privilege may waive the privilege.
It has been
observed that "waiver" is a vague term, used in many senses, and that it often
requires further definition according
to the context. Legal professional
privilege exists to protect the confidentiality of communications between lawyer
and client. It
is the client who is entitled to the benefit of such
confidentiality, and who may relinquish that entitlement. It is inconsistency
between the conduct of the client and maintenance of the confidentiality which
effects a waiver of the privilege. Examples include
disclosure by a client of
the client’s version of a communication with a lawyer, which entitles the
lawyer to give his or her
account of the communication, or the institution of
proceedings for professional negligence against a lawyer, in which the
evidence as to advice given to the client will be received.
"‘Waiver may be express or implied. Disputes as to implied waiver
usually arise from the need to decide whether particular conduct
is inconsistent
with the maintenance of the confidentiality which the privilege is intended to
protect. When an affirmative answer
is given to such a question, it is sometimes
said that waiver is "imputed by operation of law". This means that the law
the inconsistency and determines its consequences, even though such
consequences may not reflect the subjective intention of the
party who has lost
the privilege. Thus, in Benecke v National Australia Bank
, the client was held to have waived privilege by giving evidence, in
legal proceedings, concerning her instructions to a barrister
proceedings, even though she apparently believed she could prevent the barrister
from giving the barrister’s version
of those instructions. She did not
subjectively intend to abandon the privilege. She may not even have turned her
mind to the question.
However, her intentional act was inconsistent with the
maintenance of the confidentiality of the communication. What brings about
waiver is the inconsistency, which the courts, where necessary informed by
considerations of fairness, perceive, between the
conduct of the client and
maintenance of the confidentiality; not some overriding principle of fairness
operating at large.’
"The rationale for imputing waiver is illustrated in the following
passage from the judgment of Gleeson CJ in Benecke v. National
Australia Bank
(at 111-112), a case in which the appellant claimed that a settlement
facilitated by her legal advisers was not authorised
"‘The law permits the search for the truth in legal proceedings to
yield, in certain circumstances, to the public interest in
preserving the
secrecy of communications between lawyer and client. In the present case,
however, the appellant herself lifted the
veil of secrecy by giving her version
of the communications. Thereafter, there was no reason in principle why the
pursuit of the
truth should not take its course, or why the court should be
inhibited in seeking to ascertain the true facts concerning those
communications.’
"In the present case, as in the case of Benecke, it is argued that the
circumstances give rise to ‘issue waiver’. In such
cases the conduct
of a party who is otherwise entitled to a claim of privilege, impliedly waives
it by putting the advice in issue.
In Adelaide Steamship Co Ltd v Spalvins
[1998] FCA 144
(1998) 81 FCR 360
, examples of a waiver of this nature appear
from the joint judgment of the Full Court of the Federal Court (at
"‘The usual type of case said to illustrate issue waiver at common
law is one in which, in order to establish a particular right,
claim, or defence
a party who previously has been legally advised, or has provided advice, needs
to show that the advice so given
did, or did not, have a particular character,
for example that it was or was not negligent where the claim is for professional
against the adviser: see Kershaw v. Whelan
[1996] 1 WLR
; that it was not based on full information or was not meaningful, in an
undue influence claim: see Inche Noriah v. Shaik Allie Bin
[1929] AC 127
130-131; see also Bester v. Perpetual Trustee
[1970] 3 NSWR 30
and Brusewitz v.
[1923] NZLR 1106
or that it did not address or properly address a matter
which, if addressed or properly addressed, would defeat or call into question
the right or claim asserted as in claims where the applicant has to demonstrate
he or she acted with or without adequate knowledge
of a matter: see Thomason v.
Campbelltown Municipal Council
(1939) 39 SR (NSW) 347
; Hongkong Bank of
Australia v. Murphy
[1993] VicRp 83
[1993] 2 VR 419
; Pickering v. Edmunds
(1994) 63 SASR 357.
other words the cases are ones in which, in the substantive proceeding brought,
the privilege holder has put in issue the very
advice received.’
"The unfairness referred to in the cases is not assessed by having
regard to general considerations of fairness, but rather involves
consideration of the unfairness which arises because of the inconsistency in the
particular circumstances of the case of putting
the legal advice in issue but
attempting, at the same time, to exclude its proper examination by maintaining a
claim of legal professional
"The question of waiver has arisen in some of the reported cases which
required assessment of the reasonableness of a settlement relevant
litigation. It has been pointed out on a number of occasions that whether a
waiver of privilege is to be imputed depends very
much on the particular
circumstances of the case. Questions of degree may be involved." (Some footnotes
am comfortably satisfied that Ms Milburn’s letter, in freely referring to
the advice and then apparently paraphrasing it for
a page and a half in an
attempt to persuade the applicant of the correctness of the Corporation’s
approach, has served to waive
the privilege that would otherwise have attached
to the advice. If the Panel were a court of law, I would order
accordingly.
However, the Panel is not a
court of law. I am not strictly delivering a ruling on the discoverability or
admissibility of documents.
I am deciding, as an authorised officer, what
documents I will requisition under section 110 of the Act for inclusion in a
documents. I have already indicated my reservations about the whole
subject of Ms Milburn’s letter and the legal advice in
While I cannot accept Mr Beames’ argument that the legal advice is not
to the matters in issue in these proceedings, I do adopt his
associated point that releasing the legal advice would be unlikely to
significantly either the Panel’s understanding of the issues, or that of
the applicant. To agree it would do no harm
is not sufficient reason to order
production of a document. I need to be positively persuaded that there is good
reason to do so.
I do not propose to order its
production.
Ruling and directions
Pursuant to my powers as an authorised
officer under section 110 of the Act, I require the Corporation to produce to me
the following:
the annual levy rate
notices relating to the two depots later taken over by the applicant (showing
percentage levy rates, not dollar
amounts), including the attachments showing
how any adjustments under section 67 to the base rates have been arrived at.
no doubt include a list of claims and claims costs incurred by
WorkCover during relevant window periods. I direct that the names
subsequently employed by the applicant be blacked out from these
documents or a list of
documents in WorkCover’s possession as to Serco’s practices as to
the retention, employment or
re-employment of disabled workers at the two
depots, including documents or a list of documents relating to section 58B/58C
by WorkCover in relation to the two depots during the relevant periods
if such activity affected the levy payable at either depot
of activity by WorkCover in relation to practices at the two depots that have
affected the levies payable in relation to
those workplaces, one way or the
other. Again, the names of workers
subsequently employed by the
applicant should be blacked out from these
any other matter that
WorkCover treated as relevant in making the decision subject to
Note the second item is necessarily
tentative, because I do not know what exists (if anything), or how voluminous it
might be. It
may be necessary for me to hear further from the parties on this
particular topic at the next directions hearing, which can be done
more usefully
if the parameters of the topic are known.
formally indicate that it is my intention, in the course of my official duties
as President of the Panel, to disclose the material
requisitioned to the
I indicate that the requirements
of this ruling will be satisfied if a book of documents can now be compiled,
containing the material
I have mentioned and other relevant material, by
consultation between the parties in the ordinary way. (If WorkCover remains
book of documents thus compiled, it may be tendered to me and
I will hand it
over to the applicant’s legal representatives
personally.)
I will hear the parties
further if there are any other practical implications arising from this
I will list a further directions
hearing in a few weeks to monitor progress.
This decision has been appealed to the
High Court, where it was argued in June before a Court of seven members. No
decision is available
at the time of writing. Nothing in the arguments before
the High Court suggests that the passages quoted above are likely to be
disapproved.
[2005] HCA 37
(2005) 222 CLR 67
218 ALR 521
79 ALJR 1337
, although it is also said at [93] that this rule of construction has now
"lost much of its importance", and comes into operation
only "when the normal
principles of interpretation have ‘run out’".
"At this point it is necessary to restate a fundamental proposition relating to the right of a person to a fair trial in a court of
law. That is that a person is entitled to be informed of the case that is put against that person, of the evidence which, in a forensic
contest, will have to be met and answered, and that the person is to be afforded an opportunity to answer that case. As Lord Hope
of Craighead said in the recent case of Secretary of State for the Home Department v. AF (No 3)
[2009] UKHL 28
"‘The principle that the accused has a right to know what is being alleged against him has a long pedigree. As Lord Scott of
Foscote observed in A v. Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2004] UKHL 56
[2005] 2 AC 68
, [155], a denunciation on grounds that are not disclosed is the stuff of nightmares. The rule of law in a democratic society does
not tolerate such behaviour. The fundamental principle is that everyone is entitled to the disclosure of sufficient material to enable
him to answer effectively the case that is made against him. The domestic and European authorities on which this proposition rests
were referred to by Lord Bingham in Roberts v. Parole Board [2005] UKHL 45;
[2005] 2 AC 738
, [16]-[17]. In Secretary of State for the Home Department v. MB
[2007] UKHL 46
[2008] 1 AC 440
, [30], he drew attention to McLachlin CJ’s observation for the Supreme Court of Canada in Charkaoui v. Canada (Minister of
Citizenship and Immigration)
[2007] 1 SCR 350
, [53], that a person whose liberty is in jeopardy must know the case he has to meet, and to Hamdi v Rumsfeld
[2004] USSC 2730
(2004), 533, where it was declared by O’Connor J for the majority in the US Supreme Court that for more than a century it has
been clear that parties whose rights are to be affected are entitled to be heard and that in order that they may enjoy that right
they must first be notified.’
"As appears from that passage, the requirement is fundamental to the rule of law. It applies not only to a person whose liberty is
in jeopardy but to anyone whose rights may be affected."
"The underlying purpose of without prejudice privilege is to encourage negotiated settlements as between parties. In the leading case
of Field v. Commissioner for Railways for New South Wales
[1957] HCA 92
(1957) 99 CLR 285
at 291, Dixon CJ, Webb, Kitto and Taylor JJ said:
"‘As a matter of policy the law has long excluded from evidence admissions by words or conduct made by parties in the course
of negotiations to settle litigation. The purpose is to enable parties engaged in an attempt to compromise litigation to communicate
with one another freely and without the embarrassment which the liability of their communications to be put in evidence subsequently
might impose upon them. The law relieves them of this embarrassment so that their negotiations to avoid litigation or to settle it
may go on unhampered.’
"This sentiment is echoed in the judgment of Griffiths LJ in Rush & Tompkins v. Greater London Council
[1988] UKHL 7
[1989] AC 1280
, at 1299, his Lordship describing the basis of the privilege as ‘founded on the public policy of encouraging litigants to settle
their differences rather than litigate them to a finish.’ Consequently, as the Court of Appeal in Unilever Plc v. Procter &
[1999] EWCA Civ 3027
; [2001] 1 All ER 783;
[2000] 1 WLR 2436
at 2448, concluded, the protection of admissions against interest is the most important practical effect of the privilege.
"As the Court of Appeal noted, the privilege is founded partly in public policy and partly in the agreement of the parties. Consequently,
the parties can agree, either expressly or by implication, on what is to be protected under the privilege. However, the words ‘without
prejudice’ in a communication cannot be used indiscriminately as a cloak over communications and documents where the privilege
is not appropriate. The net cast by without prejudice privilege is not without bounds:
"‘This form of privilege, however, is directed against the admission in evidence of express or implied admissions. It covers
admissions by words or conduct. For example, neither party can use the readiness of the other to negotiate as an implied admission.
It is not concerned with objective facts which may be ascertained during the course of negotiations. These may be proved by direct
evidence. But it is concerned with the use of the negotiations or what is said in the course of them as evidence by way of admission.’
(Field v. Commissioner for Railways at 291-2).
"It is also clear that without prejudice privilege is not merely restricted to documents explicitly marked as such. Nor is it restricted
solely to admissions against interest. To attempt to dissect out particular admissions from communications would not only be practically
difficult but contrary to the public policy of enabling the parties to ‘speak freely about all issues in the litigation both
factual and legal when seeking compromise and, for the purpose of establishing a basis of compromise, admitting certain facts.’
(Rush & Tompkins at 1300. See also Unilever v. Procter & Gamble at 2448-9.)
"What is clear, therefore, is that without prejudice privilege is directed at communications between the parties, primarily in the
form of admissions, although not necessarily limited to that. The underlying principle behind the privilege is to ensure that any
admissions or communications directed at settling a matter do not prejudice either party should such an admission, for example, be
admitted into evidence in any eventual trial." (Some footnotes omitted.)
"It is well established at common law that legal professional privilege may be waived by implication. The circumstances in which such
a waiver can arise were referred to by the majority of the High Court in Mann v. Carnell
[1999] HCA 66
(1999) 201 CLR 1.
Their Honours said at [28]:
"‘At common law, a person who would otherwise be entitled to the benefit of legal professional privilege may waive the privilege.
It has been observed that "waiver" is a vague term, used in many senses, and that it often requires further definition according
to the context. Legal professional privilege exists to protect the confidentiality of communications between lawyer and client. It
is the client who is entitled to the benefit of such confidentiality, and who may relinquish that entitlement. It is inconsistency
between the conduct of the client and maintenance of the confidentiality which effects a waiver of the privilege. Examples include
disclosure by a client of the client’s version of a communication with a lawyer, which entitles the lawyer to give his or her
account of the communication, or the institution of proceedings for professional negligence against a lawyer, in which the lawyer’s
evidence as to advice given to the client will be received.
"‘Waiver may be express or implied. Disputes as to implied waiver usually arise from the need to decide whether particular conduct
is inconsistent with the maintenance of the confidentiality which the privilege is intended to protect. When an affirmative answer
is given to such a question, it is sometimes said that waiver is "imputed by operation of law". This means that the law recognises
the inconsistency and determines its consequences, even though such consequences may not reflect the subjective intention of the
party who has lost the privilege. Thus, in Benecke v National Australia Bank (1993) 35 NSWLR 110, the client was held to have waived
privilege by giving evidence, in legal proceedings, concerning her instructions to a barrister in related proceedings, even though
she apparently believed she could prevent the barrister from giving the barrister’s version of those instructions. She did
not subjectively intend to abandon the privilege. She may not even have turned her mind to the question. However, her intentional
act was inconsistent with the maintenance of the confidentiality of the communication. What brings about the waiver is the inconsistency,
which the courts, where necessary informed by considerations of fairness, perceive, between the conduct of the client and maintenance
of the confidentiality; not some overriding principle of fairness operating at large.’
"The rationale for imputing waiver is illustrated in the following passage from the judgment of Gleeson CJ in Benecke v. National
Australia Bank (at 111-112), a case in which the appellant claimed that a settlement facilitated by her legal advisers was not authorised
"‘The law permits the search for the truth in legal proceedings to yield, in certain circumstances, to the public interest in
preserving the secrecy of communications between lawyer and client. In the present case, however, the appellant herself lifted the
veil of secrecy by giving her version of the communications. Thereafter, there was no reason in principle why the pursuit of the
truth should not take its course, or why the court should be inhibited in seeking to ascertain the true facts concerning those communications.’
"In the present case, as in the case of Benecke, it is argued that the circumstances give rise to ‘issue waiver’. In such
cases the conduct of a party who is otherwise entitled to a claim of privilege, impliedly waives it by putting the advice in issue.
In Adelaide Steamship Co Ltd v Spalvins
[1998] FCA 144
(1998) 81 FCR 360
, examples of a waiver of this nature appear from the joint judgment of the Full Court of the Federal Court (at 371):
"‘The usual type of case said to illustrate issue waiver at common law is one in which, in order to establish a particular right,
claim, or defence a party who previously has been legally advised, or has provided advice, needs to show that the advice so given
did, or did not, have a particular character, for example that it was or was not negligent where the claim is for professional negligence
against the adviser: see Kershaw v. Whelan
[1996] 1 WLR 358
; that it was not based on full information or was not meaningful, in an undue influence claim: see Inche Noriah v. Shaik Allie Bin
[1929] AC 127
at 130-131; see also Bester v. Perpetual Trustee
[1970] 3 NSWR 30
and Brusewitz v. Brown
[1923] NZLR 1106
or that it did not address or properly address a matter which, if addressed or properly addressed, would defeat or call into question
the right or claim asserted as in claims where the applicant has to demonstrate he or she acted with or without adequate knowledge
of a matter: see Thomason v. Campbelltown Municipal Council
(1939) 39 SR (NSW) 347
; Hongkong Bank of Australia v. Murphy
[1993] VicRp 83
[1993] 2 VR 419
; Pickering v. Edmunds
(1994) 63 SASR 357.
In other words the cases are ones in which, in the substantive proceeding brought, the privilege holder has put in issue the very
advice received.’
"The unfairness referred to in the cases is not assessed by having regard to general considerations of fairness, but rather involves
a consideration of the unfairness which arises because of the inconsistency in the particular circumstances of the case of putting
the legal advice in issue but attempting, at the same time, to exclude its proper examination by maintaining a claim of legal professional
"The question of waiver has arisen in some of the reported cases which required assessment of the reasonableness of a settlement relevant
to the litigation. It has been pointed out on a number of occasions that whether a waiver of privilege is to be imputed depends very
much on the particular circumstances of the case. Questions of degree may be involved." (Some footnotes omitted.)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (161 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter