URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASC/2025/167.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:05:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
INGLIS v POLICE [2025] SASC 167 (2 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Magistrates Appeal)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
INGLIS v POLICE
[2025] SASC 167
Judgment of the Honourable
Justice Gray
2 October 2025
MAGISTRATES - APPEAL AND REVIEW - SOUTH AUSTRALIA - APPEAL TO SUPREME
CRIMINAL LAW - APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - APPEAL AGAINST SENTENCE - GROUNDS
FOR INTERFERENCE - SENTENCE MANIFESTLY EXCESSIVE OR INADEQUATE
CRIMINAL LAW - SENTENCE - SENTENCING PROCEDURE - CONCURRENT, CUMULATIVE
AND ADDITIONAL SENTENCES
This is an appeal against a sentence imposed by a magistrate on 12 February
2025 for offences of disorderly behaviour, contrary to
Summary Offences Act 1953
(SA) and assaulting a prescribed emergency
worker, contrary to
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
The learned sentencing Magistrate imposed a sentence of imprisonment of 25
days for the disorderly behaviour offence, and a sentence
of imprisonment of 12
months for the assault offence. The resultant head sentence was 12 months and 20
days, allowing for partial
concurrency, which was then reduced on account of the
appellant’s guilty plea to seven months and 21 days imprisonment.
The appellant was directed to serve five months of that sentence in custody,
whereby the balance would be suspended upon entrance
into a bond to be of good
behaviour in the amount of $200 for 18 months.
The appellant complains that the sentence is manifestly excessive, and that
the learned sentencing Magistrate erred in principle by
considering the concept
of concurrency in the context of totality.
The respondent submits that the sentence was not manifestly excessive and
that the learned sentencing Magistrate afforded due weight
to considerations of
concurrency.
Held, dismissing the appeal:
was open to the learned sentencing Magistrate to impose the penalty complained
of. Having regard to the appellant’s poor
antecedent history, which may
warrant less scope for leniency, the principles of individualised justice, and
the gravity of the offending
itself, the sentence, albeit heavy, was within the
range of permissible sentences: at [30]-[32];
learned sentencing Magistrate did not err in imposing partial concurrency. It
was within discretion to consider the issue of concurrency
in the manner in
which his Honour did in the context of imposing a single sentence: at
Magistrates Court Act 1991
Summary Offences Act 1953
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Sentencing Act 2017
Criminal Law (Assaults on Prescribed
Emergency Workers) Amendment Act 2019
s 7, referred to.
Attorney-General (SA) v Tichy
(1982) 30 SASR 84
R v Copeland (No
[2010] SASCFC 61
; (2010) 108 SASR 398;
Cruise v The King
Director of Public Prosecutions (Vic) v Arvanitidis
[2008] VSCA
(2008) 202 A Crim R 300
Ettridge v Police (SA)
[2022] SASC 96
Hackett v The Queen
[2021] SASCA 32
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Hubbard v Police (SA)
[2023] SASC 182
Police (SA)
[2020] SASC 188
Kentwell v The Queen
[2014] HCA 37
(2014) 252 CLR 601;
Lane v The Queen
[2020] SASCFC 82
Commissioner of Police (SA)
[2024] SASC 147
Markarian v The Queen
[2005] HCA 25; (2005) 228 CLR 357;
McKenna v The Queen
[2022] SASCA
(1979) 23 SASR 98
Police (SA) v Chilton
(2014) 120 SASR 32
Wittwer v Police
[2004] SASC 226
Zacher v The Queen
[2022] SASCA 83
, considered.
INGLIS v POLICE
[2025] SASC 167
Criminal: Magistrates Appeal
Introduction
is an appeal against a sentence imposed by a magistrate on
12 February 2025. The appellant pleaded guilty to the offences of
disorderly behaviour, contrary to
Summary Offences Act 1953
(SA), and assaulting a prescribed emergency worker acting in the course of
official duties, contrary to
Criminal Law Consolidation
(SA) (‘CLCA’).
learned sentencing Magistrate imposed a single sentence pursuant to
Sentencing Act
(SA), being a total sentence of seven
months and 21 days imprisonment. Pursuant to
(SA), his Honour directed that the appellant serve five months of
the sentence in custody and suspended the remainder of the sentence
on condition
that the appellant enter into a bond to be of good behaviour in the amount of
$200 for 18 months upon release.
appellant appeals against the sentence. The appeal was instituted out of time,
however; an extension of time was not opposed
by the respondent and that
extension has been granted.
are two grounds of appeal:
the sentence(s) imposed were manifestly excessive, having regard to the
pre-discount starting points of 12 months on count 1
and 20 days on count 2;
the learned sentencing Magistrate erred by treating concurrency as solely being
a question related to totality, when in the circumstances
of this case the
question of concurrency arose more persuasively by reference to the factual
overlap between the offences.
respondent submits that the sentence was not manifestly excessive. The
respondent further submits that given the two offences
were not committed as one
course of conduct, and as they had different victims, and as the offence of
assaulting a prescribed emergency
worker was committed after the
appellant’s arrest, the learned sentencing Magistrate did not err in the
application of the
principle of concurrency.
factual basis upon which the appellant was sentenced was largely uncontentious.
The circumstances of the offending were that
at about 5:45pm on 22 December
2024, police were called to Whitmore Square because of a disturbance. Upon
arrival, police located
the appellant. The appellant was intoxicated and was
yelling and swearing. Police spoke with the appellant and warned the appellant
to calm down. Police observed that the appellant had a cut above his right
were again called to attend at Whitmore Square at about 7:15pm that day and the
same uniformed patrol attended, including
the victim of the assault charge,
Constable Simister. The appellant approached the police on that occasion and
was yelling and swearing.
called for an ambulance to treat the cut above the appellant’s right eye.
Upon the paramedic’s arrival, the appellant
became aggressive towards
them. The appellant continued to yell and swear. Members of the public were
nearby, including children.
appellant’s behaviour on the second occasion that police attended is the
subject of the disorderly behaviour charge. Because
of the disorderly
behaviour, police placed the appellant under arrest. The appellant was
handcuffed, and police placed the appellant
in a seated position on the ground.
At that point, without provocation or warning, the appellant used both of his
feet to kick Constable
Simister in his shins in what has been described as
a ‘push kick’ motion. The kick is said to have caused Constable
Simister immediate pain however, no injury was suffered, and the pain subsided
after about 15 minutes. The appellant was then conveyed
to hospital where he
was examined and cleared as being fit for custody. He was refused bail and
remanded in custody.
Principles on appeal
appeal is governed by
Magistrates Court Act 1991
(SA) and is
in the nature of a rehearing pursuant to r 191.1 of the
Joint Criminal Rules
(SA). To interfere with the exercise of a sentencing discretion there
must be a demonstrated error of the kind described in
House v The
The approach to
be adopted was explained by White J in
Wittwer v Police
in which it was
The imposition of
a sentence involves an exercise of judicial discretion. This Court interferes
with the exercise of that discretion
only when it is satisfied that the
sentencing Magistrate has acted upon some wrong principle, or [if it] has
allowed irrelevant considerations
to influence it, or it has failed to have
regard to a relevant consideration or alternatively, even though no precise
error can be
identified, the sentence is so obviously unreasonable or unjust
that it can be said that there must have been a failure to exercise
discretion properly.
as Kourakis CJ held in
Police (SA) v
mischiefs which this Court must avoid in sentencing appeals are, on the one
hand, too readily imagining error in the interstices
of the necessarily economic
sentencing remarks of busy Magistrates and, on the other, too readily excusing
error as a merely infelicitous
expression of no consequence. The mischiefs can
be avoided by fidelity to, and a rigorous application of, the prescript in
House v The King.
are two distinct types of error frequently relied upon as the basis for
intervention with a discretionary judgment by an appellate
court such as occurs
on an appeal against sentence. These were summarised in
Markarian v The
in which Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne and Callinan JJ
As with other
discretionary judgments, the inquiry on an appeal against sentence is identified
in the well-known passage in the joint
reasons of Dixon, Evatt and
McTiernan JJ in
House v The King
, itself an appeal against sentence.
Thus is specific error shown? (Has there been some error of principle? Has the
sentencer allowed
extraneous or irrelevant matters to guide or affect the
decision? Have the facts been mistaken? Has the sentencer not taken some
material consideration into account?) Or if specific error is not shown, is the
result embodied in the order unreasonable or plainly
unjust? It is this last
kind of error that is usually described, in an offender's appeal, as "manifest
excess", or in a prosecution
appeal, as “manifest inadequacy”.
(citations omitted)
Manifest excess
establish that the sentence imposed was manifestly excessive, the appellant must
establish that the sentence was unreasonable
or plainly unjust such that it can
be inferred that the outcome has been attended by
That the appellate court
would have imposed a different sentence is insufficient to interfere with the
sentence on appeal. Rather,
the sentence must be outside the permissible range
of sentences for the offender and the
It is necessary to
consider whether the sentence was plainly unreasonable or unjust in the
circumstances, such that it fell outside
the sentencing discretion available to
the learned sentencing Magistrate.
following factors are to be considered in determining whether the sentence
imposed was manifestly
maximum sentence prescribed by law for the offence.
standards of sentence customarily observed for offences of the kind in
place which the criminal conduct occupies in the scale of seriousness of crimes
of that type.
personal circumstances of the offender.
– manifest excess
Submissions of the parties
appellant notes that s 20AA was inserted into the CLCA on
3 October 2019.
the offence provision under consideration is relatively new and authorities as
to sentencing standards are limited compared
to some other offences. The
amendments occasioned a material increase in the maximum penalty to five years
imprisonment.
appellant refers to the decisions of
McKenna v The Queen
Zacher v The Queen
Ettridge v Police
Hubbard v Police
The submission advanced by the appellant was that, whilst not seeking to
trivialise or otherwise diminish the seriousness of committing
an assault on
police, the conduct constituting the offence in this case represented offending
at the lower end of the scale of objective
seriousness, more comparable to the
circumstances in
than to those considered in
appellant submitted that the assault committed by the appellant at a time that
he was handcuffed involved one kick to the shin
which caused immediate but
temporary pain and no other ill effects, and as such was at the more benign end
of the scale of objective
seriousness for offences of assaulting a prescribed
emergency worker. The appellant points to there being no material ongoing
by reason of the offender being handcuffed, and to the offending being
impetuous rather than vicious, and that the action included
was highly likely to
not be capable of causing any meaningful
appellant submitted that the starting point of 12 months imprisonment for the
assault offence was not within the range of available
sentencing options. It
was also submitted that it was not even close to that
relation to manifest excess, the respondent referred to the general principles
concerning this ground, including the gravity of
the offending, the sentencing
standards of the offence of an assault on a prescribed emergency worker, and to
the personal circumstances
of the offender.
relation to the gravity of the offending, the respondent submitted:
offending was entirely unprovoked and was an example of gratuitous
offending was committed upon a police officer acting in the course of his
official duties who was only engaging with the appellant
as a result of his
other offending behaviour;
offending conduct occurred whilst in police custody for disorderly
fact that the appellant was under the influence of alcohol (though this goes
someway in explaining the behaviour) does not mitigate
the offending. In fact,
the various victims of the appellant’s offending were likely to be more
frightened as a result; and,
offending caused the victim pain.
a consequence of the above matters, the respondent submitted that, whilst the
circumstances indicate that the offending was not
at the upper end of the scale
of objective seriousness, it was also not at the very lower end.
respondent also submitted in relation to sentencing standards for the assault
that the maximum penalty of five years indicates
the seriousness that Parliament
ascribes to the type of criminal conduct involved. Further, reliance was placed
upon the decision
Director of Public Prosecutions (Vic) v Arvanitidis
in which Redlich JA
serious offence to assault police in the execution of their duties ordinarily
requiring a significant element of deterrence
in the sentence to be imposed.
The courage of police officers in protecting lives and property is something
upon which the community
depends. It is incumbent on the Court to impose
appropriate sentences to demonstrate support for the authority for police
who undertake a difficult, and dangerous task in the execution of their
duties in maintaining law and order. Ambulance officers,
and others performing
such essential duties, are to receive similar measure of support and protection.
Where the offender knows or
ought to have known the victim was discharging a
public duty of this sort, a more severe sentence will usually be imposed to
such person’s violent assaults on them when performing their
was also made to the decision in
Cruise v The
with the appellant
acknowledging that intoxication and personal dysfunction are matters bearing
upon an assessment of weight to be
placed on an offender’s personal
circumstances.
relation to the circumstances of the offender, the respondent submits
appellant was a 33-year-old Indigenous man who had lived an unstable existence
and was experiencing alcoholism and housing
appellant had only just been released the same day that he committed the
offences and that this called for a strongly deterrent
appellant had a large number of “public nuisance” convictions,
including, 40 counts of disorderly behaviour from 2012
to 2024, urinating in a
public place, possessing liquor in public, loitering, damaging property and
offensive language;
addition to the assault police matter in 2024, the appellant also had prior
convictions for spitting in 2023 and nine convictions
for resisting police from
2011 to 2024, three convictions for hindering police from 2011 to 2023, and a
conviction for fighting from
2016, a basic assault in 2023 and 2020 and another
assault police conviction in 2012; and,
appellant’s history of alcohol-fuelled violence against police despite his
unfortunate personal circumstances gave rise
to the requirement for a strongly
deterrent penalty.
respondent referred to the five-year maximum penalty prescribed by law, the
standards of sentencing reserved for those offences
and the place of the
criminal conduct occupied in the scale of objective seriousness of the crimes of
that type, and the personal
circumstances of the appellant. Having regard to
those matters, the respondent submitted that the sentence imposed by the learned
sentencing Magistrate was not outside the permissible range of sentences for the
appellant and the offence.
Consideration
this Court has previously observed, where an offender has a poor prior criminal
record or has previously committed offences of
a similar nature, the offence
will be rendered more serious than may otherwise be the case. A penalty that is
severe but still proportionate
can be expected. This does not mean that a
severe penalty is being imposed because the previous offending has been
revisited, but
rather the severity of the penalty reflects that there is less
scope for leniency.
can also be expected that, generally, the imposition of an immediate term of
imprisonment for repeat offending of this kind by
the appellant would be
expected. It can be expected that there is a need for personal deterrence.
difficulty the learned sentencing Magistrate was faced with is that the type of
offending committed in the circumstances of this
case, by this appellant, was
very similar to the form of offending that the appellant had previously engaged
in. Further, the appellant
had, on the day of this offending, just been
released from custody for similar offending. I find that this context required
which provided personal deterrence.
considering whether or not the sentence imposed involved an outcome error, I
have had regard to the observations of this Court
Hackett v The Queen
In that case, the Court of Appeal
administration of the criminal law involves individualised justice. The
imposition of a just sentence on an offender in a particular
case is an exercise
of judicial discretion concerned with doing justice in that case. The exercise
of the discretion that the law
reposes in a sentencing judge does not yield a
single correct sentence. Absent a specific error it is only if the sentence is
to be “unreasonable or plainly unjust” that a challenge of
manifest excess will succeed. A sentence which is unreasonable
or plainly unjust
for no reason other than that it is manifestly too long or too short is a
sentence which has not been imposed according
to rules of reason and justice. It
is not sufficient for this court to conclude that it would have come to a
different decision to
the one reached by the sentencing judge. The judgment is a
discretionary one and what is required is that the sentencing judge must
into account all relevant (and only relevant) considerations in forming the
conclusions reached. Judges at first instance are
to be allowed as much
flexibility in sentencing as is consonant with consistency of approach and as
accords with the statutory regime
that applies. To observe that a sentence is
“very heavy” when compared with other sentences is not, without
conclude that it exceeded the bounds of the sentencing judge’s
discretion.
(citations omitted)
sentence imposed in this case, I would find, reflects the type of sentence
referred to by the Court of Appeal in
as being one which
represented individualised justice. The sentence was at the upper end of the
range of permissible sentencing options.
However, I would not conclude that it
exceeds the bounds of the learned sentencing Magistrate’s discretion.
Looking at the
result alone, it is a heavy sentence. However, the sentence was
not manifestly excessive having regard to the maximum penalty prescribed
for the offence, and other relevant factors.
accepting that the place which the charged conduct occupied in the scale of
objective seriousness for this offence is at the
lower end, this does not
demonstrate that the sentence was manifestly excessive having regard to the
other matters relevant to the
exercise of the sentencing discretion. There is
little scope for leniency in respect of this offender in relation to this
given the significant history of similar offending.
learned sentencing Magistrate in imposing this sentence, imposed a sentence
which represented individualised
This is apparent from
the consideration given to the prior offending, the need to protect the
community through general and specific
deterrence, and the need to promote
rehabilitation. The regard had to the appropriateness of partially suspending
the sentence,
and the terms of the bond imposed which included conditions that
the appellant undergo assessment and participate in programs and
treatment as
directed by his supervising officer including in respect of alcohol, demonstrate
that the learned sentencing Magistrate
had appropriate regard to the individual
circumstances of this offender. Looking at the outcome of the sentencing
process, the sentence
is not unreasonable or plainly unjust.
dismiss ground 1 of the appeal.
concurrency
Submissions of the parties
appellant submitted that the two offences in this case were separated by a short
space of time and were underpinned by a common
cause, namely, the excessive
consumption of alcohol. Given the fleeting and opportunistic nature of the
assault upon police and
that the offence of disorderly conduct was considered by
the learned sentencing Magistrate to be effectively overwhelmed by that
the appellant submitted that a wholly concurrent penalty was appropriate.
appellant referred to the principles in
Attorney-General (SA) v Tichy
which Wells J
Where there
are truly two or more incursions into criminal conduct, consecutive sentences
will generally be appropriate. Where, whatever
the number of technically
identifiable offences committed, the prisoner was truly engaged upon one
multi-faceted course of criminal
conduct, the judge is likely to find concurrent
sentences just and convenient.
was also had to the reasoning of Kourakis J (as his Honour then was) in
Copeland (No 2)
appellant submits that the learned sentencing Magistrate failed to have any
regard to these principles, instead relying solely
on totality as a basis to
afford the relatively meagre five days’ concurrency between the notional
starting points for the
two offences. It is submitted that the failure to have
regard to the correct principle amounts to an error of approach and calls
the independent exercise of this Court’s sentencing discretion.
relation to ground 2 and the issue of concurrency, the respondent relied upon
the decision of
Lane v The Queen
in which Livesey J (as his Honour then
has been recognised as having two aspects. The first entails a final review or
check to ensure that the overall punishment
is proportionate to the
circumstances of the offending and the offender. In seeking to achieve
proportionality a sentencing Judge
has a number of tools and a broad discretion.
In connection with this aspect of totality, these tools include concurrency,
one or more of the sentences, and the imposition of a single sentence
Sentencing Act 2017
(citations omitted)
respondent submitted that there was no error, bearing in mind the discretionary
nature of the power and that the learned sentencing
Magistrate allowed partial
concurrency of five days between the two offences. The respondent further
submitted that the two offences
were not committed as one “course of
conduct” as they had different victims and the assault police occurred
arrest. The respondent also contended that although the offences
occurred close in time and were underpinned by the appellant’s
use, they were separate incursions into criminal
Consideration
relevant passage of the learned sentencing Magistrate’s remarks on penalty
provides as
of count one, the disorderly behaviour, were it not for your guilty plea, I
would have imposed a sentence of 25 days’
imprisonment and, for reasons of
totality, I would have made that sentence partially concurrent with the sentence
for the assault,
resulting in a total sentence of 12 months and 20 days.
I reduce that by 40 per cent on account of your guilty pleas and therefore
impose a single sentence for both counts of seven months
and 21 days
imprisonment.
passage occurs at the commencement of the part of the learned sentencing
Magistrate’s remarks which indicates the duration
of the sentence to be
imposed in respect of each offence. The learned sentencing Magistrate then
reduces those sentences on account
of the guilty plea and imposes a single
sentence for both counts of seven months and 21 days imprisonment.
was, in the circumstances of this case, in my view, factual matters upon which
it was open for the learned sentencing Magistrate
to rely in determining to make
the sentences only partially concurrent. Partial concurrency, even limited to
five days, was within
the learned sentencing Magistrate’s discretion. The
first offence of disorderly conduct occurred prior to the arrest of the
appellant and was brought about as a result of the appellant’s behaviour
upon police’s second attendance at Whitmore
Square, and upon attendance of
the paramedics who were attempting to treat the cut above the appellant’s
eye. This conduct
can be considered as separate and distinct from the later
offence of assaulting Constable Simister. That conduct occurred after
arrest. Partial concurrency was within the learned sentencing
Magistrate’s discretion given these separate incursions,
albeit there was
a shared a temporal nexus, and I would not read the learned sentencing
Magistrate’s remarks which make reference
to totality as revealing a
process error or suggesting that the learned sentencing Magistrate did not
consider the relevant factual
my view, there was no process error in the manner in which the learned
sentencing Magistrate exercised his Honour’s discretion
to make the
sentences partially concurrent. It was within the learned sentencing
Magistrate’s discretion to consider the issue
of concurrency in the manner
in which his Honour did, and there is no process error in the reference to
Whilst the appellant
refers to the extent of the concurrency being limited to five days as being
“relatively meagre”,
the relative amount of concurrency does not in
and of itself demonstrate a process error of the type which the appellant seeks
identify. The sentencing remarks in my view need to be read as a whole, and
in the context of the brief explanation of the reasons
for the imposition of a
single sentence.
a fair reading of the learned sentencing Magistrate’s decision, his Honour
considered both the question of concurrency and
the question of totality.
Although it would have been open to the learned sentencing Magistrate to
consider concurrency first, prior
to totality by reference to the factual
matrix, it was not an error to consider the question of concurrency when
applying the principle
of totality. I would not read the error that the
appellant complains of into the learned sentencing Magistrate’s sentencing
remarks. The learned sentencing Magistrate’s decision provides for
partial concurrency and indicates that both concurrency
and totality were
considered. There is no complaint of inadequate reasons.
dismiss ground 2 of the appeal.
Conclusion and orders
appeal is dismissed.
will hear from the parties as to any other
Notice of Appeal (FDN 1) and
Appeal Grounds (FDN 3), as orally amended: see Appeal Transcript
(‘AT’) at T2.29-36 and
Record of Outcome dated 24 June 2025 (FDN 11)
at 2, Order 2. The starting point in the sentencing remarks in respect of count
was 25 days.
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
at 504-5 (Dixon, Evatt and McTiernan JJ).
Wittwer v Police
Police (SA) v Chilton
[2014] SASCFC 76
(2014) 120 SASR 32
(Kourakis CJ, David J
Markarian v The Queen
[2005] HCA 25; (2005) 228 CLR 357 at 370-1, [25] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne
and Callinan JJ).
Kentwell v The Queen
[2014] HCA 37
; (2014) 252 CLR 601 at 615,
(French CJ, Hayne, Bell and Keane
Kentwell v The Queen
[2014] HCA 37
; (2014) 252 CLR 601 at 615,
(French CJ, Hayne, Bell and
at 99 (King CJ, White and Mohr JJ agreeing).
Criminal Law
Consolidation (Assaults on Prescribed Emergency Workers) Amendment Act 2019
McKenna v The Queen
[2022] SASCA 10 (Livesey
P, Lovell and S Doyle JJA).
Zacher v The Queen
[2022] SASCA 83 (S
Doyle, Bleby and David JJA).
Ettridge v Police
[2022] SASC 96 (McDonald
Hubbard v Police
[2023] SASC 182 (Kimber
Appellant’s Written
Submissions (FDN 5) (‘AWS’) at [23].
AWS at [25].
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Vic) v Arvanitidis
[2008] VSCA 189
(2008) 202 A Crim R 300
(Redlich JA, Buchanan and Nettle JJA agreeing).
Cruise v The King
[2025] SASCA 59
(Kourakis CJ, S Doyle JA agreeing).
Respondent’s Written
Submissions (FDN 9) at [30]-[34]. See also, Affidavit of Lauren Cuma affirmed 1
July 2025 (FDN 12) at
6-34 (Annexure LC1).
Affidavit of Jonathan Peter
Stevens dated 12 March 2025 (FDN 4).
Jones v Police (SA)
[2020] SASC 188
(Nicholson J);
Mahon v Commissioner of Police
[2024] SASC 147
at 17 (Stanley J).
Hackett v The Queen
[2021] SASCA 32 (Kelly
P, Lovell and Livesey JJA).
Hackett v The Queen
[2021] SASCA 32
(Kelly P, Lovell and Livesey JJA).
Appeal Book (FDN 10)
(‘AB’) at 2-3 (Remarks on Penalty of Magistrate Clover dated 12
February 2025).
Attorney-General (SA) v
(1982) 30 SASR 84
at 93 (Wells J, King CJ and Cox J agreeing).
R v Copeland (No 2)
[2010] SASCFC 61
; (2010) 108 SASR 398 at 424-6,
(Kourakis J). See
also at 419-21, [82]-[87] (White J).
Lane v The Queen
[2020] SASCFC 82
(Livesey J (Livesey and Kelly JJ agreeing with Bleby
J)). See also
R v Copeland (No 2)
[2010] SASCFC 61
; (2010) 108 SASR
AB at 9 (Remarks on Penalty
of Magistrate Clover dated 12 February 2025).
Lane v The Queen
[2020] SASCFC 82
(Livesey J (Livesey and Kelly JJ agreeing with Bleby
J). See also
R v Copeland (No 2)
[2010] SASCFC 61
; (2010) 108 SASR
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (400 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter