URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCT/2016/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Stephenson v Return to Work SA (Baptist Care (SA) Inc) [2016] SAWCT 3 (29 January 2016)
Stephenson v Return to Work SA (Baptist Care (SA) Inc)
[2016] SAWCT 3
WORKERS COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
STEPHENSON, Paul
Judicial Determination
4662, 4998, 5571 and 5749 of 2015
HEARING DATE:
January 2016
JUDGMENT OF:
His Honour Deputy President Judge PD
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Application for orders that proceedings
be stayed pending attendance by a worker at medical examinations - Whether
compensating authority
established grounds for such orders - Whether application
for leave to serve a summons for production of medical records should be
on the grounds that it was oppressive or fishing - Whether an order should be
made for disclosure by a worker of the identity
of his treating dentists -
Whether an application for leave to serve a summons for production on
unidentified treating dentists should
be granted - Application for stay orders
refused – Application for leave to serve summons for production of medical
declined in the terms sought but intimated that leave would be granted
if summons suitably redrawn - Application for order for disclosure
of identity
of treating dentists denied as beyond power - Application for leave to serve
summons on unidentified treating dentists
declined - Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1986 - Rules 22 and 23 Workers Compensation Tribunal Rules 2009
Mitsubishi Motors Australia Ltd v Warren
[1999] SAWCT
Zielinski v WorkCover Corporation
[2003] SAWCT 94.
WorkCover Corporation
[2007] SAWCT 49.
Mastromihalis v Return to Work
[2015] SAWCT 67.
Drysdale v Mitsubishi Motors Australia Ltd
[1988] SAWCT 18.
Little v WorkCover Corporation
[1999] SAWCT
Juett v Return to Work SA
[2016] SAWCT 2.
Bacciarelli v
State of South Australia
[2008] SAWCT
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr
Respondent: Mr Coppola
Solicitors:
Applicant: Palios Meegan
Respondent: Minter Ellison
application for directions filed 2 December 2015, Gallagher Bassett Services Pty
Ltd (“the compensating authority”),
as agents for Return to Work SA,
sought orders in relation to four disputes before the Tribunal.
orders sought were:
(1) that each
dispute be stayed under r 23 of the
Workers Compensation Tribunal Rules
(“the Rules”) pending the attendance by Mr Stephenson
(“the worker”) on Dr Reid and Dr Tomich for medical
examinations;
(2) that leave
be granted to the compensating authority to summons the clinical notes of the
worker’s treating general practitioner
Dr Robin-Karas;
(3) that the
worker disclose to the compensating authority the identity of all of his
treating dentist(s);
(4) that leave
be granted to the compensating authority to summons the clinical notes of the
worker’s treating dentist(s).
main focus of this decision is on the first of the orders sought. Two claims for
impairments alleged to have been suffered as
a sequel to a compensable back
injury were served on the compensating authority on 19 May 2015. The claims were
accompanied by expert
reports obtained by the worker which supported the
impairment claims. The compensating authority rejected the claims after having
regard to those reports and without referring the worker to obtain its own
expert reports. Early in the conciliation process, on
20 July 2015, the
compensating authority advised the worker of arrangements it had made for the
examination of the worker by two
experts of its choosing. The worker failed to
attend the examinations. The compensating authority now seeks the intervention
Tribunal to facilitate that attendance.
question is whether, in the circumstances, the Tribunal should find that the
compensating authority has established to the satisfaction
of the Tribunal that
the examinations are reasonably sought and that the intervention of the Tribunal
is reasonably required.
Dispute background
information below has been drawn from the proceedings filed in the dispute, the
Books of Documents, and the affidavit of Ms Billias
filed on behalf of the
compensating authority.
worker suffered a back injury during the course of his employment on 15 January
2009. The condition was accepted as compensable
and the worker commenced
receiving weekly payments of income maintenance. Some months later the worker
was placed on a medication
regime which included opioids and
antidepressants.
4662/2015 arose from a determination by the compensating authority dated 4 June
2015 to reject a claim made by the worker
on 19 May 2015 for conditions
described as “dry mouth, bruxism, dental decay, periodontal disease,
impairment of mastication
and deglutition” (“the dental
conditions”). The claim was accompanied by a report of Professor Goss
dated 15 May
2005 prepared at the request of the solicitors for the worker. In
the opinion of Professor Goss, the bruxism was a direct consequence
worker’s psychological disorders, and the dry mouth was the lead factor in
the periodontal disease and decay. Also,
that whilst marijuana, which the worker
had reported using since teenage years, was a potent source of dry mouth, it was
the escalation
in its use since the accident that served to seriously dry out
the worker’s mouth. Professor Goss stated that, in accordance
with the AMA
Guides, the worker had a whole person impairment (WPI) of 10% with respect to
mastication and deglutition.
determination rejected the claims on the basis that the causative psychological
condition had not been accepted as compensable,
and that the dry mouth was the
result of prolonged marijuana use since teenage years. The determination also
stated, incorrectly,
that the report of Professor Goss did not indicate that the
worker had suffered from impairment of mastication or deglutition.
4998/2015 arose from a determination by the compensating authority dated 10 June
2015 to reject a claim made on 19 May 2015
by the worker with respect to
“upper and lower gastric disease” (“the digestive
conditions”). The worker
had provided two medical reports of Dr
D’Onise in support of the claim, in one of which the opinion was expressed
worker suffered a 14% WPI due to the digestive conditions. The
determination noted that one of the reports stated that the gastric
were connected with high doses of a drug prescribed with respect to a
psychological condition. The claim was rejected on
the basis that the worker did
not have an accepted claim for any psychological disorders.
worker lodged notices of dispute in relation to each determination. The grounds
of dispute included that the compensating authority
had failed to properly
investigate the impairment claims. In furtherance of that view, the worker
issued applications for expedited
determination (“AEDs”) in relation
to each of the claims.
determination of the AEDs, the solicitors for the worker received a medical
report of Dr Frayne dated 12 June 2015, which
expressed the opinion that the
worker suffered from a 5% WPI in relation to the dental conditions. That report
was served on the
compensating authority. Also, the alleged psychological
condition was accepted as compensable by consent orders on 23 June 2015.
AED relating to the digestive conditions was heard by a conciliation officer on
24 June 2015, who took the view that the compensating
authority had been obliged
to determine the claim made on 19 May 2015 as a claim for compensation under s
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Act”), but had failed to do so. The conciliation officer determined to
reject the claim for the digestive conditions
in light of the causation issues
raised by the compensating authority. The worker lodged dispute no 5571/2015
with respect to this
determination.
second AED relating to the dental conditions was heard by a conciliation officer
on 24 June 2015 who dismissed the application
on the ground that there was no
undue delay. The worker applied for an order under s 88H of the Act that the
dismissal decision be
set aside in the interests of justice. A Deputy President
granted that application on 25 June 2015. He set aside the order of the
conciliation officer, and in light of the uncertainty as to the extent of any
WPI entitlement, having regard to the reports of Professor
Goss and Dr Frayne,
determined that the s 43 claim with respect to the dental conditions should be
rejected. The worker lodged dispute
no 5749/2015 in relation to this
determination.
relevant matters deposed to by Ms Billias in relation to the making of the
contentious medical appointments by the compensating
authority included
August 2014 the compensating authority had been advised by a letter received
from Dr Robin-Karas that the doctor could not
comply with a request to provide a
report as authority to do so had been withdrawn by the worker’s
solicitors;
(2) on 20 July
2015 the compensating authority advised the solicitors for the worker of
arrangements made for the worker to attend
upon Dr Reid, a gastro-intestinal
physician, and Dr Tomich, an ear nose and throat specialist, at 10:30am and
3:30pm respectively
on 5 August 2015;
(3) on 23 July
2015 the solicitors for the worker responded by seeking advice as to the basis
upon which the compensating authority
asserted it had authority to obtain such
assessments;
(4) on 30 July
2015 the solicitors for the compensating authority advised that the appointments
were foreshadowed at a dispute management
conference on 9 July 2015, and were
for the purpose of obtaining opinions on the disputed dental and digestive
claims, and to assess
alleged impairments. It was requested that the worker
confirm that he would attend the appointments and submit to the proposed
examinations;
(5) on 31 July
2015 the solicitors for the worker advised that, due to his work injuries, the
worker was physically and emotionally
incapable of attending more than one
appointment a day, but that he was prepared to attend the appointment on 5
August 2015 with
Dr Tomich, but was not prepared to attend an appointment
with Dr Reid on the same date;
(6) on 5 August
2015, the solicitors for the compensating authority wrote to the solicitors for
the worker and advised that the appointment
with Dr Reid had been rescheduled
for 2 September 2015. Confirmation was sought as to whether the worker would
attend and submit
to the examination.
was no subsequent communication from the solicitors for the worker as to whether
he would attend the appointments. In due course
it was ascertained that he did
not attend either of them.
disputes were referred to judicial determination on 22 October 2015. On 20
November 2015, the disputes were listed for hearing
on Wednesday, 13 April
23 November 2015, the worker lodged a statement of issues encompassing
causation, whether and to what extent there were permanent
impairments, and
whether any such impairments should be combined with impairments arising from
the initial compensable injury of
15 January 2009, or alternatively, whether
there were two or more compensable injuries in the same calendar year which
treated together as one injury.
application for directions the subject of this decision was filed on
2 December 2015.
Whether the Tribunal should intervene with respect to the
medical appointments
Submissions
compensating authority contended it was unarguably entitled to orders
facilitating the medical examinations. It submitted that
the worker’s
conduct in not attending the two appointments, without explanation or notice,
after indicating through his solicitors
that he would attend if the appointments
were arranged on separate days, was unreasonable. It submitted that the worker,
having failed
at the time he initially received notice of the proposed
appointments to raise the objections now made as to the reasonableness of
requests, was himself acting unreasonably in resisting the application for
intervention by the Tribunal, and further, that the
worker made outrageous, nit
picking and unnecessarily technical submissions in support of his
compensating authority contended it was not the law that it should have arranged
independent examinations before making the disputed
determinations, particularly
given the large influx of s 43 claims made under the Act over the period leading
up to the repeal of
the Act on 1 July 2015. Further that it could not be
said that there was undue delay in advising of the appointments on 20 July 2015,
given the claims were only made on 19 May 2015.
worker submitted that it was incumbent on the compensating authority to produce
affidavit evidence capable of establishing, to
the satisfaction of the Tribunal,
both that the medical examinations were reasonably required, and that the
intervention of the Tribunal
was reasonably sought. He submitted no explanation
had been given as to why the compensating authority had not exercised its rights
to require that the proposed examinations take place before making its
determinations under s 53 of the Act, or as to why they were
required now, so
soon after the determinations, other than by asserting that it wished to obtain
opinions in relation to the claims
and assessments of permanent
impairment.
The worker contended
that, in the circumstances, it could only be inferred that the compensating
authority now sought an order facilitating
examinations because he had chosen to
dispute the determinations.
Legal principles
compensating authority sought the intervention of the Tribunal under r 23 of the
Rules. That rule relevantly provides that where
notice for medical examination
of a person is served under the rule, and the person does not attend, the
Tribunal may, upon an application
for directions, stay the proceedings or make
such other order or direction as is appropriate. There was no suggestion that
had not been given to the worker in accordance with the rule.
general approach to be taken by the Tribunal to applications for its
intervention to facilitate attendance at medical examinations
was set out in the
Full Tribunal decision of
Mitsubishi Motors Australia Ltd v
This was at a time
before the promulgation of r 23 and its predecessor, when the Tribunal took the
view that s 53(2) of the Act bestowed
a general power on a compensating
authority to require a worker to submit to a medical examination. After
observing that the question
as to whether it was reasonable to direct that a
worker attend a medical examination arranged by a compensating authority was a
of fact, the Tribunal said:
“... it is for the party who is requesting the
direction to establish to the satisfaction of the Tribunal that the examination
is reasonably required and that the intervention of the Tribunal is reasonably
sought. If on the face of it the examination is reasonably
sought and the
intervention is reasonably required it is for the worker to establish that in
the particular circumstances the Tribunal
should nonetheless refuse to
intervene. The issue of reasonableness both as to the seeking of the examination
and the intervention
of the Tribunal may relate to the conduct of the litigation
by the parties and in particular the compensating authority which is
seeking the
examination... In other cases reasonableness may turn on the facts in existence
at the time of the request and in particular
whether new facts have come to
light following the compensating authority’s determination which may
materially influence the
case which the compensating authority is required to
23 was promulgated subsequently.
The general approach taken in
has continued to be applied with
respect to the operation of r 23:
Lubner v WorkCover
Corporation;
Zielinski v WorkCover
Corporation
Neither party
contended for any other approach.
approach of the Tribunal to the obtaining of medical reports has been recently
Mastromihalis v Return to Work
to be that:
“...the Tribunal’s usual practice has been
to reasonably allow all parties to gather further evidence during the
proceedings
which they believe will assist their case...”
and that the Tribunal
“...has been reluctant to restrict a respondent’s ability to obtain
additional medical evidence post their decision and
do not disagree with that statement as a general proposition, but it must be
applied having regard to the facts of each case. The
facts in this case require
consideration of the requests in the context of their close proximity to the s
53 investigation and the
fact that they were then not considered necessary.
Regard must be had to the principles articulated in
acknowledged in
Mastromihalis
Consideration
do not consider that the worker’s conduct consequent upon being advised of
the appointments is a relevant matter in relation
to the reasonableness of the
request that he attend the examinations. I accept that his conduct, through his
solicitors, in giving
the impression that he would attend the appointments if
they were not on the same day, thus inducing the compensating authority to
re-arrange one of them, and in failing to attend either appointment without any
advice to the compensating authority or its solicitors
of his intentions in that
regard, was conduct that was discourteous and disingenuous. The compensating
authority and its solicitors
were entitled to feel aggrieved. That conduct may
provide grounds for the making of an application that the worker or his
pay the wasted costs incurred with respect to the missed appointments
and their re-arrangement. However, it does not, in my view,
provide a ground
upon which the Tribunal might be satisfied that the orders sought are
reasonable. The request for attendance at
the medical examinations was made
before the impugned conduct, and in the circumstances, I consider that the only
matters relevant
to the reasonableness of the requests are events up to the date
the requests were made.
essence, the case put by the compensating authority was that, given there was no
prejudice to the worker due to delay, the request
that he attend the
examinations, accompanied by the explanation that they were for the purpose of
obtaining opinions on the claims
made and on the assessment of identified
impairments, should be considered to be reasonably made, and to reasonably
require the intervention
of the Tribunal given his failure to attend.
is correct, as contended by the compensating authority, that it is not the law
that it is unable to obtain an order facilitating
the examinations simply
because it chose not to obtain reports as part of an investigation before the
determinations were made. Whether
or not an order will be made despite reports
not being obtained before a determination will depend on the circumstances of
What the law requires is that, when the intervention of the Tribunal
is sought to facilitate the attendance by a worker at an examination,
compensating authority must establish to the satisfaction of the Tribunal that
the examinations are reasonably required, and
that the intervention of the
Tribunal is reasonably sought.
considering whether it is so satisfied, the Tribunal should have regard to the
responsibility placed upon a compensating authority
by s 53(1) of the Act which
requires that it “...shall make such investigations and inquiries as it
thinks necessary to determine
the claim.” As stated in earlier decisions
of the Tribunal, the compensating authority is provided with extensive
investigative
powers to assist it in evaluating whether or not a claim for
compensation should be accepted or rejected. There is an attendant
responsibility
to conduct a proper investigation of a claim. In
Mitsubishi Motors Australia
the Tribunal observed
that an investigation might reveal grounds upon which a compensating authority,
initially inclined to reject
a claim, ought nevertheless to accept it, or as to
why a worker should accept the correctness of a rejection without dispute. The
investigative powers vested in the compensating authority for this purpose,
which include the power under s 53(2) of the Act to require
that a worker attend
a medical examination, were said to be important powers, which, used
appropriately, may assist a compensating
authority to avoid the making of
ill-considered or illinformed decisions, which in turn may assist in promoting
one of the objects
of the Act, being the reduction of litigation and adversarial
contests to the greatest possible extent. A similar approach was also
Little v WorkCover
Corporation
endorsed by the Full Tribunal in
these cases illustrate, where a compensating authority has chosen, as it is
entitled to do in accordance with s 53(1) of the Act,
to determine a claim
without exercising its powers under s 53(2) to obtain its own expert reports,
but has subsequently requested
a worker to attend examinations to obtain such
reports, the Tribunal may inquire into the reasons, if any, for the compensating
deciding that it has become necessary to obtain such reports, given
that it was apparently considered not necessary to do so prior
to making the
determination. Depending upon the circumstances, the Tribunal may not be
satisfied as to the reasonableness of a request
for attendance at an examination
upon the basis of a bald assertion of an entitlement to arrange an examination
so as to now obtain
report which better enables the compensating authority to
test the worker’s case.
Tribunal is not bound by the rules of evidence, and must act in accordance with
equity, good conscience and the merits of the
. Accordingly, in
considering whether it is satisfied that the proposed examinations are required,
it may have regard to any relevant
material, including affidavit evidence, the
dispute documentation lodged with the Tribunal, and its view as to the conduct
parties in the course of the proceedings. It is not limited to a
consideration of only affidavit evidence, as the worker suggested.
course of events leading up to the making of the requests for examination is set
out above. The compensating authority received
the claims on 19 May 2015. I am
not aware of what correspondence, if any, accompanied or followed the making of
the claims prior
to their determination. The claims were determined on 4 and 10
June 2015 respectively. The claims were rejected on grounds which
appear to be
directed towards the issue of causation rather than whether there were
impairments as claimed. The approach of the compensating
authority was
misconceived in this regard, as the claims should have been dealt with as claims
for compensation under s 43 of the
Act, for the reasons explained in
ground relied upon, namely that the psychological condition for which medication
was taken was not compensable, no longer
applied as from the acceptance of that
claim on 23 June 2015.
compensating authority first wrote to the worker advising of the proposed
independent medical examinations on 20 July 2015, some
six to seven weeks after
its determinations had been made, and some eleven days after the dispute
management conference, when the
appointments were
foreshadowed.
There was no delay
in this respect which might weigh against the compensating authority’s
application. Had the examinations
now requested been arranged before the
determinations, the making of the determinations would have been delayed
accordingly, such
that the worker would be no further advanced down the dispute
resolution path than he would have been if he had attended the proposed
appointments on the dates arranged. However, these considerations do not address
the question as to why attendance on examinations
was requested on 20 July 2015
when they were not considered necessary before making the determinations.
only inference that can be drawn from the material before me is that the
determinations having been disputed, the compensating
authority now wishes to
obtain reports to better inform itself on the issues of compensability and
assessment. I was not directed
to any other development over the period between
the making of its determinations and the requests for attendance on examinations
which indicated why it was now thought necessary to obtain reports when it had
not been so thought before the determinations.
example, I have not been informed whether, since the determinations were made,
there has been any new information received in
relation to the worker’s
history or symptoms, or in relation to the medical evidence upon which he
relies, which explains why
the examinations are now thought necessary. There was
no suggestion that, if the compensating authority had appreciated initially
it was required to determine the claims as claims for compensation under s 43,
rather than simply as claims for compensation
at large, it would have arranged
medical examinations before making a determination. Although the compensating
authority made passing
reference in its submissions to the influx of s 43 claims
at the time of the
determinations,
there was no
suggestion that the determinations may have been made without arranging medical
examinations because of a demand by
the worker that they be made urgently in
light of the then perception that the effect of the transitional provisions
might be that WPI entitlements relating
to secondary injuries might be lost if no determination was made before 1 July
may be many explanations for the change in the compensating authority’s
position. Whether they include any of the above
considerations is speculation on
my part. It is not for the Tribunal to investigate the matter for itself. It is
for the compensating
authority to establish to the satisfaction of the Tribunal
that the examinations are reasonably required and that the intervention
Tribunal is reasonably sought. It is to be borne in mind that the requirement
that a worker submit himself or herself to an
independent examination is an
intrusive process which, as observed in
reasonably be thought by some workers to be demeaning and unpleasant.
burden on the compensating authority of satisfying the Tribunal in this regard
is not onerous. But the intervention of the Tribunal
should not be assumed on
the basis of an assertion by the compensating authority of an entitlement to
require that a worker undergo
an examination. The approach taken in
requires that, in a case where the reasonableness of the request is not
apparent on its face, which I consider to be the position
here, some explanation
as to why an examination is now said to be required should be given. In my view
the understandable umbrage
taken at the worker’s failure to attend the
examinations in the circumstances described above distracted the compensating
from the need to satisfy the Tribunal of the reasonableness of its
over-arching consideration is the need for the maintenance of the integrity of
the investigative process which precedes the determination
of claims, as stated
and the other decisions referred to. If adequate investigations
are not undertaken at the outset, there is a risk of encouraging
ill-considered
determinations made in the expectation that medical examinations not undertaken
to assist that initial process can
be facilitated as and when requested in the
event of a dispute. Such an outcome is not only likely to increase rather than
litigation and adversarial contests, but is likely to hold up
conciliation proceedings whilst medical information is sought at a
than it ought to have been.
mentioned above, the task of providing material which might satisfy the Tribunal
that an examination is necessary is not onerous.
Unmeritorious resistance to
reasonable requests is likely to prolong the time it takes to resolve claims and
may expose workers who
so conduct themselves to adverse costs orders.
this case, the dearth of material which indicates why the proposed examinations
are now said to be reasonably required, when they
were not thought necessary to
allow for investigation of the claims shortly before, leads me to conclude that
the Tribunal should
not intervene in the matter. Accordingly I dismiss the
application for an order under r 23 of the Rules.
decision in this regard does not prevent the compensating authority from
obtaining expert reports commenting on the assessments
relied upon by the
worker, and thus better informing itself as to any challenge it might make to
them, albeit that any experts who
provide such reports, and who might also give
evidence, may have to do so without the benefit of an examination of the worker.
does the order have an adverse impact with respect to the decision on the
applications for leave to issue summonses for production,
to which I now turn.
The applications for summonses for production and for an order
for disclosure of treating dentists
first deal with the application by the compensating authority for leave to serve
a summons for production of the clinical notes
of the worker’s treating
general practitioner Dr Robin-Karas.
compensating authority observed that, in relation to the claims for lump sum
entitlements in relation to the dental and digestive
conditions, the expert
reports relied upon the history provided by the worker as to the date of the
onset, or exacerbation, of the
conditions in relation to which the claims have
been made. In the case of the dental conditions, it was further noted that the
history indicated that the complaint of “dry mouth”
may have been in existence for some time before any medication was
consequence of the initial injury.
compensating authority thus contended that the general practitioner’s
notes were clearly relevant. It submitted that it
had a legitimate forensic
interest in perusing the notes in order to ascertain whether or not they were
consistent with the history
given by the worker, and to test the reliability of
the opinions of the worker’s experts having regard to the content of the
notes. In the alternative, the compensating authority sought an order that the
worker make discovery of the notes on the basis that
they should be considered
to be in his possession, custody or power, even if they were in the physical
possession of Dr RobinKaras.
worker submitted, as to the alternative discovery order, that it should not be
entertained as it was not sought by way of the
application for directions, and
for the further reason that, in any event, the notes could not be considered to
be in the possession
of the worker.
to the application for leave to issue a summons, the worker contended that,
because there was no proper investigation of the claims
determinations were made, it was not known what matters may or may not be
relevant, and that the request for production
of the notes was merely for the
purpose of trawling through them to find matters that may be relevant. Thus, it
was a “fishing
expedition”.
Alternatively,
the worker submitted that, in seeking leave “to summons the clinical
notes”, without any specification
as to a period or periods of time in
relation to which the notes were sought, and without any identification of the
medical conditions
the subject of the summons, the compensating authority was
seeking leave to issue a summons which was too broad in its scope, and
accordingly, oppressive.
my view the worker’s contention that the proposed summons is merely a
fishing expedition must be rejected. It is plain from
a consideration of the
three expert reports provided that the acceptance by the experts of the history
given by the worker as to
the onset of the conditions for which the claims are
made is critical to the opinions given. The fact that there is no dispute, at
this stage at least, about the accuracy of that history is irrelevant. A perusal
of the general practitioner’s medical records
may indicate the worker to
have been mistaken in terms of the history given, or that there are non-work
related factors which possibly
have caused or contributed to the conditions the
subject of the claims. Further, the statement of issues lodged by the worker
the question as to whether the two further injuries claimed should be
combined with the initial injury for the purposes of the impairment
assessment,
which also makes the dates on which the conditions emerged arguably
stated, it is relevant to know the worker’s medical history in relation to
the disputed conditions. The granting of leave
to issue a summons in this
context is unexceptional: see
Bacciarelli v State of South
to the worker’s complaint that the application for leave contemplates the
issue of a summons which contains no limitation
as to its scope, I consider that
it would be onerous to impose upon the medical practice the subject of the
summons the task of attempting
to identify which of the notes, which now span a
period of over seven years, are considered relevant to the claimed conditions
thus should be produced in compliance with the summons. That is a course
which is likely to lead to ongoing issues over the completeness
of production.
It will usually be preferable for the complete notes be produced without any
attempt by the recipient of the summons
to limit production to conditions of a
certain nature. Under r 24(9), a worker in relation to whom notes are produced
has the first
opportunity of inspecting the notes, and may object to irrelevant
parts of them being inspected by the other party, and may ask the
Tribunal rule
on that objection. If there is an objection, the Tribunal is in the best
position to determine what is or is not relevant
and what should be made
available for inspection.
to the objection to the proposed scope of the summons, being the absence of any
specified time frame, I do not agree that the compensating
authority should be
restricted to an inspection of only those notes made on and from the date of the
injury on 15 January 2009. In
light of the comment made by Professor Goss that
drug intake over many years prior to the date of injury may have caused or
contributed
to the development of the “dry mouth” condition, there
is a reasonable possibility that the medical records may contain
references to
that condition before 15 January 2009. Nevertheless, I do not consider that the
summons should be completely open-ended
in this regard. I would consider it
appropriate for the summons to be restricted so as to require disclosure of
notes from a specified
date some time prior to the date of the initial injury.
That pre-injury period may vary depending on the circumstances. In this case
period of two to three years may be appropriate. Should inspection of notes
extending back that far reveal any reason why the compensating
considers it appropriate to obtain earlier notes, it would be at liberty to make
a further application in that regard.
now turn to the application for orders relating to treating dentists. This
application has two aspects. First, that the worker disclose
the identity of all
his treating dentists, and second, that leave be granted for the compensating
authority to summons the clinical
notes of those dentists. I decline to make the
first order, as I do not consider that I have any power to do so under either
Act or the Rules, and no submission was made to me to the contrary.
is premature to grant leave to summons the clinical notes of the worker’s
treating dentists until their identity is known.
For the reasons given with
respect to the notes of Dr Robin-Karas, the notes of the treating dentists are
also relevant. On that
basis, the appropriate process is for the compensating
authority to write to the worker requesting that he disclose the identity
location, as far as is known to him, of the dentists who treated him over a
specified period of time, which, for reasons explained
above, may include some
period of time before the initial injury. Should the worker decline to respond
to that request in a manner
which the compensating authority considers
appropriate, it can take the matter further by applying under r 22 (5)(a)(ii) of
for leave to serve interrogatories on the worker in that regard.
dismiss the application under r 23 for a stay of proceedings.
make no order at this stage on the application by the compensating authority for
leave to issue a summons for production of the
clinical notes of Dr Robin-Karas.
If leave for the issue of a summons in an amended form as suggested above
continues to be opposed,
I will hear the parties further.
dismiss the application by the compensating authority for an order that the
worker disclose the identity of all of his treating
dismiss the application by the compensating authority for leave to issue a
summons for production of the clinical notes of the worker’s
dentists, noting that the application can be pursued in relation to specified
dental practices if thought necessary.
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are advised that if a party wishes to appeal against any part of this
decision which is appealable pursuant to s 86(1) of
the Act such appeal must be
filed with the Registrar in accordance with the form titled Notice of Appeal
within 14 days of the delivery
of this decision and must be served on all
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
practice of this Tribunal to publish its reasons for decision in full on the
Internet. If any party or person contends that
these reasons for decision should
not be published in full the party or person must make an application within
seven days of the
delivery of these reasons. The application shall be by an
Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should be addressed
to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within the time
specified these reasons will be published in accordance
Tribunal’s usual practice.
As explained in the letter from
Minter Ellison to Palios Meegan Nicholson dated 30 July 2015 – Exhibit
affidavit of Ms Billias.
[1999] SAWCT 88.
At p 4 (citations omitted).
Initially as r 22.
[2003] SAWCT 94.
[2007] SAWCT 49.
[2015] SAWCT 67.
[1988] SAWCT 18
see other decisions there referred to.
[1999] SAWCT 20.
Workers Rehabilitation
and Compensation Act 1986
, ss 84 & 85.
[2016] SAWCT 2
Letter Minter Ellison to
Palios Meegan Nicholson 30 July 2015 – “MB3” to affidavit of
Ms Billias.
[2008] SAWCT 38.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (158 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter