URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACAT/2025/65.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:53:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nguyen v Hao [2025] SACAT 65 (29 July 2025)
Carolyn Nguyen
NEUTRAL CITATION
Nguyen v Hao
[2025] SACAT 65
Deputy President Johns
29 July 2025
HEARING DATES
28 April 2025
SACAT FILE NO.
2025/SIR000097
ON REVIEW FROM
Member Hastwell (31 December 2024, 2024/SH006991)
The applicant sought internal review of a decision of the Tribunal which
required her to pay compensation to the respondent, on the
basis that the
arrangement between them was a rooming house agreement. The applicant argued
that such a determination was inconsistent
with other Tribunal determinations in
similar circumstances.
The applicant was the sole tenant under a residential tenancy agreement
with the landlord. The landlord had allowed her to offer the
other 2 bedrooms in
the house for rent, to other persons. The applicant did so, and a dispute arose
between her and one of the other
residents. The issue for determination was
whether the dispute could be characterised as a tenancy dispute within the
Residential Tenancies Act 1995
(RTA). If not, then the
Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to deal with it.
Under the agreement between the parties, the respondent paid the applicant
a bond and rent but otherwise shared equally in utility
payments with her and
another occupant. The agreement permitted the respondent to reside in a room at
the property and the use of
common shared areas.
The Tribunal’s decision considers the proper characterisation of the
party’s legal relationship and, consequently, whether
the Tribunal has
Held, setting aside and substituting the decision under review:
The arrangement
between the parties was not a residential tenancy agreement as the respondent
did not have exclusive occupation of
the property, or a discrete part of it (and
the fact that the agreement between the parties was described as a residential
agreement was not determinative);
The arrangement
between the parties was not a sub-tenancy as the arrangement would have
contravened sections 64 and section 65 of
The arrangement
between the parties was not a co-tenancy as the landlord only entered into a
tenancy agreement with the applicant;
The arrangement
between the parties was not a rooming house agreement as the applicant did not
rent out the room as part of a business
and therefore she was not a rooming
house proprietor;
The Tribunal
does not have jurisdiction to deal with the dispute because it is not a tenancy
dispute within the meaning of the RTA
and, therefore, the application is
Internal review – Residential Tenancy - Jurisdictional matters
– Existence of residential tenancy agreement
LEGISLATION CONSIDERED
Residential Tenancies Act 1995
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
CASES CONSIDERED
Azadegan v Kirby
[2020] SACAT 10
Banner v Banner & Ors
[2023] SACAT 99
Clark & Clark v Karan & Karan by their agent Ouwens Casserly
Property Management
(2017) SIR000078 (unreported)
Corbett v Parekh & Adhikari
(2019) SMCH000537 (unreported)
Dymond & Grey (by Elders Real Estate Playford) v Raven &
[2011] SARTT 3
Ellis v City Woman’s Hostel RTT 97/022789
Farrugia v Graham, Graham & South Australian Housing Trust
[2016] SACAT 35
Henderson v Housing Choices South Australia Ltd
[2019] SASC
Hier v Hier
[2017] SACAT 30
Leffler & Anor v Nepondi Pty Ltd
[2020] SACAT 105
Lennard v Sweet
(2021) SIR000215 (unreported)
McColl v Hearse
[2016] SACAT 38
Munroe v Small Boat Club of South Australia Inc
[2016] SACAT
Nejad v Rochow
[2020] SACAT 62
Noblett and Mansfield v Manley
[1952] SASR 155
Radiach v Smith
[1959] HCA 45
(1959) 101 CLR 209
Shires v Fisher
(2020) SIR000267 (unreported)
Street v Mountford
[1985] UKHL 4
[1985] AC 809
Tronnolone v Edwards & Bryan
[2016] SACAT 27
REPRESENTATION
The applicant appeared in person
Ms S Sproull, RentRight SA, appeared for the respondent
REASONS FOR DECISION
The application and question for determination
is an application for the review of an order made by the Tribunal on 31 December
2024 in matter number 2024/SH006991 (the original
the original Order, the Tribunal dealt with an application by the respondent
resident, Mr Hao, seeking an order for compensation
for Ms Nguyen’s breach
of her obligations to him under an agreement described as a residential tenancy
agreement, in relation
to the property at Christies Beach (the property).
the original Order, the Tribunal found that there was a rooming house agreement
between the parties, Ms Nguyen was the proprietor
of the rooming house, and she
was in breach of her obligations under the agreement. The Tribunal ordered Ms
Nguyen to pay compensation
of $1,316.20 because of her breach.
Nguyen disagrees with the original Order. She says that the determination in the
original Order that she was operating a rooming
house, is inconsistent with
other decisions of the Tribunal in similar circumstances. Accordingly, she has
applied for an internal
review of the original Order.
internal review is conducted under section 70 of the
South Australian and
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(SACAT Act). On review, section
70 SACAT Act requires that the Tribunal must make the correct or preferable
decision, taking into
account the evidence before the Tribunal at the original
hearing, giving appropriate weight to the original Order, and taking into
account any evidence the Tribunal considers is relevant and appropriate to take
into account in the course of the review.
Procedural issues
70 SACAT Act requires that an application for internal review is lodged within
one month of the decision under review, unless
the Tribunal exercises the
discretion to extend that period.
the review hearing, Ms Sproull submitted that it would be unfair for the
Tribunal to exercise the discretion to extend the period
for the lodgement of
the application, and the Tribunal should not do so.
consider that the ground of review is genuine, and the issue is of significance.
I will accept the application for review, even
though it is late.
application for internal review necessarily includes an application for leave.
Section 114A of the
Residential Tenancies Act 1995
(RTA) provides that
the Tribunal must only grant leave under section 70(1a) SACAT Act where an
application for review concerns an
order that a person make a payment to another
person, if exceptional circumstances apply. In this matter, because the dispute
an issue about jurisdiction, I consider there are exceptional
circumstances.
Nguyen has been living at the property for about three years. The property is a
three bedroom house. It has a lounge and dining
area, kitchen, laundry, one
bathroom and a separate toilet.
she first moved in, Ms Nguyen was a co-tenant with two other persons. Over a
period of time, the other persons vacated, but Ms
Nguyen continued to reside at
the property. Ms Nguyen is now the sole tenant named on a residential tenancy
agreement with the landlord.
landlord agreed that Ms Nguyen could rent out the other two bedrooms at the
property. Ms Nguyen advertised each of the other bedrooms
as unfurnished rooms
29 July 2024, Ms Nguyen entered into an agreement with Mr Hao for him to rent a
bedroom at the property. The agreement was described
– residential tenancy agreement
” between herself as the
landlord, and Mr Hao as the tenant.
4 August 2024, Ms Nguyen sent an email to Mr Hao in which she stated that:
“posed a serious risk to the life, health or safety of the landlord, the
landlord’s agent or someone who lives
in the immediate vicinity” (by
leaving doors and windows open);
failed to provide proper identification documents to her;
seriousness of these issues, she required him to leave the property on 4 August
the impression that he had no option, Mr Hao vacated the property on the same
day. He then brought an application in the Tribunal
seeking repayment of his
bond, and repayment of overpaid rent and utilities.
original Order required Ms Nguyen to pay compensation of $1,316.20 being $966.20
for his bond refund, and the repayment of rent
and utilities in advance; plus an
amount of $350.00 for breach of his right to quiet enjoyment of the property due
to Ms Nguyen having
required Mr Hao to vacate the property in circumstances
where she was not entitled to do so.
24 RTA grants the Tribunal exclusive jurisdiction to hear and determine a
tenancy dispute.
3 RTA defines the term “
tenancy dispute
(a) a claim under a residential tenancy agreement, a rooming house agreement, or
an agreement collateral to a residential tenancy
agreement or a rooming house
agreement; or
(b) a dispute between parties or former parties to a residential tenancy
agreement, a rooming house agreement, or an agreement collateral
residential tenancy agreement or a rooming house agreement, about matters
arising under the agreement or this Act; or
(c) any matter that may be the subject of an application under this Act to the
Findings of the Tribunal
Question for determination
summary, Ms Nguyen’s argument is that the dispute is not a tenancy dispute
because it does not arise from either a residential
tenancy agreement or a
rooming house agreement; therefore, the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to
deal with the dispute, and
the Tribunal should have dismissed the application.
Hao disputes the application and submits that the original Order is the correct
or preferable order – the arrangement between
him and Ms Nguyen is
properly characterised as a rooming house agreement, and therefore the Tribunal
did have jurisdiction to deal
with the dispute.
the question is: what is the true nature of the legal relationship between the
parties, and does it fall within the scope
of the definition of
in the RTA?
legal relationship between Ms Nguyen and Mr Hao could be categorised in a number
of different ways. I will consider the characteristics
of each different legal
relationship which may be relevant, and then I will consider what is the proper
characterisation of their
legal relationship. This will inform my decision as to
whether or not this dispute falls within the RTA.
The different legal relationships that may arise when one
person grants to another, a right of occupation, in residential premises
their characteristics)
following legal relationships may arise in relation to the provision of a right
to reside in residential accommodation:
landlord/tenant relationship – a residential tenancy agreement;
house/proprietor relationship – a rooming house agreement;
a boarder/lodger
relationship;
sub-tenancy;
co-tenancy;
a licence to
A residential tenancy agreement
residential tenancy agreement does not have to be in writing. It is merely a
special form of contract and so the ordinary principles
of contract law apply,
subject to the RTA.
The fundamental
requirements for any binding contract are:
an intention to
create legal relations
an offer and an
consideration
capacity of the
agreement on the
issue of whether or not the parties intended to create legal relations will
commonly arise in the context of arrangements between
family members about
accommodation, and the facts of each individual case will need to be examined to
determine whether or not there
was actually an intention to create a legal
relationship.
question of offer and acceptance can sometimes be confusing if the parties have
communicated by email or otherwise, and for example,
it may not be clear whether
a particular piece of correspondence is intended to be a binding offer, or an
invitation to treat.
53 RTA states that the only permissible consideration for a residential tenancy
is rent or a bond, or both.
person can only enter into a residential tenancy agreement as a landlord, if
they have the legal capacity to grant the right of
occupation to a
parties must agree on all essential terms of the
Particular requirements of the RTA
3 RTA defines a “residential tenancy agreement” as:
an agreement (other than a rooming house agreement) under which a person grants
another person, for valuable consideration, a right
(which may, but need not, be
an exclusive right) to occupy premises for the purpose of residence;
other words, the essential requirements of a residential tenancy agreement
the agreement
must require the landlord to provide to the tenant, a right to occupy
residential premises or a clearly identified section
of the premises;
speaking, that right must be exclusive;
the right must
be in return for the payment of rent and/or a bond; and
none of the
exemptions contained in section 5 RTA must apply.
right to occupy the entire property or a discrete section of it has been dealt
with by the Tribunal in a variety of contexts:
speaking, if a person is living under the same roof as the landlord, it would be
unlikely that they have a residential tenancy
agreement; however, it depends on
the circumstances, and even if that is the case, it may be possible for there to
be a residential
tenancy agreement – if the section of the house which is
occupied by the person is self-contained (eg with its own bathroom
and kitchen
facilities, but not necessarily a laundry), it is secure, and it has its own
means of access.
Even if there
are a number of persons living at the property, where each person occupies their
own discrete, secure, self-contained
part of the building and even if there are
some shared facilities (which do not include for example, a kitchen, bathroom or
area), then the arrangement is still likely to be a residential tenancy
A granny flat
would generally be regarded as a discrete part of premises which may be subject
to a residential tenancy
right of occupation must be created in a residential property. Whether the
agreement is for occupation for the purpose of residence,
or for a commercial
purpose, will be for the Tribunal to determine depending on the
circumstances.
right to exclusively occupy a property or a discrete section of it, would
usually be regarded as a fundamental characteristic
of a residential tenancy
Honour Justice Peek provided guidance about the significance of exclusive
possession in determining whether or not an arrangement
between parties is a
residential tenancy agreement, in
Henderson v Housing Choices South Australia
[2019] SASC 121:
Butt’s Land Law
stresses the importance of exclusive
possession and that its absence will be the leading indication that the parties
did not intend
to create a leasehold estate but intended, rather, to merely
grant a licence to occupy or enter the premises. Thus it is
A lease (or demise) gives the tenant the right to exclusive
possession – the right to exclude all others from the land. This
the right to exclude even the landlord, subject only to any rights the landlord
has by law or under the lease agreement,
such as the right to enter and view the
state of repair. ... In contrast, a licence gives a mere right to occupy, ...
is also consistent with the obligation under section 64 RTA for a landlord to
provide a tenant with vacant possession of the property
from the day the tenancy
for most contracts, consideration is a relatively broad concept, section 53 RTA
states that the permissible consideration
for a residential tenancy agreement
must only be a rent, or a bond, or both. This strict requirement has been
applied by the Tribunal
where for example, a person was required to pay for
rates and taxes for a property,
and where a person was residing in part of a disused petrol station, in return
for having a caretaker
5 RTA contains a number of exemptions; for example, the RTA will not apply to an
agreement genuinely entered into for the
purposes of a holiday or an agreement
in relation to club
Tribunal has dealt with a number of matters involving accommodation arrangements
made through
. The Tribunal’s approach with those matters has
been that each application must be considered on its merits, and merely because
an accommodation arrangement has been made through
necessarily mean that it is for the purpose of a
Tribunal has also found that the nature of an arrangement between parties can
fluctuate, if the circumstances also fluctuate –
and so, at some point in
the arrangement, it may have been a residential tenancy agreement, and at other
times it may not.
A rooming house agreement
3 RTA contains the following definitions about rooming houses:
A rooming house agreement is defined as an agreement under which “...
accommodation is provided (with or without meals, or
other facilities or
services) in a rooming house”
Rooming house is defined as “... residential premises in which 2 or more
rooms are available, for valuable consideration, for
residential accommodation
Rooming house proprietor means a person who carries on a business involving the
provision of accommodation under rooming house agreements.
Rooming house resident means a person who boards or lodges in a rooming house.
the essential characteristics of a rooming house agreement are:
the agreement
must be for accommodation at residential premises, where at least two rooms are
available for rent;
speaking, the resident will be provided with the right to exclusive occupation
of a bedroom, and access to all common areas
in the house;
a person who is
residing at the property must be providing valuable consideration in return for
the right to live there and the only
valuable consideration which can be
required is payment of rent and/or a bond;
providing the accommodation must be carrying on a business involving the
provision of accommodation under rooming house
agreements.
section 104 RTA allows for standard terms of a rooming house agreement to be
prescribed, there are no standard terms prescribed
by the regulations (although
there is a standard form of agreement on the Consumer and Business Services
use of common facilities at a rooming house will generally be governed by house
rules. A proprietor must ensure that house rules
are displayed in a prominent
location at the house, and provide a copy to a resident on
105O RTA provides that a proprietor must take reasonable steps to provide and
maintain the locks and other devices which are
necessary to ensure that the
resident’s room is reasonably secure.
105N RTA provides that a proprietor must ensure that the resident has reasonable
access to their room and shared facilities,
and will not unreasonably interfere
with their use of their room or the shared facilities.
A boarder/lodger arrangement
5(1)(b) RTA states that an agreement under which a person boards or lodges with
another, is exempt from the RTA, unless the
agreement is a rooming house
and Mansfield v Manley
J explained the situation of a boarder or lodger in the following
The primary and usual meaning of “lodger“, as so defined, is
“one who resides as an inmate in another person’s
house, paying a
certain sum periodically for the accommodation,“ or “one who
occupies an hired room in another person’s
house“... A
“boarder“ is “one who... has his food, or food and lodging, at
the house of another for compensation;
one who lives in a boarding house, or
with a family as one of its members, at a fixed rate; one who has food at
another’s table,
or meals and lodgings in his house for pay, or
compensation, of any kind. In ordinary circumstances with both lodger and
legal possession remains in the person who provides room or rooms, or
meals. He retains possession and control over rooms and means
of ingress and
egress, but grants license to guests who pay, or give consideration for the
other words, a boarder or lodger is someone who stays in the owner’s house
with them. The boarder or lodger may be provided
with meals and other services
as part of their accommodation arrangement.
A sub-tenancy
a person rents a residential property from a landlord, then that person is a
tenant. The tenant may sub-let the property to
someone-else (subject to the
landlord’s consent).
that occurs, for the purposes of the sub-letting arrangement, the tenant will
often be described as the head tenant, and the person
to whom the property has
been let will be described as the sub-tenant; but for the purposes of the RTA,
the head tenant takes on
the rights and responsibilities of a landlord under the
RTA, and the sub tenant takes on the rights and responsibilities of a tenant
under the RTA.
A co-tenancy
two persons enter into a single residential tenancy agreement as co-tenants with
the landlord, they are jointly and severally
liable to the landlord for the
duties and obligations of the tenant, under the tenancy agreement; and each of
them can exercise their
rights against the landlord, under the tenancy
than the power to make orders distinguishing between the liability of tenants
when dealing with an application under section
89A RTA, the Tribunal does not
make orders dealing with any dispute about the liability of co-tenants (ie in
relation to a dispute
between the co-tenants).
is because the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction:
the Tribunal has
no inherent equitable jurisdiction;
the Tribunal has
no specific statutory power.
same general principles apply to a dispute between co-residents, under a rooming
house agreement.
A licence to occupy
person who has a licence to occupy premises, has a form of occupation which
carries with it significantly fewer rights than those
of a tenant or rooming
house resident. A licence to occupy is granted by the owner/landlord, and is
subject to the owner/landlord’s
right to enter the property at any time.
It may be terminated at any time (subject to the terms of the agreement).
Radaich v Smith
J said as follows:
Whether the transaction creates a lease or a licence ... depends upon the nature
of the right which the parties intend the person
entering upon the land shall
have in relation to the land ...
licence to occupy may arise for example, where a right of occupation is granted
by a house owner, to a person to reside at the property
while the owner is on
holidays, and in return the person performs a caretaker role, but does not pay
deciding whether or not the arrangement between the parties falls under the RTA,
it is necessary to examine their rights and obligations
under the written
agreement which are in summary:
a) The agreement refers to Ms Nguyen as the “landlord” and Mr Hao
as the “tenant”.
b) The agreement is periodic.
c) Mr Hao was required to pay rent of $190 per week, on a fortnightly basis, to
Ms Nguyen. Rent was to be paid into a bank account
in Ms Nguyen’s name.
d) Mr Hao was also required to pay a bond of $760 to Ms Nguyen.
e) The agreement requires Mr Hao to pay one third of the outgoings
(electricity/gas/water/wifi).
f) The agreement states that excluded areas are other bedrooms and desk
g) In the “Additional terms” section of the agreement, there are
statements in relation to unacceptable behaviour, and
that most communications
will be by text.
h) The agreement purports to apply the rights and obligations of a landlord and
tenant, between Ms Nguyen as landlord and Mr Hao
terms of the agreement are clearly inconsistent with the actual arrangements
between the parties which were:
Mr Hao would
occupy one bedroom at the property, and he would have shared use of the common
facilities;
Ms Nguyen would
continue to live at the house and there would be a third person also living at
Mr Hao would pay
rent and a bond to Ms Nguyen;
occupants of the property would share equally in the utilities, the cost of
cleaning products and other items shared by
all occupants of the property, and
they would have shared responsibility for cleaning the
Question 1: Is the arrangement between the parties a
residential tenancy agreement?
established that
the title given to an agreement by the parties, is irrelevant in determining the
correct legal nature of the document.
In that matter, the agreement was
described by the parties as a licence, but the Court rejected the argument that
the description
(which was used throughout the agreement) determined the nature
of the agreement; and the Court said that even if the parties described
arrangement as a licence (to occupy), in doing so, they could not alter the true
effect of the agreement
“... the professed intentions of the parties is
irrelevant...”
the agreement purported to provide Mr Hao with the exclusive right to occupy the
entire property, that was not the case and
it was never intended to be the case.
Mr Hao was only ever to have the right to exclusively occupy a particular
bedroom in the house,
and to have a right to use the common facilities which
were shared with other residents.
the agreement cannot be a residential tenancy agreement – Mr Hao does not
have exclusive occupation of the property,
or a discrete section of
Question 2: Is the arrangement between the parties a
sub-tenancy?
her email communications with the landlord’s agent, both the agent and Ms
Nguyen have described the arrangement as a sub-tenancy.
I do not agree that the
arrangement was a sub-tenancy for the following reasons:
a) The arrangement would have contravened section 64 RTA which requires a
landlord to provide a tenant with vacant possession of
the property – that
could not happen while Ms Nguyen and another person were residing at the
b) Any such arrangement would also contravene section 65 RTA which relevantly
provides that:
“...(a) the tenant is entitled to quiet enjoyment of the premises without
interruption by the landlord or a person claiming
under the landlord or with
superior title to the landlord’s title; and
(b) the landlord will not cause or permit an interference with the reasonable
peace, comfort or privacy of the tenant in the tenant’s
premises...”
Question 3: Is the arrangement between the parties a
co-tenancy or a co-residence agreement?
matter is not a co-tenancy and the parties are clearly not co-residents, as the
landlord has only entered into an agreement with
Ms Nguyen. However, I note that
in some ways Ms Nguyen has behaved as if she and the other residents are
co-residents: for example,
in sharing with them equal rights to the use of the
common areas, and equal obligations concerning the payment of utilities and
products, and in relation to the cleaning.
Question 4: Is the arrangement between the parties a rooming
house agreement?
original Order found that the arrangement is a rooming house agreement, but Ms
Nguyen has argued that this is inconsistent with
other Tribunal decisions in
which the Tribunal has found that where a rooming house proprietor resides at
the property, there cannot
be a rooming house agreement between that person, and
other residents.
Nguyen has advertised two rooms for rent, and so this aspect of the requirements
for a rooming house, is satisfied.
Hao was required to pay rent and a bond, and so that is also consistent with the
requirements for valuable consideration, for a
rooming house.
in order for this arrangement to be a rooming house within the meaning of the
RTA, Ms Nguyen must have rented the room to
Mr Hao as part of a business which
she is carrying on involving the provision of accommodation under rooming house
agreements.
the review hearing, Ms Nguyen said that she was not seeking to make a profit
from offering the other two rooms in the house for
rent. She had calculated rent
to be paid by herself and the other two residents at the property, on the basis
of a pro rata calculation
– the person who had the largest room paid
slightly more rent. But, the total rent paid by the three of them, was an amount
equal to the amount of rent she was charged under the tenancy agreement.
that basis, I consider that Ms Nguyen is not running a business for the
provision of accommodation under rooming house agreements.
the agreement between Ms Nguyen and Mr Hao, cannot be a rooming house agreement.
this matter, I am not required to make a determination about the issue raised in
other matters on which Ms Nguyen sought to rely
(ie that there cannot be a
rooming house agreement where a proprietor resides at the property). However, I
observe that it is problematic
in a matter such as this, to determine the true
nature of the legal relationship between the parties under the RTA, when some
of their arrangements are in the nature of a proprietor/resident
relationship, while others are in the nature of a co-resident relationship.
not consider that the exemption for boarding/lodging arrangements in relation to
rooming house agreements, addresses this issue.
Question 5: Is the arrangement between the parties a boarder
or lodger arrangement?
consider that under the agreement with Ms Nguyen, Mr Hao had exclusive
occupation of his room, and this would generally be regarded
as inconsistent
with the arrangement being a boarder or lodger arrangement.
despite the shared responsibilities of the occupants, Ms Nguyen did have a level
of control over the other occupants –
they paid their rent and bond to
her, and she set the house rules. These characteristics are more aligned with a
boarding/lodging
arrangement.
consider that of all the legal relationships that could apply to their
arrangement, this is the most consistent with the terms of
their agreement. Even
so, because Ms Nguyen is not a rooming house proprietor for the purposes of the
RTA, the arrangement cannot
be a rooming house agreement under the RTA.
Question 6: Is the arrangement between the parties a licence
arrangement could be a licence to occupy but again, Mr Hao’s right to
exclusive occupation of his bedroom, does not sit
neatly with the
characteristics of a licence to occupy.
In any event, such a
relationship would be outside the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, under the
Conclusion and outcome
the reasons outlined above, I have concluded that the Tribunal does not have
is not a tenancy dispute within
the meaning of the RTA.
consequence of such a determination is that any dispute between the parties must
be dealt with in the Magistrates Court. However,
I observe that if Mr Hao had
brought his original application in the Magistrates Court, he may well have been
successful at least
for the repayment of his bond, and overpaid rent and
utilities (which is $966.20).
Orders of the Tribunal
Tribunal dispenses with the strict requirement for the application for internal
review to be lodged within one month of the date
of the decision under
Tribunal grants leave for the application for internal review to proceed.
Tribunal sets aside the Tribunal order made on 31 December 2024 in matter number
2024/SH006991 and substitutes the following
order instead:
application is dismissed as the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to deal with
Tronnolone v Edwards &
[2016] SACAT 27.
Hier v Hier
Banner v Banner & Ors
[2023] SACAT 99.
Clark & Clark v Karan
& Karan by their agent Ouwens Casserly Property Management
SIR000078 (unreported).
Although a payment for an
option may be acceptable in some circumstances.
Leffler & Anor v
Nepondi Pty Ltd
[2020] SACAT 105
, the Tribunal found that was not the case
as the person who attempted to grant a tenancy to another, was not the sole
owner of the
property, and did not have the approval of the other owner of the
property to create the tenancy agreement.
Dymond & Grey (by
Elders Real Estate Playford) v Raven & Raven
[2011] SARTT 3
Tribunal found that the landlords’ agent had made a genuine mistake about
the rent to be charged, but in the circumstances,
changed the amount of rent
payable under the agreement.
Lennard v Sweet
(2021) SIR000215 (unreported), the Tribunal found that there was a residential
tenancy agreement for a section of the house because
it was discrete, self
contained and able to be locked.
Shires v Fisher
SIR000267 (unreported).
Hier v Hier
Azadegan v Kirby
[2020] SACAT 10
, the Tribunal
found that there was a residential tenancy agreement for a granny flat.
Nejad v Rochow
[2020] SACAT 62
, the tribunal dismissed the tenant’s argument that the
arrangement was for a commercial purpose – the tenant argued that
rented the property to rent out for short term stays, a commercial purpose. But
the landlord’s agent gave evidence that
the only purpose which had been
communicated to her, was for residential use.
At paras 85 - 88.
Brendan Edgeworth,
Butt’s Land Law
(Thomson Reuters Lawbook Co, 7
2017) 306-307.
McColl v Hearse
[2016] SACAT 38.
Corbett v Parekh &
(2019) SMCH000537 (unreported).
Munroe v Small Boat
Club of South Australia Inc
[2016] SACAT 36
the Tribunal found that
there was no residential tenancy agreement because the “tenant”
lived in a shipping container
on land owned by a small boat club. The Tribunal
found that the exemption in section 5(1)(iii) RTA applied.
The Tribunal has found that
a residential tenancy agreement does exist, in some of those matters; see for
Azadegan v Kirby
[2020] SACAT 10.
Farrugia v Graham,
Graham & South Australian Housing Trust
[2016] SACAT 35.
Section 105E RTA.
Section 105D RTA.
[1952] SASR 155
Ellis v City Woman’s Hostel RTT 97/022789
Section 74 RTA.
[1959] HCA 45
(1959) 101 CLR 209.
Supra, at p 222.
[1985] UKHL 4
[1985] AC 809.
Per Lord Templeman at p
It follows that some of the
obligations under the agreement (such as the obligations to share equally the
cost of utilities and
cleaning products), are shared equally between the
residents (including Ms Nguyen) – are inherently inconsistent with a
landlord/tenant
or head tenant/subtenant arrangement.
Because of the definition
rooming house proprietor
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.33 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter