URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWLRP/2011/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Torrens Transit v WorkCover (No 2) [2011] SAWLRP 3 (25 November 2011)
[2011] SAWLRP 3
WORKCOVER LEVY REVIEW PANEL
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
TORRENS TRANSIT SERVICES (NORTH) PTY LTD
No. E20576009)
(Applicant)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
REASONS FOR RULING
PUBLISHED 25 NOVEMBER
Application for review — assessment of levy by WorkCover on
particular workplaces previously operated by another contractor
preparation of book of documents — no explicit process of discovery
provided in review process — President of
Panel invested with powers of
authorised officer — confidentiality provisions of Act — procedural
fairness — hearing
rule — consent of the person to whom the
information relates or who furnished the information refusing — disclosure
by a court or tribunal constituted by law — whether Panel
“a tribunal constituted by law” — relevance of
documents in
sections 67
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1986
Cases referred to:
Torrens Transit v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP 8
Re Monger; ex parte WMC Resources
[2002] WASCA 129
Henderson’s Automotive v. WorkCover (No.2)
R. v Trade Practices Commission; ex parte Tasmanian
[1970] HCA 8
(1970) 120 CLR 396
K-Generation v. Liquor Licensing Court
[2009] HCA 4
(2009) 237 CLR 501
FAI Insurances v. Winneke
[1982] HCA 26
(1981-2) 151
NSW Bar Association v. Muirhead
(1988) 14 NSWLR 173
Appearances:
Mr J. Wells QC, with him, Mr S.J. Dowd of counsel and
Mr S.J. Condon for the applicant employer.
Mr S.J. Doyle of counsel, with him
Mr C.M. Beames for the respondent WorkCover.
REASONS FOR RULING
Introduction
1. This is the further consideration of an application dated 9 June 2005,
pursuant to
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
(“the Act”), seeking a review of a decision relating to the
applicant’s levy rate, embodied in correspondence from
WorkCover dated 17
2. I have published a previous ruling of an interlocutory nature dated 28
October 2010:
Torrens Transit v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP 8.
explained in the course of that ruling some of the background to the dispute
between the parties and will not repeat that on this
3. In short, I am now called upon to decide the question I expressly left
open in paragraph [41] of that ruling, namely, whether this
Panel comes within
the expression “a court or tribunal constituted by law” in
of the Act.
4. This ruling should be read in conjunction with that earlier ruling.
The issue between the parties
5. The issue between the parties remains
essentially the same as I described in my previous ruling, although my previous
narrow it somewhat.
6. It was agreed previously that the material sought by the applicant
employer in this matter, Torrens Transit, could be summarised
as documents
concerning:
(a) the registration of Serco (Australia) Pty Ltd (Serco) as an employer
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
(b) the levy history of Serco;
(c) measures taken by Serco to reduce the incidence of work related
(d) the incidence or costs of claims for compensable disabilities suffered by
Serco’s workers;
(e) the rehabilitation facilities or services for disabled workers provided
(f) Serco’s practices as to the retention, employment or re-employment
[of] disabled workers;
(g) any other matter that the Corporation treated as relevant in making the
decision subject to the review,
together with legal advice obtained by the
Corporation and referred to in a letter from [Ms] Cheryl Milburn of the
Corporation to
the Applicant dated 11 July 2005.
7. The majority of the documentation sought by the applicant has been
provided by WorkCover since my ruling. Indeed, a book of documents
December 2010 has been lodged with the Panel’s registry, containing many
of the documents that will be required on
the full hearing of this matter.
8. Since that time, a good deal of correspondence has passed between the
parties and it has emerged that, contrary to what I was told
previously (namely
that there were no documents falling within the descriptions of categories (c)
and (e) and that the applicant
abandoned seeking documents in those categories
on that basis
), WorkCover does in fact have documents falling within
category (c), although the delegate making the reviewable decision in question
did not have regard to them: WorkCover’s solicitors’ letter to the
applicant’s solicitors dated 6 May 2011.
9. Consistent with the Panel’s oft-stated view that a review under
section 72 is a merits review
, to be conducted without overly
focusing on the means by which the reviewable decision came to be made, it is my
view that what matters
is whether the Panel might take account of the documents
in question, not whether the original decision-maker took account of them.
other words, relevance now is not governed by the use previously made of the
10. Given, as I observed at [12] of the previous
ruling, the close parallels between the wording of the categories and the
paragraphs of section 67(1) of the Act — under which the
reviewable decision was made — it would seem, at first blush,
difficult to
assert that the documents in question are not relevant to these proceedings,
even if I remain unsure of the extent to
which they will eventually be useful.
They clearly relate to matters that may be taken into account under section 67
in levying,
or not, a supplement, or in granting, or not, a remission. It must
be remembered, however, that this is a review of Torrens Transit’s
not Serco’s. The very point of Torrens Transit’s application is the
assertion that Serco’s levy is not relevant
to the assessment of Torrens
Transit’s levy. On this view, material that might have been used to assess
Serco’s levy,
but was not, seems of very remote relevance indeed. However,
since WorkCover asserts the contrary, there must be a possibility that
will be persuaded to use such material, and that this may include material
falling within category (c).
11. There may also be further documents in category (b) to be discovered by
WorkCover and
prima facie
protected by section 112(1).
12. In my previous ruling, at [39], I pointed out that the most obvious way
of dealing with material protected by section 112 of the
Act was by consent of
the party to whom the information relates or who furnished the information to
WorkCover, namely Serco: section
. I was surprised nobody had
thought to enquire of Serco whether they would consent to the production in
these proceedings of material
provided by them to WorkCover relating to their
former workplace, now a workplace operated by Torrens Transit.
13. That question has now been asked. I am informed that Serco consent to the
material being made available to the Panel, but not
to Torrens Transit or its
legal advisers.
14. This brings us back to the undesirable situation I outlined at [27] to
[29], where procedural fairness, and in particular the
hearing rule, would be
offended if the Panel were to take on secret evidence to which it had access,
and to which the respondent
WorkCover had access, but to which the applicant
employer did not. That situation is to be avoided if at all possible, for the
I mentioned.
15. Mr Wells QC described this as an “unacceptable position”
which justified disclosure under section 112(2)
, substantially for the
reasons I outlined in my previous ruling at [44]-[45]. This may be so, and may
be as far as this ruling needs
to go. Given Serco’s apparent position,
however, I think it appropriate to consider the alternative basis on which Mr
put his argument that I should require the material to be provided to the
Panel using my powers under section 110, and then order
it be provided to the
Is the Panel a “tribunal constituted by law”?
16. At paragraphs [40]-[41] of my previous ruling in this matter, I
“The subject of paragraph
(a disclosure required by a court
or tribunal constituted by law, or before a review authority) arose from a
question posed by me.
The Panel is certainly a ‘court’ for the
purposes of the
Evidence Act 1929
, which defines the term in
includes a tribunal, authority or person invested by
law with judicial or quasi-judicial powers, or with authority to make any
or to receive evidence …
However, there is no suggestion that this definition has wider application
than that Act.
“The word ‘tribunal’ in section 112 of the
Act, however, is not capitalised (and in any case, the Workers Compensation
Tribunal, the only ‘Tribunal’ created under the Act, is embraced by
the term ‘review authority’). While the
word ‘tribunal’
does not appear in the name of the Panel, one would have thought that the Panel
fell within the common
conception of a small-‘t’ tribunal. The
primary definition in the
Macquarie ABC Dictionary
(2003) is ‘a
body set up to investigate and resolve disputes’.
The New Oxford
Dictionary of English
(1998) defines a tribunal as ‘a body established
to settle certain types of dispute’. Both have ‘a court of
as a secondary definition, but this Panel certainly fits both
primary definitions. Is the Panel ‘constituted by law’?
explicitly contemplates the exercise of the powers under that section by a
delegate. The Panel is not created directly
by the statute, but it is
constituted by the Board of WorkCover under that power expressly conferred by
section 72 of the Act and
the further power conferred by section 17 of the
WorkCover Corporation Act 1994
, which arguably results in it being
‘constituted by law’. However, neither party to these proceedings
was prepared to
argue this way. It must be acknowledged that the Panel is a mere
administrative tribunal (but there’s that word again), and
constitution under an instrument of delegation by the Board might more aptly be
expressed as ‘constituted
law’ than ‘
law’. I therefore think it is a question that I should not decide in the
absence of an affirmative argument being advanced
by a party, and I therefore
leave it open until another appropriate occasion arises.”
17. Mr Wells contended that the Board, when exercising jurisdiction under
section 72, was indeed a “tribunal constituted by
law” and that its
delegate (this Panel) must also necessarily be.
18. He said that pursuant to section 72, the Board is established as “a
body whose proceedings are directed towards the adjudicative
function of the
final resolution of a dispute” (
Re Monger; ex parte WMC
[2002] WASCA 129
, at [25], per Murray J) and that this is
implicit in the requirement that “the Board must, on application by the
review the decision”. He quoted the Panel’s own words to
the effect that the “touchstone of [the] mandate under
section 72 is
‘unreasonableness’ of the kind that the application of the powers
conferred by section 72(4) is able to
Henderson’s
Automotive v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2005] SAWLRP 2
). He said the
Board’s discretion as to procedure is necessarily incidental to the
prescribed function of adjudication. The
critical feature is that there is an
adjudicative function directed to the final resolution of the dispute. The fact
that there is
a process of fact-finding and the application of some rule or
standard confirms the adjudicative function.
19. Mr Wells emphasised that it was not necessary to establish that the Board
or Panel had the essential features of a court in the
Practices Commission; ex parte Tasmanian Breweries
[1970] HCA 8
120 CLR 396
K-Generation v. Liquor Licensing Court
(2009) 237 CLR 501.
The word “tribunal” appears in section
as an alternative to “court”. However, the more the
features of the prescribed function resemble the functions of a court,
likely it is to be undertaking an adjudicative function such as to give it the
essential character of a tribunal. In this
connection, Mr Wells pointed out that
section 72 contemplates a dispute between
contending parties
(not necessarily an oral one) with a view to making
findings of fact
to discharge the mandate to
whether the decision of the Corporation is “unreasonable”. The
determination of that question, he said, will constitute
the final decision
which affects the rights, interests or legitimate expectations of subjects, and
in the resolution of that dispute
by adjudication of the Board, it is open to
the Board to take evidence on oath.
20. He added that there can be no doubt that the Board, in exercising its
functions under section 72, must ensure procedural fairness
observance of the
audi alteram partem
limb. Not only would this result,
he said, from the inevitable conclusion that it was under a duty to act fairly,
but it is expressly
confirmed in section 72(3) where an absolute discretion is
given to the Board to decide whether it will permit the employer or its
representative to be heard “orally” on the review — thereby
recognising that there is no discretion as to whether
to hear them at all. If
the Board acted itself, without delegating, the bias limb of procedural fairness
could not be met, given
that the Corporation is inevitably a party to every
review, and would have to “contend with the demands of necessity”,
but this consideration does not diminish the adjudicative functions of the
Board, he said, which would, at the very least, have to
be exercised
21. He further argued that if, as contended, the Board is a
by virtue of the powers conferred by section 72, it is also a tribunal
constituted by law
, namely by section 72 itself. Although the instrument
of delegation establishing the Panel (the
WorkCover Levy Review Determination
) contains certain reservations, he said, the delegation of the
“power of review under this section” is plenary. In relation
given application that comes before the Panel for review, section 72 requires
that the delegation be of “its [the Board’s]
review”, that is, all that comprises that power of review. Accordingly, if
the Board, in exercising the powers conferred
on it by section 72, is a
“tribunal constituted by law” for the purpose of section
, so also must be the body to which those powers are delegated
by the Board.
22. As an alternative argument, Mr Wells dealt with the concern I raised in
my previous ruling, namely whether it was appropriate
to categorise this Panel
as being “constituted by law”. He submitted that to interpret the
phrase “tribunal constituted
by law” as meaning a tribunal that owes
its existence
to constitutive words in a statute is too narrow a
reading and not justified. Additionally, section 72
that the power of review may be exercised
by the Board or by a
person or body appointed by the Board as its delegate. The delegation, he
suggested, is merely an enabling instrument,
not the power-conferring
instrument. Thus the statute is the constitutive source of both the power and
the repository of the power.
23. Mr Doyle said his instructions on this question were to take an
essentially neutral position, appropriately befitting a model
litigant policy.
He pointed out that the Board was not constituted by section 72, merely had some
powers conferred on it. He said
that a tribunal was normally an adjudicative
body somewhat independent of the original decision-maker and queried the
position of
the Board as part of the original decision-making process. He drew
an analogy with peer review in a professional organisation.
24. In response, Mr Wells cited
FAI Insurances v. Winneke
[1982] HCA 26
(1981-2) 151 CLR 342
in which, he said, it was found that the
Victorian Governor in Council in effect acted as a tribunal sitting above the
of government when deciding whether to renew an approval for the
appellant to act as a workers’ compensation insurer under
the legislation
then prevailing in Victoria. However, as I read the seven separate judgments in
that case, the only reason why the
question was argued in terms of whether the
Governor in Council could be regarded as a tribunal was that the action was
brought under
an administrative law statute that contained a particular
definition of “tribunal” that depended, crucially for that
whether the rules of natural justice applied with the result that an applicant
should be heard where it was proposed to
reject the application. The six
majority judgments turned on the duty to hear. Given that it was found that
there was a duty to hear,
I suppose it can be inferred that the Governor in
Council was found to be a “tribunal” within the meaning of the
although only Wilson J. found it necessary to say so (at paragraph [30]
of his decision; p.403 of 151 CLR). Brennan J. in fact expressly
found to the
contrary (at paragraph [32] of his decision; p.420 of 151 CLR), although
upholding the existence of a duty to hear.
For what it is worth, I have no doubt
that the Board (and this Panel) would qualify as a “tribunal” within
the meaning
of that statute, but this does not advance us very much on the
question of whether the Panel is a “tribunal constituted by
the purposes of section 112 of the Act.
25. The case of
Re Monger; ex parte WMC Resources
[2002] WASCA
required the Full Court of the Supreme Court of Western Australia to
consider whether the Director of Conciliation and Review under
state’s workers’ compensation law was a “tribunal” (not
defined) when he made a decision to refer a
file to a review officer where the
application had been accompanied by an invalid medical report. Murray J. wrote
(at [25]-[28]):
“For myself, I can see no reason to confine the meaning of the word
‘tribunal’ in r 11 [Order 56, rule 11 of the
Rules of the
Supreme Court 1971 (W.A.)
] to a body whose proceedings are directed towards
the adjudicative function of the final resolution of disputes. To my mind, it
not strain ordinary language to hold that a tribunal is, as Anderson J
has observed, ‘a person or body exercising judicial
quasi‑judicial functions outside the regular judicial system’. I
would accept the statement by Prof Wade in
Administrative Law
ed) that ‘a quasi‑judicial decision is … an administrative
decision which is subject to the principles of
natural justice’.
“That seems to me to accurately describe the aspect of the function of
the Director upon which attention is focused in these
applications. His decision
is not purely administrative, but one in which he performs an adjudicative
function of examining the medical
evidence submitted with the Form 22 to
determine whether, in the context of the statutory scheme, it is capable of
supporting the
expressed opinion of the medical practitioner that the degree of
disability is not less than the relevant level. To that degree,
the Director is
obliged to afford a hearing or consideration of the issue as to whether the
question of the degree of disability
is properly referred by the worker to
activate the statutory processes for the resolution of a dispute about that
[2001] WASCA 220
accepted as properly made concessions on behalf of workers in those cases
“‘… the Director’s task upon receipt of the referral
was not purely an administrative one, because the Director
must first be
satisfied that the medical evidence does “indicate” that the degree
of disability is not less than the
requisite level. While this involved an
essentially administrative function, it was also conceded that it involved a
limited adjudicative
function in the sense that his decision is a precondition
to exciting the jurisdiction of the review officer. In essence, what the
Director does is to determine whether the medical evidence does
“indicate” that the degree of disability is not less
requisite level.’
“At [52] his Honour said that the purpose of s 93D(6) is that
the Director ‘should carry out a screening function to ensure
frivolous, vexatious or fanciful assertions or claims of liability are not
accepted’. In support of that view of the
legislative scheme
Malcolm CJ referred to the earlier decision of Miller J in
Monger; Ex parte Ivey
[1999] WASC 250
at [113] Owen J expressed the same
view by saying:
“‘While the decision‑making role of the Director under
s 93D is limited, he or she is more than just a clerical
functionary. The
functions are designed to identify whether there really is a question in issue
between the parties, to assist them
to resolve the question by agreement and, if
that is not possible, to refer it to the review officer or the medical
“In my opinion, in performing that limited
quasi‑judicial role, the Director is undoubtedly subject to have his
to accept a referral and, in the absence of agreement, to refer it to
the review officer, quashed upon grounds which will support
a writ of certiorari
and in so functioning, the Director is a ‘tribunal’ within the
meaning of O 56 r 11.”
26. Anderson J. (Scott J. agreeing) ultimately came to the conclusion that
the Director was not a tribunal, but he wrote (at [76]):
dictionaries tell us that, in its primary sense, ‘tribunal’ means a
place or seat of judgment (
Shorter Oxford Dictionary
), a body appointed
to adjudicate disputes (
Butterworths Australian Legal Dictionary
(according to the
Dictionary of English Law
) a person or body exercising
judicial or quasi‑judicial functions outside the regular judicial system,
and, in these senses,
the word is quite inapt to describe the office of Director
in the performance of the essentially administrative task of examining
doctors’ reports for compliance with the medical evidence requirements of
s 93D(6) of the
Workers’ Compensation and Rehabilitation Act
and deciding whether they do or do not comply. To my mind, confirmation that
‘tribunal’ is intended to have its primary
O 56 r 11(1) is to be found in the syntactical arrangement of
that rule; the word ‘tribunal’ appears between
‘inferior court’ and ‘or of a magistrate or justice’. I
would accept the submission made on behalf
of the applicants that the
arrangement of the words and phrases in the rule strongly suggests that the word
is intended to signify a body of the same genus as
‘inferior court’, ‘magistrate’ and
‘justices’.”
27. It is to be noted that the word “tribunal” is in similar
company in section 112(2)
of the Act.
28. It seems to me that on the analysis of the WA court, the Board or its
delegate exercising jurisdiction under section 72 is certainly
a tribunal.
29. Mr Wells commented that cases discussing the word “tribunal”
seemed remarkably rare, and I respectfully agree. Moreover,
I respectfully think
that the cases of
Tasmanian Breweries
K-Generation
should be approached with great caution in the
present context, as the focus in both of those cases was upon the judicial power
the Commonwealth under Chapter III of the
Constitution
K-Generation
, as conferred upon a state court), and turned upon
criteria that may not be applicable to the Board of WorkCover, or to this Panel,
given that neither wields, nor purports to wield, the judicial power of the
Commonwealth.
30. I do, however, draw some assistance from the case of
Association v. Muirhead
(1988) 14 NSWLR 173
, in which the NSW Court of
Appeal was called upon to consider whether alleged interference with the
functioning of other workers’
compensation commissioners by the Chief
Commissioner (appointed under workers’ compensation legislation) amounted
to contempt
of court. Kirby P. wrote (at 185-191, some citations omitted):
“The determination of whether a body is a ‘court’ to
attract the protection of the law of contempt must be considered
in the light of
all of the characteristics of that body. Whether a body may be categorised as a
‘court’ depends not upon
an artificial check list of universal
application but upon the purposes for which the categorisation is made. Thus, a
decision that
a body is a ‘court’ for the beneficial provisions of
Suitors’ Fund Act 1951
, may not necessarily determine whether
that body is a ‘court’ to attract the very great power which
accompanies the application
of contempt law. Obviously, some of the same
considerations will overlap. But in each case it is important to keep in mind
for the search. Here, relevantly, it is not to decide whether the
commissioners are ‘courts’ for reasons of status, precedence,
application of a statute … or the relief against appellate costs. It is,
instead, to decide the question in the context
of determining whether an alleged
interference with commissioners in the performance of their quasi-judicial
duties will attract
the law of contempt of court.
“There is no simple answer to this question, as the parties conceded.
It is a matter of considering the criteria by which the
categorisation is to be
made and then examining the statutory and other material to decide whether the
commissioners fall inside
or outside the category for this purpose.
“The criteria by which bodies and office holders have been held to be a
‘court’ for various purposes of the law
have been explored in many
cases. The Privy Council did so in
Shell Co. of Australia v. Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[1930] UKPC 97
[1931] AC 275
; (1930) 44 CLR 530, in which it
was held that the Taxation Board of Review was not a ‘court’
exercising the judicial
power of the Commonwealth. In the course of that review,
a number of ‘negative propositions’ were enumerated as useful
the determination of whether a body is, or is not, a ‘court’.
“‘1. A tribunal is not necessarily a Court in this strict sense
because it gives a final decision. 2. Nor because it hears
witnesses on oath. 3.
Nor because two or more contending parties appear before it between whom it has
to decide. 4. Nor because it
gives decisions which affect the rights of
subjects. 5. Nor because there is an appeal to a Court. 6. Nor because it is a
which a matter is referred by another body.’
“But in that case, drawing upon the choice which was open to the
taxpayer to go to an administrative body such as the Board
or to a court
strictly so-called, the Privy Council concluded that for the purpose there under
consideration the Board of Review
was not ‘in truth a court’.
“There is no doubt that the commissioners have many characteristics of
a ‘court’. They enjoy, both in the terms
of their appointment and in
the functions they perform, many of the features which are common to courts. The
mere fact that they
are not designated as a ‘court’ or as members of
a ‘court’ cannot determine the question of the application
contempt law. What is involved is not nomenclature but the nature of the
function of the persons or body involved and the consequent
need to cloak that
function with the protection provided by the law of contempt.
“When one looks at the
of the law which is here
invoked, it is, essentially, to defend the administration of justice in the
State. Nowadays, so many tribunals
and other statutory bodies and office holders
have been created with power to make decisions affecting individuals, that there
a natural disinclination to extend to them, in all of their variety, the
exceptional procedures and drastic penalties that the courts
have fashioned for
themselves by the law of contempt. On the other hand, in a scale of court-like
bodies from which the investigating
committee under the
Medical Practitioners
is excluded but in which the inquisitorial Coroner’s Court is
included, the compensation commissioners appear closer to court-like
than either. They do not carry on inquisitorial investigations. They determine
rights by reference to pre-existing norms
expounded in the
Compensation Act
. They resolve those rights in a controversy between
conflicting parties. In this sense the
of their activities is
virtually entirely judicial in character. They are not, as so many modern
tribunals are, alternates for the
administrator, substituting their opinion of
the ‘right or preferable’ decision for an administrative decision.
they, as the Taxation Board of Review was, an administrative alternative
to an election to proceed to court. Instead, they essentially
perform the same
function as the judges of the Compensation Court. Disputed claims under the
Workers’ Compensation Act
are simply divided by an admittedly
arbitrary standard between the commissioners and the judges. The
of the functions they each perform is, relevantly, precisely the same. True it
is, there are some differences of detail in the statutory
instruction about the
way in which they are to go about their tasks. But little would appear to turn
on these. It would be surprising
if the nature of the respective functions of
the commissioners and the judges of the court were relevantly different, given
the virtual
identity of the functions they each have to perform and the factors
which assign a case to one rather than the other.”
31. The final paragraph is interesting, because a distinction between
tribunals and courts emerges. The Board (and, as its delegate,
this Panel) is,
in many ways, constituted under section 72 as an “alternate for the
administrator”. There are cases arising
under section 72 where there is a
range of possible “correct” decisions and the task becomes one of
exercising a discretion
to identify the “preferable” decision from
that range, although it must be said that any discretion must always be
in accordance with principle, as the Panel has explained many times.
More frequently, however, the task under section 72 is indeed
“determine rights by reference to pre-existing norms expounded” in
the Act. In the present context, this distinction
does not matter, because the
question is not whether the adjudicator under section 72 is a court. It is
whether it is a tribunal.
The answer seems clearly to be that it is.
32. It remains to address the question as to whether the Panel, if it is a
tribunal, could be categorised as a “tribunal constituted
am persuaded by Mr Wells’ argument that the answer must follow the
categorisation of the Board as the
prima facie
review body under section
72. Section 72, after all, expressly contemplates delegation of the review
function and treats both the
Board and its delegate the same way. Neither the
Board nor the Panel is constituted by section 72. The Board is constituted by
WorkCover Corporation Act 1994
. However, neither that
nor any other section of the
WorkCover Corporation Act 1994
Board the character of a tribunal; that arises only under, and for the purposes
of, the powers and responsibilities conferred
by section 72 of the Act. It is
section 72 itself that serves to constitute both the Board and its delegate as,
in each case, a “tribunal
constituted by law”. I so conclude.
The contentious documents
33. It follows that any documents I required to be produced to me under my
powers arising from section 110 may be ordered to be produced
also to the
applicant as a consequence of section 112(2)
. For reasons I explained
in my earlier ruling, I would in any event conceive it as part of my official
duty to disclose under section
documents produced to me. That,
however, would involve, at least notionally, two steps: disclosure
and disclosure
me. Section 112(2)
contemplates, in my
opinion, something more closely resembling traditional discovery and inspection:
certainly, in the case of a
court or the Workers Compensation Tribunal. In the
practice of this Panel, that involves collaboration by the parties on a book of
documents (usually in the form of WorkCover compiling a proposed list of
contents and the employer adding to it if it wishes), hopefully
without the
formal involvement of the Panel, and the parties disclosing to each other
through that process any documents that are
not already common to them.
34. I have considered anxiously whether, in the final analysis, I should
order production of the documents now sought by the employer.
As I said above at
], these are documents that might
have been taken into account when assessing Serco’s levy adjustment under
section 67, but
were not. The present applicant contests the propriety of
applying any element of Serco’s adjustment to its levy at all. These
documents are not relevant to that question; they would only become relevant to
this review if the Panel was persuaded that it was
necessary, and indeed,
permissible, to review the calculation of Serco’s adjustments taking
account of the material WorkCover
had, but did not have regard to. Several
controversial propositions are contained within that contingency.
35. I have come to the conclusion that ruling that the documents should be
excluded on the grounds of relevancy would be to pre-judge
the outcome of those
arguments, should the applicant be advised to mount them. It follows that I
should order their production and
let the review proceed where it will.
36. In so doing, I remain mindful that Serco has refused its consent to the
applicant or its legal advisers having access to these
documents. My finding
that that section 112(2)
(or, indeed, section 112(2)
applicable overcomes that, but it does not render it a matter of no importance.
I ask the applicant’s legal advisers to
be sensitive to Serco’s
intellectual property in any of its documents produced to them, and to produce
those documents to officers
of the applicant only so far as is necessary to take
instructions. I ask that any such officers of the applicant be counselled as
the respect with which Serco’s intellectual property should be treated. It
should not be necessary for officers of the applicant
to retain permanent copies
of any of these documents. The boot might be on the other foot in the
37. As I said in my previous ruling at [69], the Panel is not a court of law.
I am not strictly delivering a ruling on the discoverability
or admissibility of
documents. I am deciding, as an authorised officer, what documents I will
requisition under section 110 of the
Act, and then, as a tribunal within the
meaning of section 112(2)
of the Act, order produced to the
Final remarks
38. I merely note that the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
(Employer Payments) Amendment Bill 2011
that is presently before Parliament,
if passed in the form in which it was introduced, will put an end to any
problems presented
for this Panel by section 112 by including in the definition
of “review authority” a person or body conducting a review
section 72N (being the equivalent in the new provisions of the present section
72). This pending change does not and cannot
influence the interpretation of the
existing provisions, but the problem should not arise in future.
39. I also note that Mr Beames made available to me on 3 June 2011 four
documents in electronic form, which I understood to be the
contentious documents
in this matter. They remain on the hard drive of my computer, but to this point
I have not opened any of them.
The file sizes indicate they are quite
voluminous. Having reached this point in this ruling, I see no useful purpose in
them now. I will wait until they are tendered before the Panel in a
book of documents (if indeed they are) and allow counsel to take
through them, indicate any relevant portions, and make submissions on what the
Panel should make of them.
Ruling and directions
40. Pursuant to my powers as an authorised officer under section 110 of the
Act, and as the presiding officer of a tribunal under
section 112(2), I require
the Corporation to produce to me and to the applicant’s solicitors the
documents falling within the
description of “documents concerning measures
taken by Serco to reduce the incidence of work related traumas”. As
if any individual injured workers are named who did not become workers
of the applicant, their names should be redacted.
41. I indicate that the requirements of this ruling will be satisfied if a
book of documents can now be compiled, containing the material
the subject of my
two rulings and other relevant material, by agreement between the parties in the
ordinary way.
42. Finally, I remind the parties of my view (expressed at [39] of my
previous ruling) that documents relating to contractual and
other arrangements
for the acquisition by the applicant of Serco’s workforce (or part of it)
and other tangible or intangible
assets formerly employed by Serco should be
included in the book of documents. Such documentation is much more likely to be
by the applicant than by WorkCover. I note that the book of documents
lodged in December 2010 does not seem to contain anything of
this sort, and I
would expect that the next book of documents would remedy this omission.
43. I will hear the parties further if there are any further matters arising
from these directions, such as the identification of
particular contentious
documents, and I will list a further directions hearing in a few weeks to
monitor progress in any event.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (97.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter