URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASC/2025/182.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:05:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
EL-BEHIDI v COMMISSIONER FOR CONSUMER AFFAIRS [2025] SASC 182 (21 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Appeal to a Single Judge)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
EL-BEHIDI v COMMISSIONER FOR CONSUMER AFFAIRS
[2025] SASC 182
Judgment of the Honourable
Justice Gray
(ex tempore)
21 October 2025
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS - SOUTH AUSTRALIAN CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
CONVEYANCING - THE CONTRACT AND CONDITIONS OF SALE - CLAIMS FOR
COMPENSATION
This matter concerns an application for leave to appeal against a decision of
a senior member of the South Australian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal which
affirmed a decision of the respondent, the Commissioner for Consumer Affairs,
dismissing a claim under
Conveyancers Act 1994
(SA) on the
indemnity fund.
The claim by the applicant, Mr El-Behidi, arose out of a failed business
transaction concerning the sale of his business, Woodville
Pizzeria, to a Mr
Pericleous in November 2017.
The applicant did not identify error in the decision of the learned Senior
Member. The applicant made general complaints regarding
negligence and deceptive
conduct on the part of the conveyancer, and complained of a failure by the
respondent to provide assistance
to him. No party disputed that at all relevant
times no monies were paid to the applicant by Mr Pericleous and no monies were
on trust by the conveyancer.
The respondent submitted that leave to appeal should be refused as the matter
was not reasonably arguable. It was submitted that as
no trust money was held by
the conveyancer, the claim under
Conveyancers Act 1994
must fail, as such a claim is founded on the occurrence of fiduciary default by
a conveyancer in relation to trust money.
Held, refusing leave to appeal:
trust money was held by the conveyancer at any relevant time and a claim under
Conveyancers Act 1994
(SA) does not arise on the facts of this
case. There is no reasonably arguable case or matter of sufficient substance
consideration on appeal which justifies a grant of leave: at
Conveyancers Act 1994
Land Agents
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
, referred to.
Aldridge v Registrar of Firearms (SA)
[2022] SASC 5
Jackson v Lepp
Investments Pty Ltd [2016]
[2016] SASC 62
(2016) 125 SASR 1
Pix v South
Australian Housing Trust
[2016] SASCFC 57
(2016) 125 SASR 10
[2016] SASC 86
(2016) 125 SASR 191
, considered.
EL-BEHIDI v COMMISSIONER FOR CONSUMER AFFAIRS
[2025] SASC 182
Civil: Single Judge Appeal
Introduction
matter concerns an application by Mr El-Behidi, the applicant, for leave to
appeal against a decision of a senior member of
the South Australian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (‘SACAT’ or ‘the Tribunal’) made
on 3 July 2025.
12 December 2024, the respondent dismissing a claim made by the applicant
against the indemnity fund established under
, Division 3 of the
Conveyancers Act 1994
Conveyancers
pursuant to
Conveyancers Act
(‘the Commissioner’s
decision’), for compensation in the amount of
The applicant sought
review of the Commissioner’s decision before the Tribunal pursuant to
Conveyancers Act
Tribunal affirmed the decision of the
Commissioner.
The applicant seeks
leave to appeal from the Tribunal’s decision. The applicant also seeks
orders summonsing a number of
witnesses to give evidence as to the events which
are said to have taken place.
Commissioner for Consumer Affairs, (‘the respondent’ or ‘the
Commissioner’), opposes a grant of leave
to appeal, on the basis that the
applicant has not established reasonably arguable grounds. In the alternative,
the respondent submits
that the appeal should be dismissed because the applicant
did not establish any appellable error.
Background and nature of
applicant lodged a claim with the Commissioner under
Conveyancers
seeking compensation for losses he says he suffered as a result of a
transaction he entered into with a Mr Alecos
Pericleous.
claim, brought by the applicant on 21 December 2020, relates to the sale of a
business that the applicant operated which traded
under the name Woodville
Pizzeria. The business was located at Shop 3, 39 Woodville Road, Woodville SA
5011 (‘the business’).
background to this claim, as appears from the decision at first instance or the
decision of the Tribunal, is as follows:
November 2017 Mr Pericleous agreed to purchase the business for
Payment of that sum was
to be made by 1 July 2018.
7.2. Prior to
the payment of the monies on 1 July 2018, between 1 November 2017 and 1
July 2018, Mr Pericleous agreed to pay a monthly
licence fee of $2,250 to cover
rent and outgoing expenses charged by the
7.3. A licence
agreement may have been completed for the sale by Mr John Radovanovic,
an employee of FJ & F Portelli Pty Ltd,
trading as Port Adelaide
Conveyancers (‘the
conveyancer’).
Pericleous failed to make the required monthly payments and the lease agreement,
which remained in the name of the applicant,
was terminated by the
The landlord’s
agent repossessed the premises and the premises were sold at
applicant contended that he had been scammed and Mr Pericleous had moved into
the premises, sold all goods and chattels belonging
to the applicant, paid no
rent or outgoing expenses, and placed no monies in trust with the
conveyancer.
The applicant
stated that he suffered significant pecuniary losses as a result of the sequence
of events which took
the hearing before this Court, the applicant also referred to, and advanced
submissions, concerning the entry into a written agreement
to sell the business.
Whilst those factual matters referred to above appear from the papers, what is
not in dispute is that no monies
were paid to the applicant by Mr Pericleous and
no monies were held in trust by the conveyancer at the relevant times.
applicant’s claim made on 21 December 2020 to the respondent pursuant to
Conveyancers Act
for compensation from the indemnity fund was
in the amount of $330,000.
respondent dismissed the claim on the basis of the evidence before the
respondent indicating that as there was no evidence to
support that the
applicant had suffered a pecuniary loss as a result of a fiduciary default by
the conveyancer.
applicant sought review of the Commissioner’s decision before SACAT
pursuant to
Conveyancers Act
. The learned Senior Member
affirmed the Commissioner’s decision, dismissing the claim from the
indemnity fund. The learned
Senior Member identified that the issue to be
determined on review was whether a fiduciary default was committed by a
conveyancer
in relation to trust money which would support a claim for
compensation.
The learned
Senior Member’s reasons record the
is no evidence before me on review to establish that Mr El-Behidi suffered a
pecuniary loss
as a result of a fiduciary default by a conveyancer
the applicant’s filed written submission, he agrees with that factual
Accordingly,
there can be no indemnity for any loss suffered by the applicant for any
‘fiduciary default’ (i.e., inappropriate
dealing with trust funds)
under the legislation as none exists.
decision made by the Commissioner is correct at law. There is no preferable
decision because there is no discretion to be exercised
Tribunal only has the power to deal with a reviewable decision within the strict
terms of the relevant legislation which confers
This means that the Tribunal can only make a decision that accords with the
Conveyancer’s Act
and that the Tribunal only has the same decision-making
power as the Commissioner. Neither the Commissioner nor the Tribunal have
power to award compensation generally to the applicant for any other losses that
he may have suffered as a result of the subject
transaction
outside of the
of that Act.
learned Senior Member found that the terms of the
Conveyancers Act
permit for an award of compensation from the indemnity fund save and except as
permitted by
basis of the appeal and relevant principles
appeal to this Court from a decision of a senior member requires
The time for instituting
an appeal is one month.
Court should only grant leave to appeal from a SACAT internal review decision
where the appeal is reasonably arguable, and the
subject matter is of sufficient
substance to justify
consideration.
is important that leave is not granted as a matter of routine. SACAT is a
specialist tribunal, and the granting of leave too
readily would undermine the
legislative intention to establish SACAT as a specialist
The overarching
consideration is the interests of
a grant of leave be given, an appeal to this Court from a decision of SACAT is
by way of rehearing.
of fact can be drawn from evidence and materials before the Court and further
evidence or material can be submitted to
the Court if it is thought
The Court may affirm, vary
or set aside the decision of the Tribunal, and remit the matter for
reconsideration in accordance with
any directions should that be considered
appropriate.
Consideration
applicant does not in his grounds of appeal identify specific error in the
decision-making process of the Tribunal or in the
decision of the Tribunal.
Rather, the applicant, in a lengthy document attached to the notice of appeal,
makes allegations concerning
deceptive conduct and negligence on the part of the
conveyancer.
The applicant also
makes complaint as to the manner in which the Commissioner dealt with the
complaint he made about the conveyancer
Commissioner.
was explained to the applicant during the course of the hearing before this
Court, complaints concerning deceptive conduct and
negligence not relating to
trust funds may form the basis of a civil claim. Those complaints do not
identify error in the decision
relation to the complaints advanced about the conduct of the Commissioner, a
complaint in relation to that conduct may found a
civil claim or be the basis of
a complaint to the Ombudsman, but again those complaints which do not relate to
trust money do not
identify error in the decision of the Tribunal.
Conveyancers Act
states that a ‘person who has
suffered a pecuniary loss as a result of a fiduciary default may make a claim
for compensation
to the Commissioner.’ The applicant’s claim was
brought pursuant to
Conveyancers Act
the applicant in oral submissions says to the effect that the Commissioner
should have considered his claim more broadly,
the applicant advanced his
complaint as a complaint against the conveyancer and a claim on the indemnity
applicant did not identify appellable error in the consideration of his claim as
being a claim brought pursuant to
Conveyancers Act
to the provisions of the
Conveyancers Act
, fiduciary default is defined
means a defalcation, misappropriation or misapplication of trust
money occurring while the money is in the possession or control
(a) a conveyancer; or
(b) a firm of which a conveyancer is a member.
Conveyancers Act
defines trust money as
, in relation to a conveyancer, means money—
(a) that is received by the conveyancer when acting on behalf of another in
connection with a dealing with land; and
(b) to which the conveyancer is not wholly entitled in law and in equity,
but does not include money received by a conveyancer in the course of
mortgage financing.
Commissioner, as noted above, found that there was no evidence that the
applicant suffered a pecuniary loss because of a fiduciary
default by the
conveyancer.
The Tribunal
affirmed the Commissioner’s decision under review to reject the claim
under the indemnity fund pursuant to
Conveyancers Act
reaching that conclusion, the Tribunal reasoned that there was no money held on
trust by the conveyancer, and therefore so no
defalcation, misappropriation or
misapplication of trust money
The Tribunal noted
that the applicant in his filed written submission agreed with the factual
finding that there was no evidence
before the Tribunal on the review to
establish that the applicant suffered a pecuniary loss as a result of a
fiduciary default by
conveyancer.
In his notice of
appeal to this Court, the applicant states, “[a]t no point did I claim
that any funds were held or transferred
to the conveyancer’s trust
applicant has not identified any material error of fact or law in the decision
of the Tribunal. Having reviewed the reasons
of the Tribunal, no material error
of fact or law is identifiable. The statutory provisions of the
Conveyancers
indicate that a claim on the indemnity fund may be made by a person who
has suffered a pecuniary loss because of a fiduciary
Fiduciary default is
defined to mean a defalcation, misappropriation or misapplication of trust
Trust money is defined
Conveyancers
The applicant
accepts that his claim did not involve trust money.
find that on the evidence before me, there is no claim on the indemnity fund
which relates to trust money as defined in the
Conveyancers Act
on the evidence before me that the applicant is not a person who has suffered a
pecuniary loss as a result of a fiduciary
default within the meaning of
Conveyancers Act
. As indicated above, the applicant has not
identified error in the procedure of the Tribunal or the process of reasoning
by the learned Senior Member. There was no identified error in the
rejection of the claim on the indemnity fund.
I have indicated, I find on the evidence before me there is no claim on the
indemnity fund which relates to trust money as defined
Conveyancers
It follows that the appeal is not reasonably arguable, and the subject
matter is not of sufficient substance to justify consideration.
It is not in
the interests of justice to grant permission to
Conclusion and orders
application for leave to appeal is refused.
application for the summonsing of witnesses does not fall to be determined by
virtue of the application for leave to appeal having
will hear from the parties as to any further orders.
The indemnity fund, on which
claims are permitted by
Conveyancers Act 1994
established pursuant to
Land Agents Act 1994
Appeal Book (FDN 8) at 4
(Determination of Claim for Compensation under the
Conveyancers Act 1994
at 1) (‘AB’).
South Australian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
s 37(1)(a).
AB at 4 (Determination of
Claim for Compensation under the
Conveyancers Act 1994
AB at 4 (Determination of
Claim for Compensation under the
Conveyancers Act 1994
AB at 4 (Determination of
Claim for Compensation under the
Conveyancers Act 1994
AB at 4 (Determination of
Claim for Compensation under the
Conveyancers Act 1994
AB at 4 (Determination of
Claim for Compensation under the
Conveyancers Act 1994
AB at 7 (Order of the
Tribunal dated 3 July 2025 at 2, [9]).
AB at 7 (Order of the
Tribunal dated 3 July 2025 at 2, [8]-[9]).
AB at 7 (Order of the
Tribunal dated 3 July 2025 at 2, [8]).
AB at 4 (Determination of
Claim for Compensation under the
Conveyancers Act 1994
AB at 7-8 (Order of the
Tribunal dated 3 July 2025 at 2-3, [15]).
AB at 8 (Order of the
Tribunal dated 3 July 2025 at 3, [18]-[21]).
AB at 8 (Order of the
Tribunal dated 3 July 2025 at 3, [22]).
South Australian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
South Australian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
See, as to being reasonably
Jackson v Lepp Investments Pty Ltd
[2016] SASC 62
(Parker J);
Pix v South Australian Housing Trust
[2016] SASCFC 57
(2016) 125 SASR 10
(Kourakis CJ, with Bampton
and S Doyle JJ agreeing). See, as to substance:
Aldridge v Registrar of
Firearms (SA)
[2022] SASC 5
(Parker J).
Varricchio v Wentzel
[2016] SASC 86
(2016) 125 SASR 191
(S Doyle J).
Jackson v Lepp Investments Pty Ltd
(2016) 125 SASR 1
(Parker J);
Pix v South Australian
Housing Trust
[2016] SASCFC 57
(2016) 125 SASR 10
(Kourakis CJ,
with Bampton and S Doyle JJ agreeing).
South Australian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
South Australian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
South Australian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
AB at 18 (Typed note of the
applicant accompanying grounds of appeal dated 24 July 2025 at 1
(‘Applicant’s Note’)).
AB at 19 (Applicant’s
Note at 2).
The applicant appeared as a
self-represented litigant at the hearing with the assistance of an interpreter.
Conveyancers Act 1994
Conveyancers Act 1994
AB at 4 (Determination of
Claim for Compensation under the
Conveyancers Act 1994
AB at 8 (Order of the
Tribunal dated 3 July 2025 at 3, [16]).
AB at 8 (Order of the
Tribunal dated 3 July 2025 at 3, [18]).
AB at 19 (Applicant’s
Note at 2). The applicant was afforded the opportunity to seek an adjournment
of the hearing so as
to obtain legal advice however he indicated he had had the
opportunity to obtain legal advice however he was not in a position to
legal advice. The applicant sought to proceed as a self-represented litigant.
Conveyancers Act 1994
Conveyancers Act 1994
Conveyancers Act 1994
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (368 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter