URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCFC/2022/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
LEGAL PROFESSION CONDUCT COMMISSIONER v MANCINI [2022] SASCFC 1 (1 August 2022)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Full Court)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
LEGAL PROFESSION CONDUCT COMMISSIONER v MANCINI
[2022] SASCFC 1
Judgment of The Full Court
(The Honourable President Livesey, the Honourable Justice Stanley
and the Honourable Justice Doyle)
1 August 2022
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES - LAWYERS - COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE -
DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS - SOUTH AUSTRALIA
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES - LAWYERS - COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE -
PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT AND UNSATISFACTORY PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT
The Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner (the
Commissioner
order that the respondent practitioner’s name be struck off the roll of
practitioners pursuant to
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
The practitioner has a long history of disciplinary proceedings. On 17 May
2016, the Commissioner laid a charge against the practitioner
alleging nine
counts of professional misconduct. Five were assertions that the practitioner
made false and misleading representations
to the Legal Services Commission and
four comprised assertions that the practitioner claimed or attempted to claim
fees from the
Legal Services Commission which he knew, or should have reasonably
known, he was not entitled to claim.
In 2017, the Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal (the
found the practitioner not guilty of professional misconduct, but guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct on all nine counts.
On appeal, the Full
Court found the practitioner guilty of three counts of professional misconduct
and remitted the remaining six
counts to the Tribunal. On 13 August 2020, the
second Tribunal found the practitioner guilty of professional misconduct on four
counts. The Tribunal directed that the question of penalty be referred to this
Court for determination.
Held (the Court) allowing the Commissioner’s application:
name of the practitioner, George Joseph Stephen Mancini, will be struck from the
roll of practitioners kept by this Court.
2. The practitioner is
ordered to pay the Commissioner’s costs in this Court.
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
Services Commission Act 1977
Supreme Court Civil Rules 2006
(SA) r 200, referred to.
Berger v Counsel of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2019] NSWCA
Clyne v The New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
Giudice v Legal Profession Complaints Committee
[2014] WASCA 115
v Parole Board
[2017] SASC 184
Law Society of New South Wales v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
Law Society of South Australia v Murphy
(1999) 201 LSJS 456
Law Society of South Australia v Rodda
[2002] SASC 274
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v Clisby
[2012] SASCFC 43
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v Fletcher
[2005] SASC 382
Practitioners Conduct Board v Hay
[2001] SASC 322
(2001) 83 SASR 454
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Jones
[2010] SASCFC 51
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board
2011) 110 SASR 531
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v Morel
[2004] SASC 168
(2004) 88 SASR 401
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v Phillips
[2002] SASC 63
(2001) 83 SASR 467
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v Viscariello
[2013] SASCFC 37
Legal Profession Conduct Commission v Kaminski
[2021] SASCFC 39
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v Cleland
[2021] SASC 10
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v Mancini
(2018) 130 SASR 349
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v Mancini
[2015] SASCFC 106
Mancini v Legal Practitioners Conduct Board
Mancini v Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner
[2016] SASCFC
New South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
(2001) 52 NSWLR 279
Peters v The Queen
[1998] HCA 7
(1998) 192 CLR 493
Re Legal Practitioners Conduct
Board v Mancini
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Action No 2 of
2012, 19 April 2013);
Re Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v Mancini
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Action No 18 of 2010, 20 March
Re Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v Mancini
Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Action No 8 of 2016, 13 August 2020);
R (Practitioner of the Supreme Court)
[1927] SAStRp 9
[1927] SASR 58
Wentworth v New
South Wales Bar Association
(1992) 176 CLR 239
Zimes v The Prothonotary
of The Supreme Court of New South Wales
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
, considered.
LEGAL PROFESSION CONDUCT COMMISSIONER v MANCINI
[2022] SASCFC 1
Full Court – Livesey P, Stanley and Doyle JJ
Introduction
applicant, the Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner (the
Commissioner
by Originating Application dated 25 March 2021, seeks the following orders
against Mr George Mancini (the
practitioner
this Honourable Court exercise its power pursuant to
Practitioners Act 1981
) to strike the
practitioner’s name off the roll of legal practitioners maintained under
the practitioner pay the Commissioner’s costs of and incidental to the
proceedings in the Legal Practitioners Disciplinary
Tribunal (the
) and in this Court on the Fast Track ordinary
application is made under
of the Act pursuant to an order made
by the Tribunal on 18 February 2021 under
s 82(6)(a)(v)
of the Act.
the reasons that follow, an order should be made striking the
practitioner’s name from the roll.
Commissioner’s evidence
Commissioner relied upon material supported by affidavits of Ms Philippa
Branson affirmed on 25 March and 28 May 2021.
is appropriate to outline that material. The charge was originally laid against
the practitioner in the Tribunal on 17 May 2016.
Nine counts of professional
misconduct were alleged. The matter was heard by the Tribunal, presided over by
Ms Maharaj QC, on 28
April and 19 May 2017 (the first Tribunal). The
Tribunal’s decision and reasons were delivered on 10 August 2017: the
practitioner
was found not guilty of professional misconduct but guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct on all nine counts.
Commissioner appealed. The appeal was heard on 12 February 2018. The Full
Court of the Supreme Court of South Australia (the
) delivered
its judgment on 2 May 2018.
Full Court allowed the Commissioner’s appeal. On counts 1, 2 and 4, the
Full Court substituted findings of professional
misconduct and, on the remaining
six counts, the matter was remitted for re-hearing before a differently
constituted Tribunal.
remittal, the Tribunal, with Mr Sallis presiding, heard the matter between 24
and 25 July 2019 and delivered findings and reasons
on 13 August 2020 (the
second Tribunal).
The Tribunal
found the practitioner guilty of professional misconduct on counts 3, 5, 7 and
9, with counts 6 and 8 found not proven.
Submissions
on penalty and costs were heard on 15 October 2020 and, by its decision and
reasons delivered on 18 February 2021, the
second Tribunal directed that the
question of penalty be referred to this Court for determination. The
Commissioner emphasises that
the practitioner has been convicted of seven counts
of professional misconduct and that most of these involve explicit findings of
dishonesty. It will be necessary to return to those findings.
addressing the findings made against the practitioner it is appropriate to
outline his extensive history of disciplinary proceedings.
practitioner’s disciplinary history
February 1990, the practitioner was found guilty of unprofessional conduct for
lying to a client. He was admonished. In March
1992, the practitioner was
found guilty of four counts of unprofessional conduct involving delay, lack of
communication and one breach
of an undertaking. He was admonished. In March
1995, the practitioner was again found guilty of unprofessional conduct due to a
lack of communication. He was again admonished.
October 2011, the practitioner was found guilty of unsatisfactory conduct due to
a failure to complete work and a lack of communication.
reprimanded.
November 2013, the Tribunal, with Mr S P O’Sullivan QC presiding, found
the practitioner guilty of unprofessional conduct
for misleading a psychologist
and failing to pay him. The charge was framed in the Tribunal as the making of
a false and misleading
statement to a psychologist, concerning four different
matters. In the first matter the practitioner wrote to the psychologist,
telling the psychologist that the client had deposited monies in trust for the
purposes of a psychological report. In fact, at the
time the letter was sent,
the practitioner ought to have known that there were no monies in
The practitioner received
the psychologist’s report on 3 June 2009 but thereafter failed to pay the
attached invoice in the
sum of $1,210. In correspondence between July and
September 2010, the psychologist wrote to the practitioner seeking settlement
outstanding invoices in this and other matters. In the absence of a response,
the psychologist made a complaint to the Legal
Practitioners Conduct Board
) in November 2010.
relation to the second matter involving the same psychologist, the practitioner
wrote to the psychologist on 10 February 2010,
advising that the matter was the
subject of a grant of legal aid at a time when a complete legal aid application
had not been lodged.
In relation to the third matter, the practitioner again
misled the psychologist by telling him that there was a grant of legal aid.
relation to the fourth matter, the practitioner delayed more than 12 months
before completing the required commitment certificate
which would ensure payment
to the psychologist by the Legal Services Commission of South Australia (the
Legal Services Commission
). The practitioner admitted that his conduct
was misleading.
Tribunal was critical of the practitioner’s conduct, particularly his
failure to correct the misleading statements he made
and his failure to promptly
personally pay the psychologist’s accounts. In addition, the Tribunal
found that the practitioner
did not answer the Board’s inquiries with
frankness and candour, blaming others for the failure to pay the
psychologist’s
accounts. That was particularly egregious in circumstances
where the practitioner’s evidence was that his firm had the capacity
pay the psychologist’s accounts.
its decision on penalty dated 26 November 2013, the Tribunal was divided. The
majority ordered that the practitioner’s
practising certificate be
suspended for two months. In separate reasons dated 29 November 2013, the
minority considered it appropriate
to impose a fine of $9,500.
March 2014, the practitioner was found guilty of unprofessional conduct for
failing to pay a personal costs order in a Federal
Court of Australia (the
Federal Court
) matter in which he acted for the applicant and the
Australian Government Solicitor represented the respondents, the Australian
Police and the Deputy Commissioner of Taxation.
Tribunal, with Mr G G Holland presiding, made findings to the effect that,
between 5 May 2009 and 20 December 2011, the practitioner
failed to comply with
an order made by the Honourable Justice Finn on 5 May 2009, ordering that the
practitioner personally pay the
costs thrown away for a relisted appeal book
index settlement appointment on 30 March 2009. The costs were ordered to be
the Australian Government Solicitor. The practitioner had failed to
appear because he was in another court. Finn J was concerned
that he had
received no explanation for the failure to comply with the Court’s orders.
J had required that the practitioner show cause why the Court should not make an
order for costs personally against him. The
practitioner told the court that he
had no submissions to make against the proposed order. On 5 May 2009, the
Australian Government
Solicitor wrote to the practitioner requesting payment of
$244.20, by way of costs thrown away, within 14 days. The practitioner
respond to this or to a subsequent letter.
June 2009, the Australian Government Solicitor filed a Bill of Costs in the sum
of $1,134 which was served on the practitioner
on 19 June 2009. On
18 August 2009, a Certificate of Taxation was issued by the Registrar of
the Federal Court, certifying that
costs were payable in the amount of $1,134.
19 August 2009, the Australian Government Solicitor wrote to the practitioner
enclosing the Certificate of Taxation and requesting
payment within 14
practitioner did not make payment until 21 December 2010.
doing so, the practitioner attempted to avoid making payment. In August 2009 he
telephoned the Australian Government Solicitor
and said that he wished to settle
the order, asking that the Australian Government Solicitor take into account
monies he claimed
were owed to him by the Australian Taxation Office. This
attempt was rebuffed in a letter sent to the practitioner later that day.
Undeterred, the practitioner again telephoned the Australian Government
Solicitor on 31 August 2009, saying he wished to write to
the Australian
Government Solicitor about a claimed set-off. The practitioner said he would
send a letter with details of the set-off
by 1 September 2009.
letter was sent. In the absence of a letter, on 4 September 2009 the Australian
Government Solicitor asked that an order be drawn
up and sealed. On
10 September 2009, the Registrar of the Federal Court ordered that the
practitioner pay the sum of $1,134. A
copy of the original order was served on
11 September 2009. The practitioner was requested to make payment by 4.00 pm on
18 September
2009, failing which enforcement action would be taken.
18 September 2009, the practitioner wrote to the Australian Government Solicitor
claiming that the Australian Taxation Office
owed him money concerning a
subpoena and he proposed that each party bear its own costs. In that letter,
the practitioner said that
he had attended the Federal Magistrates Court on 3
February 2009 in response to a subpoena issued against him by the Deputy
Commissioner
of Taxation, seeking production of documents in his possession
relating to dealings between the practitioner and another person.
practitioner said that he had conducted an extensive perusal of his materials
for the purposes of answering the subpoena and
that he had given consideration
to proposed amendments to the subpoena. The practitioner said that his work
involved five hours
personal attendance and that he had briefed counsel to
24 September 2009, the Australian Government Solicitor wrote to the
practitioner, rejecting his proposal and giving the practitioner
September 2009 to make payment. On 1 October 2009, the practitioner wrote to
the Australian Government Solicitor asking
that his proposal be reviewed,
stating that he had written separately to the Australian Taxation Office.
Tribunal found that the practitioner’s position was without any legal
basis and had been inconsistent. For example, the
Australian Government
Solicitor represented two parties in the proceedings before Finn J, being the
Australian Taxation Office and
the Australian Federal Police, and even on the
practitioner’s approach only one of those parties could be involved in any
set-off. The Tribunal found that the practitioner’s explanation
for not making payment after August 2009 was both disingenuous
and evidenced a
complete lack of appreciation of his position as an officer of the
The Tribunal
... based on the
undisputed facts and based on the practitioner’s evidence, the tribunal is
satisfied on the balance of probabilities
that the practitioner showed a
complete disregard for Justice Finn’s order and a lack of respect of [sic]
the Federal Court
and a senior officer of that court. He went to great lengths
to avoid complying with an unambiguous order of the Court.
the Tribunal was not prepared to make a contempt finding, it found that the
practitioner’s attitude was unnecessarily
arrogant, inappropriate and
completely unjustified. The Tribunal was concerned that, in evidence, the
practitioner continued to
show a lack of insight into his behaviour and
continued to try and justify his actions. The Tribunal described it as a matter
great concern that, even after a complaint had been made and an investigation
was on foot, the practitioner still did not pay the
costs order until shortly
before the commencement of the hearing before the
Tribunal found that the practitioner committed a serious breach of his
professional obligations, amounting to a substantial,
recurrent failure to meet
the standard of conduct observed by competent legal practitioners of good
repute. The practitioner was
found guilty of unprofessional conduct on both
counts before it.
March 2014, the practitioner was also found guilty of unprofessional conduct
concerning a “failure to complete work”,
failing to advise a client
failing to properly deal with trust money. More
will be said about this matter in a moment.
practitioner appealed the two-month suspension ordered by a majority of the
Tribunal in connection with the matter involving
the psychologist. It was
determined that the matters concerning the Australian Government Solicitor and
the failure to complete
work should all be referred to the Full Court.
Full Court summarised the matters before it. On 19 April 2013, the Tribunal
found the practitioner guilty of unprofessional
conduct for making false and
misleading statements to an expert psychologist retained by him and failing to
pay that psychologist’s
accounts. The Tribunal ordered that the
practitioner’s practising certificate be suspended for two months. On 20
March 2014,
the practitioner was found to have failed to meet a costs order of
the Federal Court for over a year and to have raised a set-off
against that
order in circumstances where he knew he was not entitled to do so. On 24 March
2014, the practitioner was found to
have failed for over a year to inform a
client that a notice of appeal had not been lodged and that the client’s
appeal would
not proceed. The practitioner was found to have failed to deal
appropriately with trust monies and delayed unreasonably in making
client’s file available to a new solicitor.
determination of penalty for these matters was considered by the Full Court. By
an order made on 4 April 2014, the Full Court
set aside the two-month suspension
and substituted an order for supervision for a period of three
practitioner’s unprofessional conduct, the subject of the findings of the
three Tribunals, should be the subject of censure.
However, this alone would
not be sufficient. The public and the legal profession must understand the
serious view the Court takes
of the practitioner’s unprofessional conduct.
We have given consideration to the question of whether the practitioner should
be suspended for a period of time. On balance, as discussed above, we consider
that there would be little to be gained from suspension.
The order of
suspension imposed by the Tribunal in respect of the matter under appeal should
be set aside.
We consider it appropriate to order that it be a condition of the
practitioner’s entitlement to practise the profession of the
law that he
do so under supervision for a period of three years. The supervisor is to be a
legal practitioner approved by the Board
and the expense of supervision is to be
met by the practitioner. Minutes of order setting out the terms and conditions
of supervision
are to be prepared and forwarded to the Court for approval. The
terms of supervision are to be endorsed in full on the practitioner’s
practising certificate.
In addition to the foregoing, the practitioner is to pay the costs of the
proceedings in this Court to be agreed or taxed. It is
noted that orders for
the costs of the proceedings before the Tribunals have already been made.
order for supervision ultimately made by the Full Court was extensive. The order
included the appointment of a supervisor who
was required to provide regular
reports. In framing these conditions, the Court took into account the
practitioner’s poor
health and service to the profession. The Court
accepted that the practitioner’s poor health provided an explanation for
of the practitioner’s conduct, but it did not alter the
characterisation of that conduct, nor did it mitigate the seriousness
Plainly, the Full Court was
concerned about the practitioner’s failure to answer the Board with
frankness and candour, pointing
out that frankness and cooperation with the
Board and the Tribunal is a fundamental obligation of any legal
practitioner.
The Full Court
emphasised that the protection of the public interest includes ensuring that
professional standards of legal practice
are maintained and are seen to be
maintained.
the practitioner put evidence before the Full Court to the effect that his
absence for two months would have a catastrophic
effect on his practice and on
his personal finances, the Full Court found this troubling because it suggested
that the practitioner
conducted his practice in a way that any absence on
account of illness or holiday would have a catastrophic effect. The Full Court
accepted that this suggested that the practitioner may not have developed the
necessary techniques in the conduct of his professional
activities to take
account of the normal exigencies of life and his probable need to be absent from
practice from time to time.
The Full Court found that the practitioner’s
mismanagement of his practice had a part to play in his unprofessional
the orders made by the Full Court, between August 2014 and September 2014, three
former clients of the practitioner made
complaints to the Commissioner. In the
course of investigating those complaints the Commissioner determined that the
practitioner
had not provided his clients with a letter notifying them of the
supervision order.
January 2015, the Commissioner made an application to the Full Court to amend
the terms of the order to address the practitioner’s
breach of the
obligation to notify clients in writing that he was practising under
supervision.
an affidavit filed on behalf of the Commissioner it was disclosed that a review
of the supervisor’s reports revealed that
both the Legal Services
Commission and the Magistrates Court of South Australia (
Magistrates
) had raised concerns about the practitioner’s handling of
matters. The Chief Magistrate had made a formal complaint to the
Director of the Law Society of South Australia (the
Law Society
expressing concerns about the practitioner’s appearances in court and
delays in resolving matters. The Director of the Legal
Services Commissioner
wrote to the supervisor outlining instances of the practitioner seeking
inappropriate grants of legal aid funding
and in failing to manage files with
Commissioner commenced an investigation on his own initiative into the matters
contained in the supervisor’s reports.
the matter came back before the Full Court on 5 March 2015, the Commissioner
accepted that the failures to notify clients about
the supervision order
involved oversights which did not amount to mismanagement. Nonetheless, the
Commissioner expressed concern
that these oversights occurred. In order to
reduce the risk of further oversights, the Commissioner sought an amendment to
of the order requiring that all prospective clients be notified in
writing save in circumstances of urgency, in which case the notification
provided verbally but confirmed in writing within 14 days. The practitioner
agreed to these amendments.
Nonetheless,
given the practitioner’s administrative oversights and the concerns raised
by the Legal Services Commission and
the Magistrates Court, the Full Court
requested a further report from the supervisor. After considering that report,
the Full Court
expressed a number of
matter of serious concern that the practitioner’s handling of cases was so
poor that the Chief Magistrate considered
it necessary to make a formal
complaint. The practitioner’s administrative oversights and dealings with
the Legal Services
Commission, together with the delays in finalising a number
of his matters, suggested that he was struggling to cope with his practice.
Court was not content to leave it to the practitioner to remedy the situation.
The Court requested the practitioner enter into
a series of undertakings
concerning the management of his practice.
15 June 2015, the Court accepted a number of detailed written undertakings
proffered by the practitioner regarding the manner
in which he would conduct his
practice. The Full Court explained that the undertakings provided the
practitioner and the supervisor
with guidance concerning the Court’s
expectations. One of the undertakings was that the practitioner must decline to
instructions for new legally aided suburban or regional Magistrates Court
matters. It is unnecessary to address the balance of those
undertakings. They
were designed to improve the practitioner’s practice management and
April 2016, the practitioner applied to amend the terms of the supervision order
because he had decided to close his solicitor’s
practice and practise
solely as a barrister in the area of criminal law and child protection. The
court varied the terms of the
supervision order on 1 July 2016, appointing Mr
Mark Griffin QC as
supervisor.
April 2018, the practitioner referred himself for failing to record a trust
transaction within five business days and overdrawing
a client trust ledger.
For this, he was found guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct pursuant to
of the Act and reprimanded.
following month, the Full Court delivered the judgment outlined earlier in these
reasons concerning the subject
following year, in July 2019, the practitioner again referred himself, this time
for failing to settle an application for judicial
review within a known
statutory deadline. For this, the practitioner was found guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct, reprimanded
and fined $2,500. It is
appropriate to outline the circumstances of that matter. The referral followed
an unsuccessful application
for permission to proceed with an action for
judicial review which was heard and refused by the Supreme Court on 14 December
action for judicial review sought the review of a decision of the Parole Board
made on 7 February 2017, refusing parole and precluding
the plaintiff from
applying again until after 17 January 2018.
action was commenced on 6 October 2017, two months out of time. By r 200(2) of
Supreme Court Civil Rules 2006
(SA) the action could not proceed
without the Court’s permission. The evidence before the Court on the
extension application
to explain the delay revealed that the practitioner had
been contacted in April 2017. A representative of Prison Fellowship followed
the practitioner’s advice and drafted documents and supplied them to a
solicitor in mid-to-late June 2017. The practitioner
received the papers from
the solicitor on or soon after 30 June 2017.
practitioner was aware of the six-month time limit and planned to have the
documents filed by 7 August 2017. However, the practitioner
overlooked doing so
because of a number of other “personal and professional exigencies”.
The practitioner settled the
papers and returned them to the solicitor in late
August 2017 but, because of her own illness and other problems, the solicitor
not file the papers until early October 2017.
Supreme Court held that, by reason of the delay, even if permission and an
extension were granted, a decision was unlikely to
be delivered before
17 January 2018 by which time the applicant would be free to again apply
for parole. The lack of utility in
the application was reinforced by
recognition that, even if the Court made an order, it could do no more than
quash the Parole Board’s
earlier decision and order that the Parole Board
consider whether the plaintiff should be granted parole forthwith. Accordingly,
delay in this action, even if permission and an extension of time were granted,
it is unlikely that a decision on the action
for judicial review would be
delivered before 17 January 2018. Even if the action succeeded, the Court
could do no more than quash
the decision of the Board of 7 February 2017 and
order that the Board forthwith consider whether the plaintiff should be granted
parole. Before that time, the plaintiff will have become eligible to apply
again for parole. In any event, I note that, pursuant
Correctional Services Act 1982
(SA), the plaintiff could apply for parole
prior to 17 January 2018. In these circumstances, I am satisfied that the
action is no
longer of any real practical significance. That conclusion is not
to deny the proposition that some of the plaintiff’s grounds
reasonably arguable but, given the delay, the plaintiff will shortly have
available to her the remedy of bringing a fresh
application for parole. In my
view, she should pursue that remedy rather than occupying the time and resources
of the Court whose
orders could not provide her with any better or more
effective remedy than could be obtained by making a further application for
practitioner appeared as counsel for the applicant before the Supreme Court to
make the unsuccessful extension application.
The parties made submissions about
this matter. Whilst it may be said that the matter was initiated by the
practitioner, and not
his client, that does not diminish the
practitioner’s failure to meet the standard expected of
practitioners.
The subject complaints: the Full Court
subject charge comprised nine counts, five were assertions that the practitioner
made false and misleading representations to
the Legal Services Commission, and
four comprised assertions that the practitioner claimed or attempted to claim
fees expected from
the Legal Services Commission which he knew, or should
reasonably have known, he was not entitled to claim.
counts were together alleged to amount to a course of professional misconduct.
Alternatively, it was alleged that each separate
count comprised professional
misconduct.
conduct largely occurred between January and March 2015. Most of the facts were
admitted. Where it was alleged that the facts
amounted to false and misleading
representations, the practitioner maintained that it was never his intention to
mislead. Where
it was alleged that the practitioner claimed fees that the
practitioner knew, or ought reasonably to have known he was not entitled
claim, the practitioner denied that assertion and denied that he acted
dishonestly.
hearing the Commissioner’s appeal, the Full Court, as mentioned, made
findings of professional misconduct on counts 1,
2 and 4. It is appropriate to
address the findings made by the Full Court.
summary, the Full Court found that the practitioner’s misconduct on
count 1 comprised making false and misleading representations to the Legal
Services Commission by claiming $137 for a pre-trial conference
and $500 for
solicitor and counsel fees in a Commitment Certificate forwarded by letter dated
4 February 2015. Though the letter
notified that the client’s matter
was finalised, with the prosecution withdrawing an assault charge, and guilty
entered on the other charges, the Certificate did not disclose that
the practitioner did not attend at court for either the pre-trial
conference or
for the purposes of the guilty pleas.
counts 2 and 4, the Full Court found that the practitioner engaged in
professional misconduct when undertaking legal work for
clients by sending
emails to the Legal Services Commission requesting funding. Those requests
amounted to representations to the
Legal Services Commission that the criminal
charges against the clients were extant and that funding was required for future
work. In truth, the practitioner knew that criminal proceedings had been
finalised by withdrawal by the prosecution.
was explained in the Full Court,
the making of a knowingly false representation (count 1) involves a substantial
failure to achieve a reasonable standard of competence
and diligence and amounts
to professional misconduct. If the practitioner believed that the Commission
would still have paid the
fees claimed if he had disclosed the true position,
that did not detract from the fact that he made a knowingly false
representation,
or the conclusion that he engaged in professional misconduct,
albeit such a belief was relevant to the gravity, and the appropriate
disciplinary orders to be made as a result, of that professional misconduct.
relation to counts 2 and 4, the Full Court made a similar finding, pointing out
that if the practitioner believed the Commission
would still have paid the fees
claimed on a retrospective basis if he had disclosed the true position, that did
not detract from
the fact that he made a knowingly false representation or the
conclusion that he engaged in professional misconduct.
practitioner’s practice: legal aid funding
is necessary to say something more about the arrangements for legal aid funding
before addressing the findings made by the second
Tribunal concerning counts 3,
5, 7 and 9. It is also necessary to say something about the
practitioner’s practice over a period
of 40 years because of his
familiarity with the funding arrangements applied by the Legal Services
Commission.
practitioner was admitted to practice in 1978. In the early 1990s he worked for
the Legal Services Commission for about two
years. He then established his own
practice, primarily in criminal law, practising as both solicitor and counsel.
He was a member
of the Criminal Law Committee of the Law Society from the
mid-1990s until around 2016 after serving for a period as the chair of
practitioner’s legal aid practice comprised between 50 and 75 per cent of
his practice. The practitioner was aware that
the Legal Services Commission
approach to the grant of legal aid funding had significantly changed, and
different approaches were
taken by different Legal Services Commission officers.
During 2015, the practitioner became aware that the Legal Services Commission
obtained copies of court records concerning developments and outcomes when
determining funding.
2014, the Legal Services Commission established a panel to which practitioners
were required to apply in order to be approved
to undertake legally aided work.
The practitioner was initially refused membership because there were concerns
held by the Legal
Services Commission about his past conduct. The practitioner
successfully challenged that refusal and, on 29 December 2014, he entered
General Panel Agreement which contained special conditions meeting a number of
the concerns held about the practitioner’s
earlier conduct.
from the General Panel Agreement with the practitioner’s additional
conditions, he was required to comply with the Practice
Standards referred to in
that agreement. Those Standards were published by the Legal Services Commission
and set out the responsibilities
of legal practitioners. They emphasised that
it was necessary for practitioners to ensure that an application for legal
is lodged promptly and, wherever possible, before any activity that
would incur costs. In addition, the Legal Services Commission
stipulated that grants of aid were not retrospective and that the Legal Services
Commission would not usually pay for
work undertaken before an application is
clauses of the legal Practice Standards required practitioners to be familiar
with and observe provisions of the funding
and other guidelines made pursuant to
Legal Services Commission Act 1977
(SA), and to comply with any
conditions attached to a grant of legal assistance. Practitioners were required
to submit invoicing
and provide progress reports and reports on outcomes so as
to ensure that the Legal Services Commission was able to determine the
properly payable. This included detailing court appearances and any other
information the Legal Services Commission required.
evidence before the second Tribunal disclosed that between 1995 and 2015 the
practitioner had received more than 2,000 grants
for legal aid in connection
with his practice.
June and July 2011, the practitioner was notified of a series of matters by
correspondence from the Legal Services Commission.
These matters included that
requests for funding made on the day the funding was required, or after the
commencement of a trial,
were contrary to the Legal Services Commission
Guidelines. The practitioner was notified that funding for legal aid matters
to be approved by the Legal Services Commission before costs were incurred
and, that if no funding request had been made before incurring
a disbursement,
that request would be rejected. The practitioner was notified that claims
finalised in the Magistrates Court only
attracted funding at rates specified by
the Legal Services Commission on the Magistrates Court Scale and not on the
District Court
Scale. This notification was given on five separate occasions
between June and July 2011. The practitioner was also notified that,
matter did not proceed on the first day of trial, it attracted payment of the
“Settle Trial” fee only and not
a trial fee.
the first Tribunal presided over by Ms Maharaj QC, the practitioner gave
evidence that he believed that he was entitled to
claim for all of the fees
which he claimed. He said that he had previously made claims retrospectively
and the Legal Services Commission
had occasionally allowed them, although he
acknowledged that the Commission had also refused them. Ms Brebner, an officer
Legal Services Commission for more than 30 years, gave evidence that
where funding was sought for a plea to a major indictable offence
charged in the
Magistrates Court, the funding was approved for a District Court guilty plea,
unless the matter was finalised by means
of a plea in the Magistrates Court.
The subject complaints: the second Tribunal
remittal, the second Tribunal presided over by Mr Sallis heard and convicted the
practitioner on counts 3, 5, 7 and 9. It is
necessary to outline the findings
3 concerned what was said to be a false and misleading representation to the
Legal Services Commission following receipt of
a letter by the practitioner on
23 January 2015 granting aid for the practitioner to represent a client in the
District Court on
a plea of guilty. The Legal Services Commission authorised a
“maximum fee”, being a solicitor’s fee of $714 and
fee of $384. The practitioner certified the Commitment Certificate and signed
and dated it on 29 January 2015, even though
the client had not been
committed for trial in the District Court and the practitioner did not at any
stage appear for that client
in the District Court. The practitioner returned
the Commitment Certificate with a Case Finalisation Form on which he had written
“24 January 2015” as the finalisation date. The Commissioner
alleged that the practitioner knew that this date was false,
whereas the
practitioner said that it was an unintentional mistake, where the matter had
been resolved on 22 January 2015.
7 related to the same client. The Commissioner’s case was that the
practitioner claimed or attempted to claim fees which
he knew or should
reasonably have known he was not entitled to claim. The practitioner denied
this, and he denied acting dishonestly.
The allegation was that as the matter
was finalised in the Magistrates Court, and not the District Court, and as there
no grant of legal aid by 22 January 2015 when it was finalised, the
practitioner was not entitled to claim fees based on a District
appearance.
evidence revealed that, on 20 January 2015, the practitioner was notified that
the prosecution intended to tender no evidence
concerning his client’s
matter. At that time there had been no application or grant for legal aid. On
22 January 2015, the
practitioner attended the Magistrates Court at
around 12.30 pm when the prosecution tendered no evidence and the
client’s matter
was dismissed for want of prosecution. Around an hour
later, the practitioner made an application for legal aid funding and said
My client has been charged with sexual exploitation of a
child under the prescribed age. I request funding for this matter. Thank
For and on behalf of George Mancini
the second Tribunal, the practitioner was cross-examined about his knowledge
that legal aid would not normally be approved
if prior approval had not been
sought from the Legal Services Commission other than in rare and exceptional
The practitioner
ultimately acknowledged this as well as the further the propositions that there
was no emergency, that the client’s
matter was not a short notice matter
and that there were no rare and exceptional circumstances. The practitioner
acknowledged that
he should have addressed the fact that the charges were
withdrawn and that he was seeking retrospective funding based on the
considerable
amount of work that he had already done. The practitioner’s
explanation was that he was under pressure and wanted to get the
materials off
to the Legal Services Commission, but he did not address his mind to those
matters. He said he knew that the Legal
Services Commission would inevitably
the Tribunal found that the representation made by the certification was false
and misleading, the practitioner did not
But, as to the
statement made about the finalisation of the case, the Tribunal found that this
was knowingly false and misleading
and that the practitioner intended to mislead
the Legal Services Commission. The Tribunal rejected the submission that the
practitioner
inserted the date 24 January 2015 negligently and did so in
accordance with
principles.
the question of the fees claim, count 7, the Tribunal rejected the
practitioner’s evidence that he was not intending to
mislead the Legal
Services Commission and it rejected the evidence that he believed that he was
entitled to fees on account of work
done before the grant of legal
The Tribunal found that,
in claiming the fees, the practitioner acted dishonestly and in contravention of
his obligation to act
honestly at all times during the course of his practice of
The Tribunal found
that in claiming these fees, the practitioner’s conduct amounted to
professional misconduct.
5 and 9 concerned the representation of a different client where, again, the
Commissioner alleged that the practitioner made
false and misleading
representations to the Legal Services Commission. The practitioner denied
intending to mislead.
client’s matter had been listed for trial on 10 and 11 March 2015. On
10 March 2015 at 9.12 am the practitioner sent a
facsimile to the Legal
Services Commission following up a previous request for the Legal Services
Commission to extend funding for
a trial. Later that same morning the client
pleaded guilty. The practitioner did not amend or withdraw the funding request.
17 March 2015, the Legal Services Commission extended funding for a trial for
one day. At the same time, the Legal Services Commission
issued a Commitment
Certificate allowing additional amounts of funding to those previously
allocated. The practitioner claimed the
additional amounts.
a letter dated 20 March 2015, the practitioner wrote to the Legal Services
Commission confirming that the matter resolved on the
day of trial. He
explained that the client pleaded guilty, which he said was necessary and
appropriate. The practitioner asked
that payment be made. The practitioner
claimed on a Commitment Certificate the maximum trial fee of $299 and the
maximum counsel
fee for “extension for trial” of $858. The
practitioner certified the certificate as correct and that it accurately
reflected services undertaken.
9 concerns the same matter but addressed the fees claimed which it was alleged
the practitioner knew, or should reasonably
have known, he was not entitled to
its findings, the Tribunal emphasised that there was nothing in the material
disclosed by the practitioner to the Legal Services
Commission revealing that
the trial did not commence. Indeed, the claim for the maximum fee suggested to
the Legal Services Commission
that the trial had commenced. The Tribunal found
that the practitioner’s Commitment Certificate was dishonest and
indefensibly
The Tribunal
found that the practitioner deliberately provided inaccurate documentation and
withheld information to better secure
his chances of being paid fees which he
knew he was not entitled to
The Tribunal found
that the practitioner engaged in professional misconduct as alleged in counts 5
6 concerned an allegation that the practitioner claimed or attempted to claim
fees from the Legal Services Commission which
he knew, or should reasonably have
known, he was not entitled to when he submitted two Commitment Certificates
dated 4 February 2015.
The practitioner sought payment for a pre-trial
conference on 17 December 2013 and a guilty plea on 21 January 2014 in
circumstances
where he had not attended court on either occasion. The
practitioner denied these allegations. Nonetheless, the practitioner conceded
in his evidence that he applied for legal aid funding for attending court when
he had not done so and that the policy of Legal Services
Commission was that a
practitioner had to attend court at the time of a conference or plea or
otherwise appear in person by audio
or visual link or through an agent. The
practitioner emphasised, however, that he understood this at the time of giving
but not at the time of making the application for fees. Ultimately,
the Tribunal found that the practitioner subjectively believed
that he was
entitled to make the claim and so the Tribunal found that count 6 was not
8 concerned an allegation that the practitioner claimed or attempted to claim
fees when he knew or should reasonably have known
that he was not entitled to
those fees. The practitioner’s response was to deny acting dishonestly
and to contend that he
had submitted an application, but that the application
was refused. The Tribunal ultimately found that it was not satisfied that
act of lodging an application for legal aid funding amounted to a claim for
the alternative, it had been alleged that the practitioner attempted to obtain
fees and the Tribunal was not satisfied that he
reviewing whether, notwithstanding these findings, the practitioner knew or
ought reasonably to have known that he was not entitled
to claim fees in the
sense of lodging an application for legal aid funding, the Tribunal concluded
that the practitioner’s
letter making the claim was dishonest and
comprised professional
misconduct.
practitioner’s letter concerned a matter which had concluded by the
dismissal for want of prosecution at 12.30 pm on 22
January 2015. Just
over an hour later, an email was sent from the practitioner’s office to
the Legal services Commission requesting
legal aid to defend the client against
various charges. The application for funding was denied by letter dated
11 February 2015.
The Legal Services Commission letter identified the
application as one for retrospective funding. No Commitment Certificate had
been issued.
the Tribunal concluded in terms that suggested that it found the practitioner
guilty of professional misconduct on count
8, as well as counts 3, 5, 7 and
that is inconsistent with its
earlier finding that the act of lodging an application did not amount to a claim
or an attempt to claim
the materials provided to this Court, the Commissioner took the view, correctly,
that both counts 6 and 8 were found not
It is appropriate to
proceed on that basis.
further submissions on 18 February 2021, the Tribunal directed that the question
of penalty be referred to the Supreme
Court for determination.
The practitioner’s affidavits and other evidence
practitioner’s affidavit evidence describes a considerable change in his
practice, no longer involving a “huge numbers
of files from all different
areas of law and in a number of courts”. The practitioner says that he
now has no more than 10
matters at any one time. He explained that after the
passing of Mr Griffin QC he approached Mr Andrew Tokley QC who has
to act as the practitioner’s mentor.
practitioner says that his personal life is now healthier than it has ever been
and he is working less. He has no desire to
do legal aid work in the future.
Whilst the practitioner is prepared to do criminal work he has focused on civil
litigation, including
commercial litigation and administrative law matters.
affidavit evidence reveals a lengthy and commendable history of involvement in
professional activities and an evident, genuine
desire to improve the
administration of justice. The practitioner’s evidence included a number
of letters of support and commendation
from the following:
Hon John Sulan QC
Hon Robyn Layton AO QC
Lindy Powell QC
Marie Shaw QC
Andrew Tokley QC
John Goldberg
Rocky Perrotta
Anthony Kerin
Anne Sibree
Sari Krishnan
Joshua Davies
Vassilios and Mrs Soffia Elovaris
Honourable John Sulan QC, a member of an earlier Full Court involving the
practitioner, describes, for example, the practitioner’s
practice as
chaotic but, notwithstanding, he supports the practitioner who has always
passionately represented his clients. These
letters depose to the extent of the
assistance the practitioner has provided to others within the profession as well
as his energy
and activity in connection with human rights and civil liberties
activities.
2005, the practitioner was awarded the Brian Withers Award in recognition of his
involvement with the Law Society and the exceptional
way in which he has
provided outstanding service to the Society “above and beyond the call of
duty”. The practitioner
deposed to a very large volume of submissions
prepared on behalf of the Law Society on various criminal law issues over a
of nearly 15 years.
a psychological report dated 24 August 2021, Dr Loraine Lim rules out any
suggestion of mental illness or substance abuse disorder
but says, nonetheless,
that there are several difficult aspects to the practitioner’s personality
which explained his professional
misconduct. They include:
somewhat disorganised personal management style, a relaxed and complacent
attitude towards formal structures and systems,
a conflict-avoidant nature
(particularly in respect to his personal life), his propensity to engage in
avoidant behaviours in relation
to situations that may trigger conflicts or
emotional distress, and his tendency to engage in procrastination when his
stress levels
exceed his coping threshold. Furthermore, I believe that Mr
Mancini’s engagement in professional misconduct had typically
occurred in
the context of reactive stress and anxiety, as well as his inadequate self-care
Lim described the practitioner as having developed a greater level of insight
into his past mistakes and errors of judgment, and
that his current focus on
self-care and the significant changes made to his professional practice, albeit
belatedly, represent an
encouraging reflection of his commitment to positive
change. Dr Lim expresses the opinion that there are positive indicators to
practitioner’s strength of character provided by his commitment to
personal development and capacity to openly admit faults
weaknesses.
Consideration of the application
purpose of disciplinary proceedings is to protect the public interest. This
Court acts in the public
When acting in the
public interest the Court acts to protect the public rather than punish the
practitioner.
Nonetheless,
protecting the public includes both deterring the practitioner before the Court
as well as deterring other practitioners
from similar misconduct in the
By deterring similar
misconduct the Court seeks to maintain professional standards and, thereby,
assure the public that it may have
confidence in the legal
profession.
Court must carefully evaluate the nature and the circumstances of the
professional misconduct in order to determine the ultimate
issue, which is
whether the practitioner is fit to remain a member of the legal
profession.
The evaluation must
be undertaken recognising that, for so long as the practitioner’s name
remains on the roll, he is held
out as being fit to practise the profession of
The Court must
determine whether the Commissioner has shown that this practitioner is not a fit
and proper person to practise at
Any orders made by this
Court must be directed to ensuring that, to the extent that the practitioner is
shown to be not fit to practise,
the entitlement to practise is either
restricted or denied.
this case there are a number of conflicting considerations.
practitioner can justifiably point to a long career of public service and
genuine effort and interest in promoting the administration
of justice in the
community. He has been working assiduously in that respect for more than
40 years. Whilst his work as a legal
practitioner over a number of those
years has been characterised by dysfunction and chaos he can point to particular
stressors and
explanations for the situations in which he found himself at the
various times he has been subjected to disciplinary action.
practitioner explains that he has now removed himself from many of those
situations, principally by focusing on practise as a
barrister and improving his
practice administration. Indeed, he goes so far as to say that he now has
better insight into his difficulties
and, as set out in the report of Dr Lim, he
is actively working to develop greater insight and positive coping strategies.
The practitioner
has considerable support within the legal profession which he
has earned over a number of decades. All of this is to the practitioner’s
the Commissioner rightly points to a history of disciplinary action which
commenced as long ago as 1990. The Commissioner
points to the serious adverse
findings made in the Full Court and the second Tribunal, including the findings
of dishonesty.
must be recognised that a finding of dishonesty reflects a failure to meet
current standards of ordinary, honest people in situations
practitioner must have known that this was
Whilst dishonesty must be
determined by reference to an objective standard, the Full Court and the second
Tribunal were satisfied
subjectively,
the practitioner
recognised that what he was doing was
Honesty and
integrity are essential features of any legal practitioner’s fitness to
practise the profession of the law. As
and integrity are important in many spheres of conduct. However, in some
spheres significant public interests are involved
in the conduct of particular
persons and the state regulates and restricts those who are entitled to engage
in those activities and
acquire the privileges associated with a particular
status. The legal profession has long required the highest standards of
There are four interrelated interests involved. Client must feel secure in
confiding their secrets and entrusting their most personal
affairs to lawyers.
Fellow practitioners must be able to depend implicitly on the word and the
behaviour of their colleagues. The
judiciary must have confidence in those who
appear before the courts. The public must have confidence in the legal
profession by
reason of the central role the profession plays in the
administration of justice. Many aspects of the administration of justice
on the trust by the judiciary and or the public in the performance of
professional obligations by professional people.
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v Viscariello
the dishonesty concerned
giving dishonest and false evidence in the Supreme Court. The Full Court
emphasised that honesty and candour
with the courts, clients and fellow
practitioners are fundamental elements of any legal practitioner’s
entitlement to practise.
there is strength in the submission that the practitioner’s professional
misconduct occurred some time ago, during a
defined period and in specific
circumstances which no longer operate, that must be weighed very carefully
against the fact that the
findings which have been made are very seriously
adverse to the notion that trust and confidence can be reposed in the
practitioner.
He has been found prepared to make brazenly dishonest statements
to officers charged with disbursing public funding for legal aid.
is true that the practitioner was cooperative with respect to these proceedings
and did not put the Commissioner to proof of the
underlying factual
circumstances. Nonetheless the evidence considered by the Full Court and before
the second Tribunal demonstrated
that the practitioner failed in a number of
respects to accept that what he had done was dishonest. Though belated
acceptance has
been communicated through his affidavit evidence and counsel to
this Court, it is difficult indeed for this Court and the public
to be confident
that the practitioner has those essential qualities of character and integrity
which are necessary to secure the
right and responsibility to practise the
profession of the law.
practitioner’s conduct represented a gross departure from proper
professional standards and fell very substantially short
of the standard of
conduct to be expected from legal practitioners of good repute and
competency.
More concerning
still, years after that conduct the practitioner failed to recognise and admit
to its true character before the
Tribunal, particularly the second Tribunal.
practitioner has in the past been admonished, reprimanded, fined and, at the
time of the subject offending, subject to a three-year
supervision order.
the practitioner urged suspension, emphasising the absence of any premeditated
scheme or a strategy, as distinct from impatient
and reckless conduct, the fact
is that the practitioner lied to the Legal Services Commission and failed to
accept that characterisation
in two hearings before two Tribunals during 2017
and 2019. It is difficult to see what purpose suspension would serve, still
how a period of suspension could instil confidence in the
practitioner’s capacity for honesty and integrity. It must be emphasised
that suspension is only appropriate for those cases where the misconduct does
not demonstrate that the practitioner lacks the qualities
necessary to render
the practitioner fit to
Suspension is not
appropriate in this case. Suspension would suggest that the practitioner is
otherwise fit and proper, deserving
of only a temporary sanction.
may be assumed that striking-off may appear to the practitioner harsh, given the
short period of the offending conduct and the
small sums involved. However,
that conduct must be viewed in the broader context of the practitioner’s
lengthy disciplinary
history, his dealings with the Legal Services Commission
and the warnings he received about his legal aid claims, and that he was
time already under stringent supervision conditions imposed by this Court.
Court must act in the public interest and so as to ensure that confidence
continues to be reposed in the legal profession.
In those circumstances it must
be concluded that the practitioner lacks the qualities, character and integrity
which are essential
to legal practice. No order short of strike-off would be
appropriate.
practitioner’s name should be struck from the roll of practitioners kept
by this Court.
to hearing from the parties, the practitioner should be ordered to pay the
Commissioner’s costs in this
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Mancini
(2018) 130 SASR 349 (Kelly
, Blue and Parker JJ).
Re Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Mancini
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Action No
8 of 2016, 13 August 2020).
Re Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Mancini
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Action
No 2 of 2012, 19 April 2013), [72].
Re Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Mancini
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Action
No 18 of 2010, 20 March 2014), [74].
Re Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Mancini
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Action
No 18 of 2010, 20 March 2014), [77].
Re Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Mancini
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Action
No 18 of 2010, 20 March 2014), [120].
Mancini v Legal
Practitioners Conduct Board
[2014] SASCFC 31
, [35]-[37] (Gray, Sulan and
Bampton JJ).
Law Society of South
Australia v Murphy
(1999) 201 LSJS 456
, [27] (Doyle CJ).
Legal Practitioners Conduct
Board v Jones
[2010] SASCFC 51
, [36] (Doyle CJ, Anderson and
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Clisby
[2012] SASCFC 43
, [10] (Doyle CJ and Stanley J).
Mancini v Legal
Practitioners Conduct Board
[2014] SASCFC 31
, [26] (Gray, Sulan and Bampton
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Mancini
[2015] SASCFC 106
, [19] (Gray J, with whom Sulan and
Bampton JJ agreed).
Mancini v Legal
Profession Conduct Commissioner
[2016] SASCFC 77 (Blue
, Stanley and Bampton
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Mancini
(2018) 130 SASR 349
, Blue and Parker
Hart v Parole Board
[2017] SASC 184 (Stanley
Hart v Parole Board
[2017] SASC 184
, [12] (Stanley J).
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Mancini
(2018) 130 SASR 349
, [71] (Kelly, Blue and
Parker JJ).
Re Legal Profession
Conduct Commissioner v Mancini
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal,
Action No 8 of 2016, 13 August 2020).
Re Legal Profession
Conduct Commissioner v Mancini
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal,
Action No 8 of 2016, 13 August 2020), [68]-[69].
Re Legal Profession
Conduct Commissioner v Mancini
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal,
Action No 8 of 2016, 13 August 2020), [68]-[69].
Re Legal Profession
Conduct Commissioner v Mancini
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal,
Action No 8 of 2016, 13 August 2020), [93].
Re Legal Profession
Conduct Commissioner v Mancini
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal,
Action No 8 of 2016, 13 August 2020), [100].
Re Legal Profession
Conduct Commissioner v Mancini
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal,
Action No 8 of 2016, 13 August 2020), [125].
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Lind
(2011) 110 SASR 531
New South Wales Bar Association
[2001] NSWCA 284
(2001) 52 NSWLR 279
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v
[2004] SASC 168
(2004) 88 SASR 401
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v Jones
[2010] SASCFC 51.
Re Legal Profession
Conduct Commissioner v Mancini
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal,
Action No 8 of 2016, 13 August 2020), [128].
Re Legal Profession
Conduct Commissioner v Mancini
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal,
Action No 8 of 2016, 13 August 2020), [144].
Re Legal Profession
Conduct Commissioner v Mancini
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal,
Action No 8 of 2016, 13 August 2020), [147].
Re Legal Profession
Conduct Commissioner v Mancini
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal,
Action No 8 of 2016, 13 August 2020), [150].
Re Legal Profession
Conduct Commissioner v Mancini
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal,
Action No 8 of 2016, 13 August 2020), [160].
Re Legal Profession
Conduct Commissioner v Mancini
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal,
Action No 8 of 2016, 13 August 2020), [161].
Re Legal Profession
Conduct Commissioner v Mancini
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal,
Action No 8 of 2016, 13 August 2020), [189].
Re Legal Profession
Conduct Commissioner v Mancini
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal,
Action No 8 of 2016, 13 August 2020), [215]-[216].
Affidavit of Philippa Joan
Branson affirmed 25 March 2021, [5].
Wentworth v New South
Wales Bar Association
(1992) 176 CLR 239
, 250-251 (Deane, Dawson, Toohey and
Gaudron JJ).
Law Society
of South Australia v Murphy
(1999) 201 LSJS 456
, 461 (Doyle CJ, with whom
Millhouse and Prior JJ agreed).
Law Society of New South
Wales v Foreman (No 2)
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
, 471 (Giles AJA).
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Clisby
[2012] SASCFC 43
, [9] (Doyle CJ and Stanley J).
Ziems v The Prothonotary
of the Supreme Court of New South Wales
[1957] HCA 46
(1975) 97 CLR 279
, 297-298 (Kitto
Legal Profession Conduct
Commission v Kaminski
[2021] SASCFC 39
, [12] (Livesey P, Bleby and David
Ziems v The
Prothonotary of The Supreme Court of New South Wales
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
297-298 (Kitto J);
Clyne v The New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
, 189 (Dixon CJ, McTiernan, Fullagar, Menzies and Windeyer JJ);
Society of New South Wales v Foreman (No 2)
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
Society of South Australia v Rodda
[2002] SASC 274
(2002) 83 SASR 541
, 545 (Doyle CJ, with
whom Williams J agreed).
Law Society of New
South Wales v Foreman (No 2)
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
, [441] (Mahoney JA);
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v Fletcher
[2005] SASC 382
(Debelle J, with whom Besanko and Vanstone JJ agreed),
Legal Profession
Conduct Commissioner v Cleland
[2021] SASC 10
, [41]-[45] (Livesey JA,
with whom Kelly P and Bleby JA agreed).
Peters v The Queen
[1998] HCA 7
(1998) 192 CLR 493
, [15] (Toohey and Gaudron JJ);
Berger v Counsel of the
Law Society of New South Wales
[2019] NSWCA 119
, [240] (Payne JA, with whom
Meagher JA and Simpson AJA agreed).
Giudice v Legal
Profession Complaints Committee
[2014] WASCA 115
, [49]-[53] (Martin CJ),
[114]-[152] (Buss JA).
Re Legal Profession
Conduct Commissioner v Mancini
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal,
Action No 8 of 2016, 13 August 2020), [75], [98]-[100], [120]-[128], [144],
[147]-[149];
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v Mancini
, [68]-[69], [71], [73], [74]-[75], [77] (Kelly, Blue and Parker
New South Wales Bar
Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
(2001) 52 NSWLR 279
, [19]-[20] (Spigelman CJ, with
whom Mason P and Handley JA agreed).
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Viscariello
[2013] SASCFC 37
, [12] (Gray, Sulan and Blue
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Hay
[2001] SASC 322
(2001) 83 SASR 454
, [61] (Prior ACJ, Bleby and Martin
Re R (Practitioner of
the Supreme Court)
[1927] SAStRp 9
[1927] SASR 58
, 61 (Murray CJ);
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Phillips
[2002] SASC 63
(2001) 83 SASR 467
, [42] (Gray J, with whom Nyland
In re a Practitioner
(1984) 36 SASR 590
, 593 (King CJ).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (485 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter