URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACorC/2025/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:54:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
FOSTER, Michelle Stephanie ([2025] SACC 8) [2025] SACorC 8 (30 April 2025)
CORONERS COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
MICHELLE STEPHANIE
[2025] SACC 8
Inquest Findings of her Honour Deputy State Coroner
30 April 2025
CORONIAL INQUEST
Examination of the cause and circumstances of the death of Michelle Foster, a
wife and mother of two children who died at the hands
of a mentally unwell man,
Jayden Lowah, shortly after a chance encounter at the Noarlunga Centre. The
Inquest examined the events
that led to Mr Lowah being in the community in
a critically unwell state.
Stephanie Foster, aged 36 years of Ethelton, died at Noarlunga Centre on 25
October 2018 due to head injuries.
Circumstances
of death as set out in these findings.
Recommendations made.
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
MICHELLE STEPHANIE FOSTER
[2025] SACC 8
Introduction
Stephanie Foster was born on 13 June 1982. She died on 25 October 2018 at the
Colonnades Shopping Centre. Ms Foster was
aged 36 years.
the time of her death Ms Foster was in a defacto relationship with Ashley
Thomas and they had two children together, aged 8 and
24 October 2018 Ms Foster left the family home in Ethelton to visit her
father, who lived in Huntfield Heights, following an argument
with Mr Thomas.
She took a train into the Adelaide CBD and then a train to Noarlunga, as she had
done a number of times before when
visiting her father. The closed-circuit
television footage (CCTV) from the Noarlunga train station established that
Ms Foster disembarked
the train at 10:13pm. Upon alighting she walked in
the direction of the Colonnades Shopping Centre. Ms Foster was reportedly
from a green wine bottle and also had a can of soft
thereafter, Ms Foster became acquainted with Mr Jayden Lowah outside the
Bank SA building. A conversation took place between
the two. This was not
captured on CCTV as it was outside the view of the cameras.
11:57pm Mr Lowah was captured on the CCTV footage walking away from the
Bank SA building with what appeared to be blood on his
passer-by, Mr Christopher Graham, found Ms Foster lying face down on the
ground at approximately 12:04am on 25 October 2018. He
could hear her breathing
and called emergency services. Mr Graham was provided with instructions to turn
Ms Foster onto her back.
When he did, he observed severe injuries to her
head and face. While attempting to apply pressure to Ms Foster’s
face and head wounds, he noticed that she had stopped breathing. Mr
Graham performed cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and the
ambulance officers arrived at 12:19am and 12:20am respectively.
Tragically,
resuscitation efforts were unsuccessful and Ms Foster was pronounced life
extinct at 12:25am on 25 October 2018.
who had remained in the vicinity of Ms Foster after the attack, approached
a police officer who had just arrived on scene,
Ms Foster’s body and stated, ‘
Mr Lowah was
taken into custody and charged with Ms Foster’s murder.
later told police that Ms Foster had approached him while he was sitting
down smoking a cigarette. They spoke for a while
until Ms Foster walked
away leaving her handbag behind. Mr Lowah stated that he waited for her to
return for her handbag, having
decided that he would kill her, as she had
apparently touched him inappropriately (which was consistent with an aspect of
delusional belief system). When Ms Foster returned as he
expected, Mr Lowah grabbed her by the hair, kicked her legs out from under
her and slammed her head, face down, onto the ground repeatedly, until he became
fatigued. At one point he walked away after hearing
a car. He returned shortly
after and noticed Ms Foster was having difficulty breathing. Mr Lowah
told police that he did not want
to help Ms Foster and wanted her to die,
so he left her and started walking around again. It was shortly after this that
arrived on scene and Mr Lowah announced what he had
23 June 2020, his trial on the charge of murder was heard by Justice S Doyle
(Doyle J) who found the objective elements of the
offence of murder were
established (
however he found Mr Lowah was mentally incompetent to commit the offence of
murdering Ms Foster. By operation of the
Criminal Law Consolidation Act
(CLCA), that meant Mr Lowah was unable to have formed the
necessary intent (
to kill Ms Foster, which is required to prove the charge of murder.
Therefore, by virtue of his mental illness, he was found not
guilty of the
offence. The consequence of the finding was that Mr Lowah was declared
liable to supervision under Part 8A of the
7 August 2020, Doyle J made an order committing Mr Lowah to a mental health
facility (James Nash House) for a limiting term of
on the findings of Doyle J, it is open on the evidence to find that
Mr Lowah caused the death of Ms Foster on 25 October 2018,
chance meeting at the Colonnades Shopping Centre a few hours
for Inquest
the completion of the criminal proceedings as detailed above, a decision was
made by the State Coroner that it was necessary
to conduct an Inquest to examine
the cause and circumstances of the death of Michelle Stephanie Foster.
Ms Foster did not know Mr
Lowah. Simply by fateful chance she was in
a place and at a time where Mr Lowah happened to be. Had she not met
Mr Lowah on this
day, she would not have died by his hand. It was
therefore necessary to examine how and why Mr Lowah was at large in the
in a psychotic state and able to kill an innocent young woman
41 days after his release from prison. Disturbingly, this was also
having presented at the Noarlunga Hospital Emergency Department one day
following his release from prison (and approximately
six weeks before he killed
Ms Foster), informing clinicians that he had formed homicidal intent. He
was released back into the community
without a fixed address just hours
will be detailed below, there was not one act or omission on the part of any
particular person or entity relating to the management
of Mr Lowah’s
mental health that directly contributed to the death of Ms Foster. It was,
however, open on the evidence to
find that, following the cessation of depot
medication in April 2017, there were a number of missed opportunities to have
and modified his illness trajectory. These missed opportunities saw
Mr Lowah’s illness deteriorate to such a point that even
medication was reinstated in November 2017, it did not have sufficient
therapeutic effect to prevent the actively psychotic
state he was assessed to be
in at the time he killed Ms Foster.
letter written on 2 February 2015
by Dr Marshall Watson, consultant child and adolescent psychiatrist, to Dr Ken
Hooper, consultant psychiatrist, for the purposes
of handing over care,
expressed the view that Mr Lowah had a provisional diagnosis of
schizophrenia with differentials including
schizoaffective disorder and
delusional disorder. This letter was written at a time when Mr Lowah was
16 years old and having been
released on Licence into the community after
expressing homicidal ideation. This was directed towards his father due to a
delusional system of perceived sexual abuse by him. In the letter,
under the subheading of ‘
Ongoing Treatment
’, Dr Watson
‘It is important to recognise that Jayden has been
compliant with treatment to date. It is my opinion that Jayden does require
ongoing treatment. Although he has been cooperative with treatment to date,
Jayden will require very close monitoring of his mental
health issues upon
I am concerned that he will minimise his psychotic symptoms and
this risks complacency with then a relaxing of treatment options,
which could
then again increase his risk.
I believe the best approach at this time
is to be alert, not alarmed.’
letter had a prophetical quality as, two years later, Mr Lowah was trialled
for a period without depot medication after just
one assessment by Dr Angelos
Giannakoureas from the Northern Mobile Assertive
Care (MAC) team. The cessation of the depot injections at this time was in
to a questioning of the diagnosis of schizophrenia with his behaviour
thought to be more attributable to personality factors and
illicit drug use.
This decision was later described by consultant psychiatrist, Dr Paul
Furst, as the ‘
destabilising event
’ in Mr Lowah’s
mental health. Associate Professor (A/P) Danny Sullivan, expert psychiatrist,
agreed with this opinion.
While they shared the view that the decision to stop
the depot was not unreasonable at the time, it was the subsequent management
Mr Lowah, or lack thereof, that saw his illness deteriorate, along with the
withdrawal of the supportive structures that were
in place for Mr Lowah in
the community which had protective qualities. The consequence of this
destabilisation was to place Mr Lowah
at a baseline of mental illness that
interventions were not able to address prior to Ms Foster’s death.
will be seen below, I have accepted the opinions of Dr Furst and A/P
Sullivan that the decision to cease Mr Lowah’s antipsychotic
medication, aripiprazole (administered in a depot
on 11 April 2017,
destabilised Mr Lowah’s already fragile mental health. I have also
found that the causal effect of this
cessation was a disengagement with mental
health services, the loss of his housing arrangement with ensuing homelessness,
a deterioration
in his mental state, and violent offending for which
Mr Lowah was imprisoned. He was not investigated for a mental impairment
and served his sentence as a prisoner. Mr Lowah was then released
into the community without parole (as he had served his entire
sentence) and
within six weeks had killed Ms Foster. The relaxing (in effect ceasing) of
the treatment for Mr Lowah’s schizophrenia,
as predicted by
Dr Watson, saw the risk that Mr Lowah posed to others
appropriateness or otherwise of Dr Giannakoureas’ (and his
team’s) management of Mr Lowah in this period will be examined
in this Finding.
lengthy involvement with the mental health system in South Australia revealed
that he was difficult to manage both
in the community and whilst
institutionalised. Mr Lowah displayed violent and aggressive behaviours
even when he was receiving depot
medication. The extensive mental health case
notes revealed that anyone who spent any length of time with Mr Lowah had
for the level of risk he posed to others. However, I remind myself
that underlying this behaviour was an insidious disease, schizophrenia.
Mr Lowah suffered a very early onset of this illness which meant, among
other things, a poor prognosis.
Mr Lowah’s description of his ‘
belief system
he experienced during psychotic episodes, as documented by Dr Furst in the
months following Ms Foster’s death,
revealed the frightening nature
of Mr Lowah’s disease. This was reported as:
complex persecutory system of delusions about this world being a simulation
populated with agents of artificial intelligence
controlled by entities from
another reality who maintain this reality and influence his life through
“mind control” in
order to influence his future ... these entities
had been torturing him mentally not only by controlling his mind and speaking to
him constantly, but by causing spores to exude through his face which he
experienced as like a
July and November 2017, when Mr Lowah was not receiving depot injections,
he came to the attention of three senior consultant
psychiatrists
for assessment of
his mental state, who did not detect clear evidence of active psychosis. As
will be detailed below, it was the
expert evidence of Dr Paul Furst that
Mr Lowah was continuously psychotic from July 2017, and potentially as
early as May 2017, when
the effects of the last depot injection, administered a
month earlier, wore off. It is not suggested that the assessments were globally
erroneous, rather that it was difficult to assess Mr Lowah who possessed a
level of insight into his illness and was able to (at
times) actively mask his
symptoms to avoid treatment, particularly in settings where there were short or
cursory interactions in
time-pressured environments. This was on a background
of the recent questioning of the diagnosis of schizophrenia and drug use,
behavioural factors in the differential mix.
Compounding
that, as was ultimately discovered after Ms Foster’s death,
Mr Lowah suffered from treatment resistant schizophrenia
for which only one
in an oral form and could not
then, and still cannot now, be administered as a
slow-release depot injection. As will be outlined below, this method of
administration
of clozapine would have been troublesome for someone in the
community with Mr Lowah’s circumstances, living a transient lifestyle
who was often non-compliant with medication. In fact, clozapine is not
commenced in the community, but in an in-patient environment
to watch closely
for side-effects. After Ms Foster’s death, when in the custody of
forensic mental health services, Mr Lowah
was trialled on clozapine.
Mr Lowah did suffer heart related side effects which saw the medication
ceased and then reinstated slowly.
This demonstrated that Mr Lowah
suffered from a very serious and complex illness which was difficult to treat
and at times difficult
to diagnose.
are all factors that I have considered when reaching certain
Ms Foster’s death, a post mortem examination was conducted on 26
October 2018 by Dr Neil Langlois, who is a forensic
pathologist at Forensic
Science South Australia (FSSA). Dr Langlois prepared a post mortem report
dated 15 March 2019, which was
received into evidence at
Dr Langlois
cited the cause of Ms Foster’s death as ‘
’, with the significant findings being laceration with skin loss
to the frontal region, lacerations with bruising to the left
scalp, bruising to
the right side of her face, acute damage to her upper incisor teeth, acute
subdural haemorrhage, brain swelling,
microhaemorrhages in the brain and early
APP positive axons in the brain (consistent with a short period of survival).
also had a significantly high blood alcohol level of 0.36%, which
Dr Langlois opined would have been expected to produce effects
ranging from
marked impairment of judgment and coordination to unconsciousness. In his
interview with police, Mr Lowah commented
that Ms Foster appeared to
be intoxicated or was pretending to be more intoxicated than she
The post mortem toxicology
report provided strong support for a finding of the former. This also went some
way to explain a level
of disinhibition in Ms Foster’s behaviour when
approaching and speaking to someone unknown to her on the evening of her
Ms Foster’s
brain was retained for neuropathological examination. This examination was
undertaken by Neuropathologist, Professor
Peter Blumbergs of FSSA. Professor
Blumbergs prepared a macroscopic
and microscopic
report, both of
which were tendered to the Court. Professor Blumbergs’ findings included
a subdural haemorrhage
patchy subarachnoid haemorrhage.
There was a tiny contusion
the left temporal pole of the brain including the brain stem. Microhaemorrhages
were present within the brain including the brain
stem. Dr Langlois, in
his post mortem report stated that these findings were in keeping with head
injury resulting in damage (tearing)
of blood vessels and damage to the brain.
Another important finding (as touched on above) was early
positive axons found in the
corpus callosum
Dr Langlois
‘Impacts to the head can shake the brain. This is
more likely when the mechanism of injury is for the head being rapidly
accelerated
and decelerated, such that would occur with inflicted impacts onto a
hard surface. This can result in deformity of the brain matter
within the skull
causing damage to axons, which are the long processes of nerve cells.’
pathologist’s finding was in keeping with the acceleration and
deceleration action that Mr Lowah described he used when
Ms Foster’s head against the concrete steps. This was in addition to
the odonatological finding of damaged teeth and
the appearance of injuries to
Ms Foster’s head and face, as well as the microscopic findings of
injury to her scalp, mouth
and tongue. This was all supportive of a finding of
blunt head injury being inflicted shortly before death.
accept Dr Langlois’ cause of death and find that Ms Foster died
documentary evidence at Inquest comprised 91 exhibits.
addition to the documentary evidence, oral evidence was heard from:
Ms Stephanie
Zulian, Social Worker, Yatala Labour Prison
Williams, Psychologist, Yatala Labour Prison
Dr Ian Jennings,
retired Psychiatrist formerly of SA Prison Health Service
Mr Shaun Lowah,
father of Jayden Lowah
Ms Jennifer
Moore, Mental Health Nurse, Barossa Hills Fleurieu LHN
Superintendent James Blandford, SAPOL Public Protection Branch
Detective Chief
Inspector Denise Gray, SAPOL Serious & Organised Crime
Taylor, Psychiatrist, Southern Drug and Alcohol Services
Dr Tushar Singh,
Psychiatrist, Mental Health Service, Southern Area LHN
Professor Danny Sullivan, Expert - Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist
Dr Paul Furst,
Expert - Forensic Psychiatrist
Giannakoureas, Senior Consultant Psychiatrist
Nance, Psychiatrist, Flinders Medical Centre
Dr Zhao Wang,
Medical Practitioner, formerly of Flinders Medical Centre
Tamar Allner, case co-ordinator at the Adaire Clinic, Noarlunga Hospital, was
summonsed to give oral evidence at the Inquest.
Upon application by her
solicitor, Mr Jamie William Dayman, Ms Allner was excused from her
summons due to ill health.
Dayman’s affidavit comprehensively set out the reasons why Ms Allner
should be excused from both oral evidence and the
requirement to provide an
affidavit. I accepted Mr Dayman’s submissions.
Ms Allner’s dealings with Mr Lowah were pivotal to some of
Dr Furst’s opinions, certain conclusions in relation to
Ms Allner’s involvement with Mr Lowah while he was a client of
the MAC team (based on forensic analysis of the notes and other
oral evidence),
were reasonably open on the evidence. Ms Allner was provided with an
opportunity to respond to draft findings that
concerned her involvement with the
clinical care of Mr Lowah by way of letter dated 16 January 2025.
27 February 2025, Ms Allner filed a detailed affidavit with the Court. This was
prepared with the assistance of documents that
had been tendered during the
Ms Allner’s
affidavit was sent to the other interested parties and a Directions Hearing was
held on 14 March 2025. Ms Allner’s
affidavit was received into evidence
with the agreement of all interested
no further evidence was called and, with the caveat that Ms Allner’s
version of events was not challenged in cross-examination,
the Findings below
have taken her evidence into account while balanced against that of other oral
and documentary evidence.
Michelle Stephanie Foster
examining the issues considered relevant to the cause and circumstances of
Ms Foster’s death, it was important to focus on
the illness and
treatment of Mr Lowah, who had been diagnosed with schizophrenia from the
unusually early age of 15. Consequently,
there was a focus away from
Ms Foster, her life and who she was to her family. Ms Foster’s
mother was invited to prepare a
detailed statement about her daughter; a
much-loved member of her family and a mother of two young children. Annexed to
Andrea Foster’s
affidavit were touching letters from
Ms Foster’s daughter and brother. Ms Foster’s partner
also provided an affidavit
to the Court and spoke lovingly of her.
was the daughter of Andrea and Steven Foster. Ms Foster’s parents
separated when Ms Foster was young, and she was
raised by her mother.
Ms Foster was described by her mother as a beautiful baby who was content
to amuse herself for hours and slept
well. As she grew older, she developed
caring happy go lucky
Ms Foster was someone ‘
who always wanted to do things for
She was very
protective of her younger brother (Peter Spiniello) who was born when she was 14
years old. In Mr Spiniello’s
letter to the Court he remembered his
sister as someone who ‘
nurtured an environment of openness and
’. He reflected on the mother that Ms Foster was,
describing her two daughters as being shaped by her grace, resilience and
enduring affection.
Spiniello stated, ‘
in the wake of Michelle
s passing, her
laughter may have dimmed, but the harmonies she sings still resonate within my
attended Mitcham Girls High School in her early teens and left in Year 10 to
commence employment at a patisserie in Arndale,
where she was eventually
promoted to the role of Manager. Andrea Foster described this employment as
giving her daughter a sense
Ms Foster met
her partner, Mr Ashley Thomas, when she was 19 years of age and they had two
daughters together. They lived in the
north-western suburb of Ethelton. Mr
Thomas described his partner as a very friendly person who loved her children
and who would
talk to anyone regardless of who they were or their
background.
Mr Thomas remembered
Ms Foster’s kind and giving nature, specifically when she visited her
father and made roast pork for him
and the other residents at the caravan park.
On another occasion, Ms Foster made soup for a family who were experiencing
difficulty.
May 2018 Ms Foster rekindled her relationship with her father and would
spend time with him at his home, often overnight.
Mr Thomas described that
Ms Foster would catch a train into Adelaide city and then another train to
Noarlunga and then walk to her
father’s caravan in Huntfield Heights.
Ms Foster’s father’s house was approximately 30 minutes
walking distance
from the Noarlunga train
Mr Thomas noted
that Ms Foster’s visits to her father often coincided with her
consuming alcohol. Ms Foster’s mother
thought her daughter had
difficulty with binge drinking and perceived this to be in part due to her
tumultuous relationship with
Notwithstanding
Ms Foster’s mother’s concerns for her relationship with Mr
Thomas, it was plain that Ms Foster was dearly
loved by her family and was
a caring and devoted mother to her two young children. Mr Thomas stated the
‘As a result of what was done to Michelle, I have
lost the partner I love and mother of my children. [The two girls] have lost
their mother and have to grow up without her. Even now, it has not sunk in, and
we expect her to be coming home, like after a few
days at her Dad’s, but
she isn’t. Every part of us
was enroute to her father’s house when she had the tragic misfortune of
meeting Mr Lowah on 24 October 2018.
a poignant tribute to her mother, Amelia Thomas, described the difficult stages
of grief she experienced during her childhood,
having never stopped missing her
mother’s warm hugs. Now that she is a young adult, Amelia has stopped
asking why her mother
left but imagines that she is by her side. Whenever a
butterfly passes by, she says hello to her mother and hopes that she is proud
her. In her note, Amelia promised that she will do whatever she can to show
others what an amazing person her mother
Ms Foster’s
mother, who attended for each day of the Inquest along with her Aunt Leslie,
made a powerful observation which has
remained with me, particularly when
considering the findings below. While Andrea Foster had good reason for feeling
hatred towards
Mr Lowah, she saw her daughter’s death in a different
light after hearing the evidence at Inquest. Andrea Foster said the
‘[Michelle] was robbed of life and that cannot be
replaced. In respect to Jayden Lowah; fundamentally as a system, we failed
Jayden and the community. He was released when it was not safe to do so and he
was not in a position where he could be safely reintegrated
into the community.
I believe that if it wasn’t Michelle, it would have been someone else that
Jayden Lowah would have killed.’
I have said, while the focus of the Inquest was necessarily elsewhere, I have
not overlooked the significance of the loss of Ms
Foster’s life. I
am grateful to her family for providing such touching tributes and
photographs.
Court heard from two expert witnesses, A/P Danny Sullivan and Dr Paul
Sullivan is an expert forensic consultant psychiatrist who received his medical
degree from the University of Melbourne in 1994.
He holds three master’s
degrees in Medical Law, Bioethics and Management. He is a Fellow of the Royal
Australian and New
Zealand Psychiatrists and a Fellow of the College of
Psychiatrists (UK) and Associate Fellow in the Royal Australasian College of
Medical Administrators. He is an accredited member of the Faculty of Adult and
Forensic Psychiatry of the RANZCP. A/P Sullivan
is currently the Executive
Director of Clinical Services at the Victorian Institute of Forensic Mental
Health, a role he has held
since 2004. He has been involved in Serious Incident
Reviews relating to homicides. He has clinical experience in forensic
prison and hospital settings, including the assessment and management
of mentally disordered offenders.
was conferred with his medical degree in 2002 and began his psychiatric
training, obtaining his Fellowship of Psychiatry
in March 2010. He completed an
Advanced Training Certificate in Forensic Psychiatry in December 2011. Notably,
Dr Furst was employed
as a consultant psychiatrist with the Forensic
Community Mental Health Service in 2010. In January 2011 he took on the role of
psychiatrist at James Nash House. In August 2016, Dr Furst took
up the position of Head of Unit of Forensic Community Mental Health
He has conducted outpatient clinics at Yatala Labour Prison (Yatala), the
Adelaide Remand Centre and Mobilong Prison.
Dr Furst holds the title of
Clinical Lecturer in Psychiatry with the University of Adelaide and was awarded
the Associate Fellowship
of the Royal Australasian College of Medical
Administrators. Dr Furst assessed Mr Lowah briefly in September 2017
when covering
for Dr Craig Raeside at James Nash House. He then interviewed
Mr Lowah in November 2018 and then on another three occasions for
purpose of assessing his mental competence to commit the alleged offence of
murder and his mental fitness to plead and stand
trial. This also occurred at
James Nash House.
role as an expert witness was unique in the sense that he had been briefly
involved in Mr Lowah’s mental health
treatment (prior to
Ms Foster’s death) and undertook the investigation into
Mr Lowah’s mental incompetence, at the request
Mr Lowah’s solicitor, following Ms Foster’s death. This
required a number of interview hours with Mr Lowah. Dr Furst
a very detailed report for the Supreme Court proceedings which then became an
exhibit at the Inquest.
Dr Furst had expressed certain opinions about Mr Lowah’s mental
health management in this report, he was asked to provide
a further report for
the Court in order to answer questions relevant to the cause and circumstances
of Ms Foster’s death and
give oral evidence, both of which he did.
was submitted by Mr John Homburg of counsel (for Dr Giannakoureas) that
given Dr Furst formulated his opinions in a different clinical
environment
to that of Dr Giannakoureas, undertook extensive interviews with
Mr Lowah for the purpose of a mental impairment assessment
and had the
benefit of all available historical information concerning his mental health,
there was a risk that his opinions could
become infected by outcome bias and
retrospective reasoning. It was submitted that this was particularly the case
with the opinions
expressed relating to Dr Giannakoureas’ involvement
with Mr Lowah’s care. I agree that this risk existed, particularly
given Dr Furst’s main contact with Mr Lowah was when he was so
floridly unwell after the death of Ms Foster (November 2018)
that he was
unable to tolerate in-depth interviews. In his oral evidence, Dr Furst
also acknowledged this risk.
Sullivan provided a forensic psychiatric opinion as an entirely independent
expert witness. He did not assess Mr Lowah at any
time and was not
involved in the mental competence investigation. After Dr Furst gave oral
evidence, A/P Sullivan was requested
to provide a further report and was
recalled to give evidence. This was in part to comment on the opinions
expressed by Dr Furst.
Ultimately, I considered the opinions of both
experts aligned on the main issues of criticism. I have accepted the evidence
both Dr Furst and A/P Sullivan.
Hindsight Bias
warn myself concerning a vital consideration in the assessment of the evidence
and any potential criticisms of witnesses in this
Inquest, namely hindsight
description of ‘hindsight bias’ is given in the Australasian
Coroners Manual, namely as:
'The tendency after the event to assume
that events are more predictable or foreseeable than they really were.
What is clear in hindsight
is rarely as clear before the fact. If it were,
there would be far fewer mistakes made. It is an obvious point, but one
that nonetheless
bears repeating, particularly when Coroners are considering
assigning blame or making adverse comments that might damage a person’s
reputation...
Hindsight, of course, is a very useful tool for learning lessons from an
unfortunate event. It is not useful for understanding how
the involved
people comprehended the situation as it developed. The distinction needs
to be understood and rigorously applied.'
stated, I am very mindful of this warning when considering the evidence in this
Definitions
is important at this juncture to define the terms that will be used throughout
this Finding. Firstly, a Community Treatment Order
(CTO) is an Order made in
the South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (SACAT) to require a
person with a mental illness
to cooperate with treatment determined necessary by
a psychiatrist or authorised medical practitioner, including taking any
for that mental illness absent their
If a person the
subject of the Order refuses to abide by the conditions, they can be taken under
the care and control of police,
SAAS or an authorised mental health professional
in order to receive that
Mental Impairment Supervision Licence (a Licence) imposes conditions set by the
Court on offenders who commit an offence but are
found to be not guilty by
reason of mental impairment and are subsequently released into the community. A
Licence is in force for
a ‘limiting term’ which is fixed with regard
to the likely sentence of an offender who was not mentally impaired.
Supervisory
responsibility for those released on Licence is divided between the
Parole Board and the Minister for
Inpatient Treatment Order (ITO) is an order made by a medical practitioner or
authorised mental health professional that a person
receive treatment as an
in-patient in a treatment centre. Following an examination, it must be
determined that the person has a
mental illness and, because of the illness, the
person requires treatment either for their protection from harm or for the
of others from harm. In addition, they must have impaired
decision-making capacity relating to appropriate treatment of the person’s
mental illness, and there is no less restrictive means than an ITO of ensuring
appropriate treatment of that
Domestic Violence Intervention Order (formerly known as a Restraining Order) is
instituted to restrict the behaviour or actions
of a particular person. It is
to protect people from domestic or family
emergence of Jayden Lowah’s mental illness and the focus of the
Lowah was born on 8 August 1998 to parents Sharon Buer and Shaun Lowah. Jayden
was the middle child of three boys. Mr Lowah’s
parents separated in
2001, with the children remaining in the care of their mother. It was around
this time that Ms Buer was hospitalised
due to her mental health
deteriorating, and the three boys spent eight weeks in foster care. Thereafter,
Ms Buer was hospitalised
a number of times for her mental health which
caused extensively documented trauma to Mr Lowah. This appeared to have
set the scene
for Mr Lowah’s scepticism of his own psychiatric
illness and mental illness in general. Dr Craig Raeside (consultant
psychiatrist)
in 2017 described Mr Lowah as rejecting the medical model of
mental illness.
attended Seaford Rise Primary School and was noted to be of above average
intelligence and accelerated in his learning.
In 2008, at the age of 10,
Mr Lowah was referred to the Child and Adolescent Mental Health Service
(CAMHS) due to concerning behaviour
This included aggressive
and threatening behaviour towards his mother and younger
Reports of this
behaviour continued as Mr Lowah commenced high school, with Mr Lowah
also coming to the attention of police after
engaging in criminal
It was reported that
he had commenced using cannabis in
It was around this time
that Mr Lowah reported his father hitting him repeatedly during a contact
visit. For a period following
this, Mr Lowah was noted to be very angry
with his father and refused contact with him.
3 June 2014, when Mr Lowah was 15, he stole his mother’s car with the
stated intention of travelling to Goolwa, where his
father lived, to kill him
with a knife. Mr Lowah was apprehended by police before he arrived in
Goolwa and detained under a Level
1 ITO pursuant to the
Mental Health Act
by staff at the Victor Harbor
admitted to having used cannabis the day before. He informed a medical officer
that he had recently stayed with his father
which had stirred up bad memories
(the details of which he refused to disclose at the time) and planned to stab
him. When speaking
to staff at the hospital he described feeling less outraged
than earlier, but that he still wanted to cut off his father’s
leg and let
Mr Lowah was then
transferred to the Women’s and Children’s Hospital (WCH), where he
was admitted to the paediatric
psychiatric ward (Boylan Ward) for a period of
six weeks, between 3 June and 28 July 2014. At the time of his admission he was
to be floridly psychotic.
principal diagnosis for this period of admission was ‘
first episode
which Mr Lowah was commenced on a depot antipsychotic, risperidone, (due to
concerns about non-compliance with medication) 25mg
intramuscularly per
fortnight. Underlying the psychosis was thought to be a diagnosis of
schizophrenia. Upon discharge, Mr Lowah
was placed under a CTO on 1 July
2014 and referred to ongoing follow up through
the time of his apprehension by police, Mr Lowah was charged with three
criminal offences relating to his attempts to act on homicidal
ideation towards
his father.
As part of the
investigation into Mr Lowah’s mental competence to commit the
offences against his father, Dr Marshall Watson
provided an opinion to the
Magistrates Court in a report dated 28 January 2015. Dr Watson
‘[a]lthough Mr Lowah had previously been
diagnosed with a psychotic illness, it is my opinion as per the DSM-V criteria
on balance at this point in time, Jayden has a diagnosis of Schizophrenia
(with symptoms including delusional ideation, irritability,
guardedness and
social isolation that have occurred in the absence of substance
report was reproduced almost verbatim in the handover letter to Dr Hooper
dated 2 February 2015, a portion of which has been
extracted above in this
Finding. Of note was the comment by Dr Watson
‘without treatment, [Mr Lowah’s] risk of
relapse with a mental illness [was] high, as [was] his potential risk for
towards those incorporated in his delusional belief system.’
charges were dealt with on 12 February 2015 by way of a
investigation, with Mr Lowah found to be mentally incompetent to commit the
offences and released on Licence. A limiting term
of 12 months was
Relevantly, there were
several conditions attached to the Licence including:
was to be under the supervision of the WCHN-CAMHS, except in relation to the
treatment and monitoring of his mental health,
which was entrusted to the
Clinical Director of WCHN-CAMHS and any other psychiatrist or psychologist
nominated by the Clinical Director;
Mr Lowah be
required to reside where directed;
abstain from drugs and alcohol;
attend regular psychiatric or psychological
significance of the above conditions was twofold. Firstly, during this period
of Licence it was observed by Mr Lowah’s
treating psychiatrist
(Dr Watson) that apart from two brief periods, one of several days and one
of several weeks, Mr Lowah had spent
the entire period of his Youth Team
Episode of care back in secure care in the Adelaide Youth Training Centre (AYTC)
due to breaches
of his Licence
conditions.
While less than
ideal for Mr Lowah, this demonstrated that there was an imposed structure
in place for his frequent non-compliance.
Secondly, and in contrast, when
arrested for violent and unprovoked criminal offences in August 2017 (detailed
later in the Finding),
after the cessation of the depot medication,
Mr Lowah pleaded guilty (without applying for a mental incompetence
investigation) and
was sentenced to an immediate term of imprisonment. He spent
two periods in James Nash House during this period of
imprisonment
with the second
admission revealing his schizophrenia had relapsed secondary to the planned
cessation of antipsychotics.
was recommenced on the antipsychotic aripiprazole once released from Yatala into
the community on 14 September 2018 (after serving
his entire sentence), but
he was not subject to supervision. The only enforced structure for
Mr Lowah in the community was to have
his depot medication once a month as
required by the CTO.
will be detailed below, the Parole
and those caring for
Mr Lowah in the High Dependency Unit (HDU) of Yatala in 2017-2018 held
serious concerns about the risk Mr Lowah
posed once released into the
community in September 2018. The Parole Board denied Mr Lowah parole when
he applied in June 2018,
stating that the Board considered him ‘
significant risk to the community as to be unsuitable for release on
Mr Lowah’s head sentence came to an end, extensive efforts were made
by the HDU, in particular Ms Stephanie Zulian and
Mr Luke Williams, to
ameliorate this risk. However, these were unsuccessful for a number of reasons.
As will be detailed below,
the Parole Board had no power over Mr Lowah when
released in September 2018, and the HDU and social workers were constrained by
lack of engagement and the lack of formal mental health orders, such as a
Licence or ITO. Following his release, other than those
administering his
medication, there were no eyes on Mr Lowah, with tragic consequences for
was therefore a focus of the Inquest as to the basis for Dr Angelos
Giannakoureas’ decision to cease Mr Lowah’s antipsychotic
medication in April 2017, which on its face appeared incongruent with the
previous diagnosis and treatment for schizophrenia and
the warning of treatment
complacency by Dr Watson.
Circumstances
leading up to the death of Ms Foster
The cessation of
depot medication
to the period of time following the diagnosis of first episode psychosis,
Mr Lowah was admitted to Boylan Ward on six further
occasions between
December 2014 and August 2016. These admissions were relatively brief and for
different reasons, including a change
in antipsychotic medication (due to a
common side effect with
risperidone),
breakthrough
auditory hallucinations following drug use, and emotional dysregulation. This
history was supportive of his early diagnosis
of schizophrenia at the age of 15.
A/P Sullivan in his evidence opined that a diagnosis of schizophrenia at this
age was unusual,
but not rare.
There was no suggestion during the Inquest that this diagnosis was made in
the initial diagnosis and the institution of antipsychotic medication by way of
depot injection, there were two occasions where
Mr Lowah’s depot was
ceased. The first occasion occurred on 31 December 2015. While not directly
relevant to Ms Foster’s
death, I touch on this occasion as it was a
well-documented example of Mr Lowah’s propensity to relapse without
regular antipsychotics.
The circumstances giving rise to this occasion were
that, following a period of mental health stability, Mr Lowah requested
the depot be ceased. Coincidentally, the CTO that had been put into place
the year before had lapsed. Mr Lowah’s depot treatment
been the antipsychotic zuclopenthixol, and fortnightly
400mg quetiapine nocte. At his request the depot
was ceased and he was prescribed an oral dose of 400mg quetiapine. With the
of the CTO and the change to an oral medication only, Mr Lowah was
trusted to maintain the oral antipsychotic. Unfortunately, it
was plain from
the mental health records that Mr Lowah’s mental state stability was
quick to deteriorate with the change in
the medication regime and his subsequent
non-compliance. I will detail this deterioration below.
January and March 2016 Mr Lowah was conveyed to the Lyell McEwin Health
Service (LMHS) with concerns in relation to his mental
health. On the first
occasion he threatened suicide to his mother, but then informed police he had no
intentions of following through,
rather he intended to lay the phone on the
train tracks while his mother was listening. This was on the background of her
to allow him to reside with her. The second occasion, Mr Lowah
presented with evidence of psychosis including paranoid delusional
Mr Lowah had informed his carer that he was starting to have paranoid
thoughts and was feeling agitated in the context
of cannabis use. He was
detained under a Level 1 ITO and transferred to Boylan Ward where he remained
for three days.
1 July 2016, Mr Lowah was seen by consultant psychiatrist, Dr Geetha Giri
in the community for review. He was accompanied by his
care coordinator (CC),
Leon. Leading up to this review advice had been sought by Dr Giri from
Dr Watson (who was no longer Mr Lowah’s
treating psychiatrist).
Dr Watson responded with concern that Mr Lowah was displaying signs
reflective of his relapse signature
and that an urgent review was
At the commencement
of the review Mr Lowah declared to Dr Giri that he had stopped taking
all his medication. He stated that his
illness was solely related to cannabis
use, and he had ceased smoking it. Accordingly, he had thrown out all his
medication as he
considered he did not need it in the absence of cannabis use.
It was evident to Dr Giri during the review that Mr Lowah knew his
had lapsed and that he could not be forced to take fortnightly depot injections.
At one point during the appointment, Mr Lowah
became hostile and tried to
take his file from Dr Giri.
a letter to Mr Lowah’s GP about the review, Dr Giri described
Mr Lowah’s behaviour at times during the review as ‘
and intimidating
’. At one point he stated to both Dr Giri and
you speak like robots, you are
highlighted in this letter that she was specifically concerned about
Mr Lowah verbalising that he had stopped medications
and noted he was a
significant threat to other people when he became unwell. She recommended that
he be referred to Dr Watson for
assessment and management options, and that
further appointments to review his mental state be conducted via telepsychiatry
as she was of the view that her appointments with him had not been
therapeutic, and the clinical risk had significantly
letter to Mr Lowah’s GP left the reader with an impression of her
discomfort in Mr Lowah’s presence.
15 July 2016, Mr Lowah presented to the WCH ED with a recorded several week
history of self-discontinuing his oral antipsychotic
medication. Mr Lowah
had been residing with his father in Goolwa in this period and his father became
worried as Mr Lowah was making
paranoid accusations about his father
allegedly taking photographs of him while
Upon arrival in the ED
Mr Lowah was noted to be agitated and paranoid and it was thought that
depot medication should be recommenced.
This was a decision already being
independently contemplated by the Southern Fleurieu Youth Mental Health Team
(YMHT), who had been
managing him in the community. A Level 1 CTO was made
and confirmed on 19 July 2016 (to be reviewed by SACAT/Boylan on 12 August
2016) and depot zuclopenthixol
Mr Lowah was
discharged from the Boylan Ward on 22 July 2016, to remain under the care of
Southern Fleurieu YMHT whilst living at
his father’s house, with Junction
Housing to be considered as accommodation in the medium term.
injections reinstated
clinical records reflected that there was an immediate angered response to the
reinstitution of the depot antipsychotic from Mr
Lowah. On 5 August 2016
Mr Lowah refused to have his depot and visited his mother who was a mental
health inpatient on the Morier
Ward, Noarlunga Hospital. On that day he
threatened to harm consultant psychiatrist Dr Newman, who formed the
opinion that Mr Lowah
was psychotic. Mr Lowah was detained and
transferred to the Boylan Ward where he received his missed depot. He was
discharged the
following day. Over the next six months, between August and
December 2016, Mr Lowah declined the administration of depot on at least
three occasions and was noted to be angry, irritable and
insightless.
His Level 1 CTO
expired on 16 August 2016. Accordingly, an application was made for a Level 2
CTO, which was listed for hearing
on 7 September 2016.
January and July 2016, when Mr Lowah was not receiving depot injections,
there was a well-documented escalation in Mr Lowah’s
behaviour with
active non-compliance, poor insight, threatening and paranoid behaviour,
hospital presentations and admissions under
ITOs. This was the exact scenario
predicted by Dr Watson in his handover letter to Dr Hooper and the
psychiatric opinion he provided
to the Court in January 2015. Dr Watson
referred to this as Mr Lowah’s ‘
’. On this occasion it was quickly realised that
Mr Lowah required more structured treatment and the depot medication was
reinstated.
Mr Lowah’s discharge from Boylan Ward in August 2016, the Noarlunga
MAC team became involved with his care. The MAC team
was part of the Noarlunga
Community Mental Health Service (NCMHS) based at Adaire Clinic, Noarlunga
Centre. Mr Lowah also moved
into Junction Housing in Morphettville on 17
August 2016.
application heard on 7 September 2016 confirmed a Level 2 CTO effective until
6 September 2017. Pursuant to that Order,
Mr Lowah was administered
aripiprazole (300mg) every four weeks by way of depot and 20mg oral aripiprazole
daily. Importantly, that
regime commenced on 26 August 2016 and remained in
force until Mr Lowah saw Dr Giannakoureas on 11 April 2017, at which
antipsychotic depot medication was ceased. The CTO authorised
treatment be given despite refusal or the absence of consent to the
and required that the treatment and care of Mr Lowah be governed by a
treatment and care plan. Order 6 is extracted below:
As a result of this order, and if required, an authorised officer or police
officer may take Jayden Tane Lowah into the
officer’s care and control for
the purpose of transport to a treatment centre or other place for mental
examination or treatment
in accordance with the provision of the
Mental Health
The Noarlunga MAC
initially under the care of the MAC team, and residing at Junction Housing, it
was recorded that Mr Lowah developed a rapport
with his support worker and
was accepting of the support offered. This, along with his accommodation at
Junction Housing, was recorded
to be a ‘protective
Mr Lowah was
noted to be cooperative with receiving his depot in January and February 2017,
although did voice concerns about his
physical health. While short-lived, this
was a documented period of time where Mr Lowah was responding to treatment
and the supports
that had been put into
On 10 March 2017,
Mr Lowah refused the administration of depot. He was assessed as
experiencing paranoid ideation about the potential
for unqualified staff to be
diagnosing and treating him.
The depot was administered on 16 March 2017 with the support of the CTO.
or about 22 March 2017, Mr Lowah was approved for an IPRSS package, a
service offered through United Care
(UCW) providing
psychological support, domestic assistance, outings, socialisation, and
re-engagement with the community. A meeting
was arranged between UCW and the
MAC team to facilitate this service. It is important to acknowledge the
particular significance
this proposed package had for Mr Lowah. As
described by A/P Sullivan, with an unusually early diagnosis of schizophrenia
years) there was a high risk of the illness interrupting very vital
developmental stages including education, interpersonal relationships
friends and family, and employment. With later onset schizophrenia these
protective factors are often in
It was not difficult to
see that the early diagnosis and treatment (both medication and involuntary
in-patient and custodial detention)
had already impacted on Mr Lowah in
these important developmental areas. The program offered by UCW could have
provided Mr Lowah
with aspects of his formative years that his illness
or about 7 April 2017, the role of Mr Lowah’s CC was handed over to
Ms Tamar Allner, with a case note dated 12 April 2017
On 11 April 2017,
Mr Lowah attended the Morier Ward for his monthly depot injection.
I have found that what occurred following
this appointment was the
destabilising event
’ in the mental state of Mr Lowah.
April 2017, Dr Angelos Giannakoureas was employed at the Noarlunga Health
Service as a consultant psychiatrist. He had been in
this employ for nine
years. By way of training, Dr Giannakoureas was conferred with his medical
degree in 1995 and commenced psychiatric
training in the two years following his
basic medical training (intern and RMO year). He received his fellowship with
Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists (RANZCP) in 2006.
Dr Giannakoureas provided two affidavits to the Court and
evidence at the Inquest.
mother, Sharon Buer, was a private patient of Dr Giannakoureas and had been
so for a number of years. Ms Buer had
spoken of her son to
Dr Giannakoureas and his understanding of Mr Lowah (prior to their
first meeting on 11 April 2017) was that
he exhibited behavioural difficulties
which caused conflict at home and necessitated a restraining order at times. He
that Ms Buer found this very difficult as she wanted to support
her son but was often frightened of
Ms Buer asked
Dr Giannakoureas to become Mr Lowah’s psychiatrist.
Dr Giannakoureas was initially reluctant, stating ‘
t usually see two members of the same
Mr Lowah was not physically seen by Dr Giannakoureas before 11 April
2017, the case notes reflected that Dr Albert Matti
independently discussed
Mr Lowah with him on two occasions regarding his management
Dr Matti was a senior
psychiatric registrar working in the MAC team and Dr Giannakoureas was his
supervising consultant.
it happened, quite by chance, on 11 April 2017 Dr Giannakoureas was
Ward, unhappy
Dr Giannakoureas explained that he would often
see patients that his
colleagues preferred not to, including complex cases. He therefore did not
consider it unusual to be called
if there was a behavioural disturbance on the
Dr Giannakoureas
was notified that Mr Lowah was in the Morier Ward HDU by someone from the
MAC team. It was reported that Mr Lowah
was being verbally abusive to
staff. Dr Giannakoureas attended and calmed Mr Lowah down and walked
with him on his way to the clinic.
Dr Giannakoureas spent some time
talking to Mr Lowah, during which Mr Lowah expressed feelings of
sadness and that he was not in
control of his future, which made him think of
This appeared to
Dr Giannakoureas to be in part due to being forced to have depot
injections, which Mr Lowah was of the view he
did not need in the absence
of illicit substance use. Mr Lowah repeated his long-held belief that his
psychosis was linked to cannabis
use, and he would remain well if he abstained
from this illicit drug use. Dr Giannakoureas noted that the aggression he
in the Morier Ward appeared to be directed solely at female staff
members, and he formed the view that he might have a better rapport
Mr Lowah because he was
Dr Giannakoureas accepted that there was a potential for conflict with him
treating Mr Lowah’s mother, he denied that
this compromised his
decision to commence treating Mr Lowah, or to cease his depot medication on
that day, which both Mr Lowah and
Ms Buer (previously) had asked him
Dr Giannakoureas
made an entry in Noarlunga Health Service Notes reflecting his comments,
assessment and plan for Mr Lowah:
‘Was at the HDU Morier,
creating a scene
Verbally abusive
Wanted to know why he was having depot there, instead of Adaire
Eventually calmed down
Told me he was unhappy about the depot Aripiprazole
Acknowledges becoming psychotic, but attributes this to Cannabis use
States he would be ‘fine’ if he ceased using
After some initial carry on, became reflective and told me he was sad
Feeling like he’s not in control of his future makes him think of
Said being forced to have an injection contributes to this
Denied voices, ideas of reference, thought interference
Reactive in affect
No current evidence of psychosis
Angry young man with borderline traits and a predisposition to becoming
psychotic, in the context of substance abuse
Survivor of an unhappy childhood
Finds it difficult to contain his emotions
Depot ceased
Will do his best to refrain from illicits
Review in three weeks’
Dr Giannakoureas’
oral evidence largely supported the above entry in the clinical records. An
important clarification in his
oral testimony was that upon accepting
Mr Lowah as his patient at that time, he was not dismissing the previous
diagnosis of schizophrenia.
Rather, he considered there were other things going
on, including borderline traits, thereby questioning rather than dismissing
diagnosis. He also considered that Mr Lowah was at risk of suicide if the
depot regime continued. This consideration was armoured
by the distress
Mr Lowah’s mother had expressed that her son may commit suicide if
not taken off the depot
medication.
Dr Giannakoureas made the decision at his first appointment with
Mr Lowah to cease the depot medication. He stated in making this
he considered the dilemma, ‘
Do I continue with the depot, on the
assumption it is treating an underlying illness, and risk causing so much
distress the patient
factor that influenced Dr Giannakoureas’ decision was that he viewed
the continuation of depot medication to be
an impediment to establishing a
therapeutic relationship with Mr Lowah. He had formed the preliminary view
that Mr Lowah’s
agitated and aggressive behaviour in the absence of
psychosis was driven by environmental factors and substance
Dr Giannakoureas
stated that he took Mr Lowah off the depot on 11 April 2017, ‘
’. He recalled making ‘
Mr Lowah that he was to stop taking drugs and behave himself and, in
return, he would give Mr Lowah a trial without the
depot injection and see
him regularly.
did receive the depot injection on that
but thereafter the
agreement reached was for him to be trialled without any antipsychotic
medication, in particular the depot injection.
Dr Giannakoureas’ plan to review Mr Lowah in three weeks.
Dr Giannakoureas stated the following:
‘My agreement with
Jayden was that I would pause his depot medication on a trial basis, provided he
stopped using illicit substances
and attended appointments made by the MAC team.
I emphasised that if he continued using drugs and became psychotic, I would
depot antipsychotic. My plan was not to abandon Jayden or rule out
treatment with depot in future. I assumed consultant responsibility
managing his care and insisted that he would continue being our patient. It was
simply not my intent to discharge him from the
MAC team. Jeanette Moir was
designated his clinical coordinator. The MAC team would closely monitor
Jayden’s mental state
in regular reviews.’
to ceasing the depot, Dr Giannakoureas did not review Mr Lowah’s
recent mental health history from the
Had he chosen to
undertake this task, the records would have been readily available to him by way
of Noarlunga Hospital case notes.
Critically, that would have included Dr
Marshall Watson’s referral letter to Dr Hooper dated 2 February 2015,
with the caution
that Mr Lowah may minimise his psychotic symptoms, leading
to a false sense of security and reduction of treatment intensity, which
would increase his risk.
of this letter had been placed in Volume 1 of the Noarlunga Heath Service
notes along with multiple discharge summaries from
his various admissions to the
Boylan Ward, including when he was first diagnosed with schizophrenia after
expressing intentions to
In addition, there were
entries relating to his recent admission to the Boylan Ward following his
self-discontinuation of his oral
antipsychotics bringing about a psychotic
episode after the first trial of ceasing depot. As detailed above, the latter
saw his depot injections reinstated, and the Level 2 CTO put into
This episode was
proximate in time to the MAC team receiving and accepting Mr Lowah’s
referral to their service. It was also
a very recent example of an unsuccessful
attempt to take Mr Lowah off depot medication and a potential predictor of
what might happen
if this was to
Dr Giannakoureas’ claim that he took Mr Lowah off the depot
with caution
’, was unsupported by his failure to review the
clinical records.
two expert psychiatrists called to give evidence during the Inquest agreed that
Dr Giannakoureas’ decision to cease the
depot injections, in the
circumstances as they presented on the day, was ‘
unreasonable
Neither expert expressed any real concern about the decision by
Dr Giannakoureas to assume consultant responsibility for Mr Lowah,
the same time as treating his mother. Their criticism of this aspect of
Mr Lowah’s treatment was the lack of a structured
management plan to
deal with non-compliance after the cessation of the depot injection and the
change in narrative around his
I will deal with
this below.
was evident that Mr Lowah displayed antisocial and aggressive behaviours
even when receiving depot medication. However, the effect
of ceasing the depot
medication saw a relaxing of forced structure that had previously required
Mr Lowah to attend the Morier Ward
for depot injections, which had the
underlying benefit of providing supervision and assertive follow up if required.
While the CTO
remained in place in principle, the focus of the CTO, being the
depot injection and the structure around ensuring Mr Lowah received
essentially became obsolete. The other consequence of ceasing the depot
injection was a moving away from the approach toward
the underlying illness for
which Mr Lowah had been receiving antipsychotics. It became apparent, as
will be set out below, that
when the antipsychotic medication was stopped,
members of the MAC team saw Mr Lowah in a different diagnostic light.
pause here to provide some context in relation to Ms Allner’s involvement
which was detailed in her affidavit dated 27 February
2025 and provided after
the close of oral evidence for reasons detailed above.
Tamar Allner was a Registered Nurse who has worked in several different fields
of nursing from the beginning of her career in 1993.
In 2007, Ms Allner
undertook further studies in mental health at Flinders University and continued
her career as a mental health
nurse. In May 2015, she commenced employment at
the Adaire Clinic, originally in
In late 2016,
Ms Allner moved to Team B of which there were two sub-teams, ‘Transitional
Care Team’ and ‘Mobile
Assertive Care’ (MAC) Team. Ms Allner
worked in both sub-teams at different times, but relevantly worked with
Mr Lowah while
undertaking duties in the MAC Team.
Allner explained in her affidavit that she was temporarily allocated as
Mr Lowah’s CC on 7 April 2017, as his former CC Ms
reportedly felt at risk of harm from him. The case note of the handover of
Mr Lowah’s care does not reflect Ms
James’ apparent fear of
Mr Lowah, or the temporary nature of Ms Allner’s
Although I note that
one would not necessarily expect to see details of this in such an entry.
Allner’s role as CC was formalised on 12 April 2017 at a Case Review with
the case note recording ‘
ongoing care co-ordination via Tamar
was not present at this meeting and was apparently not consulted about taking
over the role of sole CC.
her affidavit, Ms Allner expressed her discontent with not being consulted about
the decision. She stated:
‘Transfer of Jayden’s care
to me should have involved a meeting between Jayden, his former care
co-ordinator, Sian, and
me so I could formally introduce myself to him as his
new care co-ordinator. This would have assisted me in building rapport and
therapeutic relationship with
to this time, Ms Allner knew only of Mr Lowah by reputation. From her
affidavit it appeared that this information came primarily
from Ms James, that
Mr Lowah had a significant family history of domestic violence, reported
illicit substance use, dysfunctional
family unit and was considered a risk to
staff safety due to aggressive behaviour.
Allner expressed the view that she was left to piece everything together herself
in relation to Mr Lowah in the context of an upcoming
four-week period of
annual leave, an excessive caseload and a lack of leadership and staffing
issues. She affirmed in her affidavit
that due to these factors, she was unable
or found it difficult to escalate her concerns.
was apparent from Ms Allner’s affidavit that she had formed certain views
of Mr Lowah prior to meeting with him, and was
unhappy about having been
allocated as his CC. While the information she received from Ms James was
factually correct, it was evident
that Ms Allner’s perception of
Mr Lowah was coloured before she had taken the opportunity to form her own
clinical assessment.
before having met Mr Lowah, Ms Allner arranged for Mr Lowah to have
his scheduled depot medication on 11 April 2017 in a different
location due to
concerns raised by Ms James about staff safety. Instead of the GP Plus clinic,
Ms Allner arranged for Mr Lowah to
be brought to the Morier Ward of the
Noarlunga Hospital and receive the injection in the High Dependency Unit (HDU).
Ms Allner arranged
security and members of the MAC Team to be in
attendance.
It is unclear
whether Mr Lowah was notified of the change in arrangements in advance.
This demonstrated that Ms Allner had a pre-conceived
view of Mr Lowah that
was subsequently reinforced by his outburst on the day.
Allner did not meet Mr Lowah on 11 April 2017. It was only because a Code
Black was called in response to Mr Lowah’s volatile
behaviour that Ms
Allner attended and witnessed some of the incident. I do not consider this a
meeting in the true sense, where
they were introduced to one another. With Ms
Allner being formally allocated to the role of CC on 12 April 2017 and speaking
Mr Lowah over the phone on five occasions following that, it was not
until 11 July 2017 that they met for the first
I consider this to be
an unacceptable timeframe, particularly given what occurred in this three-month
period. However, I accept
there were mitigatory factors involved where Ms
Allner was concerned, not the least of which being the absence of a structured
Following the cessation of depot
Predictably,
following the cessation of depot, there was an almost immediate disengagement
with the MAC team and an escalation in
Mr Lowah’s erratic behaviour
which saw his supports and protective factors either fall away or withdrawn.
Arguably, the most
important of those included Mr Lowah’s
accommodation at Junction Housing and his support package from UCW. While
Dr Giannakoureas
gave evidence of what he thought was the understanding
between himself and Mr Lowah on 11 April 2017, there was no established
to ensure Mr Lowah remained on track. As Dr Watson had
predicted, Mr Lowah had minimised his symptoms which saw the relaxing of
treatment options, which increased his risk. In his oral evidence,
Dr Giannakoureas accepted that he had made an inaccurate assessment
Mr Lowah on 11 April
He remarked that in
retrospect, the level of manipulation by Mr Lowah was very surprising to
him. He did not believe at the time
that Mr Lowah was
sophisticated enough to be that
Dr Giannakoureas placed emphasis on this conclusion being made in
retrospect. However, had he thought to review Mr Lowah’s
history before making the decision, he may have had cause for genuine caution
given the historical pattern displayed by Mr
Lowah, as well as
Dr Watson’s prediction.
not exhaustive, below were the documented events following the cessation of
Mr Lowah’s depot, noting that the expert evidence
heard at Inquest
was that the therapeutic benefit of the depot Mr Lowah received on 11 April
2017 would have worn off by mid-May
On 28 April
2017, Mr Lowah attended an appointment with Dr Neild and it was recorded
that he had abstained from cannabis use for ten
days but had then used a number
of times ‘but little per occasion’. Dr Neild formed the impression
that Mr Lowah’s
awareness and insight appeared to be good and there
was improved engagement but noted an ongoing risk of developing psychosis due
drug use, and the reduced circulating
antipsychotic.
On 22 May 2017,
Ms Allner noted a phone conversation with Rebecca from Junction Housing
during which she was advised that Mr Lowah’s
mother considered Jayden
to be mentally unwell, using cannabis again, and had become agitated, having
damaged his property by punching
the walls. Rebecca suggested that Jayden
should be on depot again. In her entry, Ms Allner queried whether Rebecca
was a qualified
mental health
Allner’s affidavit, she stated that she did not know Rebecca and was
therefore uncertain as to her qualifications. She
stated that Rebecca’s
qualifications would be relevant to the weight to be given to her suggestion
that Mr Lowah recommence
his depot. Ms Allner asserted that she asked
Rebecca questions to ascertain whether Mr Lowah was exhibiting behaviours
with psychosis, such as pulling cables out of the walls or
television. As Rebecca was apparently unable identify any such behaviours,
Allner noted ‘
did not identify any acute MH issues
Allner asserted the belief that if Ms Buer was of the view that her son
should recommence the depot medication that she
would have advised herself, Dr
Giannakoureas or her own CC.
At some point in
this time frame, Dr Giannakoureas became aware that Ms Buer had
expressed to a member of the MAC team that she believed
her son should be back
on depot medication. This was a change in her position from only a few months
affidavit, Ms Allner asserted that she had an undocumented
conversation
Ms Buer to follow up on the information from Rebecca. She stated that
Ms Buer was unable to identify any symptoms of psychosis
and described her
son becoming aggressive in the context of cannabis use. Ms Allner did not state
that she explored with Ms Buer
her concern that her son was
mentally unwell
’, as reported by Rebecca. It is likely that
this conversation was that where Ms Buer suggested that the depot
medication be
reinstated. Dr Giannakoureas recalled a member of the MAC Team
telling him this at some stage.
On 23 May 2017,
the Junction Housing Case Manager, Ms Meg Hastings phoned MAC duty worker and
advised that Mr Lowah was unwell and
could not keep the appointment with
Dr Giannakoureas. Ms Hastings advised that he was paranoid and aggressive,
and she could not
On 24 May 2017,
the Noarlunga Hospital phoned the MAC duty worker and advised that Mr Lowah
had seen a nurse practitioner following
intentional self-inflicted
expressed the view that this was not indicative of psychosis, rather, it was
consistent with Borderline Personality Disorder
or Post Traumatic Stress
On 25 May 2017,
Ms Allner noted a phone conversation with Mr Lowah that he had
smashed walls after being pissed off at Junction Housing
Ms Allner also recorded in this entry that there was ‘
indication of agitation or hostility, nil perceptual disturbances identified,
nil thought disorder
appeared that this assessment of Mr Lowah was made from the phone
conversation.
On 25 May 2017
an email was received from Trevor Old of UCW. The email confirmed the damage to
Mr Lowah’s accommodation and
the laceration to his index finger,
self-inflicted burns on his left hand and that he was annoyed and distressed
that Ms Meg Hastings
had looked at his Facebook
On 25 May 2017,
Ms Allner made an entry in the Noarlunga Health Service notes recording
that Ms Hastings from UCW contacted the MAC
team and spoke to a duty worker to
report her belief that Mr Lowah was mentally unwell. Ms Allner
recorded underneath:
‘Not assessed as being
psychotic, thought disordered or mentally unwell as suggested by Junction
Housing. Unannounced home
visit therefore not indicated.’
Ms Allner explained in her affidavit that she did not form the view that
Mr Lowah was psychotic based on this information from Ms
Hastings as
Mr Lowah had been seen at the Noarlunga ED and they did not report to her
or record on CBIS any acute mental health
She stated that if
Mr Lowah had been psychotic, this would have been identified during his
assessment at Noarlunga ED and recorded
on CBIS, and the MAC team would have
been notified.
It appears that
Ms Allner considered the lack of corroboration of Ms Hastings’ concern for
Mr Lowah’s mental health as
proof to the contrary. Further, Trevor
Old did not report psychotic behaviour to
Also on 25 May
2017, Ms Buer contacted Noarlunga Health Service in her capacity as a client of
the service. She spoke to Kristina
Juraja who made a case note of the
conversation. This case note was not available during the Inquest as it was
part of Ms Buer’s
confidential file. Following the receipt of Ms
Allner’s affidavit, specifically those matters referred to in paragraphs
[187]-[190]
those acting on behalf of Southern Adelaide Local Health Network
(SALHN), provided the case note to the Court. In addition to information
her own mental health, Ms Buer was recorded as telling Ms
‘Concerned about son Jayden. Stated that he is not
weel (sic), is angry and
, smashed his house up,
threatened workers.’
There was no corresponding case note in Mr Lowah’s records, but Ms
Allner did depose to a memory of speaking with Ms Buer on
this occasion when Ms
Jaraja (Kris) handed the phone over. Ms Allner’s memory of her
conversation with Ms Buer was that she
informed her that Mr Lowah had been
acting aggressively after smoking a few bongs but had eventually
calmed down
On 30 May 2017,
Ms Allner attempted to conduct a home visit with UCW. It was apparent that
someone was home but did not answer the
On 8 and 9 June
2017 phone calls to Mr Lowah went
unanswered.
On 9 June 2017,
a note of a case conference recorded an unanswered phone call to Mr Lowah,
as well as a home visit by UCW on 8 June
2017 during which Mr Lowah
conveyed that he did not want contact with mental health services and that he
had been failing to attend
community services. Further damage to his unit and
regular use of cannabis was noted. The UCW worker, Mr Old, was recorded by
Allner in this entry to express the view that Mr Lowah was not
confused, disorientated or
On 12 June 2017
a phone call to remind Mr Lowah of an appointment with
Dr Giannakoureas went
unanswered.
On 13 June 2017,
Ms Allner recorded that Ms Hastings sent an email to her, enquiring whether
Mr Lowah had been engaging with any supports,
as he had disengaged with her
and she was keen to keep him housed and for him not to be breached by Job
Prospects as he would lose
A Summons to
Produce was issued for Ms Allner’s emails on 5 September 2024 which
were tendered to the Court on 20 November 2024.
Within this bundle of emails
was Ms Allner’s response to Ms Hastings’ query, which was to
inform her that Mr Lowah was
engaging well
advice to Ms Hastings was to have Mr Lowah charged for the damage to his
unit or to warn him about
Ms Hastings
responded shortly after to express her concern that Mr Lowah’s mental
health had declined significantly since
the depot had ceased and that she and
Mr Lowah’s mother were concerned about
Ms Hastings’
concern relating to Mr Lowah’s decline in mental health was not
included in Ms Allner’s note of this
communication in the Noarlunga
Hospital notes, or any subsequent entry, nor did it appear to have been
communicated to Dr Giannakoureas.
Despite speaking
with Mr Old from UCW and agreeing to attend the appointment to see
Dr Giannakoureas, Mr Lowah was not at his address
at the scheduled
pickup time.
Accordingly,
Mr Lowah did not attend his appointment with Dr Giannakoureas on
13 June 2017. This was recorded by Ms Allner in a
progress entry
along with ‘
nil acute concerns re MS
Unsuccessful
On 16 June 2017
Junction Housing indicated that they would not be renewing Mr Lowah’s
lease in July 2017 due to ‘
thousands and thousands
worth of damage which would not be repaired until his
lease expired and he had left the
On 22 June 2017,
the IRPSS Package provided by UCW was withdrawn due to non-engagement by
On 26 June 2017,
Ms Allner emailed Dr Giannakoureas and another mental health staff
member to inform them that she was putting Mr
Lowah up for clinical review
that week as he was not engaging, but still under a CTO. She noted that
Mr Lowah had failed to attend
any appointments since having depot ceased,
but there were no grounds to go in with SAPOL and do an urgent assessment (as
would allow if acted upon).
review conducted on 5 July 2017 detailed Mr Lowah’s non-adherence
with the agreement made with Dr Giannakoureas,
his failure to attend
scheduled appointments and his evasion of MAC team
Notwithstanding
this well-documented disengagement with services and an escalation in behaviour
from Mr Lowah, with at least four
reports (from those with whom he
having contact) that his mental health was unstable and he was
still abusing illicit substances, the clinical review entry astonishingly
recorded the following:
‘No concerns voiced by other services
involved re: MS [mental state] nil indication for CC [case coordinator] to
attend with
SAPOL to check welfare or assess Jayden. Nil concerns for MS
indicated during phone calls with CC. Nil perceptual Dx [disorder]
identified.
Jayden had good recall of events, well orientated.’
palpable observation of the above entry from the clinical review meeting was
that there had been little to no contact with Mr Lowah
between the
cessation of depot and the clinical review by the MAC team to have gained any
reassurance that Mr Lowah’s mental
health was stable or otherwise.
Furthermore, there had been no face-to-face contact between Mr Lowah and
the MAC team between 28
April 2017 and the clinical review being held. A/P
Sullivan described the assessment of Mr Lowah’s mental state over
period as based on incidental observations and not structured
assessments.
Perhaps most
concerningly, the comment that ‘
no concerns [were] voiced by other
’ was plainly wrong.
Allner explained in her affidavit that it was understood by those in the MDT
(presumably the MAC team) that the mental state symptoms
they were assessing
were specifically psychotic
However, this was
not put to Dr Giannakoureas for his comment as the affidavit of Ms Allner was
received following the closure of
the evidence. Further, it is difficult to
reconcile this explanation given the report of paranoia from Ms Hastings.
Allner was present at the clinical review. She did not elaborate in her
affidavit as to the discussion pertaining to reports from
other services, or as
to Mr Lowah’s mental health more generally. She stated, rather, that
the main topic of conversation was
whether the CTO would be allowed to
The notes indicated
that Dr Giannakoureas would likely allow it to lapse on 6 September 2017.
way, the information recorded in the note of the clinical review that no
concerns had been raised by other services was incorrect,
and there had been no
reliable in-person assessment of Mr Lowah’s mental state following
cessation of the depot, with the exception
of his review with Dr Neild on 28
April 2017.
day following the clinical review Ms Allner unsuccessfully attempted to
speak with Mr Lowah. On 10 July 2017, a duty worker from
the MAC team was
again unsuccessful in reaching Mr Lowah to advise him of the appointment
with Dr Giannakoureas the following day.
Later the same day, a mental
health nurse at Noarlunga ED contacted the MAC team advising that Mr Lowah
had presented with a bone
fracture and inquired as to whether they wanted to
speak with him while he was there. A phone call received a short time later
the news that Mr Lowah had left the ED and was believed to be
making his way to the Flinders Medical Centre (FMC) Plastics
Department.
did not attend the FMC on 10 July 2017, rather he presented at the Marion GP
Plus Health Care Centre
his mother, Ms Buer, and saw duty worker Jenny Hoyle. The entry made by Ms
Hoyle indicated that when he was told to go to FMC,
he expressed reluctance as
t want to go under
’. He had reportedly
been provided with the ‘
before for pain and that had freaked him
encouraged Mr Lowah to attend FMC to have his finger treated. She also
recorded her observation that he was expressing
some signs of paranoia with the
remark that ‘
you need to make sure you tell people
Hoyle recorded that Mr Lowah then left with his mother, ‘
to go to FMC plastics
Hoyle also recorded in the same case note that Steve, a mental health nurse from
Noarlunga Hospital, had observed Mr Lowah as
a little irritable and
suspicious prior to leaving
is apparent that Ms Allner effectively disregarded the information from Steve
(as recorded by Ms Hoyle) that Mr Lowah appeared
to be suspicious during
his attendance. Further, she was not prepared to infer from the note of Ms
Hoyle, which referred to signs
of paranoia, that she was concerned about
Mr Lowah’s mental
appeared that Ms Allner was not prepared to accept information from others,
regardless of their qualifications, if that information
was suggestive of a
re-emergence of psychosis. The reason for this reluctance cannot be known with
certainty, however it may be
that Mr Lowah’s threatening behaviour
led to a conscious or unconscious desire to interpret his conduct as being
personality
driven rather than a re-emergence of his psychosis. A personality
driven cause would justify a lapse of his CTO and result in no
further contact
with the MAC team.
Dr Giannakoureas
sees Mr Lowah for the first time since 11 April 2017
following day, being 11 July 2017, Mr Lowah attended at the Noarlunga
Health Service with his mother for his scheduled appointment
Dr Giannakoureas. Ms Allner was present at this appointment. This
was the first face to face contact with the MAC team since
28 April 2017 and the
first time Dr Giannakoureas had seen him since he ceased his depot
medication, three months before. It was
also the first time Ms Allner had
met Mr Lowah in person. The entry in the clinical notes is as
‘Attended with mother
Eating and sleeping OK
Ongoing angry outbursts
Says he’s doing OK
Hypervigilant to slights
Worries about what people think of him
No ideation of suicide, or harm to others
Burns himself to relieve tension
Cannot rule out self-injury
Occasional Cannabis use (acknowledges it makes him
‘paranoid’)
Casually dressed
Doesn’t like using phones
Not overtly delusional or thought disordered
Reactive in affect
Recent fracture of left index finger
in FMC ED yesterday
Left just prior to surgery
‘I was tripping out on laughing gas’
Acknowledged being scared
Stable mental state
Redirected to ED for surgical reduction, as per plastics, with letter
Review in four weeks’
though Mr Lowah had returned to illicit drug use and had effectively
disengaged with supports (he had broken ‘
Dr Giannakoureas did not reinstate the depot medication at this time. He
was of the view that Mr Lowah was not thought
disordered or delusional.
However, the following day, Mr Lowah was detained under a Level 1 ITO for
apparent psychotic behaviour,
which I will detail below. During oral evidence,
Dr Giannakoureas was challenged about whether he considered it possible
Lowah was psychotic at the appointment based on the events of the
following day. Further, he was asked why he did not reinstate
medication at this appointment. Dr Giannakoureas explained that he decided
to give Mr Lowah another chance to stay off
Ms Buer also advocated for her son to remain off the depot medication,
despite having expressed a different view at an
earlier time to a member of the
MAC team and to Junction Housing staff
One available
inference is that Ms Buer, who was at times frightened of her son, did not
feel comfortable expressing her true opinion
in his presence.
Dr Giannakoureas conceded that it was possible that Mr Lowah was
psychotic at the time of the appointment, but
‘You know for someone to know that others perceive
them as unwell and be organised enough to maintain a conversation without
away any evidence of psychosis, especially if they’re reactive and
conversational, demonstrates an element of control,
manipulation and
deceitfulness but I didn’t get that impression when I saw him the day
before. What I suspect might have happened,
and again I’m only
speculating, is that after the appointment with myself he might have thought
‘I’m in the clear
now’ so he used heavily the evening before,
but I can only
speculate.’
attended the FMC to undergo surgery on his hand that evening and was discharged
that day, Mr Lowah’s
behaviour escalated resulting in Ms Buer contacting SAPOL and SAAS.
Ms Buer reported that Mr Lowah had
visited a friend and while away had
taken a hammer to his hand. He used the hammer to smash the cast that had been
applied the day
before, damaging his fingers. Upon his return home, his
behaviour was so threatening that Ms Buer locked herself in a room of her
house due to fears for her own safety. Mr Lowah was taken into the care
and control of SAAS pursuant to
Mental Health Act
(powers less
restrictive than an ITO). The clinical records reflected that he was happy to
be transferred to hospital in the safety
net, was unsure as to why he had
removed his cast or hit his hand with a hammer and that he appeared vague and
was slow to respond,
looking around at
Mr Lowah denied
hearing voices or hallucinating. It was recorded that Ms Buer told the ED
staff upon arrival:
‘Jayden had been smoking THC for past few
days and has become increasingly agitated, pacing, cursing and responding to
stimuli ... said psychiatrist agreed to cease the depot because Jayden
would not smoke THC anymore.’
in the FMC ED, Mr Lowah was noted to be guarded, hostile and paranoid. His
speech was difficult to follow at times and described
and derailing when attempting to answer some
chemically restrained (with droperidol, midazolam and olanzapine) after a Code
Black was called. This enabled medical staff
to safely conduct x-rays on
Mr Lowah’s left hand. The treating medical officer, Dr Kjaer,
recorded that Mr Lowah appeared
psychotic and
on presentation and
placed him under a Level 1 ITO. The recorded plan of management for
Mr Lowah included closed ward management
and to liaise with
CMHT/psychiatrist
Dr Giannakoureas.
July 2017 he was transferred to the secure unit of the Margaret Tobin Centre
(MTC). Consultant psychiatrist Dr Michael Nance
attempted to interview
Mr Lowah on 13 July 2017 at 11:15am with resident medical officer, Dr Zhao
Wang. However, Mr Lowah became
hostile very quickly and the interview was
terminated. Dr Nance confirmed the ITO and recorded on the Order that
Mr Lowah had a
history of schizophrenia, recent drug use and agitated
expert opinion on the decision to cease depot injections on 11 April
pause here to discuss the expert evidence on the decision making of 11 April
2017 and what followed thereafter. As outlined above,
Dr Furst and A/P
Sullivan were of the same general view that it was not unreasonable for the
depot injections to be ceased on that
day. Dr Furst opined that it was not
unreasonable for a psychiatrist to try and withdraw treatment, as it was often a
good practice
to revisit a
However, what
Dr Furst observed from his review of the clinical notes was a change in
narrative around Mr Lowah’s illness.
He expressed the following
‘I think that it’s not unreasonable for
psychiatrists to try withdrawing treatment, you know, and that’s often a
good thing. We don’t like patients to be on medication forever without
potentially revising your diagnosis, being prepared
to be wrong. I think the
difficulty lies - it seemed like from that assessment, it very much went on a
pathway of “he doesn’t
have schizophrenia” as opposed to
“he might not have schizophrenia, let’s try taking him off the
medication and
be prepared to review it, and if it’s not going well,
let’s get him back on it” ... I mean, I think that there’s
different ways to approach the withdrawal of treatment, and generally with
someone with a history of violence, I would suggest
you should withdraw
treatment carefully with ongoing monitoring. And he did have further
appointments with Dr Giannakoureas but I
didn’t get the sense from
the case notes that there’d really been a dedicated plan around the
withdrawal of treatment,
and the risks that that might pose, and what the risk
management plan was if those risks were starting to be identified, ie reports
from junction housing, “Well, he’s not doing very well”,
“actually, Mum says he’s talking to himself”,
you know. These
are the sorts of things that you might go “Okay, that’s part of our
risk management plan, we’ve
identified that, let’s change the
treatment”.’
Dr Furst acknowledged that time had proven his assessment correct, he also
observed the existence of Dr Watson’s letter
which was based on a
longitudinal history of Mr Lowah’s mental illness (schizophrenia)
that had historically persisted in the
absence of drug use and did respond to
treatment. Dr Watson’s opinion was set out in a careful and
considered manner in the
letter that Dr Giannakoureas would have had
available to him but did not
While Ms Allner
deposed to the location of volume 1 of the clinical notes being stored in
archives, I do not accept that this was
an impediment to having reviewed them.
Clinical records are often stored offsite and can be called for without
difficulty. Further,
Dr Giannakoureas did not raise any such issue as
preventing him from having read Mr Lowah’s mental health history. He
that he did not review Mr Lowah’s notes prior to ceasing the
depot medication.
Sullivan was also of the view that a more definitive management plan should have
been put into place at the time of ceasing the
depot. He opined that an aspect
of this plan should have been regular urinalysis which had a number of benefits;
it was a deterrent
to drug use, it could be used to persuade Mr Lowah to
attend drug and alcohol counselling, and it was an increased opportunity for
mental health staff to observe Mr Lowah when he attended for urinalysis.
A/P Sullivan was of the opinion that the plan should have
been developed by the
multidisciplinary team with the view of including Mr Lowah’s family
and his mental health team. During
cross-examination, A/P Sullivan was taken to
an earlier mental health care plan that had been created for Mr Lowah in
2015 and revised
A/P Sullivan opined that a similar plan should have been created (or the earlier
plan revised) for Mr Lowah and agreed to on 11
April 2017, when the
depot medication was ceased.
the numerous reports of drug use, non-attendances at scheduled appointments,
damage to property and self-inflicted injuries,
it was A/P Sullivan’s
opinion that the MAC team would have been justified in
the CTO to have
Mr Lowah brought to hospital for a brief admission in order to review his
mental state and consider reinstitution
medication.
On balance, it
is open on the evidence to find that had a mental health care plan been drafted,
with Mr Lowah’s signed agreement
to its terms, his ensuing
non-compliance would have been more visible to those in the team, particularly
Dr Giannakoureas, who would
likely have taken responsibility for the plan
and its enforcement. The mental health plan would have worked in harmony with
CTO either by working as a deterrent to Mr Lowah’s behaviours, or
as a trigger for the conditions of the CTO to be activated.
Of course, none of
this happened.
the meeting on 11 July 2017, A/P Sullivan expressed the opinion that
Dr Giannakoureas ought to have considered recommencing Mr
depot medication. He qualified this opinion by accepting that if
Dr Giannakoureas had not detected a relapse in Mr Lowah’s
condition (which was his evidence), he may not have seen this as
justifiable.
A/P Sullivan
did suggest that at the very least, this was an opportunity to introduce a
requirement for urine drug screening or
enrolling Mr Lowah in counselling.
Another compounding feature at play was that, based on the information recorded
in the Noarlunga
Health Service notes, particularly by Ms Allner, the more
concerning reports of Mr Lowah’s behaviour were not being shared
Dr Giannakoureas, or at least not being recorded in the clinical records.
With that said, Dr Giannakoureas was aware of Mr
Lowah’s broken
promises in the form of a continued failure to attend his scheduled appointments
and his use of cannabis in
the preceding period, from which he had promised to
abstain. Dr Giannakoureas’ justification of ceasing the depot
with the hope of establishing a therapeutic relationship had by this
stage proven to be unsound.
available observation from an analysis of the Noarlunga Health Service records
when compared to Ms Allner’s emails, was that
Ms Allner appeared
eager to minimise the negative reports relating to Mr Lowah. In doing so,
she queried the qualifications of those
and ultimately refused
to respond to Ms Hastings (from Junction Housing) entirely following her
concerns about Mr Lowah’s mental
health which had been expressed on
more than one occasion.
‘From: Russell, Catherine (Health)
Sent: Tuesday 13 June 2017
To – Tamar Allner
Subject: Meg from Junction Housing
Please phone Meg from Junction Aust re: Jayden Lower
From Tamar Allner (Health)
Sent: Tuesday 13 June 2017
To: Russell, Catherine
Subject: Meg from Junction Housing
Ms Allner was at the coal face with other services and agencies, she
therefore had the ability to re-engineer the narrative or
omit certain important
concerns when reporting back to those who had less direct contact with
Mr Lowah, such as Dr Giannakoureas.
It was difficult to understand
exactly what Ms Allner’s motivations were, however her fear of him,
apparently passed on from
the last CC, Ms James, may have contributed. There
was an available observation that from the time Ms Allner became involved
Mr Lowah’s care, his best interests were not well-served and
those in the community were at a heightened risk of experiencing
the impact of
his declining mental health.
possible explanation was provided by A/P Sullivan during his expert evidence.
He was asked to comment on the difference in
available supports for those who
have been diagnosed with a personality disorder as opposed to a diagnosis of
schizophrenia. He
explained that there was often a stigma associated with a
primary diagnosis of a personality or behavioural
‘Certainly, many services, public services and many
private practitioners will be reluctant to take on a person who has a primary
diagnosis only of personality disorder and in many cases mental health
legislations nationally specifically exclude personality disorder
itself as the
basis of compulsory treatment under restrictive frameworks. So there is a
stigma and it's also perhaps associated
with a reduced access to services if the
diagnosis is seen as the main issue.’
a question mark remained over the motivations of Ms Allner, Dr
Giannakoureas was asked directly about his decision making relating
treatment of Mr Lowah between 11 April 2017 and his discharge from the
service in November 2017.
While he agreed he had not had regard to Dr Watson’s opinions in his
letter dated 2 February 2015, it was the evidence of
Dr Giannakoureas that
he reached similar conclusions to Dr Watson,
organically.
He explained
that this was in relation to Mr Lowah being a complex patient and that he
would have preferred for him to remain on
depot if suicidal ideation had not
been expressed. Dr Giannakoureas clarified that while other staff (health
workers) may have been
lured into Mr Lowah minimising his psychotic
symptoms risking treatment complacency, that was not his approach with
Mr Lowah. He
‘A. That was certainly a
possibility with other staff, that they would look at Mr Lowah’s
behaviour and drug use and assume
that that was the sole cause of his problems
without taking into account that the drug abuse would actually cause a psychotic
mentioned that might be the problem for other health workers.
we assume from that, that that was not the approach you took.
it's not the approach I took.’
this may have been a permissible approach to take on 11 April 2017, by
11 July 2017, the landscape had changed with the agreement
reached between
Mr Lowah and Dr Giannakoureas being fundamentally broken.
Furthermore, the possibility of other staff members assuming
Mr Lowah’s behaviour and drug use was related to a personality
disorder gathered momentum without documented correction
Dr Giannakoureas.
his oral evidence, Dr Giannakoureas accepted that, following his decision
to cease Mr Lowah’s depot medication in April 2017,
there was a
deterioration in his mental state. Moreover, he considered that the assaults
perpetrated by Mr Lowah on two unknown
individuals in late August 2017
(detailed below) may have been causal to this
deterioration.
accept the evidence of Dr Furst and A/P Sullivan. Accordingly, I find that
while the decision by Dr Giannakoureas on 11 April 2017
to cease the depot
was made in haste, it would not have been unreasonable in and of itself due to
the circumstances as they presented
on the day, if appropriately implemented.
However, I find that a failure to review Mr Lowah’s mental health
history, set out
in records accessible to Dr Giannakoureas, and the lack of
a structured management plan to set clear goals of expectation, saw a
of psychotic symptoms which the depot medication had been holding at bay. The
failure was not so much the cessation of
the depot medication, but the failure
to watch closely for the need to reinstate it when it became apparent that it
was a destabilising
event. Had Dr Giannakoureas set structured goals and a
management plan on 11 April 2017 (or at a later time after having reviewed
Mr Lowah’s clinical records), the reports of cannabis use and the
disengagement from the MAC team (for almost three months)
would likely have been
followed up by Dr Giannakoureas himself. This could have potentially
ameliorated the impact of the omission
of certain concerning behaviours from the
clinical records. The fact that this serious decision was made so quickly and
an adequate implementation plan, leads to an inference that
Dr Giannakoureas had taken the opportunity to make a decision which pleased
both of his patients (Mr Lowah and Ms Buer), but was not well thought
through. Dr Giannakoureas’ ‘
Mr Lowah was optimistic, particularly given that depot is used in cases
where compliance was questionable. It was inappropriate
to act with such hope
without a comprehensive support plan in place. This is not something realised
in retrospect. Non-compliance
’ was always a
potential and arguably an inevitable outcome. This should have been appreciated
by Dr Giannakoureas. It was
Furthermore,
I find that Ms Allner did not accurately document the deterioration in
Mr Lowah’s mental state, which saw his health
deteriorate to a
dangerous point. The way in which Ms Allner recorded information was subjective
and appeared coloured by her own
assessment of the validity of that information.
That carried with it the risk that those reading her documentation would be
by any erroneous assumptions made by Ms Allner. I accept the
context in which this occurred contributed to this undesirable state
of affairs,
namely that Ms Allner had no management plan to follow and had formed a view of
Mr Lowah from negative accounts of him
and his behaviour.
to the Margaret Tobin Centre
to Mr Lowah’s admission to the MTC, the Noarlunga Health Service
notes reflected that Ms Allner had been notified
of Mr Lowah’s
attendance at the FMC ED on 12 July 2017 by email from a clinical nurse. The
information contained in the email
to Ms Allner was that Mr Lowah had
been brought in by SAAS/SAPOL in an agitated and paranoid state, he had trashed
his unit and also
re-injured his hand by deliberately hitting it with a hammer.
His mother reported that he had been smoking large quantities of
replied to the clinical nurse the following day notifying her that she had
attended at the MTC to see Mr Lowah that morning
(13 July 2017).
FMC clinical notes reflected that Dr Wang spoke with Ms Allner on 13
July 2017 to obtain collateral information. It is likely
that this conversation
took place via telephone, although there is also a record of Ms Allner
having attended in person as well.
Unfortunately, Dr Wang had no
independent memory of the conversation or where it took place. He did however
make a contemporaneous
entry in the clinical records of the conversation. The
salient features of this entry were:
That the depot
had been ceased because it was thought that all presentations were likely
secondary to personality disorder and behavioural
misconduct; and
presentation was not out of character for Mr Lowah and antipsychotics had
not helped in the
are a number of observations to be made about this entry in the clinical
records. In doing so I accept Dr Wang’s evidence
that he while he
did not remember, it is likely he made this entry shortly after speaking with
Ms Allner and that it represented
a summary of their conversation rather
than a verbatim account.
Allner also accepted that this was a reasonable recount of the information
provided by her.
examination, there was no corresponding record of the discussion with
Dr Wang in the Noarlunga Health Service case notes,
except to document that
a discussion took place. Secondly, the information relating to the cessation of
the depot injection did
not align with the evidence given by
Dr Giannakoureas, namely that it was incomplete. Finally, the statement
that antipsychotics
had not helped in the past was factually incorrect. The
latter inconsistency was also observed by Dr Furst when he assessed
in James Nash House only a few months later, on 2 September 2017.
He recorded, ‘
reported that antipsychotics hadn
NB this seems in contrast to admission in March 2016 where reported he had done
well on Quetiapine
’ provided by Ms Allner left little
to no room for consideration of anything but a personality disorder. This is an
of the point made by Dr Furst in his oral evidence; that the
narrative around Mr Lowah’s illness had changed.
Allner explained in her affidavit that her opinion that antipsychotics had not
of an entry in his mental
health plan from 2016. This plan included a section entitled ‘
medication has helped me in the past
?’. The section was blank. From
this, Ms Allner apparently inferred that antipsychotic medication had not been
effective in
the past. This was despite Mr Lowah being in receipt of the
antipsychotic depot medication at the time of the mental health plan
clearly recorded within the document. Ms Allner also referred to reports of
aggressive behaviours and ongoing suicidal
ideation while Mr Lowah was
receiving depot Aripiprazole in support of this inference. I reject Ms
Allner’s explanation.
that information having been collected by Dr Wang from Ms Allner, and
relayed to Dr Nance, Dr Nance attempted to reinterview
on 14 July 2017 at 10:39am.
This time he did so successfully. During the interview Mr Lowah reported
having difficulty recalling events and felt a ‘
bit jumbled
He reported self-harming because he did ‘
the need to punish himself. The clinical records reflected that Mr Lowah
asked Dr Nance not to look at him because
he did not know what he was
thinking and he did not like it. Mr Lowah explained that it was hard to
communicate as no one understood
the way he did. The entry reflected that
Dr Wang (who made the entry in the clinical records of the interview)
observed Mr Lowah’s
left hand to be swollen with open sutures on his
fourth finger as well as burn marks to his left forearm. It was
recorded assessment that Mr Lowah had a
complex history with multiple diagnoses
impression that day was
most consistent with poor impulse
control and emotional dysregulation secondary to borderline personality
disorder/anti-social personality
disorder (BPD/ASPD), [with] no current evidence
of psychosis
Mr Lowah’s ITO was revoked by Dr Nance. The plan was to liaise
with the Plastic Surgery Department and follow up with the
community mental
health team.
his oral evidence Dr Nance accepted that there was a possibility that the
symptoms displayed by Mr Lowah during this interview
were consistent with
psychosis. However, he noted that they were consistent with other diagnoses as
and he did not assess
Mr Lowah as suffering from a relapse of
schizophrenia.
He was asked
whether this may have impacted on his ability
to assess for psychosis. Over the
course of his admission to the MTC, Mr Lowah had been administered mood
stabilisers and sedatives
including midazolam, lorazepam and
olanzapine.
agreed that Mr Lowah would still have been experiencing the effect of
olanzapine at the time of his interview as it had
been administered at 6:45am
that morning. He did not consider however that this would have directly
impacted on his
assessment.
could not be precise about the weight he assigned to each of the factors under
consideration, but it was clear there were
three main components; the clinical
presentation, the face-to-face mental state examination, and the collateral
information. Dr
Nance told the Court that while it was possible
Mr Lowah was psychotic at the time of the assessment, his overall
conclusion of Mr
Lowah on the day was that he was not suffering a relapse
of schizophrenia. Unfortunately, but not inappropriately, Dr Nance placed
weight on Dr Giannakoureas’ assessment on 11 July 2017, which
concluded that Mr Lowah’s mental state was stable. Also
unfortunately, he placed weight on Ms Allner’s ‘
’ information. Dr Nance explained
‘....in coming to the final conclusion, you have to
weigh up all of these factors. And sometimes, the whole is more than the
the parts.’
was entitled to rely on the information provided by Ms Allner (likely
conveyed through Dr Wang) which was in keeping with
his understanding of
the assessment by Dr Giannakoureas a few days earlier (which was infected
with the same information from Ms
Allner). He was also entitled to rely on
its accuracy. Unfortunately, the information was neither accurate, nor
complete. Dr Nance
gave evidence that while he had no independent
recollection of being present when collateral information was provided by
he would have had regard to the information as communicated by
Dr Wang and taken it into account when assessing
believed he would have placed a ‘
fair amount of
information obtained from Ms Allner. Dr Nance explained that
Ms Allner’s views, as part of the MAC team, provided a
longitudinal
perspective on Mr Lowah’s mental health
When giving
evidence, Dr Nance stated that he was probably not aware that
Ms Allner had only met Mr Lowah on one occasion at the
information was provided, or that Dr Giannakoureas had ceased the depot
medication at his first meeting and
assessment.
Therefore, this
decision-making by Dr Nance was based on incomplete information.
was Dr Furst’s opinion following Ms Foster’s death that
Mr Lowah was most likely continuously psychotic from at least
July 2017, if
not as far back as May (when the effect of the last depot administered in April
had worn off).
This opinion
was provided in the report he prepared for the Supreme Court. Dr Furst
confirmed his opinion when giving oral evidence,
and confirmed that this
included Dr Nance’s assessment on 14 July 2017. It was also the
evidence of A/P Sullivan
Dr Giannakoureas (after reviewing the clinical records of the
assessment)
Mr Lowah was experiencing psychotic symptoms at the time of
Dr Nance’s assessment. As touched on above, Dr Nance did
that this was a possibility.
made the following comment:
‘Interestingly, despite the
history of a marked increase in agitation and aggression, the observation of his
mother that he
had been responding to internal stimuli, which was consistent
with the ambulance report and his report to nurses that he had intrusive
thoughts, as well his history of schizophrenia confirmed at Boylan Ward and
recent cessation of treatment, combined with his seemingly
bizarre self-harm, he
was determined to be presenting with symptoms consistent with Borderline and
Anti-social Personality Disorder
... Interestingly, despite the report of
jumbled thinking coupled with intense agitation and violence consistent with
previous psychotic
episodes, he was considered not to be psychotic and
presenting with personality-based behavioural problems.’
did not understand Dr Furst to be critical of Dr Nance’s
ultimate diagnosis, rather retrospectively quizzical. However, it
Sullivan’s evidence that diagnostic overshadowing provided a plausible
explanation for the factors mitigating against
the identification of a psychotic
state in Mr Lowah. A/P Sullivan explained that diagnostic overshadowing,
or the tendency to interpret
symptoms in line with a previous diagnosis, may
have played a role in the diagnosis of Mr Lowah by Dr Nance. He
explained that the
questioning of the diagnosis of schizophrenia by
Dr Giannakoureas, interpreted by Ms Allner as a re-diagnosis of
antisocial personality
disorder and behavioural misconduct, likely influenced
Dr Nance’s interpretation of Mr Lowah’s presentation.
readily accepted that he placed importance on the information
provided by Ms Allner.
information produced at Inquest, it also appeared on its face that
Ms Allner actively discouraged the reinstating of depot medication.
email communication from Ms Allner to Dr Giannakoureas on 14 July
2017, on the topic of Dr Nance’s decision to revoke the
I popped down there yesterday to make sure they
t go back down the Depot
Dr Giannakoureas, who did not remember receiving this email and therefore
could not put it into context, had indicated in a previous
email that he agreed
with the ultimate assessment of Dr Nance, namely that Mr Lowah’s
symptoms were not due to a relapse of
schizophrenia.
Ms Allner did not give oral evidence to explain why she would need to
convince those assessing Mr Lowah not to reinstate the depot
medication.
In her affidavit, Ms Allner stated her email was poorly worded and open to
misinterpretation. She asserted that she
was trying to convey that the depot
should not be
unnecessarily
reinstated.
Sullivan was asked whether it was unusual for a case coordinator to advocate for
a particular position in relation to treatment.
His evidence was that it would
not be unusual if that was the considered view of the team. A/P Sullivan
explained the difficulty
he saw with Ms Allner’s actions on that day
was that the decision being relayed by Ms Allner was that it was not part
printed management plan which was available and showed evidence of
planning and consideration about the management trajectory of
Dr Nance acknowledged that Mr Lowah’s mother was not contacted
for collateral information. He gave evidence that he
was unsure why this did
not occur as it would usually be part of their
It was the evidence
of Dr Wang that he would only contact family members for collateral
information if the patient was unable to
give a history, or if there were no
care workers allocated, or none available to speak with. Dr Wang placed
more importance on the
information of case workers as this was provided with a
clinical lens.
However, had
Ms Buer been spoken to for the purpose of obtaining collateral information
on 14 July 2017, it was probable that she
would have relayed the same concerning
information that she provided to the paramedics and the ED clinicians two days
well as expressing her view that her son should be back on depot
medication (as she had conveyed to the MAC team and other community
support workers).
Dr Nance stated that if he was aware Ms Buer thought her son should
recommence depot medication, he would have given that some weight,
particularly
given her previous request to Dr Giannakoureas for the depot medication to
Dr Nance agreed
that Ms Buer should have been contacted.
was submitted by Counsel Assisting, Ms Roper, that the failure to contact
Ms Buer appeared to result from an assumption (on Dr
part) that clinical information was the most valuable source of collateral
information. She submitted that this Inquest
had highlighted the flaws with
that assumption and demonstrated the value of collateral information obtained
from those closest to
the patient, who ordinarily have more frequent contact
with the patient over a longer period and who are more attuned to fluctuations
in their mental state. I agree with Ms Roper’s submission and find that
the failure to contact Ms Buer was a missed opportunity
for highly relevant
information to have been obtained detailing a decline in Mr Lowah’s
mental state. Had this occurred, there
was a distinct possibility of a
different treatment outcome, whether or not Dr Nance revoked the ITO.
After all, the CTO was still
the topic of Dr Nance’s psychiatric assessment of Mr Lowah,
overwhelmingly the evidence supported a finding that Mr Lowah
experiencing psychotic symptoms at the time. Furthermore, as opined by A/P
Sullivan, I find that the questioning of Mr Lowah’s
diagnosis of
schizophrenia by Dr Giannakoureas was misinterpreted by Ms Allner to
be a re-diagnosis of a personality disorder, with
the focus thereafter away from
the possibility of a resurgence in psychotic symptoms. This in turn led to an
altered narrative being
shared with Dr Wang and Dr Nance. Ultimately,
this influenced Dr Nance’s assessment of Mr Lowah due to
diagnostic overshadowing.
In making these findings I am not rejecting the
evidence of Dr Nance. I accept that he undertook a careful and thorough
examination
of Mr Lowah and relied on certain information gathered from
what he thought (and was entitled to think) was a reliable source. I
view that Dr Nance was a credible and reflective witness. Furthermore, I
am not critical of Dr Nance or Dr Wang for their
assessment of
Mr Lowah, based on what appeared to be strong support for Mr Lowah
remaining off the depot medication. I do however
find that Ms Buer should
have been contacted to obtain collateral information, and that the failure to do
so was a missed opportunity
to gather insight from a more direct source which
may have seen a different outcome. Had Ms Buer been contacted at this
is probable that she would have communicated her view that
Mr Lowah be reinstated on depot injections, as she had expressed to at
least one member of the MAC team and members of Junction Housing.
was released back into the community on 14 July 2017 and returned to his
accommodation at Junction Housing, despite having
been notified that his lease
would likely not be renewed. The period following Mr Lowah’s release
from the MTC saw the completion
of his already advanced disengagement from the
MAC team, with multiple unsuccessful attempts to contact
appointments with his community service
obligations,
and ultimately
his eviction from Junction Housing for the ‘
intentional
’ done to the house totalling approximately
The MAC team were
also notified by Mr Lowah’s mother that he was attempting to contact
her despite an intervention order being
Further, that she was
concerned he may be using illicit substances and that he had sold or given away
most of his household items.
He had also removed his stitches from his hand
which caused an infection requiring hospital
his eviction from Junction Housing, Ms Buer informed the MAC team that she
had observed her son sleeping on a park bench
located across the road from her
house and attempting to gain access. Mr Lowah was charged with breaching
his bond and contravention
of an Intervention Order (relating to his mother) on
four occasions
between 13 and
27 August 2017. On 27 August 2017, he was convicted for contravening the
Intervention Order for the fourth time and
sentenced to 17 days imprisonment,
which was suspended upon him entering into a further
28 August 2017 a further case conference was held with Tamar Allner, Sian James
and two other employees of the MAC team. The entry
noted that Mr Lowah was
considered to be a ‘
client of concern
’ with his whereabouts
unknown, although it was possible he may be at his mother’s house despite
a current intervention
order in place. Once again, and despite the numerous
accounts of Mr Lowah’s further disengagement since 14 July 2017, the
reports of illicit substance use, removing his own stitches from his injured
hand, giving away his belongings and repeatedly contravening
the Intervention
Order, it was recorded that:
‘[Mr Lowah] is currently not
on any prescribed medication as MS (mental state) stable. He does not need to
attend ED and there
has been no collateral to suggest MS has declined since last
review by Dr Giannakoureas. Depot was ceased. For clinical review
close if DNA (does not attend) next appointment with
Dr Giannakoureas.’
was simply astounding that the events over a relatively confined period of time
(five weeks) were not viewed as concerning, without
at least raising the
suspicion of a change in Mr Lowah’s mental state. Equally as
surprising was the determination made on
multiple occasions in the clinical
records, presumably by Ms Allner, that Mr Lowah’s mental state
was stable when she had not
seen him or spoken with him at all during this
period of time. While some events had been set in train before he was
hospitalised
at MTC (the damage to the Junction Housing property and likely
eviction), there was now homelessness, more self-harm, and intimidating
towards his mother from whom he was restrained from contacting, and recent
criminal charges for assaulting a police
It is important to
again note that the MAC team still had the effect of the powers of the Level 2
CTO in place at this time (expiring
on 7 September 2017), to compel
Mr Lowah to attend for treatment had they seen his behaviours in a
different light. Unfortunately,
the die had been cast for Mr Lowah with
the MAC team and they were foreshadowing a discharge from their service, which
followed shortly
thereafter on 2 November
Allner asserted reliance upon on the assessment of Dr Nance and Dr Giannakoureas
that there was no evidence of psychosis as at
July 2017. It appears that in the
absence of a structured management plan developed by Dr Giannakoureas, Ms Allner
was under the
mistaken impression that the only relevant observations of
Mr Lowah’s mental state were observations by trained mental health
clinicians of acute psychosis. She attributed his attendance to the FMC on 13
July 2017 as an episode of drug induced aggression
and paranoia. In the absence
of any guidance to the contrary, this appeared to cement in
Ms Allner’s mind the belief that
only non-drug induced psychotic
behaviours reported by qualified mental health clinicians would justify a
notation other than ‘MS
reinforced the significance of the failure to formulate a structured management
plan, on either 11 April or 11 July 2017. If
a structured management plan had
highlighted the primary aspects of ‘the deal’ reached between
Mr Lowah and Dr Giannakoureas,
including cannabis use, non-attendance of
appointments and aggressive and violent behaviours, Ms Allner may have had cause
on the information she was receiving from external agencies. Ultimately
the management plan was Dr Giannakoureas’ responsibility.
It was apparent
from Ms Allner’s affidavit that her reference to ‘MS Stable’
established psychotic behaviour as witnessed by a mental health
professional’
. The use MS Stable was vague and open to
misinterpretation. Had she been required to identify specific behaviours
indicative of
his relapse signature, by way of a structured management plan, it
is possible that the reports of aggression, property damage, paranoia
non-compliance with court ordered appointments would have triggered a
re-assessment of the need for depot medication. In addition,
had Dr Nance
had access to a management plan which identified Mr Lowah’s relapse
signature, he would have been in a better
position to assess Mr Lowah and the
agreement reached in April, of which there was a well-documented contravention.
and charged for two assaults
31 August 2017, only three days after the case conference was held by the MAC
team, Mr Lowah was arrested for assaulting two individuals,
unknown to him,
at different times and locations. On the first occasion, Mr Lowah
assaulted a young woman at McDonalds on Hindley
Street by approaching her from
behind, grabbing her hair and throwing her to the ground. This occurred at
approximately 2:20am.
The victim was waiting in the restaurant to collect her
food order when he assaulted her. Mr Lowah exited the store after the
and when apprehended by police stated that he thought he knew her, and
she had been saying something about him losing a fight the
night before. He
then told police that he did not care if he knew the female or not and did not
really care if he had hurt her.
Mr Lowah was arrested, charged with Common
Assault and then granted police
in the afternoon of the same day, Mr Lowah approached a male legal
practitioner on Gouger Street from behind and hit him over
the head with a
chair. Once again, this individual was not known to Mr Lowah and was
simply sitting at an outdoor eating area of
a city café going about his
business. Mr Lowah was again arrested by police and this time refused
police bail. Mr Lowah
was charged with Aggravated Common Assault. He told
police that he had assaulted the man because he had a problem with the way the
man looked at him.
Mr Lowah was conveyed to the Royal Adelaide Hospital (RAH) due to concerns
regarding his mental state.
RAH clinical records reflected that Mr Lowah was assessed in the ED by a
psychiatric registrar named Dr Michael Hartstone, who
noted that his manner was
quite concerning with the suspicion that he was paranoid and might be
disassociating. Mr Lowah was noted
to be initially calm during the review,
but quickly became paranoid and irritable. He had difficulty answering
questions and forgot
who the doctor was during the assessment. He was also
distracted by noise outside the room and mumbled under his breath. The
doctor noted the two assaults on unknown victims without provocation
and, seemingly unbridled by the false understanding of a re-diagnosis,
the following:
‘I suspect that this young man is currently
psychotic although he is not able to provide me with any subjective information
to support this.
Given that his depot was ceased in April and he has had
previous psychiatric admissions for psychosis I suspect that he does have
schizophrenia but this is complicated by antisocial personality traits
continues to pose a significant risk to the public in the near future. SAPOL
have indicated that they are concerned about his
risk and they are unwilling to
plan was for Mr Lowah to be nurse specialled (one-on-one nursing care),
sedated and transferred to James Nash House. He was detained
under a Level 1
ITO at 5:40pm on 31 August
still in the RAH awaiting transfer, Mr Lowah was assessed by Dr Paul Davis,
senior consultant psychiatrist, on 1 September 2017,
for the purpose of
reviewing the ITO as required by
Section 21(5)
Mental Health Act
Davis was not called to give evidence at the Inquest. However, it was clear
from his entry that the assessment of Mr Lowah
left an impression on him,
with him recording that it was ‘
Davis made the following record of his mental state examination
‘Eventually awake, aware he was in hospital. Aware he
had been change [sic] with assault offences,
very hostile, and menacing but
in a cold, calm, calculated way. Able to provoke strong feeling of being unsafe
in his company
. Difficult to determine, presence of degree of formal
thought disorder and extent of paranoia. Clearly he is not mentally
Davis noted Mr Lowah’s past psychotic illness and that he had been
hospitalised in the Boylan Ward as a teenager, that he
had displayed antisocial
behaviour and family had taken out an intervention order against him, and that
his current CTO was for review
in September 2017. Dr Davis also made the
following note of Dr Giannakoureas’ assessment a few days before –
stable mental stte [state] assessment
concluded that as Mr Lowah was clearly not mentally well, he required
inpatient psychiatric ward evaluation in a secure
Dr Davis confirmed
the Level 1 ITO and noted that forensic mental health, the duty nurse manager
and the RAH ED mental health nursing
unit manager were all aware.
that evening while awaiting a bed at James Nash House, a Code Black was called
due to an escalation in Mr Lowah’s behaviour.
From an irritable and
threatening demeanour, Mr Lowah’s symptoms intensified, becoming
suspicious of staff and hypervigilant.
Mr Lowah was also recorded to be
spitting at staff. He was administered 1mg of olanzapine and 2mg of clonazepam
intramuscularly
and then shackled to his barouche. A decision was made to
transfer Mr Lowah to a specific ward with a nurse special as there was
bed available at James Nash House. This was recorded as being approved as the
least inappropriate
following morning Mr Lowah was reviewed by consultant psychiatrist Dr I
Nielsen who made the following observations:
‘Seen in C3
– shackled to barouche ... looking dishevelled and dirty ... either
didn’t answer or said ‘what’s
that got to do with you’.
Looked intently at me with a menacing look. Told me ‘
people pissed me
off so I assaulted them
’. Refused to say how they pissed him off. At
times stared intently at the ceiling smiling inappropriately at times. Appeared
to be responding to internal stimuli. Refused to answer re perceptual
disturbances. Said ‘
t have schizophrenia
– wouldn’t elaborate. Appeared suspicious – intense staring
with refusal to answer questions. No FTD (formal
thought disorder). Lacking
insight. No rapport.
Assess – 19-year-old man, homeless with history of ASPD (antisocial
personality disorder) and schizophrenia, arrested for assault.
to assess but likely psychotic (particularly in view of negative drug screen).
Significant history of aggression.
Plan – Requires a JNH bed for further assessment and review.’
was transferred to James Nash House on the afternoon of 2 September 2017 and
reviewed by Dr Furst the same day. This was
the first occasion that
Dr Furst met Mr Lowah. After noting his history and the days
preceding his transfer to James Nash House,
Dr Furst recorded his
impression as follows:
‘19 year old. Hx (history) of
schizophrenia but diagnosis questioned by adult services. Background of
developmental trauma,
conduct disorder and violence.
Suspect cannabis related psychosis with DDx (differential diagnosis) –
ASPD (antisocial personality disorder). Frequent user
of cannabis and episodes
of care after associated with cannabis use. Presents as aggressive and very
uncooperative. Recent history
of assault + current state indicates he is a high
risk of violence at present.
safe for ward access at present.’
his admission to James Nash House (2-7 September 2017), Mr Lowah spent most
of his time in seclusion due to his aggressive
and unpredictable behaviour. On
5 September 2017, he assaulted a mental health nurse by reaching through
the trap of the seclusion
room door and pulling out a moderate amount of her
psychiatrist Dr Craig Raeside assessed Mr Lowah twice during this
admission. Ultimately, Dr Raeside’s assessment
on 7 September 2017 was
antisocial personality disorder – no psychotic illness - with
likely drug induced psychosis last week
’. That was despite a clear
drug screen six days earlier. Dr Raeside was not able to detect clear evidence
of psychosis, although
Mr Lowah was observed as being vague and guarded at
Accordingly, the ITO
was allowed to lapse, and Mr Lowah was discharged from James Nash House
without medication. The day before
he was discharged the Level 2 CTO expired.
As Mr Lowah had not been granted bail for the second assault, he was
transferred to Yatala
Readmission
to James Nash House
was evident from the clinical records of the South Australian Prison Health
Service (SAPHS) and the Department for Correctional
Services (DCS), that whilst
on remand in Yatala between 7 September and 15 November 2017 for the assault
offences and the breaches
of bond, Mr Lowah’s mental health continued
to deteriorate. On 15 November 2017, two months after being discharged from
Nash House, he was readmitted. This was on a background of prison staff
noting that he was responding to internal stimuli, appearing
distracted, thought
disordered and perplexed. Notably, this was despite spending over a month in
HDU and G Division, which was seen
to indicate his behaviour was attributable to
a mental illness rather than a drug induced psychosis. Mr Lowah had also
to restart medication within the prison and as a result was transferred
to James Nash House, where he was reviewed by Dr Oliver Burgess
who undertook an
Burgess observed that Mr Lowah had an intensity of eye contact, at times
appearing distracted and muttering. His speech was noted
to be brief and he was
hostile with significant offence taken to benign wording. Dr Burgess also noted
significant latency and relative
poverty of content, but no otherwise gross
thought disorder. He also observed Mr Lowah to appear to be responding to
internal stimuli.
Dr Burgess’ impression was a ‘
schizophrenia secondary to planned cessation of
antipsychotic
underlying antisocial personality disorder, substance abuse disorder (THC
predominantly), in remission in a controlled
environment.
recommended Mr Lowah be commenced on the antipsychotic medication
aripiprazole to be administered by way of a depot
He detained
Mr Lowah on a Level 1 ITO (which was followed by a Level 2 ITO) and
foreshadowed an application for a Level 2 CTO.
was noted to rapidly improve following the recommencement of the depot injection
on 20 November 2017. Five days after his
first assessment, Dr Burgess recorded
that he was dramatically less distractable and less hostile and did not appear
to be responding
to internal
Dr Burgess made the
observation that his relapse in a drug free setting (G Division and HDU of
Yatala) ruled out a purely drug-induced
illness which had remained a
differential whilst in the community. Perhaps most importantly, Dr Burgess
placed significance on treating
Mr Lowah’s psychotic illness to
assist with maintaining his abstinence from cannabis and addressing social
factors such as
summarised in the application for the Level 2 CTO which Dr Burgess indicated
would allow for medication to be started and monitored whilst in custody or the
community, with the aim of assisting Mr Lowah engaging
with a community
team once released.
undated application for the Level 2 CTO, Dr Burgess expressed the following
‘Mr Lowah has a history of violence including
assaults on staff, his illness schizophrenia with disorganised features is one
in there (sic) is clear evidence that treatment reduces this risk.’
Dr Burgess had the benefit of hindsight in relation to Mr Lowah’s
recent mental health journey, his assessment and plan
for Mr Lowah saw an
almost complete reversal of the approach and underlying philosophy taken by
Dr Giannakoureas and the MAC team
earlier in the year. This was
particularly so in relation to the treatment for his illness to support him to
abstain from cannabis
use, rather than stopping the treatment in the hope that
he would abstain from cannabis use (as was his broken promise).
Mr Lowah repeatedly expressed a desire to return to Yatala where he would
have been permitted to smoke
cigarettes,
the Level 2 ITO
was revoked by Dr Raeside on 27 November
Mr Lowah was
released from James Nash House on the same day and readmitted to the HDU of
Yatala. The separation summary from James
Nash House stated that while
Mr Lowah appeared to be mildly thought disordered and at times appeared to
respond to internal stimuli,
he repeatedly stated that he preferred the prison
environment rather than the psychiatric environment and he was transferred back
to the YLP HDU environment.
medication reinstated
this point onwards in the timeline (20 November 2017), Mr Lowah received
regular depot medication without interruption, until
Ms Foster’s
death. He was therefore receiving the treatment as prescribed. However, it was
Dr Furst’s opinion that
the treatment was not having its full
therapeutic benefit. Following the cessation of the depot injections in April
2017, Mr Lowah’s
mental state had deteriorated to such a point that
even when the depot was reinstated, it was not containing his illness.
gave this evidence with the benefit of hindsight as he had treated
Mr Lowah in James Nash House following the death of Ms Foster.
this period he described Mr Lowah remaining in James Nash House for an
extended period of time, continuously observed and repeatedly
assessed by
skilled senior consultant forensic psychiatrists. Even with this intensive
treatment he remained very unwell for a long
time until clozapine was
introduced. It was the observation of the progression of Mr Lowah’s
recovery following Ms Foster’s
death, that suggested he had been
unwell for a long time.
‘The issue was that he was getting the treatment as
prescribed, it just wasn't working very well and that - it was working well
enough that it wasn't very obvious to people that he was sick; it was probably
just containing him enough that it hid the more florid,
you know, presentation
that would've really declared him as being unwell. So I'm not sure - I mean,
the community team potentially
could've seen him a little bit more often but
that wouldn't necessarily have improved his mental state. I think when we look
his treatment history, it didn't matter what medication he was on, it only
got him so far. It kind of got him a bit better; not
a lot, but a bit, and it
really wasn't until he spent a long time in James Nash House on clozapine that
he really started to get
acknowledged that in coming to his opinion as set out above, he also had the
luxury of all the information provided by the
Courts, plus the SA Health records
which he had sought, including discharge letters and case notes. He was able to
put together
a chronology to demonstrate a clear sense of when
Mr Lowah’s mental state began to deteriorate, which dated back to the
of the antipsychotic depot treatment. Dr Giannakoureas was
obviously not in this position when he took over the psychiatric care
Mr Lowah. The criticism that Dr Furst made (as did A/P Sullivan) was
that Dr Giannakoureas did not have in place an adequate
management plan to
monitor non-compliance, with the narrative of diagnosis then having been changed
by other members of the MAC team.
While I accept that Dr Furst had the
benefit of voluminous records, as well as the ability to forensically examine
the period of
time following the cessation of the depot medication, it is
difficult to overlook the availability of Dr Watson’s letter to
Dr Giannakoureas at the time he assumed consultant care of Mr Lowah.
For reasons outlined above, I have accepted the evidence of
of imprisonment
12 December 2017, Mr Lowah was sentenced for the two assaults occurring on
31 August 2017
Adelaide Magistrates Court. Mr Lowah received a sentence of 12 months and
14 days with a non-parole period set at 6 months,
backdated to 31 August
2017, when he had been taken into custody after being refused
The sentencing
magistrate, Deputy Chief Magistrate Cannon, in his sentencing remarks noted the
serious and violent nature of the
offending and Mr Lowah’s
‘I have fixed an
unusually short non-parole period to make sure he is under a relatively long
period of supervision attendance
in the community.’
Mr Lowah’s significant mental health history and having been
diagnosed with a relapse of schizophrenia only a month
before, during an
inpatient stay at a forensic mental health facility under a mental health
detention order and a Level 2 CTO having
just been reinstated, Mr Lowah (or
his legal representatives on his behalf) did not commence an investigation into
his mental competence
to commit the offences. There was no request for any
psychiatric reports to investigate his mental competence or fitness under
269K of the CLCA. I am unaware of the reason why an investigation of
this kind was not initiated. There are a number of plausible
explanations
however this was not an issue that was examined at Inquest. While I make no
criticism of Mr Lowah’s legal representative,
having no information
relating to the circumstances in which he was retained or the information
available to him at the time, I am
of the view that Mr Lowah should have
undergone this assessment.
an investigation been initiated, there were a number of compelling and proximate
events to suggest that a finding of mental incompetence
would have been reached.
They included the bizarre nature of the offending, the transfer to the RAH by
SAPOL following the second
assault due to their concerns for
Mr Lowah’s mental state, the recent assessment of Dr Burgess
(20 November 2017) that Mr Lowah’s
schizophrenia had relapsed
secondary to depot cessation, the recommencement of antipsychotic depot
medication and the application
and granting of a Level 2 CTO to ensure
Mr Lowah continued to take his depot medication. I acknowledge that there
were fluctuations
in the assessments by different senior consultant
psychiatrists preceding this sentencing, however investigations in relation to
mental competence are not undertaken in a treatment setting. On balance I find
that had a mental health investigation been undertaken,
Mr Lowah would have
been found not guilty by reason of mental impairment.
Furst gave expert evidence about whether a finding of mental incompetence
following a Court ordered investigation would have impacted
Mr Lowah’s custodial sentence, and the circumstances surrounding his
later release into the community. Dr Furst gave detailed
evidence on this
topic and remarked that Mr Lowah’s status as a sentenced prisoner had
a significant effect on both factors.
He explained that there was a
whole raft of things that might have been triggered had he been
declared or investigated for his mental competence at that
as follows:
‘Mr Lowah would have spent his entire
sentence (and possibly longer) in James Nash House as a forensic patient under
close psychiatric
observation for the limiting term, with the obvious benefit of
an ongoing assessment of his mental state by mental health clinicians.
focus of the term would have been his rehabilitation, and there would have been
discretion to delay release into the community
if there was no
accommodation;
There would have been a more structured plan in the form of a Licence
following his release from the custody of the Minister of Health.
would have ordered reports under sections 269Q and T of the CLCA, which would
have involved the preparation of a treatment
plan, second opinions, and
recommendations about supervision either in custody or in the community. These
reports would have coordinated
a collaboration between the local Community
Mental Health Service with oversight from the Forensic Community Mental Health
the Parole Board, and the Department for Correctional Services. It
would also have involved conditions such as urinalysis (for illicit
use) and enforceable sanctions for breach of conditions.’
will be detailed below, without the above structures in place, those caring for
Mr Lowah in Yatala had serious concerns for the
risk he posed to himself
and others as his sentence came to an end, and went to considerable effort to
ameliorate this risk. Unfortunately,
these efforts were ultimately unsuccessful
and Mr Lowah was released into the community and was essentially homeless.
While a Level
2 CTO was still in place requiring him to have a monthly depot
injection, Mr Lowah had no allocated community mental health team
no fixed place of address. He killed Ms Foster six weeks after his
release. I will now detail what I consider to be the
valiant efforts of the
prison health staff (in particular Ms Zulian and Mr Williams) to
prevent Mr Lowah from being released from
prison and when that failed,
their attempts to see Mr Lowah’s safe return into the community with
adequate support networks.
These frustrated attempts highlighted system
failings that have given rise to recommendations, as detailed later in the
of imprisonment in Yatala
the nine months (approximately) following his custodial sentence being imposed,
Mr Lowah was moved around between the general prison
population (E
Division), G Division
and the High Dependency Unit.
The Court heard evidence from two prison health staff who were involved with
Mr Lowah’s care in the HDU. Social worker, Ms
Stephanie Zulian, and
forensic psychologist, Mr Luke Williams. Mr Williams had also been the
manager of the HDU since its inception
Mr Williams
explained that the HDU had six camera observation cells which were used
primarily to manage prisoners who were deemed
to be at acute risk of suicide or
self-harm. They were also used to manage prisoners who had displayed aggressive
behaviour when
it was deemed to be mental health
The evidence of
Mr Williams revealed that the HDU beds were in high demand and there was a
waiting list for admission. Consideration
for admission was therefore on a
daily triage basis to ensure the service was made available to everyone
suffering from mental health
Mr Williams
expressed the view that Mr Lowah’s ability to cope in the mainstream
prison environment was limited due to his serious
mental health issues and his
risk to others.
He and other
staff members tried to keep Mr Lowah in the HDU for as long as possible,
but this was not always achievable due to
the demand for the service. While in
HDU, Mr Williams observed Mr Lowah often display non-compliant and
aggressive behaviour and
was therefore moved between the acute and therapeutic
units. On occasion he was transferred to G
Mr Williams
formed the opinion that Mr Lowah’s risk of violence fluctuated with
his mental health; when his mental health
was not well controlled with
antipsychotic medication his risk of violence would increase. Even with the
depot medication being
reinstated on 15 November 2017, Mr Lowah’s
mental health was unstable at times. However, Mr Williams identified the
cause for concern was Mr Lowah’s impending release; being the
risk of homelessness. He explained:
‘Whilst he did not
undergo formal assessment of his risk of violence, I understood that release
into the community was likely
to be a significant risk for him. This was due to
the fact that this was likely to be a destabilising situation that would likely
increase the risk of substance use and decrease his ability to appropriately
manage his mental health through engagement with mental
health services.
Alternatively, if he was released to a stable situation where he had his needs
met and was in receipt of ongoing
support for his mental health, this would
reduce somewhat.’
was significant force to Mr Williams’ observations. These opinions
had been previously expressed by other mental health
professionals, including
Dr Watson and Dr Burgess who acknowledged the ongoing chronic risk
Mr Lowah posed which escalated when he
was unwell. Dr Burgess noted that
Mr Lowah would be unlikely to maintain abstinence from cannabis use unless
his psychotic illness
had been treated and would be unlikely to address social
factors such as homelessness and unemployment, particularly with his
disorganised
had day-to-day contact with Mr Lowah when he was admitted to the HDU. She
noted that he always presented with blunt affect,
did not engage well in
conversations and was guarded when asked
Mr Lowah was
also monitored intermittently by the High Risk Assessment
(HRAT) for reported
thoughts of self-harm, concerning behaviour and unwillingness or inability to
engage with clinical and custodial
staff. Ms Zulian recalled a number of
concerning incidents during Mr Lowah’s frequent admissions to the
HDU. They included:
Fashioning a
noose from his bed sheet and attempting to hang himself in his cell on 18
January 2018; and
Damaging his
cell including kicking windows, urinating on the door of his cell and yelling
abuse from his cell; and
Threatening to
assault staff including a threat to cause a laceration to the neck of a prison
8 January 2018, Mr Lowah applied for parole in anticipation of his
non-parole period ending on 28 February 2018. Mr Lowah’s
application
was considered on 5 April 2018 and he was interviewed by the Board on 26 June
2018. The Presiding Member of the Parole
Board, Ms Frances Nelson KC, provided
a statement to the Coroners Court detailing the Parole Board’s
consideration of Mr Lowah’s
application in accordance with
Correctional Services Act 1982
. Ms Nelson noted
Mr Lowah’s extensive mental health history, his violent offending,
and his lack of post-release plans. It
was also noted that
Mr Lowah’s mother had a current intervention order against him and he
had no supports in the community
that he could identify. In her statement,
Ms Nelson detailed her understanding of Mr Lowah’s past
non-compliance with medication,
his abusive behaviour towards staff and his
threats to kill ‘
’ on 13 March 2018 and his threats
’ on 15 March
the interview of Mr Lowah conducted by the Parole Board, he told them that
pretty much delusional
’ when he committed the subject
offences. He denied using illegal drugs or alcohol and went on to say that
if I were to say why I committed the offences then I
going into my
Parole Board noted that his head sentence came to an end on 14 September 2018,
at which time the Board would have no power to
impose any conditions on his
release. Notwithstanding, the Board formed the view that Mr Lowah was not
suitable for parole in June
2018. Ms Nelson stated:
Parole Board considered that Mr Lowah was such a significant risk to the
community as to be unsuitable for release on parole.
We also considered that he
would not comply with parole supervision.’
that decision made, Parole Board members turned their attention to the end of
Mr Lowah’s sentence. Ms Nelson stated:
concerned that [Mr Lowah] would present a management issue when he was
released at the end of his sentence. As a result,
the Parole Board asked
Community Corrections to explore the possibility of referring Mr Lowah for
semi-structured accommodation and
see if they could facilitate a management plan
for his ultimate release by way of involving the Forensic Mental Health Team,
Disability SA and also perhaps the Exceptional Needs Unit. It was the
view of the Parole Board a multi-agency approach was necessary
response to the view held by the Parole Board, contact was made with NDIS, the
Exceptional Needs Unit, and an Aboriginal Liaison
Officer to assist
Mr Lowah with both eligibility and application for supported accommodation
and supports in the community. On each
occasion Mr Lowah refused to either
participate in an assessment, or sign consent forms required for these
addition to the above efforts directed by the Parole Board, Ms Zulian
attempted to arrange an in-prison appointment with Centrelink
for Mr Lowah,
but this was unable to be facilitated. Mr Lowah also refused to allow
Ms Zulian to disclose his mental health history,
thereby preventing her
ability to complete applications for multiple agencies and organisations in the
community on Mr Lowah’s
behalf. Both Ms Zulian and
Mr Williams acknowledged in their evidence that one of the biggest barriers
the HDU faced in attempting
to put appropriate services in place, was
Mr Lowah’s refusal to
recalled that when declining to engage with her efforts, Mr Lowah had
expressed a preference to be homeless upon
An available
inference is that Mr Lowah was aware that the consequence of his refusal to
engage would be his release at the end
of his sentence with no obligations.
Accordingly, Ms Zulian applied to SACAT for a Guardianship and
Administration Order.
urgent hearing on 10 September 2018, the Office of the Public Advocate
(OPA) was appointed as limited guardian of Mr Lowah.
With this in place,
Ms Zulian contacted five organisations seeking accommodation for
Mr Lowah, but was informed there were no vacancies.
Mr Lowah was not
eligible to stay in a hotel funded by DCS following his release as he would have
served his full sentence. One
service required an upfront amount of $660 which,
unsurprisingly, Mr Lowah as a prisoner, did not have. The only support
was able to organise was the Helping Young People Achieve Program
(HYPA). While this would have provided Mr Lowah with emergency
these supplies were to assist him in a sleeping rough environment. This was the
exact scenario that Ms Zulian was working
so hard to avoid.
housing options looking bleak and the end of Mr Lowah’s head sentence
approaching, Ms Zulian and Mr Williams organised
for Mr Lowah to
be seen by visiting forensic psychiatrist, Dr Ian Jennings. In doing so, they
were hopeful that Mr Lowah may have
met the criteria for an ITO, thereby
preventing (or at least delaying) his release into the community.
Mr Williams gave the following
‘Well certainly
we did have concerns regarding his mental health, and we referred him to the
Prison Health Service for an assessment
of his suitability for an inpatient
treatment order. So really that would have been the only way that we were aware
of to prevent
his release into the community, given that he was being released
completely sentence served and there was no period of parole, there
was no scope
for either us or Community Corrections to remain involved in his care. As you
said, we referred him to the SMU to see
if there was scope to place him on an
extended supervision order and the advice was that there wasn’t. So in
our mind, that
would have been the only other option in terms of preventing his
Mr Williams,
as a forensic psychologist, told the Court he believed Mr Lowah met the
criteria for the imposition of an ITO. He clarified
that he was of the view
that Mr Lowah appeared to meet the criteria of a mental health disorder and
presented a risk to himself or
to others. Mr Williams gave evidence that
he and other clinicians (with whom he had spoken) formed the opinion that
Mr Lowah was
or might have been reacting to internal
Had Mr Lowah
been assessed by a psychiatrist as meeting the criteria for an ITO, it would
have resulted in him being subject to
a period of involuntary treatment, most
likely in a psychiatric
Jennings’ assessments of Mr Lowah
5 September 2018 Dr Jennings saw Mr Lowah. Dr Ian Jennings had
graduated from his medical degree at Flinders University in 1976
and obtained
his psychiatric fellowship in 1982. In his early career, Dr Jennings
worked in both the public and private sector in
South Australia and the Northern
Territory. Around 1990 he cared for inpatients at James Nash House for a period
of two years and
then returned to the private sector. Dr Jennings
continued to hold forensic mental health clinics in most prisons in South
on a two sessions per week basis until he retired, including Yatala.
Dr Jennings retired from psychiatry in February 2019, just
five months
after his last of the three consults with Mr Lowah. Following his
retirement, he described ‘
disconnecting
professional life. He gave evidence at the Inquest on 20 September 2022.
As his contact with Mr Lowah came at the
end of a long career in forensic
psychiatry, it was not unsurprising that Dr Jennings had no memory of
seeing Mr Lowah on this occasion
or any prior
He could not
recall any conversations with either Mr Williams or Ms Zulian about
Mr Lowah in 2018. Accordingly, Dr Jennings relied
entirely on his
entries recorded in the SAPHS file of Mr Lowah when giving evidence.
mentioned above, there were three occasions that Mr Lowah saw
Dr Jennings in 2018. The first was on 18 April 2018 when a referral
’ by Dr L Noakes, and dated 26 March
2018, was submitted asking for Mr Lowah to be assessed for psychosis as he
appeared to
be responding to internal stimuli and was on a waiting list for
James Nash House.
referral listed the reasons for seeking the consult and the management
assistance as:
‘Management Plan – angry, risk to
others, was transferred to division. Recent unprovoked assault on prisoner to
G Division.’
Dr Jennings
told the Court that while he could not remember the consult, his entry reflected
that he did not detect any psychosis
on this occasion, rather viewed the
reported behaviours as a ‘
not uncommon
be transferred to James Nash House. He also placed less weight on the referring
doctor’s opinion of psychosis as he was
psychiatrist.
Mr Lowah was on a regime of antipsychotic medications, he added a trial of
olanzapine and valproate and recorded the plan
to review him in one
months’ time, believing (as documented) that his behaviour issues appeared
to be dominant in his
presentation.
second consult was on 30 May 2018 with Dr Jennings’ entry noting that
Mr Lowah was ‘
’ with a review date in two
months’ time. However, the records reflected that the next assessment of
Mr Lowah by Dr Jennings
was not until 5 September 2018.
Dr Jennings could not explain why there had been a three-month interval
instead of two. Dr Jennings
could also not recall being asked to review
Mr Lowah on this occasion by either Ms Zulian or Mr Williams.
With reference to the
entry in the SAPHS
Dr Jennings
initially queried whether there had been a request by Ms Zulian or
Mr Williams to assess Mr Lowah’s mental state
for the purpose of
a mental health detention, based on what he had written in the records. His
usual entry in the case notes following
such a request would be: ‘
reviewed with regard to mental state with regard to detention
something along those lines.
Instead, Dr Jennings’ entry commenced with ‘
which he interpreted in his evidence as meaning he did not
detect any active psychotic
Dr Jennings
conceded that he did not have the best memory in the world and was not asserting
that the HDU staff had not spoken to
him about their concerns for Mr Lowah
on this occasion. He simply did not remember it taking place. Dr Jennings
commented that
had Mr Williams expressed concerns for Mr Lowah’s
mental state, he would have taken this more seriously than concerns expressed
a GP or general nurse. He placed weight on Mr Williams’ experience
as a psychologist who had worked in the forensic area
for a long time and was
actively involved in running the
Dr Jennings’
entry on this occasion focused on Mr Lowah’s psychosocial situation
as his prison sentence was coming to
an end. He noted the importance of
Mr Lowah having suitable accommodation in order to be linked with an
appropriate community mental
health service. As demonstrated by
Ms Zulian’s and Mr Williams’ evidence, the numerous
entries in the prison health
records, and Ms Zulian’s detailed
Timeline for Throughcare Planning
this issue was
already at the forefront of the minds of HDU staff. That had been the primary
reason HDU staff wanted Mr Lowah assessed
by Dr Jennings, to prevent
him being released into the community with no accommodation and therefore with
no ability for a community
mental health team to monitor his mental health.
There were a number of questions that were unable to be answered in relation to
Dr Jennings’ reviews of Mr Lowah due to Dr Jennings’
inability to remember. I am not critical of Dr Jennings’
memory. I do however observe a notable disconnect between the entries made by
Dr Jennings and the observations of prison
health staff of
Mr Lowah’s behaviour, including (as mentioned above) threats to harm,
threats to kill, responding to internal
stimuli, and urinating and smearing
faeces on the wall of his cell. As will be detailed below, there was a
concerning reason for
this disconnect; Dr Jennings did not have access to
the Justice Information System when undertaking his clinics at the gaol.
giving his evidence, Dr Jennings candidly explained the sub-optimal
conditions of the psychiatric clinics that he ran at the
prison. He described
the clinics as always being full and having limited time to talk to each
prisoner that he saw.
Dr Furst gave similar corroborative evidence on this
Dr Jennings also
described the referral process as problematic. On occasion prisoners were
referred to him and neither he nor the
prisoner knew why. Sometimes the reviews
took place in G Division and he was required to conduct the consultation through
screen which added complexity to the process and another barrier to
effective engagement. Dr Jennings stated that the review of
conducted on 18 April 2018 would have been conducted through a glass screen as
Mr Lowah was in G Division at the
Dr Jennings
described the process of arriving at the prison, being given a pile of notes and
looking through the medical files for
psychiatric reports to get a feel for the
issues that required addressing. Following that, Dr Jennings was required
to locate a
room to conduct his reviews as one was not allocated to
This evidence went some
way to explaining the limitations on an adequate mental health assessment being
undertaken for mentally
unwell prisoners. It also provided no comfort that
there was a thorough assessment of Mr Lowah on 5 September 2018.
was the evidence of Mr Williams that he had concerns about the decision of
Dr Jennings not to detain Mr Lowah, although he did
not think he
raised his concerns with Dr Jennings as the psychiatrist was only an
irregular visitor at the
Ms Zulian had a
memory of being told that Mr Lowah did not meet the criteria for an ITO
following Dr Jennings’
She stated in her
affidavit (sworn approximately 18 months after the death of Ms Foster) that
it was basically put back to me that I would have to manage him and
try to do as much as I can prior to his
Ms Zulian and Mr Williams had a clear memory of asking
Dr Jennings to review Mr Lowah and the reasons for requesting the
Dr Jennings did not dispute their evidence, he simply could not
remember that conversation, or really anything relating to Mr Lowah.
Overwhelmingly, the evidence supports a finding that Mr Williams and
Ms Zulian did request a review of Mr Lowah by Dr Jennings for
consideration of the imposition of an ITO. I further find that this request was
made based on their concerns for Mr Lowah’s
mental state and the risk
he posed to himself and others upon his looming release.
was the opinion of Dr Furst that Mr Lowah was ‘
’ at the time of the assessment by Dr Jennings on 5
September 2018, and that he would not have described Mr Lowah’s
health as ‘
‘Well, it was stable in the sense that it was
consistently poor, but clearly I think he was quite unwell and I wouldn’t
have described it as stable in the sense that its ok for him to continue, you
know, with whatever treatment he is having, yes.’
expressed the opinion in his addendum report (requested by the Coroners Court in
anticipation of his oral evidence) that
it was reasonably possible Mr Lowah
was experiencing psychotic symptoms at the time of Dr Jennings’
review. Dr Furst came
to this opinion based on his review of the documents
contained within the JIS. He opined that from the time Mr Lowah assaulted
nurse at James Nash House on 5 September 2017 right through to his release
(and therefore including all three reviews by Dr Jennings,
importantly the last review), the notes were strongly suggestive that he was
Dr Furst highlighted the inability of prison mental health staff (or
visiting specialists) to access information from other
departments, despite
those departments having direct involvement with the prisoner and that
involvement occurring within the prison
environment. Dr Furst held the
opinion that this was the ‘
Ms Foster’s death. He made the following
‘This brings me to the key issue with this case,
which is the fragmented medical records system for Mr Lowah. Whilst his
files documented his admissions to hospitals, his James Nash House medical
records were not on Sunrise, his SA Prison Health Services
records were not on
Sunrise and his Correctional Services records were not available to health
practitioners involved in his care.
I note there is the dedicated sharing of
HRAT minutes, but this is not always obvious during a busy clinic and may not
available on the day. Had there been improved information sharing, it
is possible that Dr Jennings may have reached a different
conclusion in
regard to whether Mr Lowah’s schizophrenia was ‘stable’.
gave evidence that the information contained within the JIS records for the time
following Mr Lowah’s second discharge
from James Nash House (28
November 2017), were 35 separate concerning entries that Dr Jennings would
not have had access to in his
role as the visiting psychiatrist, but were
suggestive of psychosis (irritable, aggressive, unreasonable and paranoid
behaviour).
While by no
means exhaustive, these included:
Being observed
playing an imaginary
thought the prison officers were ‘
Stating that he
was delusional and asked whether other prisoners heard
Complaining that
other prisoners were listening to his conversations and were ‘
’ that he was on the
Multiple threats
kill any cunts’
(directed towards prison guards and other
prisoners);
Concerns that
the staff could try and kill him by staring at him and could not be reassured
that no one had been staring at
Reporting that
the prisoner next door could see into his mind and knew what was going on in his
explained that, had Dr Jennings been privy to this information, he could have
challenged Mr Lowah during the assessment.
For example, during the
assessment on 5 September 2018, Dr Jennings recorded that
Mr Lowah informed him that he had ‘
no particular problems with
inmates or staff
’’. Had Dr Jennings had access and then
reviewed the JIS entries, he would have seen multiple entries of Mr Lowah
and threatening prison guards and exhibiting violent, aggressive and
paranoid behaviour. Dr Furst noted that if Dr Jennings had
Mr Lowah on this inconsistency, it may have unravelled
Mr Lowah’s attempts to hide his psychosis which would not
superficial questioning.
is evident from Dr Jennings’ note that he did not assess
Mr Lowah’s mental state as unstable. Even though Dr Furst
of the view that Mr Lowah was most likely psychotic at that time, he did
not go so far as to say that Dr Jennings had incorrectly
Mr Lowah. I find that Dr Jennings did not have available to him the
highly concerning information that was most relevant
Mr Lowah’s mental health, namely the entries from the prison officers
with whom he had day to day contact. While
I accept the evidence of
Dr Jennings in relation to the clinics he conducted being overbooked,
rushed and disorganised, by far the
principal impediment to undertaking a
reliable assessment was the inadequate information sharing capabilities across
the different
agencies working within the prison system. It is simply
unfathomable that a specialist doctor tasked with assessing a prisoner’s
mental state would not have immediate access to collateral information about the
prisoner’s day to day behaviour.
was asked the following question:
‘Q In terms of Dr Jennings'
assessment and the information that he did not have available to him, is it
reasonable to conclude
that Dr Jennings would have reached a different
conclusion about whether Mr Lowah's schizophrenia was stable, than the
he reached if he had that information.
wouldn't go so far as to say that it would have made it - that he would've made
a different conclusion; he might have. He might
have. He would've had more
information to consider, the weight that he put on different things I can't say
but it certainly would've
given him more information to consider, might've ...
changed the outcome of his assessment.’
Dr Furst was more definitive about the pathway available to Mr Lowah
and the subsequent implications of an assessment that
Mr Lowah was
psychotic with the imposition of an ITO under the
Mental Health Act
explained that if this had happened, Mr Lowah would have (ideally) been
returned to James Nash House for treatment and stabilisation
of his mental state
to a level where he was not aggressive, thought disordered and threatening
people. Perhaps, most relevantly
to his situation at this time, a period of
inpatient psychiatric treatment would have allowed further time to improve
decision-making capacity and his ability to engage with
those attempting to find accommodation for him. He explained that schizophrenia
is not just a psychotic condition, but also a neurological condition that
affects the sufferer’s ability to think and make
decisions. A/P Sullivan
gave similar evidence about the effects of schizophrenia on
Dr Furst’s evidence that ‘
it might have been quite a
different outcome if [Mr Lowah] had been returned to James Nash House,
rather than being
with Dr Furst’s evidence and find that the inadequate information
sharing capabilities within the prison system hampered
Dr Jennings’
ability to make an informed assessment of Mr Lowah’s mental state.
This was another missed opportunity
and has highlighted the need for urgent
consideration of this issue.
was supportive of the need for improved information sharing processes. He
explained during his oral evidence that there
was a joint systems protocol (JSP)
awaiting approval which details how prison health and corrections will work
together in order
information.
2023 an amended
Joint Systems Protocol
was approved. The previous version
of this policy was approved in May 2010. Both documents are complex and it is
difficult to imagine
an easy application in a practical setting.
However, it has been confirmed that JSP only allows
the provision of medical information from SAPHS to DCS.
more applicable document to the circumstances arising in this Inquest is the
Protocol for the Exchange of Information between SA Health and the DCS
dated 5 May 2015.
object of this protocol is to guide information disclosure for the
‘treatment care or rehabilitation of a prisoner’
and ensures
appropriate disclosure of information between SA Health and Correctional
Services staff for the proper management of
a prisoner overcoming
confidentiality requirements.
However, despite the stated object of this Protocol, visiting psychiatrists
still do not have access to the JIS. I will return to
this topic under the
heading of Recommendations.
Ms Zulian’s
email to the SAPOL Corrections Unit
it became apparent that attempts to find accommodation for Mr Lowah, or
engage him with services in the community were futile,
Ms Zulian sent an
email to the SAPOL Corrections Unit after receiving advice from the Sentencing
Management Unit (SMU). Ms Zulian
explained that she was concerned that
Mr Lowah would reoffend, not due to his history but rather due to his
behaviour in custody.
She observed that when in the HDU there was little to no
warning that Mr Lowah would display violent behaviour. She noted that
to his history of impulsivity, and extremely poor frustration tolerance with
poor emotional regulation, he would lash out without
Ms Zulian had
herself observed Mr Lowah behave violently and in an emotionally
dysregulated way.
'Good Afternoon,
Prisoner Jayden Lowah #172502 D.O.B 08/08/1998 is being released from custody
tomorrow 14.09.2018 on straight release with no supervision
Prisoner Lowah has been diagnosed with Schizophrenia, Borderline Personality
Disorder and has Antisocial traits. He has a history
of suicide attempts and
self-harming behaviour where on many instances he attempted suicide by laying
down on train tracks. While
incarcerated on 18.01.2018, he twisted and knotted
a sheet and placed it around a chair in his cell and neck.
I have concerns in relation to Prisoner Lowah's release and it was
recommended by SMU that I email SAPOL Corrections to notify you
of my concerns.
While he has been incarcerated he has refused to consent to any community
support including ENU and NDIS as he would
benefit from supported accommodation
due to his limited coping ability. I applied for SACAT for a Guardianship order
and an urgent
hearing was heard on Monday 10.09.2018 where this was granted.
Due to the short timeframe between when the guardian was granted
and when he is
being released, I am in the process of attempting to find accommodation for him
and it appears that his only options
are emergency housing.
Prisoner Lowah is at high risk of reoffending and harming others due to
his significant history of making threats towards others,
poor frustration
tolerance, impulsivity and emotional dysregulation. He has displayed violent
behaviour at James Nash House late
last year where he pulled the hair of a nurse
through the trap on his door. He has had multiple incidents during his
incarceration
including refusing to return to his cell, kicking the windows and
doors, yelling abuse at staff, urinating on the door of his cell,
damaging cell
property and threatening to assault staff such as threatening to cause
lacerations on the neck of an officer.
Should police come into contact with Mr Lowah, he may require mental
health treatment and monitoring as I believe he will be non-compliant
medication because of his disorganised thinking, paranoia, and poor planning
skills. Mr Lowah is currently prescribed a
depot and is on a Community
Treatment Order.
If you could please distribute the above concerns to the relevant team that
would be greatly appreciated.
If you have any questions in relation to Prisoner Lowah, please feel free to
receipt of Ms Zulian’s email, Senior Constable Paul O’Donnell
from the Public Protection Branch of SAPOL sought advice
from Acting Detective
Sergeant Jason Olsen, who instructed him to raise a street check report (SCR) on
Shield. Senior Constable
O’Donnell was also advised to email the
intelligence sections of the four main districts advising them about
Mr Lowah and the
street check, and to update SHIELD with an address when
they became aware of one. Detective Sergeant Olsen contacted HYPA on Monday
September to enquire as to Mr Lowah’s whereabouts and was advised
that he had left their headquarters without securing
accommodation.
information was passed on to Ms Zulian. These were all appropriate steps,
but ultimately fruitless.
the topic of this email and the response it generated, the Inquest heard from
Detective Superintendent Adam Blandford (DSU Blandford)
and Detective Chief
Inspector Denise Gray (DCI Gray) of SAPOL. DSU Blandford was, at the time of
giving oral evidence, the officer
in charge of the Public Protection Branch of
SAPOL. This branch had been created in 2018 and acted as a conduit between
Correctional
Services and the Parole
At the time of its
creation, a few weeks following Mr Lowah’s release from Yatala, DCI
Gray was appointed as the officer in
charge (18 October
Both police officers
provided affidavits to the Court and gave oral evidence at the Inquest.
learning of Ms Foster’s death from the executive leadership team of
SAPOL, DCI Gray became aware of the
raised by Senior
Constable O’Donnell in response to Ms Zulian’s email to SAPOL
Corrections Unit of the same date. DCI
Gray had not previously been aware of
Ms Zulian’s email or the SCR, having commenced her new role
approximately a month after
they were generated. The summary of the SCR was as
'Prisoner Jayden Lowah #172502 D.O.B 08/08/1998 is being
released from custody tomorrow 14.09.2018 on straight release with no
supervision
from DCS. Prisoner Lowah has been diagnosed with Schizophrenia,
Borderline Personality Disorder and has Antisocial traits. He has
a history of
suicide attempts and self-harming behaviour where on many instances he attempted
suicide by laying down on train tracks.
While incarcerated on the 18.01.2018,
he twisted and knotted a sheet and placed it around a chair in his cell and
neck. DCS have
concerns in relation to Prisoner Lowah's release and it was
recommended by SMU that I email SAPOL Corrections to notify you of my
While he has been incarcerated he has refused to consent to any community
support including ENU and NDIS and he would
benefit from supported accommodation
due to his limited coping ability. I applied for SACAT for a Guardianship order
and an urgent
hearing was heard on Monday the 10.09.2018 where this was granted.
Due to the short timeframe between when the guardian was granted
and when he is
being released, I am in the process of attempting to find accommodation for him
and it appears that his only options
are emergency housing. Prisoner Lowah is
at high risk of reoffending and harming others due to his significant history of
threats towards others, poor frustration tolerance, impulsivity and
emotional dysregulation. He has displayed violent behaviour
at James Nash House
late last year where he pulled the hair of a nurse through the trap on his door.
He has had multiple incidents
during his incarceration including refusing to
on the door of his cell, damaging cell property and threatening to
assault staff such as threatening to cause lacerations on the
officer. Should police come into contact with Lowah, he may require mental
health treatment as it believed he will be
non-compliant with
medications.'
Gray explained that with her ex-homicide detective background she had particular
insight into how murder affects family, the offender’s
relatives and the
community. She gave the following evidence:
‘This situation
obviously worried me so I undertook a lot of steps to try and rectify that from
happening again, so I researched
legislation, applicable legislation -
Sentencing Act, Criminal Law, High Risk Offenders Act. I looked at our being
new to the section,
the SAPOL systems and processes in managing high-risk
offenders the Department for Corrections systems of managing high-risk
Supporting structures that may assist like the Offender Management
Team, serious offender committee with Department for Corrections,
interaction and tried to look at how I can improve those processes. I also had
a debrief meeting with two members of DCS
if I can call them that, a sentencing
management unit and to try and get early notification of a release of such a
person particularly
if they’ve got no conditions or homeless. So to try
and bring some services together to try and put in a plan to try and manage
those people when they walk out of
Blandford described the timing of Ms Zulian’s email as
’, given that it was sent a day before
Mr Lowah’s release. I understood this comment was made in the
context of a potential
missed opportunity to arrange a case conference with DCS
in order to mitigate risk.
Counsel Assisting Ms Roper submitted that the email was sent as an option of
last resort, having exhausted all other avenues to
try to delay his release and
in the alternative to support Mr Lowah in the community upon release. I
agree with this submission.
Furthermore, had Ms Zulian thought to email
SAPOL Corrections at an earlier time, it is unlikely to have made any material
due to Mr Lowah’s continued refusal to engage with any
services. Furthermore, without any orders in place, police would have
to arrest Mr Lowah unless he was committing an offence.
touched on in the passage of evidence above, DCI Gray organised a debrief with
Luke Williams and Emma Roesch from DCS. Present
at the meeting were members
from SAPOL Corrections Unit. The purpose of the debrief was to reassess the
actions taken with respect
to Mr Lowah with a view to improving processes
such as early notification to SAPOL when a high-risk offender is released, and
an interagency case management approach to best address the risk.
DCI Gray explained that it was more difficult to put appropriate
arrangements in
place for a person who is not the subject of an Extended Supervision Order
(ESO), particularly if they are homeless.
She gave the following
‘As I said, it makes it very difficult if
they’re homeless and they’ve got no conditions. Generally, I would
having that pre-meeting with Department for Corrections, trying to plan and
change the situation of having no conditions or no home.’
DSU Blandford and Mr Williams from the HDU described the systems
reforms implemented following DCI Gray’s review after
Ms Foster’s death, as assisting with positive relationships between
DCS and SAPOL, as well as the implementation of case conferencing
of high-risk
offenders being released into the community to ensure an interagency and
multi-agency approach.
unlikely to have assisted Mr Lowah given his refusal to engage with
services and subsequent release into homelessness, these
changes were both
timely and appropriate.
Supervision Orders
DSU Blandford
and DCI Gray gave evidence about ESOs. This was an avenue considered by
Ms Zulian and Mr Williams, but quickly discarded
due to their
(correct) assessment that Mr Lowah would be ineligible. The objective of an ESO
is to provide the means to protect
the community from being exposed to an
appreciable risk of harm posed by various serious
detailed below, this would have been a particularly effective way of managing
Mr Lowah in the community, especially in
the absence of another mechanism
by which to monitor him (a Licence or parole conditions). However,
Mr Lowah was not eligible for
an ESO as the offences for which he was
imprisoned did not meet the first limb of the criteria under the relevant Act.
Court heard evidence about the mechanics of an ESO from DSU Blandford. He
explained that the Serious Offender Committee (SOC)
is chaired by an executive
from DCS and attended by members of SAPOL (and other agencies) and can make
recommendations to the Attorney-General
for an ESO.
On the basis of
the recommendations the Attorney-General may apply to the Supreme Court for an
ESO with respect to a person who
is a high-risk
Proceedings are
governed by the
Criminal Law (High Risk Offenders) Act 2015
Criminal Law (High Risk Offenders) Regulations 2015
(SA) and Chapter 3
Part 5 of the
Uniform Special Statutory Rules 2022
(SA). The application
must be made within 12 months of the end of the offender’s sentence
(including on release on parole
or home detention) or existing ESO, or after the
sentence is wholly satisfied (for life
imprisonment).
The Supreme
Court must consider at least one report from a prescribed health professional
which includes an assessment of the person’s
likelihood of reoffending
with similar offences.
Court may make an ESO if satisfied that the high risk offender poses an
appreciable risk to the safety of the community if not
supervised under the
When considering
whether or not to make an ESO, the Court’s paramount consideration is the
safety of the community.
ESOs can remain in force for up to five years and a further order may be made
following a further application from the
Attorney-General.
Importantly,
once an order is made, the ESO can include conditions that the offender not
commit further offences, not take illicit
substances and be under the
supervision of a Community Corrections officer. Parole-like conditions can be
imposed by the Court and
varied if necessary, including the requirement to wear
an electronic monitor, live at a certain address and undertake programs or
activities.
If conditions
are breached, the offender may be placed on a Continuing Detention
ESO can only be made in relation to a person classified as a ‘
’. Focusing on violent offenders (as was relevant to
Mr Lowah), under section 5 of the Criminal Law (High Risk Offender) Act
(the Act), a ‘
high risk offender
is defined, inter
alia, as a ‘
serious violent offender
’ who was sentenced to a
period of imprisonment in respect of a ‘
serious offence of
. The Act defines a ‘
serious offence of
serious offence
’ which in turn is
defined as an indictable offence that is punishable by imprisonment for life, or
for a term of five years,
or where the conduct constituting the offence
The death of, or
serious harm to, a person, or a risk of death of, or serious harm to, a person;
Serious damage
to property in circumstances involving a risk of death of, or harm to a person;
Perverting the
course of justice in relation to any conduct that, if proved, would constitute a
serious offence of violence.
amendments to the Act saw the definition of a ‘
’ broadened to include assisting principal offenders of
serious offences of violence or serious sexual
This was in
response to a notorious prisoner who had served his full sentence and was
re-entering the community without any supervision.
The recent amendments, made
after the Inquest was closed, would not have changed Mr Lowah’s
eligibility at the time of his
release from prison in September 2018.
DSU Blandford
explained that Mr Lowah did not meet the first limb of the eligibility
criteria in the legislation as he had not been
sentenced to imprisonment
carrying a maximum statutory penalty of five years or more, arising from the
assaults on 31 August 2017.
Consequently, he was not considered to be a
high risk offender
’. He was therefore not eligible for
consideration under the second limb which would have almost certainly been
that he posed an appreciable risk to the safety of the community if
he was not supervised under the order. As DSU Blandford explained,
the Act is very specific as to who can actually fit the criteria of an
extended supervision
told the Court that a submission was filed by DCI Gray on 15 March 2019, and
endorsed by the Commissioner of Police, that
the definition of a ‘
risk offender
’ should be broadened beyond serious sexual offenders,
serious violent offenders and counter-terrorism offenders to include
interest and public risk clause. This submission was sent to the
Attorney-General in the form of a Commissioner’s
Briefing Paper on 22
March 2019. His evidence was as follows:
‘So DCS and SAPOL
are of the same view that there should actually be a public interest, public
risk clause within the High Risk
Offenders Act that can be considered, not just
a serious violent offender or a sexual offence or a counter-terrorism type
the topic of ESOs, DCI Gray shared the same view as DSU Blandford that the
inclusion criteria to be considered a ‘
high risk offender
for the purposes of the Act was quite restrictive in that it only applied to
certain categories of offences. DCI Gray’s
evidence on this topic was
informed by her research of this legislation following the death of
Ms Foster. In considering the legislation
against the circumstances of
Mr Lowah’s release into the community with no supervision, DCI Gray
‘I think there should be a
discretion and I think if you look at the objects of that Act it is about the
protection of the community
from high-risk offenders. If you look at the
obligation of the judge to apply those ESOs it is for the safety of the
community is
paramount. I think there’s a number of other sections that
are limiting on that legislation. So, for example there were two
offenders that
were very high-risk, were incarcerated, but at the time of the conviction they
were sentence served. So I could not
apply any ESO to them because
they’re not serving a sentence. So there’s a number of intricacies
to that legislation
that prevent people going on to those orders including the
sort of catch all public interest
was considerable force to the evidence of both DSU Blandford and DCI Gray
on the topic on ESOs. An ESO was considered as a
possible avenue by the HDU
staff at Yatala, but correctly not pursued due to ineligibility. Had
Mr Lowah been eligible, and an ESO
applied for and granted, he would have
been subjected to a much higher level of scrutiny upon release from prison than
he ultimately
was. A regime of supervision would have been structured, similar
to that seen in 2015 when Mr Lowah was released on a Licence, following
attempt to act on homicidal plans to kill his father. Perhaps the condition
with the most importance would have been for Mr
Lowah to reside at a
certain address. That would have enabled a community mental health team to be
allocated and provide monitoring,
for a Community Corrections officer to
supervise his day-to-day activities and ensure he was engaging with the imposed
conditions,
and provided him with a place to live so he was not vulnerable to
negative influences such as drugs and alcohol. Of all the possible
interventions, and in the absence of a Licence, an ESO would have provided
Mr Lowah with considerable structure and support in the
community with a
level of supervision to reduce the risk to others.
Ms Zulian’s
advice and Mr Lowah’s release from Yatala
stated that she felt it necessary to provide Mr Lowah with an emergency
strategy just prior to his release. She explained
in her affidavit and oral
evidence that if he felt at risk of self-harm or harming someone else, he was to
go immediately to an hospital
ED, call police, or call the mental health triage
As will be detailed
below, Mr Lowah followed this advice less than 24 hours after being
released from Yatala.
14 September 2018 Mr Lowah was released from prison. From the SAPHS case
notes, it was apparent that three nights of emergency
accommodation had been
tentatively arranged at Scotty’s
However, it appears
that this did not eventuate. Mr Lowah was instead conveyed from Yatala to
the HYPA office in Adelaide city
by a volunteer with the view to having
emergency accommodation secured, or provisions to sleep rough provided. This
did not occur
as Mr Lowah left HYPA and made his way to the Noarlunga train
station via train. At about 2:15am the following morning, Mr Lowah
an ambulance from a public phone box at the Noarlunga interchange. He reported
that he wanted to go to hospital because he
felt as if he was going to start
hurting people. Mr Lowah waited in the vicinity of the phone box until an
ambulance arrived, which
was not until 4:35am.
arrival the paramedics noted that Mr Lowah was calm and compliant but
appeared hypervigilant. He had been sitting in the cold
for an extended period
in a t-shirt. The patient clinical record recorded that Mr Lowah’s
past medical history included a
diagnosis of schizophrenia and that he had been
released from prison the day before. It was recorded by one of the paramedics
Mr Lowah repeated the assertion that he felt he could start hurting
people. The paramedics placed Mr Lowah under a Care and Control
(pursuant to
Mental Health Act
) and conveyed him to the
Noarlunga Hospital ED, arriving a short time
at the Noarlunga Hospital Emergency Department
Mr Lowah arrived at the ED of the Noarlunga Hospital on 15 September 2018
he was initially assessed by ED medical officer, Dr
Siang Ding. The notes of Dr
Ding reflected that when he assessed Mr Lowah at approximately 6am, he was
guarded and not engaging,
that his eye contact was poor and that he had
regressed under the blanket. Mr Lowah requested to speak with a
psychiatrist and wanted
a mental health
When asked why he
had presented to hospital, it was recorded that Mr Lowah stated
t know ... it’s pretty much what I told
the ambos .... I want to speak to a psychiatrist .... now I just want to
observed a paucity of speech which was limited to mumbling brief answers as well
as a blunt affect, but was unable to assess
his insight or judgment. He did
note that Mr Lowah did not appear to be responding to internal stimuli.
After speaking with the
ED consultant and a mental health nurse, Dr Ding
continued the Care and Control Order pending a mental health assessment
given alleged intent to harm others and current refusal to engage with
ED staff for
Andrew Taylor, a first-year registrar undertaking his psychiatric rotation and
Dr Tushar Singh, a consultant psychiatrist, reviewed
Mr Lowah at
approximately 9:40am. Both Drs Taylor and Singh were interviewed by Detective
Brevet Sergeant Carman on 25 September
2020 in relation to their involvement
with Mr Lowah as part of the coronial investigation and provided an
affidavit almost two years
after Ms Foster’s death. It was their
evidence that this was the first time they became aware that the young man who
assessed on the morning of 15 September 2018, after claiming that he would
kill someone, had been responsible for the death of a
woman six weeks after
their assessment. This delay was clearly an undesirable state of affairs,
particularly when Ms Foster’s
death was in relatively close proximity
to the attendance at the Noarlunga Hospital ED. When giving evidence, both Drs
Singh relied solely on the clinical notes and their affidavits as
they had no independent memory of Mr Lowah. This was despite
Taylor affirming in his affidavit that his recollection of
Mr Lowah’s attendance was
moved away from this assertion in his oral evidence and I ultimately understood
that he claimed to have had no memory
of Mr Lowah when interviewed by
Detective Carman. Either way, Dr Singh was the consultant psychiatrist
present at the assessment
and the doctor in charge of the decision making.
Dr Taylor’s role was primarily as the scribe. He was also a very
doctor. Fortunately, the assessment notes made by Dr Taylor were
comprehensive and given the paucity of memory of both assessing
doctors, the
only reliable account.
salient features of the assessment as recorded by Dr Taylor were as
made a call to SAAS for homicidal ideation. Mr Lowah stated:
ll probably kill someone, I may as well kill
The target of
Mr Lowah’s homicidal ideation was not identified, he said
could not identify the reason for the homicidal ideation and stated
it’s because I have different beliefs
indicated that if he does kill someone it would not be his fault and inferred a
mental impairment defence pursuant to section
269 of the CLCA.
complained about prison and being released into homelessness the previous day
and said he was in a worse position than before
he was imprisoned.
again expressed that he wanted to harm someone, possibly by cutting their
throat. This was in response to perceived mistreatment.
stated that he wanted to have a home and it did not matter if he had to tell the
mental health service, he just did not want
Drs Singh and Taylor gave evidence that, based on the entry in the case notes, a
conclusion was reached that Mr Lowah was not
exhibiting any Axis 1
pathology, meaning he was not suffering from a major mental illness such as
schizophrenia.
Further that
their assessment of Mr Lowah’s presentation was that it was for
secondary gain
’. Dr Taylor explained that secondary
when a patient has some involvement with the health service
and the function isn
t in itself to achieve treatment for a
particular health condition, be it psychiatric or physical, but rather to obtain
else secondary to this
Mr Lowah’s case, the
secondary gain was perceived to be his
desire not to be homeless. It appeared that the assessment reached by
Dr Singh, that there
was nothing in Mr Lowah’s presentation to
warrant psychiatric input, was based on the following:
The mental state
assessment of Mr Lowah revealing no acute illness; and
An entry located
on CBIS from Dr Jennings that he had assessed Mr Lowah’s mental
’ only a few days earlier; and
That the threats
to kill were not directed towards a specific
Ms Foster’s death had been at the hands of someone unknown to her,
Dr Singh was asked how he reconciled that information
with the reassurance
he gleaned from Mr Lowah’s threats to kill not being directed towards
a specific individual. Dr Singh
expressed the view that there must have
been an intervening culmination of factors influencing a change in
Mr Lowah’s mental
state. He explained:
‘So between
the time when we saw Mr Lowah and the actual event a number of things could
have gone wrong. Mr Lowah could have
been non-compliant with his
treatment, may have been lost to follow up, may have indulged in drug use or may
have been intoxicated
at the time which may have affected his judgment and that
may have led to him acting in the manner that he did.’
was asked to comment on whether the factors he postulated as causative in the
lead up to Ms Foster’s death were foreseeable
risks on the day of the
assessment, given that Mr Lowah was being released from the hospital into
that releasing Mr Lowah into
vulnerability
’ however he had an
expectation that the community mental health team would follow up with
Mr Lowah and noted that there were
a number of positive prognostic factors
at the time of assessment including a current CTO, a local mental health team in
up to date depot medication, which provided a level of
reassurance.
Interestingly,
as will be detailed below, none of the factors that Dr Singh considered
likely in the lead up to Ms Foster’s
death were at play on the day
she was killed. Mr Lowah was up to date with his prescribed medication,
there was no evidence of drug
use, nor was he demonstrably affected by alcohol.
While Mr Lowah had been lost to follow up initially, the efforts of a
family friend
connected him with a local community mental health service.
its face, the decision to discharge Mr Lowah into the community from the
ED, with a history of schizophrenia after having expressed
an intention to hurt
or kill someone, appeared fundamentally flawed particularly in light of
Ms Foster’s violent death six
weeks later. However, it was necessary
to examine the presentation to the Noarlunga Hospital ED in isolation from the
tragic events
that followed. Accordingly, the expert psychiatric witnesses were
asked to comment on the appropriateness or otherwise of the assessment
Mr Lowah on the morning of 15 September 2018, with the focus on their
assessment and the information they had to hand that morning.
detailed above, Dr Furst’s evidence was that Mr Lowah was
continuously psychotic from at least July 2017 and possibly earlier
effects of the last depot injection on 11 April 2017 wore off a month later.
That meant that Mr Lowah must have been psychotic
at the time he was
assessed by Drs Singh and Taylor, however the psychosis was not detected.
Dr Furst was not ultimately critical
of their decision to release
Mr Lowah, but did question aspects of their assessment. In the report
prepared for the Supreme Court
hearing, Dr Furst noted that despite
references by Mr Lowah to having ‘
different beliefs
was assessed as not having any delusional thinking and to be seeking secondary
He went on to note
‘different beliefs ... were apparently not explored
... Sadly, despite his history of mental illness and extreme violence associated
with psychosis, he was not kept in hospital for observation and further
assessment.’
oral evidence, Dr Furst stated that it would have been useful to know the
degree to which Dr Singh tried to uncover the nature
different beliefs
’, which to him ‘
sounded like a
red flag about: this is possibly someone who’s got delusional beliefs or
beliefs that he knows are not shared
the notes made by Dr Taylor, this could not be further analysed as
Dr Singh had no memory of his assessment of Mr Lowah.
In any event,
Dr Furst clarified in oral evidence that he could not go so far as to say
that Mr Lowah ought to have been admitted
for observation, based on the
information that they had available to them at the time. Dr Furst again
raised the issue of access
to relevant information across different agencies.
He explained:
‘So I think it’s - it was one of those
situations where the clinicians had limited information available to them, they
had CBIS, so they could see that Dr Jennings had said that he was stable,
they were able to access OACIS, which would’ve shown
that he was
discharged from James Nash House, not kept in on a - under an inpatient
detention order; and that would indicate that
the treating doctors at James Nash
House believed that he was mentally stable enough to be discharged from hospital
Sullivan commented on this issue as well. In a more general sense, he referred
very frequent
’ shortfalls in information available to
psychiatrists pertaining to a patient’s criminal history. He explained
access to this would enable the psychiatrist (or mental health clinician)
to determine which treatment had been effective and whether
cessation in
treatment had been accompanied by an increase in criminal
However, A/P
Sullivan was of the opinion that an ED is not the place to peruse hundreds of
pages of material about a patient to
resolve the dilemma of whether the patient
is seeking accommodation through admission, or is genuinely making statements
of a deteriorated mental state. The assessment should be based on
a little bit of information [with the rest] based upon the clinical
assessment you make at the time to determine the person
agreed with Dr Singh’s evidence that it would be more difficult for
the psychiatrist to assess the non-specific threats
and whether he would
actually act on them, than with a specific target. A/P Sullivan opined
that it would require a ‘
nuanced assessment based upon the clinical
presentation at the time as well as the specifics of the
Ultimately,
A/P Sullivan expressed the view that while a voluntary admission to undertake a
comprehensive assessment would have been
Ms Foster’s death only weeks later, he was not critical of the
decision not to admit Mr Lowah
given that he was on a depot medication and
a further admission would not necessarily change the trajectory of treatment.
opined that a voluntary admission was not inappropriate and may
have allowed a more in-depth assessment and gathering of collateral
information.
However, he was of the view that it was a matter for clinical judgement and the
gathering of further information may
not have been more illuminating for their
This was because
the information obtained from SAPHS would have included the same records that Dr
Jennings had access to, as well
as the psychiatric assessments of Dr Jennings.
This would have reinforced the idea that Mr Lowah should have been
discharged. Dr
Furst was of the opinion that it would not have made a
difference.
understood that Dr Furst and A/P Sullivan were very much in agreement on
the issue of information sharing among the different agencies.
looked further back to Dr Jennings’ inability to access the JIS and
his ultimate assessment of Mr Lowah had a flow
on effect with the
assessment in the Noarlunga ED by Drs Singh and Taylor. It was reasonable
therefore for Drs Singh and Taylor
to rely on the recent assessment by
Dr Jennings who they understood conducted the assessment while
Mr Lowah was still a prisoner.
They could not be expected to know of the
limitations that affected his assessment. They were also reassured with the
that Mr Lowah was in receipt of an antipsychotic depot medication
in the community. However, the information Drs Singh and Taylor
upon was fragmented and incomplete. This was the same difficulty faced by
Dr Jennings when he reached the conclusion that
Mr Lowah was mentally
stable as detailed earlier in the Finding. Like Dr Jennings,
Drs Singh and Taylor did not have access to the
JIS relating to the recent
concerns by prison officers, nor the HDU notes detailing the concerns of
Ms Zulian and Mr Williams. Reliance
on this system prevented a
conversation with those who had longitudinal knowledge of Mr Lowah and the
way in which he presented when
unwell. Dr Furst’s concern about
inadequate information sharing highlighted a significant gap in the management
and mentally unwell individuals in the prison system with deleterious
flow-on effect once released into the community.
is released from Noarlunga Hospital ED
release from Noarlunga Hospital, Mr Lowah contacted his father (Shaun
Lowah) who picked him up at some point later on 15 September
2018. Shaun Lowah
was aware that his son had been in prison, but had not expected his imminent
release. When he received the phone
call, he travelled from his home in Goolwa
to Noarlunga to collect him. Shaun Lowah became aware that Mr Lowah had no
money or identification
and in the period of time he remained at his
father’s house (approximately five weeks), Shaun Lowah did what he could
his son while he awaited Centrelink payments to commence. Shaun
Lowah provided an affidavit to police in the hours following
Foster’s death. He told police that he had not detected anything
out of the ordinary with his son in the weeks he had been
staying there. He
observed ongoing tension between Mr Lowah and his brother (who resided
permanently at the Goolwa address) but
that was not unusual between the
the five weeks he stayed at Goolwa, Mr Lowah also received assistance from
Shaun Lowah’s friend, Ms Gloria May. Ms May became
Mr Lowah was staying with his father and observed him to be a quiet young
man who avoided eye contact when meeting for
Ms May kindly offered
to take Mr Lowah to the local offices of the government agencies in order
for him to get back on his feet
with income and medications. Ms May took
Mr Lowah to Centrelink to apply for Newstart allowance, to Service SA to
obtain identification
and then to Bank SA to establish an account. She also
rang the prison to enquire what medication he was taking and how to get a
script. The SAPHS notes reflected that Ms May contacted the prison on
28 September 2018 enquiring about Mr Lowah’s Centrelink
and informing them of his current address, and leaving her mobile number as a
Southern Fleurieu Community
Health Service (SFCHS) via facsimile, to the attention of
At some point Ms May recalled speaking to a female mental health worker. This
was registered mental health nurse, Ms Jennifer Moore
from SFCHS.
her affidavit, Ms May did not recall any concerns that she had about
Mr Lowah’s behaviour with the exception of one occasion.
explained that she had observed Mr Lowah looking at her with a smirk or a
grin which she described as unnerving. At the time
she wondered what he was
thinking. Beyond that one occasion, Ms May did not witness any inappropriate
Prior to Ms
May’s benevolent efforts, Mr Lowah had been completely disconnected
from community supports, including the community
mental health team.
the efforts of Ms May, a meeting was organised between Ms Moore and
Mr Lowah, and a script for his antipsychotic depot medication
was obtained.
Ms Moore provided an affidavit and gave oral evidence at the Inquest. This
was in relation to the very short period
of contact with Mr Lowah in her
role as mental health nurse, while he was staying with his father. Annexed to
her affidavit were
SFCHS progress notes relating to Mr Lowah. Commencing
on 22 October 2018, Ms Moore contacted Ms May who had nominated herself as
recent referral for Mr Lowah as a family friend. The entry for this date
recorded the assistance Ms May had been providing Mr
Lowah and the living
arrangements in Goolwa, including that Mr Lowah and his brother were not
getting along well. Ms Moore’s
recorded plan was to organise a one-on-one
visit with Mr Lowah and to reimburse Ms May for the prescription medication
she had purchased
on Mr Lowah’s behalf. Ms Moore then contacted
Mr Lowah and he was noted to reluctantly agree to meet her at his
her entry in the note, Ms Moore did question whether Mr Lowah was
hearing voices when he alluded to people (other than his
brother) being at the
house. Mr Lowah told Ms Moore, ‘
I’m not hearing voices you
Moore attended the Goolwa address with a mental health occupational therapist
from SFCHS on the same day. As he had conveyed on
the phone, Mr Lowah
repeated his intention was to travel to Onkaparinga as soon as he had money as
he did not like living with his
brother. On further questioning of this plan,
it became apparent to Ms Moore that he had nowhere to live, and it was
unlikely that
he had any friends in the area. Mr Lowah was however
insistent upon going. Ms Moore suggested that she could give him his depot
injection (which was due on 26 October 2018) before he left Goolwa.
Mr Lowah looked through his belongings but could not find the
prescription,
so Ms Moore took him to the Goolwa Medical Clinic and obtained a script for
both depot aripiprazole and olanzapine
from a local doctor. The pharmacy did
not have the depot medication in stock but indicated they would order it in for
the following
day. Ms Moore was aware that Mr Lowah still had some
olanzapine tablets which helped with his sleep, so neither script was filled,
and she dropped Mr Lowah back to his father’s house. Mr Lowah
assured Ms Moore that he would collect the scripts and attend
the Adaire Clinic
to have his depot administered. Ms Moore’s plan was to follow up in a
couple of days. Her notes reflected
that she attempted to contact Mr Lowah
twice over a two-day period with no response. She then spoke to Ms May on
25 October 2018
and was informed that Mr Lowah had caught the bus to
Adelaide despite encouragement from his father to
her affidavit, Ms Moore noted her observations of Mr Lowah on the day she
met him for the first time. She recalled that at one
point she did wonder
whether he was responding to auditory hallucinations when he laughed to himself
a couple of times during their
conversation. She asked him what he was laughing
that Mr Lowah was unwell. The last entry in Ms Moore’s case notes
relating to Mr Lowah was a record of a telephone call between
May on 26 October 2018. The text of the entry was as
‘Returned call made by Gloria May to work mobile last
night. Gloria said she rang because she didn't know if clinician was yet
that Jayden had been arrested and charged with murder of a woman in Noarlunga.
She said that his father Shaun and brother Jarrad
were notified by police
yesterday afternoon - police went to their home where only Jarrad was home, then
rang Shaun at work to let
him know. Gloria said that she was there with Shaun
and Jarrad last night and cooked them tea. She said Shaun was debating about
taking the day off work today to try to see Jayden, but she knows that he went
to work today, as he needs the pay. She thanked clinician
for recent contact,
said that she thinks though that "the system" has let Jayden down "for a long
to the period of time before Mr Lowah left Goolwa, on 24 October 2018,
Shaun Lowah recalled driving to the shops and seeing
his son waiting at a nearby
bus stop. Mr Lowah told his father that he was getting on a bus and
might go to
Shaun Lowah
unsuccessfully attempted to talk him out of leaving but then suggested that if
he was going somewhere he should leave
his important documentation in a safe
place (birth certificate, identification). Mr Lowah refused. It was clear
that Mr Lowah had
finally received his Centrelink payment as he had left
some money for his father and for Ms May at the house. Shaun Lowah then drove
to the shops and on his return saw his son again, still waiting for a bus. He
tried again to talk him out of leaving, but Mr Lowah
was determined. In
his affidavit, Shaun Lowah explained:
‘I couldn’t change
his mind. He said it twice, then I went to the shops and I drove back again,
like ten minutes later.
I tried to persuade him a couple of times, not for any
other reason than he didn’t have that much money and he didn’t
anywhere to stay. I couldn’t understand why he would want to come down to
town. When I say town I mean the Seaford or
Noarlunga areas. He did say,
‘if I need to sleep I’ll go to the city’ in like a shelter
somewhere.’
was the last direct evidence of Mr Lowah’s movements until his fatal
encounter with Ms Foster.
available observation of this period of time was that Mr Lowah remained
with his father in Goolwa until his Centrelink payments
came through. As soon
as he received his first payment, Mr Lowah was on a bus with nowhere to go,
nowhere to stay and no one to
visit. This was consistent with an impaired
decision making capability due to his impaired mental state as described by
Ms Foster’s death
the months following Ms Foster’s death, Mr Lowah was interviewed
on four occasions by Dr Furst. Over that time, Mr Lowah
revealed to
Dr Furst the extent of his delusional beliefs. He explained that while he
was living with his father in Goolwa he had
decided on a plan to kill himself
with a gun and planned to visit a Christies Beach gun range to access a firearm.
If that did not
work out, he would cut his throat with a knife. He referred to
this plan as Plan A. Plan B was to kill someone else to get back
at the people
who were controlling his mind, which he had been experiencing for years.
Dr Furst recorded the following:
‘Mr Lowah reported
that he had been experiencing the same symptoms for years and that this mainly
consisted of concerns about
"mind control". He found it hard to answer how long
he had these beliefs, other than that it was for "a long time". He reiterated
that the world we lived in was "not the original reality or universe". He
indicated that there was no particular piece of technology
in the universe that
was the source of what he called the "mind control" but said that it was "really
just magic". He claimed that
technology created a simulation and that the voices
were not even actual real people, but most likely they were the result of what
he called "the mind control'. He indicated that people other than him in this
simulation were not real, but somehow manufactured.
He indicated that he
believed he had been born twice and that everyone other than him and the voices
were like "artificial intelligences".
He claimed that he had been born naturally
and "out of this reality" and therefore he had concluded that all other people
were ''just
artificial simulations".’
respect to Ms Foster, Mr Lowah told Dr Furst that there was no
particular reason he picked her as part of his Plan B, she was
just in the wrong
place at the wrong time. Mr Lowah thought she had touched him
inappropriately and was saying things that he thought
were about mind control.
Further, he reported the belief that Ms Foster was created and not a real
person. When he made the decision
to kill her, he thought the mind control
people might have put that thought into his head and that subconsciously
Ms Foster knew
that he was going to kill her. Mr Lowah told
Dr Furst that he killed Ms Foster due to ‘
that the mind control people were putting him through and that ‘
opinion expressed in his report dated 3 May 2020 was that killing Ms Foster
was the breaking point of enduring months
and perhaps years of what he perceived
to be mental torment from alien entities from an alternate reality, forming the
he had to do something terrible to change his situation. He viewed
Ms Foster not as a real person, but an artificial intelligence
and that his
actions were linked to an alternate reality and events far into the
is not suggested that any of the clinicians who treated Mr Lowah between
2017 and November 2018 were aware of the information he
disclosed to
Dr Furst or the extent of his delusional beliefs. What it does demonstrate
was the acutely psychotic state he was in
at the time of Ms Foster’s
death and his ability to hide the more florid features of his psychosis from
even senior consultant
psychiatrists.
that said, it is hard to escape the prediction of Dr Watson in his letter of 2
February 2015:
‘Without treatment, Jayden's risk of relapse
... is high as is his potential risk for violence towards those incorporated in
to (sic) his delusional belief system.’
Ms Foster’s death preventable
is an issue that is not free from difficulty. For reasons detailed below I have
found that Ms Foster’s death was not preventable
on the balance of
probabilities. While I have found that Dr Giannakoureas’ decision to
cease depot medication without an adequate
plan in place to monitor
non-compliance destabilised Mr Lowah’s mental health and saw a
deterioration in his illness that the
medication had been keeping at bay, it is
too simplistic to draw a direct connection between this event and
Ms Foster’s death,
which occurred 18 months later.
was a direct causal connection between Dr Giannakoureas’ decision and
the random assaults on 31 August 2017, as the depot
medication had worn off and
Mr Lowah’s health had swiftly declined, seeing an increase in erratic
behaviour and aggression
resulting in a loss of housing and supports. This set
in train a number of events where opportunities arose for the trajectory of
Mr Lowah’s illness to have been altered. These opportunities were
first opportunity was to have investigated Mr Lowah for mental competence
after the assaults in August 2017. As Dr Furst indicated,
occurred, Mr Lowah’s sentence would have taken place in a therapeutic
mental health environment rather than a punitive
one. This would have seen
intensive treatment of Mr Lowah’s illness with the obvious benefit of
assisting his decision-making
capabilities. The second opportunity was the
inability of Dr Jennings to access the JIS which contained relevant and
collateral information about Mr Lowah’s day to day
conduct. Had Dr Jennings seen these entries, he may have made a different
decision about Mr Lowah’s mental state. This was at a crucial point
in the timeline, being just before his release. This
had a flow-on effect for
the ED assessment by Drs Singh and Taylor.
against the above missed opportunities was the reinstating of
Mr Lowah’s depot antipsychotic in November 2017, providing
plausible reassurance to those who assessed him in both the prison and the
community. It was only after Ms Foster’s death
that it was realised
the reintroduction of antipsychotic medication was too little and too late.
This was due to a combination of
the environments in which he was assessed, the
fragmented information sharing capabilities and Mr Lowah’s ability to
of the more florid features of his illness. Added to this mix was the
poor prognostic outcome for Mr Lowah who was diagnosed with
schizophrenia
at the unusually young age of 15 and the treatment resistant illness from which
(it was ultimately discovered) he suffered.
Conclusions
findings I have made are set out in accordance with the issues above. I have
come to these conclusions on the basis that I am
comfortably satisfied each of
them were established on the evidence.
Foster died on 25 October 2018 at Colonnades Shopping Centre. She was
36 years old.
cause of Ms Foster’s death was head injuries. These injuries were
inflicted by Mr Jayden Lowah, causing her death.
was killed by Mr Lowah after a chance meeting. The two were previously
unknown to each other and met when Ms Foster was
passing through the area
after catching a train to Noarlunga to visit her father.
was a very unwell and dangerous individual from an early age. He was exhibiting
signs of disordered behaviour from as early
as the age of 9 years old.
2014, at the age of 15, Mr Lowah was detained under the
Mental Health Act
for stealing his mother’s car with the stated intention of driving to his
father’s house to kill him. Mr Lowah believed
that his father had
molested him when he was younger. This notion was an aspect of
Mr Lowah’s delusional belief system.
admitted to clinicians that he had been smoking cannabis the day before he
voiced (and partly acted on) homicidal ideation
towards his father. Over the
coming years, Mr Lowah repeatedly asserted that his episodes of psychosis
were solely due to cannabis
use and not from any underlying disease such as
schizophrenia.
was diagnosed with first episode psychosis with the underlying condition thought
to be schizophrenia and detained for a period
of six weeks in a paediatric
mental health facility at the Women’s and Children’s Hospital. He
was commenced on an antipsychotic
depot medication for the first time during
this admission.
diagnosis of schizophrenia at the age of 15 is unusual but not rare.
was criminally charged for the offences relating to his father, but found not
guilty due to mental impairment in January
2015 and placed on a Mental
Impairment Supervision Licence with a limiting term of 12 months.
was the expert report of Dr Marshall Watson (who had been Mr Lowah’s
treating psychiatrist) that was the basis for the Court’s
ultimate finding
of mental incompetence. This report had a prophetical warning in relation to
treatment complacency of Mr Lowah;
namely that he would minimise psychotic
symptoms, risking complacency with a relaxing of treatment options, which would
Licence imposed a number of conditions on Mr Lowah, including that he must
reside where directed and abstain from drugs and alcohol.
The conditions of
Licence saw Mr Lowah only remain in the community for two brief periods
during the 12 months, with the rest spent
in secure care due to
non-compliance. This demonstrated the effectiveness of the Licence conditions
in an unwell and non-compliant
individual.
was trialled without his antipsychotic depot medication on two occasions before
Ms Foster’s death. This was done at
the request of
first occasion was in December 2015 when the depot was ceased and Mr Lowah
continued with an oral antipsychotic. His CTO had
recently lapsed.
mental health quickly deteriorated and Dr Watson (who was no longer
Mr Lowah’s treating psychiatrist) was notified
and duly advised that
his behaviour was consistent with signs reflective of his relapse signature and
an urgent review was indicated.
The review took place, and Mr Lowah was
recommenced on depot injections in July 2016. A CTO Level 1 and then Level 2
were granted
to enable compliance with the depot injections to be enforced if
necessary. This was an appropriate response to the trial without
injections.
August 2016, Mr Lowah was accepted into the care of the MAC team based at
the Adaire Clinic, Noarlunga Centre under the care of
psychiatric registrar,
Dr Albert Matti. Mr Lowah received his depot injections at the Adaire
Clinic where the MAC team was based.
August 2016 and March 2017, there was a period of stability in
Mr Lowah’s mental health, with housing being provided
by Junction
Housing, a good rapport being established with his case coordinator (Leon), and
approval to receive community-based supports
through Uniting Care Wesley in an
attempt to reintegrate Mr Lowah into society.
7 April 2017, the role of case coordinator was temporarily handed over to
Ms Tamar Allner. This was confirmed at a meeting on
12 April 2017, in her
absence. She did not formally meet Mr Lowah face to face until 11 July
Allner was aware that Mr Lowah had a reputation of being aggressive before
taking over as case coordinator. She did not feel that
she had received an
appropriate handover and was understandably apprehensive about managing such a
volatile client in the circumstances.
This impacted on her engagement with
Mr Lowah which was at its highest, brief. Due to these concerns, Ms Allner
organised for Mr
Lowah to receive his depot on 11 April 2017 in a more
secure environment with a number of staff present.
second occasion that Mr Lowah’s depot medication was ceased was on
11 April 2017. The decision to do so was made by Dr
Giannakoureas
after he had been alerted to a disturbance caused by Mr Lowah who was
resisting his depot medication. A Code Black
was called. Mr Lowah did
receive his depot injection that day, notwithstanding his objections.
Dr Giannakoureas
was the supervising consultant psychiatrist to Dr Matti and had spoken to him
Dr Giannakoureas was also the
treating psychiatrist of Mr Lowah’s mother (Ms Buer) and was
aware of some of his background.
However, he had not met Mr Lowah before
11 April 2017. On this day, Dr Giannakoureas responded to the disturbance,
spoke to Mr
Lowah, assumed the role of consultant psychiatrist and ceased
the depot medication. Ms Buer had also requested that her son’s
depot medication be stopped. Both Ms Buer and Mr Lowah expressed the
view that if the depot continued he was at risk of suicide.
The decision to
stop the depot injections at this time was not inappropriate based on the
circumstances of the day. However, the
decision was not appropriately
implemented.
Giannakoureas did not reject the previous diagnosis of schizophrenia, rather he
considered that Mr Lowah’s behaviour at the
time may have been
influenced by illicit drug use and borderline traits and was prepared to trial
him off the medication. This was
a questioning of the diagnosis rather than a
Dr Giannakoureas failed to do on 11 April 2017 was establish a structured
management plan to ensure that Mr Lowah maintained
his promise to abstain
from drug use and attend appointments. Furthermore, Dr Giannakoureas did
not review Mr Lowah’s clinical
records, which would have been
available to him and detailed a concerning pattern when the depot medication was
stopped, as prophesied
by Dr Watson in his letter of February 2015. These
omissions were failings on the part of Dr Giannakoureas and saw the
destabilisation
of Mr Lowah’s mental health, putting him on a
downward trajectory.
consequence of this destabilisation was to place Mr Lowah at a baseline of
mental illness that later interventions were not able
to address, including the
reinstitution of antipsychotic depot medication in November 2017.
28 April 2017, Mr Lowah attended an appointment with a doctor at the MAC
team and admitted he had been smoking cannabis. That
was the last appointment
he attended for the next 10 weeks.
mid to late May 2017, the effects of Mr Lowah’s depot injection
administered on 11 April 2017 had worn off.
mid-May and 11 July 2017 there were not less than 17 documented concerns raised
in relation to Mr Lowah, with no eyes on him
by the MAC team. These
included concerns raised by outside agencies who were providing support in the
community, non-attendances
with the MAC team and at times active avoidance,
reports of damage caused by Mr Lowah to his accommodation, threats of
eviction from
accommodation, reports of Mr Lowah smoking cannabis,
withdrawal of the community support package and self-inflicted injuries to his
hand. Ms Buer also conveyed to a member of the MAC team that she thought
her son should be recommenced on depot injections.
concerns should have seen the enforcement of conditions of the Level 2 CTO,
which were still in place (primarily Order 6), to
have Mr Lowah assessed in
a treatment centre to reassess his mental state and the need for medication.
response to the reported concerns (or lack thereof) revealed a pervading change
in narrative around Mr Lowah’s illness (from
schizophrenia to
behaviours brought about by borderline personality traits), particularly by his
case coordinator, Ms Allner. Without
Dr Giannakoureas having set
certain expectations with his team regarding Mr Lowah’s
non-compliance, the reports of concern
were dismissed as non-mental illness
related antisocial behaviour.
did not accurately record concerns of community-based teams in the clinical
records available to Dr Giannakoureas and the
other members of the MAC
team. Ms Allner made positive assessments of Mr Lowah’s mental
state in the clinical records which
were not based on structured assessments or
face to face interactions.
was experiencing psychotic symptoms from at least July 2017 and as early as May
2017 when the therapeutic effect of the depot
injection administered on 11 April
2017 had ceased. As Mr Lowah had a level of insight into his illness, and
actively masked symptoms,
his psychosis was difficult to detect, even by a
number of senior consultant psychiatrists who assessed Mr Lowah in
different mental
health settings.
11 July 2017, Mr Lowah attended an appointment with Dr Giannakoureas
and Ms Allner. Ms Buer accompanied her son. This was the
appointment Mr Lowah had attended with him in three months and the first
time he had formally met Ms Allner in person. Despite
having demonstrably
failed to adhere to the agreement made with Dr Giannakoureas in April 2017,
Mr Lowah’s depot medication
was not reinstated, nor was a structured
plan initiated to monitor compliance. Instead, Dr Giannakoureas found
mental state to be ‘
response was wholly inadequate and reinforced the permeation of the narrative
that Mr Lowah’s behaviour was due
to borderline personality traits.
Mr Lowah should have been recommenced on depot medication at this time.
following day, 12 July 2017, Mr Lowah was conveyed by ambulance in a mental
health safety net to the Noarlunga Health Service
after exhibiting agitated,
paranoid and self-harming behaviours and having smoked cannabis. He was
detained under an ITO and remained
too unwell to be assessed until the following
day. Mr Lowah was transferred to a secure ward in the Margaret Tobin
to this assessment taking place, Ms Allner conveyed information to the
clinicians at the Margaret Tobin Centre which was inaccurate
and incomplete,
namely that Mr Lowah’s depot had been ceased as all presentations
were likely secondary to personality disorder
and behavioural misconduct.
Further, that his current presentation was not out of character and that
antipsychotics had not helped
in the past.
ultimately assessed Mr Lowah’s presentation as most consistent with
poor impulse control and emotional dysregulation,
secondary to borderline
personality disorder/antisocial personality disorder with no current evidence of
psychosis. The ITO was
revoked and he was discharged back into the
placed weight on Ms Allner’s incorrect information and altered
narrative around Mr Lowah’s illness. Dr Nance
was entitled to
do so, believing that Ms Allner possessed a longitudinal perspective on
Mr Lowah’s mental health history.
Unbeknownst to Dr Nance, she did
not. Dr Nance also placed weight on the assessment of
Dr Giannakoureas that only a few days before,
Mr Lowah’s mental
state was ‘
’. This influenced Dr Nance in his
assessment of Mr Lowah on 13 July 2017. It is probable that Mr Lowah
was psychotic on this
day, but the diagnostic overshadowing and incorrect
information clouded the assessment.
who initiated Mr Lowah’s transfer to hospital the day before, should
have been contacted by Drs Wang and Nance for
collateral information. That was
an omission on their part.
Ms Buer been contacted at this time, it is probable that she would have
communicated her view that Mr Lowah be reinstated on depot
injections, as
she had expressed to a member of the MAC team and a member of Junction Housing.
Dr Nance would have placed importance
on this information.
to the change in narrative around Mr Lowah’s illness and the
subsequent assessments made that he was not suffering a psychotic
illness, he
was discharged from the MAC team after his continued non-attendance.
Mr Lowah was evicted from his housing and became
destabilised him and his mental health.
assaulted two individuals unknown to him on 31 August 2017 at different times in
unprovoked circumstances. On the first
occasion, he was granted police bail and
the second he was conveyed to the Royal Adelaide Hospital due to concerns that
he was psychotic.
He was assessed by Dr Davis and placed under a Level 1 ITO.
was a direct causal link between these assaults and the cessation of the depot
injections which saw a deterioration in Mr Lowah’s
mental health and
an increase in aggression.
was transferred from the Royal Adelaide to James Nash House and assessed by
Dr Furst and then Dr Raeside. Mr Lowah remained
at James Nash House
for five days with the ultimate diagnosis by Dr Raeside being antisocial
personality disorder with likely drug
induced psychosis. Depot medication was
not reinstated. The Level 2 CTO expired the day before he was discharged to
mental health continued to deteriorate once in the prison environment on remand.
This was reported on by the HDU
staff and when Mr Lowah refused to start
depot medication, he was transferred back to James Nash House.
in James Nash House, Mr Lowah was assessed by Dr Burgess to have suffered a
relapse of schizophrenia secondary to planned cessation
of antipsychotic. The
depot medication was reinstituted, and an application was made for a Level 2
an improvement in his mental state and short-term reduction in his levels of
hostility and aggression following the reintroduction
of antipsychotic depot
medication, Mr Lowah’s illness had deteriorated to a point where the
reintroduction did not adequately
treat his psychotic symptoms which persisted
was transferred back to the HDU of Yatala after he repeatedly expressed a desire
to be back in an environment where he could
smoke cigarettes.
was sentenced to a period of 12 months and 14 days imprisonment on
12 December 2017, with his sentence being backdated to
31 August 2017 when
he was taken into custody. Mr Lowah’s mental competence to commit
these offences was not subject to an
investigation. Had this occurred, it is
probable that he would have been found mentally incompetent in relation to the
two assaults
on 31 August 2017 and he would have been treated in a forensic
mental health setting with the focus of his term on treatment of his
illness and
rehabilitation. Following his release from the custody of the Minister for
Health, Mr Lowah would have been released
on Licence with conditions
similar to that imposed in 2015. This would have ensured structure and
supervision in the community.
spent the remainder of his term of imprisonment being moved between general
units, the HDU and G Division due to varying
levels of irritability,
aggression, paranoia and bizarre behaviour. The JIS records reflected a number
of concerning events documented
by prison staff. These included Mr Lowah
threatening to harm and kill other prisoners and staff, a suicide attempt,
comments that
other prisoners and staff could read his mind or were talking
June 2018, Mr Lowah applied for and was refused parole. The Parole Board
considered Mr Lowah to be such a significant risk to
the community as to be
unsuitable for release on parole. The Parole Board raised the need for
Mr Lowah to have semi-structured accommodation
upon his release at the end
of his term of imprisonment, and to manage Mr Lowah in the community with a
multi-disciplinary approach.
This did not occur, notwithstanding considerable
Health staff members Ms Zulian and Mr Williams valiantly attempted to
find Mr Lowah accommodation and support in the community
with multiple
agencies and organisations being contacted. These efforts were primarily
hampered by Mr Lowah’s refusal to engage
with the process. This was
due to Mr Lowah’s poor mental health which in turn affected his
cognition causing him to be difficult
to engage and make decisions.
visiting psychiatrist, Dr Jennings, saw Mr Lowah on three occasions during
this period in custody, one where he was housed in
G Division. The clinics
conducted by the visiting psychiatrist were overbooked and disorganised without
a designated room for assessments
to take place.
or about 5 September 2018, Ms Zulian and Mr Williams requested that
Dr Jennings review Mr Lowah in order for him to be assessed
possible detention under an ITO. Both had concerns that Mr Lowah may have
been detainable due to his behaviour in the months
leading up to this request.
Both Ms Zulian and Mr Williams feared that Mr Lowah may pose a
risk to others when released at the end
of his prison term and that a period of
mental health detention with treatment may be beneficial.
5 September 2018, Dr Jennings saw Mr Lowah as requested. This was the
third assessment. Dr Jennings did not assess Mr Lowah as
detention under an ITO. His notes were brief and did not document any concerns
regarding Mr Lowah’s mental state.
Mr Lowah, who was suffering
psychotic symptoms, was able to mask these symptoms in the assessment.
Jennings did not have access to the Justice Information System entries relating
to the day to day contact Mr Lowah had with staff
and fellow prisoners.
This significantly impacted Dr Jennings’ ability to make an informed
and accurate assessment of Mr Lowah
and was a missed opportunity to have
considered concerning collateral information in the assessment.
Mr Lowah been detained by Dr Jennings, he would have been transferred to
James Nash House for review by specialist forensic psychiatrists.
have delayed his release into the community and assisted in improving his mental
state and his ability to make informed
decisions about his own wellbeing,
including accommodation. This was the final opportunity to have intervened in
improving Mr Lowah’s
mental health trajectory before
Ms Foster’s death.
provided Mr Lowah with advice to implement an emergency strategy if he felt
at risk of self-harm or harming someone else
when released from prison on
14 September 2018. This was appropriate advice.
Parole Board, Ms Zulian and Mr Williams held fears for the safety of
others with Mr Lowah being released into the community with
no supervisory
oversight and no fixed accommodation. These fears were well founded. The
efforts of Ms Zulian and Mr Williams in
attempting to address these
concerns were admirable.
the day of release, Mr Lowah was conveyed by a DCS volunteer to the office
of Helping Young People Achieve (HYPA). He was asked
to wait to see someone but
left the office before that could occur and travelled to Noarlunga by train.
the early hours of 15 September 2018, Mr Lowah contacted SAAS from a public
phone box and informed the operator that he wanted
to go to hospital as he felt
he was going to start hurting people. Mr Lowah waited in that location for
approximately two hours
for the ambulance to arrive and was conveyed to the
Noarlunga Hospital ED. Mr Lowah was following the advice of
was assessed by a psychiatric registrar and a consultant psychiatrist
(Drs Taylor and Singh). They were aware that Mr Lowah
had recently
been assessed by a psychiatrist in prison who had found his mental state to be
stable. Further, that he was in receipt
of a regular depot antipsychotic and
subject to a Level 2 CTO. This information was reassuring in the context of
considering an
ITO and admission to a mental health facility.
Taylor and Singh assessed Mr Lowah as not suffering from a major mental
illness and that his presentation was more in keeping
with secondary gain,
namely a place to sleep.
was able to mask his psychotic features during the assessment. Further, the
information relied upon by the assessing doctors
was infected by the assessment
of Dr Jennings, which in turn was hampered by an inability to access
relevant collateral information.
Accordingly, it was not unreasonable for Drs
Taylor and Singh to arrive at the conclusion to discharge Mr Lowah without
any intervention.
discharge from the Noarlunga Hospital ED, Mr Lowah spent some time in
Noarlunga and then travelled to Goolwa to stay with his
father, Shaun
was assisted by a family friend (Ms May) to obtain identification, establish
Centrelink benefits and organise a bank account.
Prior to Ms May becoming
involved and contacting Yatala, Mr Lowah’s whereabouts were unknown
to the community mental health
mental health nurse from Southern Fleurieu Community Health Service made contact
with Mr Lowah and organised for a prescription
to be filled for his next
depot injection which was due on 26 October 2018.
day Mr Lowah’s payments were established, he immediately left his
father’s place and travelled back to Noarlunga.
Mr Lowah had no
particular destination in mind but had formed the intention to either commit
suicide or to kill someone. Tragically
for Ms Foster, it was the latter
plan that he acted on.
the time of Ms Foster’s death, Mr Lowah’s antipsychotic medication
was up to date. However, it was not adequately
addressing his symptoms.
Recommendations
section 25(2)
Coroners Act 2003
I am empowered to make
recommendations that in the opinion of the Court might prevent, or reduce the
likelihood of, a recurrence
of an event similar to the event that was the
subject of the Inquest.
the course of the Inquest there were unprompted comments from several witnesses
in South Australia and
nationally. An interesting perspective was volunteered by DSU Blandford,
who been a police officer for 43
years. In the context of managing someone like
Mr Lowah in the community with just a CTO in place, he said the
‘And again I'm not a mental health expert, medical,
I don't have a medical degree, so it's not my area of expertise. But what
would say after 43 years is that people who are suffering mental health crisis
or mental health issues are not thinking rationally
and they're not making good
decisions. And what we see in our world on the front line is people who don't
maintain their medication
regimen, who go off the rails and don't recognise that
in fact going off the rails until they hit crisis. And 43 years of policing
taking people backwards and forwards once upon a time to Glenside where they
were actually given asylum and care to now a public
hospital or a GP, they are
out before my people have finished the paperwork because there are no secure
beds, there are not facilities
for people who are in crisis who need a moment or
a couple of days to actually get back onto a regimen where they recognise that
where they thought they were they weren't at all, and that there is in fact a
stable life which they can then be maintained and helped
to maintain. Now, it
seems to me if a person who has been found mentally incompetent for a criminal
offence in his past and has
continued to demonstrate a mental illness throughout
his incarceration is then suddenly released out of a structure with no clear
intention of actually wanting to manage their life or do anything better and is
left to their own device on the street, I'm not quite
sure anybody expects the
end result to be.’
Sullivan referred to the chronic under resourcing of services nationally, and
scandalously limited resources available for prisoners when they
were released
With a particular
focus on accommodation for released prisoners (as was relevant with
Mr Lowah) A/P Sullivan opined that accommodation
is known to be critical to
treatment, stability of mental state and reintegration of people recently
released from prison.
Dr Furst agreed that accommodation links the community services to provide
the wrap around treatment that people like Mr Lowah
Intertwined
with the issue of resources for community-based supports and housing was the
issue of the fragmented information sharing
capabilities between the various
agencies managing mentally unwell individuals in the prison system, health
system, mental health
system and the community. This was the most concerning
issue at play according to Dr Furst. Mr Lowah was able to, at times,
the more florid symptoms of his illness, leaving the assessing
psychiatrists to rely on the incomplete and limited information which
available to them at that time. It must be remembered that when psychiatrists
such as Dr Jennings and Dr Singh (and Dr Taylor)
assessed Mr Lowah they
were doing so in busy treatment settings with limited information and
significant time pressures. With the
move away from institutionalised care (as
referred to by DSU Blandford) to community-based care, the systems
supporting the care
must speak to each other. This is of course an enormously
complex and resource heavy endeavour. In the meantime, consideration
legislative mechanism enabling a level of supervision upon release (ESO) is a
practical safety net for high-risk prisoners being
released into the community
with no other supervising orders in place.
therefore refer to the evidence of Chief Superintendent Blandford and Chief
Inspector Gray (as well as the Commissioners Briefing
that the Attorney-General consider broadening the definition of
high risk offender
’ for an Extended Supervision Order in the
Criminal Law (High Risk Offenders) Act 2015
(SA), with the additional category
of public risk and/or public interest for those offenders who have been
identified as an unacceptable
risk to the community, such as those with a
chronic mental health illness who display violent behaviours, like
that the Chief Executive of the Department for Correctional
Services consider providing to SA Prison Health staff, and visiting prison
specialists, read only direct access to the Justice Information System to assist
with the mental health/psychiatric assessment of
addition, and in light of the above recommendation, I
referral forms for the visiting psychiatrists, an example of which is seen in
the SAPHS clinical records
for Mr Lowah and written by Dr L Noakes, have an area designated within the form
to make reference to dates and times of specific
episodes of concerning mental
health behaviour as recorded in the Justice Information System.
Acknowledgments
acknowledge the valuable assistance of both special counsel, Mr Peter Longson
who opened the Inquest and was counsel assisting for
10 days, and Ms Emma Roper
who seamlessly assumed conduct of the part-heard and complex Inquest.
acknowledge the comprehensive investigation conducted by Detective Brevet
Sergeant Tyson Mobbs, and his attendance and assistance
throughout the Inquest
would like to convey my sincere condolences to the family and loved ones of
Michelle Foster.
Keywords: Homicide; Psychiatric/Mental Illness
Exhibit C31, Annexure A (ROI),
pages 41-42
Exhibit C20, page
Exhibit C31, Annexure A
(ROI), pages 41-42
The physical
act of committing a crime
intention or knowledge of wrongdoing that constitutes part of a crime
This letter was an almost
verbatim repeat of a report that Dr Watson provided to the Magistrates
Court dated 28 January 2015 in support
of a mental incompetence defence for
Mr Lowah for the offences which precipitated Mr Lowah’s six-week
in-patient stay at the
Boylan Ward (WCH) after being apprehended on his way to
kill his father
Exhibit C55,
page 319, emphasis added
slow-release form of medication that is administered intravenously
Exhibit C55, page
Transcript, page 939
Exhibit C56, pages 42 and
Dr Michael Nance, Dr Paul
Furst, Dr Craig Raeside
Exhibit C3, Record of
Interview at Christies Police Station
Exhibit C3a
Exhibit C3b
Blood between the inner
lining of the skull and the brain
Blood on the surface of the
Amyloid precursor
The structure that joins the
two sides of the brain
The part of the brain that
connects with the spinal cord to the body and contains vital centres that
regulate breathing and circulation
Exhibit C1a, page
Affidavit of Jamie William
Dayman dated
Exhibit C63; Inquest
Exhibit C71
Exhibit C7, page 11
Exhibit C7, page
Exhibit C14a, Annexure
Exhibit C14a, Annexure
Exhibit C14a, paragraph
Exhibit C7, page
Exhibit C7, pages
Exhibit C17, page 5
Exhibit C14, page 2
Exhibit C7, paragraph
Exhibit C14a, Annexure A
Addendum affidavit of
Andrea Foster, paragraph 34
Exhibit C56
Legal Services Commission of
South Australia 2024,
Community Treatment Orders
, accessed 4 October
https://www.lawhandbook.sa.gov.au/ch30s04s01.php
Provided that the
conditions set out in
Mental Health Act
Department for Correctional
Services 2024,
, Government of South Australia, accessed 4
October 2024,
https://www.corrections.sa.gov.au/community-corrections/licences
Sections 21
Health Act 2009
Government of South
Australia 2024, Intervention Orders, accessed 4 October 2024,
https://www.sa.gov.au/topics/housing/emergency-shelter-and-homelessness/legal-protection-from-domestic-violence/intervention-orders
Exhibit C59a, pages
Exhibit C41, page 185
Exhibit C41; Transcript page
Exhibit C34b, Annexure B,
pages 8-9 (2012)
Exhibit C41, page 185
Exhibit C35, page 8
Exhibit C35, page 11
Exhibit C41, page 185
Exhibit C55, page 319
Threaten to kill or endanger
life (aggravated), Carry Offensive Weapon, and Unauthorised person to Drive
Motor Vehicle on Road
Exhibit C39, page 129
Exhibit C39, page 128
Exhibit C55a, page 319
Exhibit C39, page 103
Exhibit C41, page 278
August 2017; 15-28 November
Exhibit C59a, pages
Exhibit C52, pages 2-3
Exhibit C52, page 3
A known side effect of
Risperdal Consta is symptomatic hyperprolactinaemia
Transcript, page 938
Exhibit C41, pages
Exhibit C41, page 318
Exhibit C41, pages
Exhibit C41, page 300
Exhibit C41, pages
Exhibit C41, pages
Exhibit C41, pages 215, 225,
268-269 and 311
Exhibit C41, page 275
Exhibit C55a, page
Exhibit C55a, page
Exhibit C55a, pages
10-13; Exhibit C41
C55a, page 31
Transcript, page
Exhibit C55a, page
Exhibit C15, paragraphs
Exhibit C15,
paragraph 38
Exhibit C15a,
paragraph 15; Exhibit C55, page
Exhibit C15, paragraph
Exhibit C55a, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C55a, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C15, paragraph
46 (page 10)
Transcript,
Transcript, page
Exhibit C55a, page 211
(date entered 10.4.17 – this was clearly in error as he attended on
11.4.17 for depot); C55b
Exhibit C15a, paragraph 38
Transcript, page 710
C55, page 319
Exhibit C55,
Exhibit C55, page
Exhibit C55, page 155
– Dr Giannakoureas was part of the clinical review meeting where
Mr Lowah’s referral was discussed
A/P Sullivan,
Exhibit C51a, paragraph 36; Dr Furst, Transcript, page
A/P Sullivan, Exhibit
C51a, paragraph 36; Dr Furst, Transcript, page 619
Team A was tasked with
undertaking emergency assessments of consumers and triaging incoming referrals
to be actioned immediately
or presented to the Multi-Disciplinary Team for
further discussion and review (para
Exhibit C55a, page
Exhibit C55a, page
Affidavit, paragraph
Affidavit, paragraph
Affidavit, paragraph
Affidavit, paragraphs
Affidavit, twice on
28/04/17 (para 150), 24/05/17 (para 210), 13/06/17 (para 232) and 03/07/17 (para
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C55a, page
Exhibit C55a, page
Exhibit C15a,
paragraph 45; Transcript, pages 687-688,
Ms Allner stated that
this note may be on Ms Buer’s CBIS records
Exhibit C55a, page
Exhibit C55a, page
Exhibit C55a, pages
Exhibit C55a, pages
Exhibit C55a, page
Allner. [199].
Allner, [209].
Exhibit C40a, Noarlunga
Health Service Notes of Sharon Buer, dated 25 May 2017, emphasis
Exhibit C71,
paragraph 188
C55a, page 79
C55a, pages 83, 85
Exhibit C55a, page 85
Exhibit C55a, page 89
Exhibit C55a, page 93
Exhibit C63, page 232, email sent on 13 June 2017 at
Exhibit C63, page
231, email sent on 13 June 2017 at
Exhibit C63, page
Exhibit C55a, page
Exhibit C55a, pages
Exhibit C55a,
pages 95, 105
C55a, page 105
C55a, pages 117-121
Exhibit C55a, pages 119
Transcript, page 884
Allner, [255]
Exhibit C55a, page
An adult community
mental health service provided by the SA
Methoxyflurane
– commonly referred to as the ‘Green
C55a, page 129
C55a, page 129
C55a, page 129
C55a, page 129
[273]-[275]
Exhibit C55a,
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C58, page 43;
Exhibit C58a for A3 size version of same
Exhibit C58,
pages 53-54
Exhibit C58,
pages 53-54
Exhibit C58,
Exhibit C58, page
Exhibit C58, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page 697
Transcript, page
Exhibit C55a, pages
Transcript, page
A/P Sullivan explained
that by ‘revoking’ he meant the enforcement of a condition in the
CTO and not the cancelling of
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C55a, page
Email refusing to
return Ms Hastings phone call to another
Exhibit C63,
page 46, emphasis added
Transcript, page 865
Dr Giannakoureas was no
longer working at the Noarlunga Hospital in November 2017, having left in
September of that year. It is acknowledged
he was not the psychiatrist who
discharged Mr Lowah from the
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C63, pages
Exhibit C58,
pages 47-48
Transcript,
Exhibit C59, page
Exhibit C58, page
Exhibit C58, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C58, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C56, page
Exhibit C51a, pages 7,
Transcript, pages
Exhibit C56,
pages 10-11
Exhibit C63,
Exhibit C63,
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C15a,
paragraph 45
Transcript,
Exhibit C55a,
pages 137, 151, 153, 161,
Exhibit C55a, page
Exhibit C55a, pages
145, 155; Exhibit C41, page
Exhibit C55a, pages
Exhibit C55a,
Exhibit C34b
Annexure B, pages 2, 4-5
Exhibit C39, page 33
Exhibit C55a, page 169
Exhibit C55a, page 165
Exhibit C55a, page 201
Exhibit C39, page 33
Exhibit C39, page 33
Exhibit C60, pages 5 and 99-100, emphasis
Exhibit C60, pages
Exhibit C60, page
Exhibit C60, pages
83-84, emphasis added
Exhibit C60, page 28
Exhibit C60, page 28
Exhibit C60, page 88
Exhibit C60, pages 88-89, emphasis
Exhibit C59, page
Exhibit C59, page
132; Exhibit C57, page 25
Exhibit C59, page 142
Exhibit C59a, page 73
Exhibit C59a, pages 71-73
Exhibit C59a, page 151
Exhibit C59a, page 109
Exhibit C41, pages
Exhibit C41, page
Exhibit C59a, page
Exhibit C59a, page
Exhibit C59a, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
As well as other
offences – Contravene Intervention Order x 2
Exhibit C39, pages 33,
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, pages
559, 560-562
high-risk prisoners (including violent behaviour and suicide risk)
A Statewide Mental Health
38 bed facility for acute and high needs prisoners (including mental health and
aged care) with multi-disciplinary
staff (social workers, psychologists,
occupational therapists and aged care
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C44, paragraph
Exhibit C44, paragraph
Exhibit C41, page
Exhibit C43,
paragraph 4
Prisoner’s deemed to be of high risk of self-harm or suicide during their
admission process are assessed by
HRAT to determine whether they are low,
moderate or high risk in order to establish appropriate arrangements to be made
accommodation in
Exhibit C43,
paragraph 5
Exhibit C52,
paragraphs 4-9
C52, paragraph 11
Exhibit C52, paragraph 18
Exhibit C52, paragraph 12
Exhibit C52, paragraph 13
Transcript, page 63 (Williams), pages 32, 33, 35-37 (Zulian); Exhibit C43, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C38, page
Exhibit C38, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C38, Volume 1,
Part I, pages 47-48
Exhibit C38
Transcript,
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, pages
Transcript, page
Transcript, pages 91,
Transcript, page 81;
Exhibit C43, page 9
Exhibit C43, paragraph 19
Exhibit C43, paragraph 19
Transcript, page 577
Exhibit C56a, paragraph
Exhibit C56a,
paragraph 13
Transcript,
Transcript, page
15/3/2018, 10/4/2018, 12/4/2018,
Transcript,
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C73, Protocol
for the Exchange of Information between SA Health and the DCS,
Exhibit C73, page 3,
Transcript,
Transcript, page
Exhibit C43, Annexure
A, emphasis added
Transcript, page
The Public Protection
Branch was created and brought under the Offender Management Unit along with the
SAPOL Corrections Section
- It acts as a conduit between Correctional Services
and the Parole Board
Exhibit C47a
C47a, page 1
Transcript,
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page 61
(Williams); Transcript, pages 245-246
(Blandford)
Criminal Law
(High Risk Offenders) Act 2015
Transcript, page
Criminal Law (High
Risk Offenders) Act 2015
Criminal Law (High
Risk Offenders) Act 2015
https://www.lawhandbook.sa.gov.au/ch13s08s05.php
Criminal Law (High Risk
Offenders) Act 2015
ss 10(1)(a)
-(c), (d), (e), (3) (4), (2),
Criminal Law (High
Risk Offenders) Act 2015
Criminal Law (High
Risk Offenders) Act 2015
Transcript,
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C43,
paragraph 18; Transcript, page
Exhibit C38, Volume 2,
C40, page 33
Exhibit C40,
Exhibit C40, page
Exhibit C40, page
Exhibit C48, page
Transcript, page 380
(Singh), Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C56, page
Exhibit C56, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C56a, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C45,
paragraph 21
Exhibit C53,
paragraph 7
Exhibit C38
Exhibit C53, paragraph 17
Exhibit C46, Annexure A, page
Exhibit C46, Annexure
Exhibit C46,
Annexure A, page 2
Exhibit C46, Annexure A
Exhibit C45, paragraph 30
Exhibit C45, paragraph 30
Exhibit C56, paragraph
Exhibit C56,
paragraph 9.16
C56, paragraph 14.4
Exhibit C39, page 128
Transcript, pages 255-256
Exhibit C51, paragraph 75
Exhibit C51, paragraph 46
Transcript, page 563
Exhibit C38, page 95
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (998 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (989 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter