URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SARTT/2014/6615.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:04:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
South Australian Housing Trust v Poland [2014] SARTT 6615 (28 November 2014)
REASONS FOR ORDER OF THE TRIBUNAL MADE ON 28 NOVEMBER
27 NOVEMBER 2014 at ADELAIDE
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN HOUSING TRUST v POLAND
(RT14/6615)
Frustration – property substantially burnt by fire. Property boarded up
because it was a safety hazard. The tenant was living
in a car or at
friends’ houses. This was the second house which the tenant had been
renting from the SAHT in which there was
a fire within a period of 12 months.
The SAHT brought an application to terminate the tenancy on the grounds of:-
Frustration;
tenant’s breach of her agreement;
tenant’s conduct.
No order was made to terminate the
agreement. This order is an interim order discussing the multiple issues raised
by the application.
Ultimately the SAHT agreed to rehouse the tenant.
On 25 November 2014 an application was lodged with the Tribunal by the
landlord. It seeks an order for termination of the residential
RESIDENTIAL TENANCY AGREEMENT DETAILS
Rental premises: 7 Kingsbury Street Davoren Park SA 5113
South Australian Housing Trust
Tenant: Tracey Poland
commenced: 26 July 2014
Rent: Rent is payable under the agreement
SWORN EVIDENCE
was given in person by:
Representatives of the
LANDLORD Todd Wierenga, Darren
TENANT Tracey Poland
The application
The application seeks termination of the tenancy due to a fire at the
premises which occurred on 3 November 2014 and which has rendered
the premises
uninhabitable.
The application also seeks termination of the tenancy because the tenant is
in breach of her tenancy agreement by not residing in
the property.
The evidence and submissions of the parties
The evidence and submissions of the Trust representatives
In summary the Trust raised three grounds for the termination of Ms
Poland’s tenancy.
Ground 1 Frustration
Mr Wierenga submitted that the Tribunal should consider that the tenancy is
terminated due to frustration – as the property
is uninhabitable, it is no
longer possible for the Trust to perform its obligations under the tenancy
agreement. Although no written
report was available at the hearing, Mr Wierenga
submitted photos of the property which show extensive damage to the property. He
said that the property has been boarded up so that no person can gain access for
safety reasons.
Ground 2 The tenant’s breach of her tenancy agreement
Mr Wierenga submitted that the tenant has admitted that she is unable to
reside in the property since the fire and she has informed
Trust officers that
she has been living in her car or staying with friends.
Mr Wierenga submitted that accordingly Ms Poland is in breach of her tenancy
agreement as she is required to personally reside in
the property.
Ground 3 The tenant’s conduct
Mr Wierenga gave evidence that Ms Poland had been relocated to this property
after a fire in another Trust property occupied by Ms
Poland. He said that the
first fire was lit by an associate of Ms Poland’s, and that Ms Poland had
continued to associate with
the same group of people after her relocation. Mr
Wierenga’s evidence was that this fire had been deliberately lit but the
police have been unable to identify a suspect. He said that at this stage Ms
Poland is not a suspect.
Mr Wierenga also submitted that Ms Poland has been at times aggressive
towards Trust staff and on one occasion recently she threw
a can at a Trust
officer. Mr Pettrey gave evidence that he was present when Ms Poland threw the
can at a Trust officer.
The evidence and submissions of the tenant
Ground 1 Frustration
Ms Poland said that she did not want to give up her Trust property. She said
that she wants the Trust to relocate her but they will
not do so. She said that
she is unable to afford private accommodation.
Ms Poland said that she has 5 children and although the children do not live
with her, she has access to them but while she has nowhere
to live she is unable
to have access to her children.
Ground 2 The tenant’s breach of her tenancy agreement
Ms Poland agreed that she has been living in her car or somewhere other than
the property. She said that she returned to the property
on one occasion to
obtain some of her belongings.
Ground 3 The tenant’s conduct
Ms Poland said that the fire at her previous property was caused by a person
called Matthew Haskell who is now incarcerated. She said
that she has been
telling the Trust that she is in danger because of Mr Haskell’s family but
they have ignored her requests
to be relocated on the grounds of personal
She said that she did not know who lit this fire, but there were at least 2
other fires in the area on the same night and all three
fires occurred in Trust
properties.
Conclusions and Findings
Ground 1 Frustration
I agree with the Trust that the property is no longer inhabitable. The
question is whether this means that the tenancy agreement has
frustrated.
Residential Tenancies Act, 1995
(the Act) has recently been amended to
allow for either a landlord or tenant to serve notice terminating a residential
tenancy agreement
in certain circumstances. Those circumstances include the
situation “
where a property has been destroyed or rendered
uninhabitable
Unfortunately those provisions do not apply to the Trust. The Act
specifically states that only certain provisions apply to the Trust
provisions do not include the frustration
provisions.
However, under Section 93 of the Act the Trust may apply to the Tribunal for
an order for possession of the premises if:-
a residential tenancy is terminated by notice of termination
under this Act or, in the case of a tenancy under which the South Australian
Housing Trust is landlord, under the residential tenancy
I consider that if the agreement has terminated because of frustration at
common law, then the Trust is entitled to apply to the Tribunal
for an order for
possession under Section 93 of the Act.
The law concerning frustration at common law is complex and there has been
much written about it. I will state a few basic principles
relevant to this
The basic principle of frustration is as follows:-
Frustration occurs whenever the law recognizes that without
default of either party a contractual obligation has become incapable
performed because the circumstances in which performance is called for would
render it a thing radically different from
that which was undertaken by the
Where frustration occurs it automatically discharges the parties from the
obligation to perform their contractual
frustration is self-induced the parties are not discharged but the disadvantaged
party may claim that the contract has been
repudiated.
destruction of the subject matter of the contract may or may not lead to the
frustration of the whole or part of the
The mere fact that an event deprives a party to a contract of the benefit
which that party expected to receive does not necessarily
mean that the contract
is frustrated, even where performance may be physically impossible. The courts
look at whether or not the
obligation is an “absolute”
Where there is a written contract, the question of whether or not frustration
has occurred will depend on the construction of the
contract. If the parties
have expressly dealt with the event relied upon as frustrating the contract then
the position is governed
by the terms of the
If the contract contains provisions which are sufficiently clear as to the
consequences that are to flow upon the occurrence of a
particular event, then
frustration will not
The question
comes down to one of interpretation of the contract – sometimes the
contract may be incomplete or the contract
will include a term which effectively
discharges a party in the circumstances.
In this matter the issue is the proper construction of Clause 8(a) of the
tenancy agreement which states as follows:-
if in the opinion of the Trust, the accommodation provided becomes
inappropriate to the requirements of the tenant, because of the
size of the
premises or some other factor associated with the premises, the tenant will upon
request by the Trust transfer to more
appropriate Trust
accommodation;”
It is clear from Clause 8(a) that the tenancy agreement specifically provides
for the Trust to provide the tenant with accommodation,
not necessarily at 7
Kingsbury Street Davoren Park should that accommodation become unsuitable (in
the opinion of the Trust).
Both parties agree that the property is no longer suitable for the tenant to
occupy. The tenant is requesting that the Trust provides
her with alternative
accommodation. The Trust would prefer not to do so.
In these circumstances I am reluctant to conclude that the contract has been
terminated by frustration. I consider that there must
be a reasonable argument
that Clause 8(a) applies in these circumstances to prevent the Trust from
claiming that the tenancy agreement
is terminated as (by virtue of Clause 8(a))
the Trust is obliged to provide Ms Poland with alternative accommodation.
I will adjourn the application for the Trust to further consider this aspect
of the matter and I invite further submissions from them
on this point. The
views I have expressed above are preliminary only and subject to their further
submissions.
Ground 2 The tenant’s breach of her tenancy agreement
Section 93 of the Act allows the Tribunal to make an order for possession of
a Trust property where the tenant is in breach of their
tenancy agreement. In
this case it is the tenant’s obligation to personally reside in the
The purpose of this power is to terminate a tenancy where a tenant is at
fault. In this matter, the tenant’s failure to occupy
the premises appears
to be through no fault of her own. I consider that to make an order for
possession in these circumstances would
also be contrary to Section 32(2) of the
Act which requires the Tribunal to according to equity and good conscience.
Therefore at this stage (subject to further submissions by the Trust on this
issue) I indicate a preliminary view that I am unlikely
to make an order for
possession on this basis.
Ground 3 The tenant’s conduct
The Tribunal has power to terminate a Trust tenancy on the basis of the
tenant’s conduct under Section 87 of the Act and under
Section 90 of the
It may well be that the Trust has evidence to substantiate such a claim
however at the moment I do not consider that the application
of the Trust has
thoroughly canvassed this issue. (I expect that is because the Trust expected
the tenancy would be terminated otherwise).
The rules of procedural fairness require the tenant to be notified of the
claims made against her so that she has a proper opportunity
to respond. I
invite the trust to make further submissions about this ground at the adjourned
hearing also and it may be that a further
adjournment is necessary if the Trust
is to pursue this aspect of the matter so that the claim may be properly
formulated.
Because of these complexities I will adjourn further consideration of the
application and issue directions. For safety reasons, I
will also make a
restraining order so that the tenant does not attend at the property unless a
Trust officer is present.
Trust will undertake investigations about the other fires which the tenant said
occurred in Trust properties at Davoren Park on
3 November 2014 and report back
to the Tribunal about those fires at the next hearing.
tenant will not attend at the property at 7 Kingsbury Street Davoren Park
without an officer of the Trust being in attendance
consideration of the application is adjourned to 2.00pm on Friday 5 December
2014. Notices of hearing will be sent to the
parties and to the Tenants’
Information and Advocacy Service
Presiding Member
Section 83B and
Section 86B of the
Section 5(2)
Contractors Ltd v Fareham UDC
[1956] UKHL 3
Scanlan’s New Neon Ltd v Tooheys Ltd
[1943] HCA 43
(1943) 67 CLR 169
Bank Line Ltd
v Arthur Capet & Co
[1918] UKHL 1
(1919) AC 435
Goldsbrough
Mort & Co Ltd Carter
[1914] HCA 80
(1914) 19 CLR
[1863] EngR 526
(1863) 3 B & S 826
Ltd v Arthur Capel & Co
(1919)AC 435 at
Clause Neon
Ltd v Hardie
(1970) Qd R 93
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.24 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter