URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWPRP/2015/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:11:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
RSL Care v WorkCover [2015] SAWPRP 1 (29 January 2015)
[2015] SAWPRP 1
WORKCOVER PREMIUM REVIEW PANEL
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
RSL CARE SOUTH AUSTRALIA INC.
No. E01563805 — file refs 201065516, 201721461, 201730198)
(Applicant)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION OF SOUTH
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
REMARKS ON ADJOURNMENT WITH DIRECTIONS
29 JANUARY 2015
Applications for review — statutory payment — employer
considering assessments unreasonable — employer contending
injuries included in claims history unreasonably affecting premium — two
claims before Workers Compensation Tribunal
and lengthy adjournment sought until
Tribunal proceedings resolved — observations on speed with which
applications before Panel
should proceed — directions as to information to
be produced before lengthy adjournment granted —
section 72M
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
— section 157,
regulation 4
Arrangements)(Administration) Regulations 2015
Cases referred to:
Business S.A. v. WorkCover
[2014] SAWPRP 2
Smith’s Snackfood Company v. Workcover and Tauss
(1994) 178 LSJS 196
6 WCATR 339
REMARKS ON ADJOURNMENT
Introduction
applicant employer has lodged applications for review pursuant to section 72M of
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Act”) dated 11 October 2012, 1 November 2013 and 6 November 2013, seeking
reviews of decisions of the WorkCover
Corporation of South Australia (“the
Corporation”)
respectively
dated 15 August 2012 (the employer’s initial premium for 2012-2013), 16
August 2013 (the employer’s hindsight
premium for 2012-2013) and 20 August
2013 (the employer’s initial premium for 2013-2014).
72M of the Act provides as
(1) If an employer considers that a decision of the Corporation as
(a) the estimate of remuneration that is to be used for the calculation of a
statutory payment; or
(b) the fixing or assessment of a statutory payment; or
(c) the imposition of penalty interest or a fine; or
(d) the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead to
the remission or imposition of a supplementary payment,
is unreasonable, the board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a
statutory payment, penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined
by the board, by the board itself, or by a committee or
person to whom the board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the board has an
absolute discretion as to whether
it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the board may—
(a) alter an estimate of remuneration;
(b) alter a statutory payment or an assessment;
(c) quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
(d) direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
(e) quash or vary a condition imposed by the Corporation.
(5) An application under this section for review of a decision of the
Corporation—
(a) must, if the decision relates to a class of employers, be made within 4
months after notice of the decision was given; or
(b) must, if the decision relates to an individual employer, be made within
2 months after the employer was given notice of the decision,
unless the board (or its delegate) allows an extension of time for making the
application.
Panel is the Board’s delegate for the purpose of a review under section
WorkCover Premium Review Panel Determination 2012
Australian Government Gazette
, 10 May 2012, p.1617). It is to be noted that
the 2012 Determination has been superseded by a new
WorkCover Premium Review
Panel Determination 2014
South Australian Government Gazette
July 2014, p.3200), but clause 1 of Part 9 of that Determination provides that
the 2012 Determination continues to apply to an
application lodged before 26 May
section 157
will be brought into force as
soon as 2 February 2015: see
(Commencement) Proclamation
, 4 December 2014, p.6610), clause 2(3)(za), while the
repeal of section 72M of the 1986 Act will not occur until 1 July 2015. As
two provisions are identical in all significant respects, they appear capable of
operating side by side until then. The change
does not appear to affect these
proceedings.
each of the applications before the Panel, it is alleged by the applicant
employer that its premium has been unreasonably inflated
by the inclusion in its
claims history of claims that ought to have been excluded by virtue of clause
4.1 of Part 6 of the
WorkCover Premium Order (Experience Rating System)
, or, in the case of the third application, of the
Premium Order (Experience Rating System) 2013-14
. The chain of provisions
involved is set out in the Panel’s decision in
Business S.A. v.
[2014] SAWPRP 2
, at [5] – [16].
the case of the first application, claims made by workers I shall refer to as
the first worker, the second worker, the third worker,
and the fourth worker,
have been included in the calculations. The third worker had two claims that
were included in the calculations,
but the overwhelming majority of claims costs
were posted against one of them. The fourth worker also had two claims, but each
them show in the calculations that form part of the reviewable decision as
having claims costs of $0.00.
second application, as I have indicated, refers to the same claims year
(2012-2013) as the first application, but refers to the
, whereas the first application refers to the
initial premium
for that year. As I have understood it, the claims history of an employer is
calculated in regard to claims with a date of injury
earlier than the preceding
31 December, so one would have expected that the list of claims would not change
between initial and hindsight,
although the claims costs would often change.
However, my understanding may be incorrect (and the Panel will hear the parties
that issue as necessary), as several of the claims have dates of injury that
the years of the assessments. For example, the list of claims
that forms part of the second reviewable decision include claims made
second and the fourth worker that occurred during 2012-2013 and were not
included in the first reviewable decision, and also
by a fifth worker, and a
sixth worker, each of which arose during the year in question. However, the same
schedule designates the
claim of the second worker with an “N”,
indicating its claims costs have
been taken into account, contrary to
the coding on the equivalent schedule forming part of the first reviewable
decision. A second
claim with a different injury date is attributed to the
second worker on this schedule, and is designated “Y”, indicating
its claims costs
been taken into account, and this claim appears
with the same designation on the equivalent schedule forming part of the third
third application, seeking a review of the 2013-2014 initial premium, raises the
issue of the claims by the first worker, the
second worker, the third worker,
the fourth worker, the fifth worker and the sixth worker. The schedule titled
“2013-14 Premium
Claims Summary” that forms part of the reviewable
decision again designates the claim of the second worker with an
indicating its claims costs have
been taken into
account. The second worker’s other claim is not listed at all.
three applications have been before me several times for directions and progress
has been slow but not non-existent. Additional
medical material has been
obtained in relation to some of the workers, which may well be of assistance at
review, but has not resulted
in a resolution. There has, however, been some
narrowing of issues, with, for example the Corporation informing me that all
costs in relation to the fourth worker have been booked to an injury
which is conceded to be secondary.
parties agree that the major claims in dispute are those of the second and third
workers. Both of those matters have been made
the subject of notices of dispute
in the Workers Compensation Tribunal. The question whether a claim is for a
primary or secondary
injury, sought to be determined purely for the purpose of a
dispute on the employer’s premium, is not a matter within the jurisdiction
of the Tribunal: see
Smith’s Snackfood Company v. Workcover and
[1994] SAWCAT 65
(1994) 178 LSJS 196
6 WCATR 339
A.65/1994. The Tribunal will often make a finding as to whether an injury is
primary or secondary as a matter incidental to
a dispute over which it does have
a finding in most
circumstances. Moreover, an employer may dispute that a claim
accepted by the claims agent is compensable at all, and if that argument
successful, then it might be expected that claim would cease to be taken into
account as part of the employer’s claims history
for premium calculation
the case of the third worker, there was an indication at one stage that the
dispute before the Tribunal was lodged by the worker
in consequence of the
claim(s) being rejected by WorkCover’s claims agent. However, the precise
ambit of the proceedings before
the Tribunal in relation to both the second and
third workers are not known to me.
have now been asked to adjourn further consideration of the applications before
the Panel until the outcome is known of a trial
before the Tribunal that is
listed to commence in May 2015, but which has, I understand, been listed for
hearing previously and been
adjourned. I understand the trial relates to the
claim(s) of the third worker.
agreed to vacate the directions hearing listed for today on the basis of the
employer’s solicitor’s request (with the
Corporation’s
consent) relayed to me by email, in recognition that this is a no-costs
circumstances that any worthwhile
progress would be made if I required the parties to attend. However, my
agreement was not without
misgivings.
is an informal jurisdiction in which it should be expected that applications for
review will usually be dealt with expeditiously.
While I recognise the
inevitability of waiting for Tribunal proceedings to be completed where these
are expected to seriously affect
the outcome of an application before this
Panel, the progress in this matter is simply unsatisfactory.
mentioned, the adjournment today was related to the trial in May of a matter
relating to the third worker.
in relation to the first worker appears to be complete. In July I was advised
that the employer had produced one or more
statements from the worker that it
contended supported secondary coding. The worker himself now seems to be
uncontactable, but the
written statements, presumably made close to the date of
injury, should be admissible and will need to be weighed by the Panel.
supplementary medical report in relation to the second worker dated 30 June 2014
was tendered to me by the Corporation at a directions
hearing in August. At the
latest directions hearing in October, I was informed that the dispute before the
Workers Compensation Tribunal
in relation to the second worker was still at the
conciliation stage and that the parties were due before a Conciliator the
relation to the fourth worker, I was informed by the Corporation at a directions
hearing in August that all costs had been booked
to the claim that was conceded
to be secondary. If that means that none of the reviewable decisions as to the
employer’s premium
now reflects any claims costs associated with the
fourth worker, I would not expect the Panel could or should take that aspect
claim of the fifth worker, according to the Corporation, involved $420 of claims
costs. Presumably, the difference it makes to
the employer’s premium is
much less than that. There is a limit to the amount that should reasonably be
expended on further
investigating or contesting such a matter.
relation to the sixth worker, I was informed in August that a short-form report
had been obtained by the Corporation from the worker’s
treating medical
practitioner after waiting since December 2013 for it to be prepared. It did not
seem conclusive and I enquired
at that time whether a long-form report should be
considered. The size of the claim and the impact on the premium were raised by
the Corporation as possible reasons why this may not be economic, not to mention
the time the doctor might take to respond after
the previous delay on a
short-form request, and the fact that the claim is now inactive. It is not
ultimately for me to direct the
activities of the parties in gathering evidence,
but the Panel’s duty to enquire does suggest a slightly more active
than a court might take.
the circumstances, it seems reasonable for the Panel to demand greater clarity
before further lengthy adjournments are granted.
particular, where adjournments are sought on the basis of ongoing proceedings
before the Tribunal, copies should be produced by
the party seeking the
adjournment of the relevant notice(s) of dispute and the reviewable decision(s)
the notice(s) relate(s) to.
If the proceedings in the Tribunal proceed to
judicial determination or are subject to lengthy adjournments in the Tribunal,
Panel ought to be informed with some specificity.
applies to the second and third workers in these matters.
relation to the fourth worker, the employer has had plenty of time to confirm
whether it accepts the Corporation’s assertion
that the claim in question
is not now having any impact on its premium. It should now do so.
relation to the fifth worker, the employer has had plenty of time to decide
whether it accepts the Corporation’s statement
and whether it desires to pursue a dispute in relation to that claim. It needs
now to make its position
relation to the sixth worker, the employer has had plenty of time to decide
whether it accepts the Corporation’s statement
claim and whether it desires to pursue a dispute in relation to that claim. The
Corporation has had plenty
of time to decide whether it considers it feasible to
obtain a long-form report or whether it wishes to rely on the evidence already
gathered, in the event that the dispute about the sixth worker’s claim
proceeds to hearing. Both parties now need to make their
positions clear.
have considered whether there is anything to be gained by now hearing the
disputes in relation to all but the second and third workers
and hearing those
disputes after the Tribunal proceedings in each matter are resolved (if it is
still necessary to hear them at that
stage). I have concluded that hearing these
matters in such a piecemeal fashion would only increase the costs of the matters
all involved, and this is a factor to which I should give great weight in a
no-costs jurisdiction where an applicant is unable to
recover costs even if
completely successful. Section 72M(2) operates to ensure that a disputed premium
is paid pending resolution
of the application for review, so the Corporation is
not financially disadvantaged in that sense by an employer’s request for
an adjournment. I note that even if the Panel proceeded to hear aspects of these
matters that are ready for hearing, the proceedings
as a whole would simply be
part-heard and the applications for review would not be finally determined.
Accordingly,
I conclude that the Panel should await resolution of the matters before the
Tribunal before proceeding further with these
applications for review.
for the information I have sought above, I will not further inflate the
parties’ costs by calling the matter on again for
directions at this time.
The information can be set out in a letter or an email to the Panel’s
registry, and the copies of
notices of dispute can be supplied the same
Pursuant to my delegated powers under the Act, I direct the parties to provide
the information and copies of documents I have specified
] above within 28 days of receipt of
these remarks.
will list a further directions date when I receive that material. That date
will, on present indications, be beyond the middle of
From 2 February 2015, the
Corporation’s name will change to the Return to Work Corporation of South
Australia: see
, Schedule 9, clause 8, and
(Commencement) Proclamation 2014
December 2014, p.6610). From that date, the Corporation may act under either
Regulations 2015
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (156 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter