URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SALGCmr/2010/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:01:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hampstead Hotel [2010] SALGCmr 3 (17 August 2010)
LIQUOR LICENSING ACT, 1997
ORDER OF THE LIQUOR
AND GAMBLING COMMISSIONER
Application No:
Licence No:
HAMPSTEAD HOTEL
143 MAIN NORTH EAST ROAD
COLLINSWOOD
LIQUORLAND (QLD) PTY LTD
Effective Date:
17 August 2010
APPLICATION FOR VARIATION TO EXTENDED TRADING
AUTHORISATION
This is an application by the licensee of the Hampstead Hotel situated at 143
Main North East Road, Collinswood made under
of the Act to vary its
extended trading authorisation hours in respect of Areas 2, 3, 8 & 9 and for
the additional hours Monday
to Wednesday 12midnight to 2am the following
The hotel is currently permitted to trade under its extended trading
authorisation in Areas 1 to 4 & 6 to 9:
Thursday to Saturday midnight to 2am
Sunday 8pm to midnight (excluding Christmas Day)
Christmas Day midnight to 1am the following day
The application attracted a Notice of Objection from local Council under
of the Act and proceeded to a contested hearing.
Hotel Location
The licensing authority attended a view of the hotel and adjacent residences
in company with the representatives of the parties.
The hotel is situated at the corner of Main North East Road and Hampstead
Road, Collinswood with the main entry to the premises being
accessible from the
large hotel carpark facing away from both roads. Residential premises abut the
hotel carpark to the northwest.
The hotel provides the full range of services to the public with a
substantial dining area (Area 1) permitting 165 persons, Gaming
Area (Area 2)
125 persons, Lounge Bar (Area 3) 100 persons, Sportsbar (Area 4) 200 persons, a
very large stand alone bottleshop,
Outdoor Courtyard - adjacent to sportsbar
(Area 6) 50 persons, outdoor smokers area - adjacent to sportsbar (Area 7) 10
outdoor smokers area adjacent to Lounge Bar (Area 8) 55 persons,
outdoor smokers area adjacent to Gaming Room (Area 9) 20 persons
allowing for a
total capacity of 725 persons (excluding the bottle shop).
The parts of the premises that form this Application are the Gaming Area
(Area 2), adjacent Lounge Bar (Area 3) and their respective
outdoor smoking
areas (Areas 9 and 8) respectively.
My view of the licensed premises disclosed that both these smoking areas are
situated at the closest points to the nearest residential
property (being a 2
storey apartment/flat complex) approximately 20 metres distant from Area 9.
The Objection
The local Council’s objection was essentially intended to seek
maintenance of the existing hotel hours.
I note that the Development Act Application underpinning this application to
vary the hotel’s extended trading authorisation
was ultimately determined
by way of consent order before the Environment, Resources and Development Court
[No 65 of 2010] in the
following terms:
“ BY CONSENT THE COURT ORDERS that:
A. Development Plan Consent is granted to Development Application NO.
050/476/2009 to vary the gaming area and lounge bar trading
hours at the
Hampstead Hotel located at 127/143 North East Road, Collinswood for a period of
twelve (12) months from the date of
this order, subject to the following
conditions:
combined capacity of Areas 2 and 3 on the plan marked “Exhibit A” is
not to exceed 150 persons at times when those
areas are trading between midnight
and 2am on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday mornings.
combined capacity of Areas 8 and 9 on the plan marked “Exhibit A” is
not to exceed 50 persons at times when the areas
are open to patrons between
midnight and 2am on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday mornings.
noise levels emitted from the premises after midnight when measured at the
nearest noise sensitive location shall not exceed 8dB
above the ambient
background noise in any octave band of the sound spectrum.
licensee must provide approved responsible persons and at least one (1) licensed
security guard to patrol the car park and hotel
environs after midnight until 30
minutes after the closure to ensure that residents are not disturbed by patrons
leaving the premises.
is to be placed near all exits of the hotel and maintained at all times advising
patrons leaving the hotel not to disturb
nearby residents as the patrons depart
the premises.
conditions, where pertinent, of pervious development approvals in respect of the
hotel shall continue to be complied with to the
reasonable satisfaction of
Council at all times.
B. A copy of Exhibit A shall remain on the court
C. The operative date of the consent hereby granted is 10 May
In order to succeed with an application an applicant must satisfy the
requirements of section 44(2) of the Act namely:
44—Extended
trading authorisation
(2) An extended trading authorisation cannot be given unless the
licensing authority is satisfied that—
(a) the grant of the authorisation would be unlikely to result in undue
offence, annoyance, disturbance, noise or inconvenience to
people who, for
example, reside, work, study or worship in the vicinity of the licensed
premises; and
(b) the licensee will implement appropriate policies and practices to
guard against the harmful and hazardous use of liquor.
In Nepeor V Liquor Licensing Commissioner
(1987) 46 SASR 205
the Full Court confirmed that the onus lies with the licensee to satisfy the
prerequisite requirement on the balance of probabilities
even in those
situations where an objector has positively asserted the opposite .
I note the Decision of His Honour Soulio J in the Licensing Court Decision in
Jackpots on Hindley
[2009] SALC 35
(24 December 2009)
In the context of
, “undue” means not appropriate or
suitable, or going beyond what is appropriate warranted or natural, or
excessive. [3]
What is undue must be considered in the context of the
activities of licensed premises. Any resident living near an hotel must
a certain amount of necessary or usual noise from people arriving at or
departing from the premises. [4] It will often be
necessary to expect
residents to tolerate a degree of disturbance or inconvenience, even annoyance
or offence in the interests of
the community’s need for licensed premises.
In Hackney Tavern the Full Court accepted Judge Kelly’s
interpretation of the work “undue” as a correct application
law, when he said: [6]
Any resident who lives nearby an hotel must expect a certain amount of
necessary or usual noise from people either arriving at or,
more likely,
departing from the premises. From time to time one or more of the patrons might
be expected to be noisier than others
- calling out, even yelling and screaming
might occur. In extreme cases a fight or two. These are, in my experience, the
of disorder and inconvenience that might be realistically expected by
nearby residents. ... Disturbance such as loud talking, swearing
perhaps even
the odd screaming, perhaps even a fight or two, even on a relatively regular
basis might not in many cases be classed
as undue. As I have said, people who
live in the vicinity of a hotel must accept some disturbance.
The Evidence
The applicant tendered a Report [Exhibit A2] and also called as a witness Mr
Darren Jurevicius - Acoustical Engineer.
Mr Jurevicius gave evidence that whilst the Environment Protection Noise
Policy 2007 excluded the assessment of noise that may be
the subject of
proceedings under the
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
, that criteria would be useful
to assist in providing some objectivity to the noise assessment in connection
with this application.
In the report prepared by the witness [Exhibit A2] at page 4, the witness set
out the “Noise Policy”:
“3.2 Environment Protection (Noise) Policy 2007
3.2.1. Application of criteria
Development application
Under the Noise EPP, for development authorisation application, the
predicted source noise level for a development should not exceed
the indicative
noise level less 5dB(A) at existing noise-affected premises.
According to the Guidelines for use of the Environment Protection (Noise)
Policy 2007, the criteria for development applications are
5 dB(A) more
stringent than the criteria for assessing general compliance to account for
sensitivity to noise of a noise affect premises to a new noise source;
scope for inclusion of reasonable and practicable noise reduction measures to
new development;
effect of noise.”
and went on in his report as follows:
“....... The Hotel is only seeking to extend its current operating
hours from 12 midnight to 2am on Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays.
sources are only new noise sources at the proposed extension times. The
residents are already exposed to patron noise
and car park noise from the Hotel
seven days a week and up to 2am on Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays. As such,
the residents would
not have an increased sensitivity to the noise from the
proposed extension as they experience it every day and night.
There is no increased scope for inclusion of reasonable and practicable
noise reduction measures as this proposal is not for a new
development but the
use of the existing development for extended hours.
The issue arising from the cumulative effect of noise is where there is
the potential for other developments to be approved which
would increase the
overall noise level in the vicinity of the noise sensitive receptor. The zone
that the residences are located
in and the zones directly adjacent are
Residential with the exception of the Neighbourhood Centre zone in which the
Hotel is located
in. The Neighbourhood Centre zone is a small zone that is
already developed. It is unlikely that a new noise source will be introduced
into the area without the removal of an existing noise source. In this case,
the cumulative effect of noise on the receptor is not
consideration.
For the reasons outlined above, the 5 dB(A) development application
penalty to the criteria is not believed to be appropriate for
this assessment,
and the criteria for assessing general compliance should be adopted.
The witness went on to detail his assessment of patron and carpark noise as
“4.0 Assessment
4.1 Nearest noise sensitive receptors
The nearest noise sensitive receptors are located in a two storey
apartment block, which shares a boundary fence with Hampstead Hotel
the car park area. The closest point of the apartment block is approximately 20
m from the Hampstead Hotel building and
outdoor areas.
Based on observations during a site inspection, the apartments are
separated from the Hotel land with a 1.2 m high Colorbond fence
on a concrete
plinth. This raises the height of the fence to approximately 2.1 m at the end
closest to the Hotel to approximately
1.8 m in the middle of the fence span.
The land between the fence and the apartment building is a driveway which
leads to a communal car park to the south of the building.
This area is not a
private open space, and would not likely be used by the residents for enjoyment.
4.2 Patron noise
4.2.1 Scenario
Areas 8 and 9 are semi-enclosed spaces formed against the main Hotel
building with a roof over. To the north, facing the nearest noise
receptor, are a combination of vertical, angled concrete columns, straight metal
columns and a half height wall. These
elements provide a barrier for patrons
sifting in Area 8, obscures direct view and effectively halves the open area for
8 and 9. To the east and west, there are half height walls with open
areas above.
Security staff at the Hotel have logged how many patrons are in the gaming
room from 11 am to 2 am during the week. The patron numbers
are shown in Table
Table 3 Number of patrons in the gaming room (January to March 2010)
We have been advised by the Hotel staff that the patrons using the Hotel
on Monday to Wednesday from 11pm onwards are generally there
to use the gaming
room and there are very few patrons in the lounge bar.
Areas 8 and 9 have a total patron capacity of 50 people (with 30 in Area 8
and 20 in Area 9). However, as can be seen from the numbers
in Table 3, it would
be unlikely for the outdoor areas to reach capacity from 12 midnight to 2 am on
Mondays to Wednesdays. We have
assumed, on a worst-case basis, that if allowed
to operate on Mondays to Wednesdays until 2am, the number of patrons will be the
same as on Thursdays and Fridays. As such, a worst case situation would be seven
patrons who would be able to use the beer garden
from 12 midnight to 2am.
4.2.2 Results
Generally for patron noise assessments, it is assumed that one-third of
the number of patrons are talking simultaneously. This may
be increased to a
half if the number of patrons is relatively small. Various scenarios of noise
arising from patrons were modelled
using typical speech and laughter noise
levels provided by Australian Standard 2822-1985 Acoustics - Methods of
Predicting Speech
predicted typical worst case noise levels at the closest four units of the
apartment block. The closest two units are approximately 20 m from the Hotel and
the next closest two units are located approximately
25 - 30 m from the Hotel.
We have also provided the assessment of patron noise from the outdoor areas
during maximum capacity, although
this situation will be highly unlikely during
the proposed extension of hours.
Note that the presented levels include a 5 dB(A) characteristic penalty to
account for modulations from perceived variations in speech
loudness during
social conversations, for example normal to raised voice, bursts of laughter
Table 4 Predicated environmental noise levels from patron noise with
different scenarios at the closest two units
Noise source scenario
Equivalent continuous noise level,
Closest units
2nd closest units
Ground floor
Ground floor
17 people (1/3 of 50 talking in raised voice)
17 people (1/3 of 50) talking in normal voice
3 people (1/2 of 7) talking in raised voice
3 people (1/2 of 7) talking in normal voice
Notes: 1. The presented levels include a 5dB(A) characteristic penalty
for modulation characteristics.
2. Highlighted cells represent a typical worst case scenario.
The results in Table 4 show that during typical worst case patron noise,
the 48 dB(A) night time criterion is met at all units of
the closest apartment
4.3 Car park noise
4.3.1 Scenario
Security staff at the Hotel have logged how many cars are in the car park
from 11am to 2am during the week. The number of cars are
shown in Table 5.
Table 5 Total number of cars in the car park (January to March 2010)
4.3.2 Results
Assuming that all the cars are there until dosing at 2 am and all cars
leave at once within a 15 minute period - would have approximately
departing in a 15 minute period. The noise from car park activity includes door
slamming, engine starting and accelerating
The predicted noise level at the ground and top floor units from car park
noise are presented in Table 6.
Table 6 Predicted environmental noise levels from car park noise
Noise source scenario
Equivalent continuous noise level,
Ground floor
4 car movements in 15 minutes
The results in Table 4 show that from car park activity, the 48 dB(A)
night time criterion is met at all units of the closest apartment
4.4 Discussion
4.4.1 Predicted noise levels in context
The predicted noise levels from patron noise are conservative. The
likelihood of 3 people simultaneous talking in raised voices for
a continuous 15
minute period is low. It is typical for patrons who use the gaming lounge to
only use the outdoor areas if they want
to smoke. It would be unlikely that they
would sit outside to socialise and talk when they are at the Hotel to use the
gaming machines.
Note that while the assessment is based on all seven patrons
using the outdoor area at once, this is a very unlikely situation. Should
be outside talking it is also unlikely that they will be talking in raised
voices as the background noise level is relatively
low and voice level would not
have to be raised to talk over others.
The predicted noise levels from car park activity are based on four car
movements in 15 minutes. This may only happen at closing time
when patrons and
employees are leaving and as such, the predicted noise level is worst case.
Additionally, as truck and car pass-bys
along North East Road and Brookes Road
vary between 45 - 54 dB(A), the noise and character of the noise from car park
use would be
similar to existing ambient noise, and would therefore be less
intrusive than patron noise.
4.4.2 Persons affected
For patron noise, the predicted level at the closest unit meets the
criterion and the predicted noise levels at the other units are
5 - 19 dB(A)
below the criterion.
Similarly for car park noise, the predicted noise level at the top four
units will meet the criterion and the predicted level for
the bottom four units
is 9 dB(A) below the criterion.
From the results it can be seen that the noise impact of the proposed
extension is minimal and even at the worst affected units, the
predicted noise
levels for all typical worst case situations will comply with the Noise EPP
4.4.3 Internal noise levels -
The noise levels are highest at the top floor units; however, they do not
have any outdoor open space that would be affected by the
Hotel noise. On this
basis, it may be more relevant to consider the internal noise levels.
The Noise EPP references Australian/New Zealand Standard 2
107:2000 Acoustics—Recommended design sound levels and reverberation
for building interiors (ASINZS 2107) as providing appropriate internal noise
criteria. For houses and apartments near minor
roads (having the more stringent
requirements), AS/NZS 2107 recommends the following criteria ranges:
• 30 —40 dB(A) for work and living areas
• 30 —35 dB(A) for sleeping areas.
Assuming a partially open window, it is common practice to adopt a 15
dB(A) noise reduction across a residential facade (note that
this is the
reduction adopted by the Noise EPP in application of the WHO criteria). The
resultant internal noise levels with a partially
open window are presented in
Table 7. Note that we have not applied the characteristic penalty for patron
noise modulation in this
case as it is not applicable for internal noise
assessments.
Table 7 Predicted internal noise levels with different scenarios at the
closest apartment block
Noise source scenario
Equivalent continuous noise level,
Ground floor
17 (1/3 of 50) people talking raised voice
17 (1/3 of 50) people talking normal voice
3 people talking in raised
voice (1/2 of 7)
Noise source scenario
Equivalent continuous noise level,
Ground floor
3 people talking in raised
voice (1/2 of 7)
4 car movements in 15
Note: (1) the internal noise criteria are based on the more stringent
sleep area criteria for apartments near minor roads.
From the results in Table 7, it can be seen that although the
environmental noise level just comply with the environmental noise criterion,
the internal noise levels with partially open windows for al situations will
comply with the requirements of AS/NZS 2107.”
5.0 Conclusion
An environmental noise impact assessment has been undertaken and presented
in this report for the proposed extension of operating
hours for the Hampstead
Hotel from 12 midnight until 2am on Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays.
Noise emissions from the development relating to patron noise and car park
noise have been assessed against relevant environmental
noise criteria. It is
predicted that the typical worst case noise scenarios will comply with the night
time noise criterion. In
additional the noise impacts of the proposed extension
will be acceptable as:
the predicted
levels are based on worst case situations that are not likely to occur during
typical operation of the Hotel;
the proposed
extension to the operating hours is the same as the current approved operating
hours for Thursday, Friday and Saturday;
as such, the noise sources and impact
would be similar during the proposed extension;
the top floor
units are the worst affected, and the predicted noise levels during typical
worst case situations still comply at the
top floor units, the noise levels, at
the bottom floor units are significantly lower, being shielded with the boundary
there are no
outdoor private open spaces for the top floor units, and as such external noise
levels may not be as relevant as internal
noise levels;
the predicted
internal noise levels within the closest apartment block will comply with
appropriate internal noise criteria for bedrooms
with partially open windows and
there is no special need for acoustic treatment to protect the amenity of the
Therefore, I am of the opinion that in terms of noise impact the
proposed extension of hours should be acceptable and will comply
with the intent
of the relevant noise policies and standards. .......”
The applicant tendered Report of Mr Jeff Smith dated 16 August 2010 tendered
and admitted into evidence as: [Exhibit A1] to demonstrate
the extent of use of
the hotel and adjacent hotel car park which can best be summarized in the
conclusions detailed in the report:
“Conclusion
The data sets show that patronage levels and consequent use of the Hotel
Car park, is very low, even on Friday and Saturday nights
when patronage might
generally expected to peak. On the basis of my analysis of the data I would
expect there to be fewer than 10
patrons in the combined areas of the Gaming
Room and adjacent bar after 1am on any day.
From my view of the data I anticipate that very few of these patrons would
frequent the outdoor smoking areas attached to the Gaming
Room and Bar.
I would expect there to be fewer than 4 persons on the outdoor smoking
area at any time after 1am, and most often no more than 1 person
From my observation of the car park count I expect there would be fewer
than 10 vehicle movements between 1am and 2am on any day.”
The applicant called Gary Armstrong - Business Development Manager (Spirit
Hotels - Coles Group) to give oral evidence.
The witness gave evidence that he has 20 years plus in the hotel
The witness went of to testify that gaming patrons are traditionally middle
aged individuals who generally operate in isolation, or
couples. The witness
added that these individuals are unlikely to be boisterous and that in his 3
years employment with the Spirit
Hotels Group, he has not become aware of any
resident complaints in connection with the operation of the Hampstead Hotel,
that there is a complaint logging process in place within the Spirit
Hotels Group. The witness testified that he routinely conducts
random visits to
each of the hotels in the “Group”, including nightly visits.
The witness went on to give evidence that a complement of 2 hotel staff
together with a static security guard at the main entrance
are intended to staff
the hotel during the additional hours sought.
The witness also testified that he did not expect more than 2-3 smokers in
the outdoor area (Area 9) at any one time during the sought
hours and went on to
add that he expected minimal use of the Lounge Bar (Area 3) and adjacent outdoor
(Area 8) during the additional
hours, the witness went on to add that these
areas are being sought essentially to provide a facility for gaming patrons,
based on the requirement that gaming areas are not permitted to operate
in isolation at any given point of time.
The objector tendered a Report dated July 2010 [Exhibit 01] and called as a
witness Mr Christopher Paul Turnbull.
The witness gave evidence in his report that the Environment Protection
(Noise) Policy 2007
“has been based on the recommendations of the World
Health Organization related to sleep disturbance at night”
The report went on to provide:
“The Policy excludes matters that may be the subject of proceedings
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
. However, I am of the opinion that the
Policy still provides an indication of the noise levels that will impact on the
an area when assessing patron noise and carpark noise associated with
The Policy provides goal noise levels based on the Development Plan Zone
of the noise source and noise sensitive receiver. The Hotel
is located within
the Neighborhood Centre Zone of the City of Prospect. The closest residences are
located to the north within the
Residential Zone.
Where a proposed noise source is located within a commercial zone and the
noise receiver is located in a residential zone, the maximum
equivalent (Leq) noise level for the proposed noise source is 45 dB(A) at night
(10pm to 7am).
Penalties for the character of the noise should be applied according to
the policy. A penalty may be applied for each of the characteristics
fluctuation, low frequency or impulsiveness. As the noise from activities
associated with the proposed extension of hours
will fluctuate, a 5 dB(A)
penalty is considered to be warranted, effectively reducing the allowable noise
level to 40 dB(A).
The Policy allows a relaxation of the criteria in situations where
existing background noise (eg from traffic) is likely to mask the
noise from the
proposed noise source. Therefore to determine the existing background noise
level in an equivalent location to the
closest residences, a noise logger was
placed overnight on Tuesday the 6th of July 2010. During the period between
midnight and 2:00am,
a background noise level of 40 dB(A) was recorded. As this
level is the same as the effective criterion, relaxation of the criterion
considered to be warranted.”
“Predicted Noise
The noise from
activities during the proposed extension of hours has been predicted based on
the following:
50 patrons in
the combined outdoor Areas 8 and 9.
A maximum of
10 cars departing the carpark in a 15 minute period during the proposed
extension of hours.
measured at other hotels.
The noise from patrons
located indoors in areas 3 and 4 has been considered and it is expected that
this noise will not be audible
at the closest residence.
The combined noise from patrons and the carpark at the upper level window
of the residential units to the north west on Hepburn Street
is predicted to be
55 dB(A). This predicted noise level is dominated by the patrons in the outdoor
areas with a significantly lower
contribution of noise from the carpark.
The predicted noise from patrons and the carpark exceeds the goal noise
levels of the Policy by a significant margin and exceeds the
sleep disturbance
criterion of the World Health Organisation Guidelines.”
and concluded
“Conclusion
The proposed application involves the extension of hours from midnight to
2:00am on a Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday night in licensed
areas 2, 3, 8 and 9.
The noise from activities during the proposed extension of hours is
predicted to exceed the objective criteria within the Environment
(Noise) Policy and the World Health Organisation Guidelines to protect against
sleep disturbance.
Therefore, it is my opinion that if the application were granted:
offence, annoyance, disturbance or inconvenience to people who reside in the
vicinity of the premises would be likely to result;
The amenity
of the locality in which the premises are situated would be adversely affected
Assessment of Evidence and Submissions
Both Mr Jurevicius and Mr Turnbull gave evidence that the Environment
Protection Noise Policy 2007 is expressly excluded from matters
falling under
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
I accept the evidence of Gary Armstrong and also Mr Jeff Smith supporting the
position that very few patrons are likely to utilize
the licensed premises
during the hours sought and then they would ordinarily be gaming patrons who are
unlikely to be noisy individuals
given their demographic. I also accept their
evidence that very few of those gaming patrons would in fact frequent the
I have some difficulty in accepting Mr Turnbull’s evidence having
regard to his predictions being based on the expected numbers
(“50 patrons in combined outdoor areas Areas 8 and 9”) and (“a
maximum of 10 cars departing the carpark
in a 15 minute period during the
proposed extension of hours”). I find that the predictions are not
supported by the evidence
of the applicant’s witnesses concerning
projected use of the licensed premises during the extended trading hours
Consequently, I accept the expert acoustical evidence presented on behalf of
the applicant where there is any inconsistency with the
objector’s expert
acoustical evidence.
I note that there has been no evidence of resident complaints or concerns in
relation to the existing operation of the hotel, including
the use of the
outdoor areas servicing the gaming area and adjoining lounge bar.
I further note that the terms of the Development Approval Consent also set
out a number of “safeguards” in relation to
the operation of the
licensed premises under the hours sought in this application.
Mr Turnbull, in his evidence testified that the license will be unable to
comply with the following condition of Development Approval
Consent namely:-
noise levels emitted from the premises after midnight when measured at the
nearest noise sensitive location shall not exceed
8dB above the ambient
background noise in any octave band of the sound
As this requirement forms part of the Development Approval Consent issued by
the relevant planning and development authority, it would
be appropriate for the
condition to also become a licence condition and equally importantly, for the
licensee to comply with that
condition at all times.
Mr Jack Costello, appearing for the applicant reminded me during submissions
that the Development Approval consent has a “sunset”
approval until 10 May 2011 and will be subject to further consideration at that
Mr Ben Allen submitted that my findings ought to be based on the applications
as lodged and not on the projected patronage of the
relevant areas. I do not
accept this argument and my findings are based on the evidence as presented as
to the anticipated patron
numbers during the hours sought.
I find that
section 44(2)
and the authorities referred to earlier in my
decision clearly set out the test to be applied in applications in relation to
trading authority such as the application.
Having heard the evidence and submissions of the parties, I am satisfied that
the use of the areas during the times sought by the
applicant will be minimal
and am satisfied that with the following conditions, the applicant has satisfied
the test under
section 44(2)
of the Act:
combined capacity of Areas 2 and 3 on the plan marked “Exhibit A” is
not to exceed 150 persons at times when those
areas are trading between midnight
and 2am on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday mornings.
combined capacity of Areas 8 and 9 on the plan marked “Exhibit A” is
not to exceed 50 persons at times when the areas
are open to patrons between
midnight and 2am on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday mornings.
noise levels emitted from the premises after midnight when measured at the
nearest noise sensitive location shall not exceed 8dB
above the ambient
background noise in any octave band of the sound spectrum.
licensee must provide approved responsible persons and at least one (1) licensed
security guard to patrol the car park and hotel
environs after midnight until 30
minutes after the closure to ensure that residents are not disturbed by patrons
leaving the premises.
is to be placed near all exits of the hotel and maintained at all times advising
patrons leaving the hotel not to disturb
nearby residents as the patrons depart
the premises.
legible and prominent signage must be placed and maintained along the boundary
fence abutting the residential property nearest
to Areas 8 & 9 with the
following words:
NO PARKING IN THIS AREA AFTER 11PM
Signage must be placed in Areas 8 and 9 with the following words (or
Please keep noise to a minimum in this Area at
so as not to disturb nearby residents
For the reasons above, I vary the extended trading authorization in respect
of Areas 2, 3, 8 & 9 to include Monday to Wednesday
midnight to 2am the
following day however on an
basis only and reviewable on
giving the parties liberty to apply at that time
conditions 1 to 7 detailed above.
Assistant Commissioner Legal
Delegate of the Liquor and Gambling
Commissioner
(EM/YAI) Date of Order: 23 August
Copies to: Rick Harley, Hunt & Hunt Lawyers, GPO Box 439, Adelaide
Ben Allen, Wallmans Lawyers, GPO Box 1018, Adelaide 5001
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (257 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter