URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACAT/2016/38.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:53:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McColl v Hearse [2016] SACAT 38 (8 July 2016)
Housing & Civil
Internal Review
Peter (Pedro) McColl
NEUTRAL CITATION
Timothy Hearse
McColl v Hearse
[2016] SACAT 38
Justice Parker, President
8 July 2016
SACAT FILE NO.
2016/SIR000023
ON REVIEW FROM
The South Australian Civil & Administrative Tribunal (Member Duffy)
2016/SH003512
1. The Tribunal sets aside the decision under review by finding that the
Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to hear this matter.
Residential tenancy – jurisdiction - meaning of residential tenancy
agreement – no rent payable under agreement –
agreement not a
residential tenancy agreement
Procedural fairness – apprehended bias – Tribunal member
referred to respondent’s business during hearing
LEGISLATION
Residential Tenancies Act 1995
ss 3(1), 5, 24.
CASES CONSIDERED
Currie v Misa
(1875) LR 10 Ex 162.
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. This is an application for an internal review of a decision made by
Member Duffy on 25 May 2016 that Peter (Pedro) McColl give
vacant possession of
a property at Welland in favour of Timothy Hearse. The order for vacant
possession was to take effect on 22
June 2016. However on 21 June 2016,
Judge Cole, in her capacity as Deputy President of SACAT, granted a stay in
respect of the vacant
possession order. She did so on the basis that the issues
were complex and the balance of convenience favoured a stay until the issues
be resolved.
2. The circumstances surrounding
the alleged tenancy are highly unusual. Mr McColl was previously the owner
of the subject property
at Welland. His business encountered financial
difficulties and a bank was about to exercise its rights as mortgagee to apply
the Supreme Court for an order for possession and sale of the property. So as
to avoid that occurring Mr McColl negotiated an agreement
Mr Hearse. The two men were business acquaintances but not friends. The
substance of the agreement was that Mr Hearse would
buy the property for an
amount sufficient to meet the sum owed by Mr McColl to the bank and to
cover the cost of stamp duty and conveyancing.
3. It is necessary to set
out the complete terms of the agreement.
Both parties agree
1 purchase price $687314.53 on 12/8/2014
2 P McColl will continue to reside for 12 months no rent payable
3 during which time P McColl will maintain house to same standard as
purchased [photos supplies]
4 Improvements will be done by mutual agreement
5 the purpose of this agreement will be to sell house with in one calendar
year from purchase
6 selling cost include interest from settlement date at 20% {1 full year
interest = $137462.90]
7 other selling costs are a] insurance
b] council rates
c] land tax
d] improvements
8 electricity water gas esl are to be paid when due by P McColl
9 after all costs expences ,interest, taxes,improvements and original
purchase price are taken in to consideration
Then if there is monies over and above any profit will be split 50/50 between
P. McColl and The Whyalla Property Trust
8 should have added council rates ,insurance [in the unlikely event you walk
away at within the 12 months]
10 P.McColl can deposit monies toward repurchase during 12 month period thus
reducing interest 11. P.McColl can purchase within 12
months period at original
purchase price plus pay all contract fees,interest,holding expences,and any
improvements incurded during
this agreement
The various spelling errors
and other idiosyncratic features appear in the original document. It has been
reproduced exactly.
4. The document was prepared as an email but the
printed version was signed by both parties and witnessed. I was informed that
the agreement the property was immediately conveyed into the ownership
of Mr Hearse.
5. As I said to the parties during the course of the
hearing, their agreement has many unsatisfactory features. It was most unwise
use such an informal document to record an agreement involving a large sum of
money and very unusual arrangements. They would
have been far better served if
they had engaged a legal practitioner to prepare a document that recorded their
agreement in terms
that left no room for uncertainty.
The member’s reasons
6. The member conducted hearings
on 28 April 2016 and 25 May 2016. The purpose of the adjournment was to enable
the member to conduct
legal research given the highly unusual nature of the
7. In his statement of reasons dated 25 May 2016 the member
stated that the only issue was to determine whether the agreement constituted
residential tenancy agreement and thereby SACAT would have jurisdiction to
determine the dispute. The member found that a residential
tenancy agreement had
commenced on 12 August 2014 when the agreement had been signed. He found that
the tenancy was for a fixed term
which had expired. Mr McColl had not
vacated the property despite numerous requests from Mr Hearse for him to do
so. He noted that
Mr Hearse would discontinue proceedings in the
Magistrates Court. He suspended the order for vacant possession on the grounds
hardship and ordered that it would take effect on 22 June 2016. The member
did not provide any explanation for his conclusion that
there was a residential
The application for internal review
Mr McColl stated in his application for internal review that he believed
that the member was biased towards the landlord because
he apparently knew him
from Whyalla and they drank together at the pub. He also stated that he was
unhappy with the decision. He
is unemployed and waiting for the proceeds of the
sale of the house as he believes that he is entitled to the profits upon the
The intention had always been to sell the property after 12 months and
that was written in their agreement.
9. At my request, the member has prepared a
supplementary statement of reasons dealing with the allegation of bias. He noted
supplementary reasons dated 29 June 2016 that there had not been any need
for him to determine the credibility of either party. The
matter had turned upon
whether the agreement constituted a residential tenancy agreement. The member
stated that he did not know
Mr Hearse. He had never met him prior to the SACAT
hearings and had never drank with him in a pub or at any other place. He was
that Mr Hearse owns a boat business in Adelaide and a good many years ago
he had bought two boats from that business. However, to
the best of his
recollection, he had no dealings with Mr Hearse in relation to either
transaction. He was also aware that Mr Hearse
had purchased a fishing tackle
business and associated property in Whyalla about ten years ago. The business
had closed shortly before
the transaction that is in dispute in these
proceedings or very shortly thereafter. The member had no knowledge of the
arrangements
concerning the sale of the tackle business but the fact of the sale
was common knowledge in Whyalla (where the member lives).
commencement of the internal review hearing I drew the attention of
Mr McColl to the supplementary statement of reasons
prepared by the member.
I asked whether in light of the denial by the member that he knew
Mr Hearse, he wished to maintain that ground
of review. He said that a
member of the Tribunal registry staff had suggested to him that he should
include that allegation. The
staff member had assisted him to complete the
application for internal review over the telephone. Mr McColl stated that
wish to pursue the allegation of bias.
11. Notwithstanding
the withdrawal by Mr McColl of the allegation of bias, given the reference
by Mr McColl to a member of the Tribunal
staff, I have made enquiries about
that matter. The staff member informed me that he had asked Mr McColl to
state his grounds for
internal review. Mr McColl said that the member knew
Mr Hearse and drank with him in the pub. The staff member simply recorded
information provided to him by Mr McColl. He did not tell
Mr McColl to make up that allegation. I unequivocally accept his
explanation.
12. The transcript shows that the member stated during the
hearing that he had some knowledge of Mr Hearse’s business interests
because he lived in Whyalla. Importantly, he also said that he did not know
Mr Hearse personally. It may be that Mr McColl misunderstood
not recall correctly what the member had said. It was not prudent for the member
to refer in the hearing to his personal knowledge
of the business interests of
one of the parties. That should generally be avoided by SACAT
13. I am satisfied that a reasonable apprehension of bias does
not arise under the test in
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
205 CLR 337
, ie might a fair minded lay observer reasonably apprehend that the
decision maker might not bring an impartial mind to the resolution
question that must be decided. Given that Mr McColl has abandoned that
ground of review, the issue does not require any further
consideration.
14. I turn to the legal
issues relating to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. Section 24(1)(a) of the
Residential Tenancies Act 1995
(the RT Act) confers exclusive
s 24(2) provides
the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to hear and
determine a monetary claim if the amount claimed exceeds $40,000 unless the
give their written consent for the Tribunal to hear and determine the
matter. While the transaction between Mr Hearse and Mr McColl
a sum very much greater than $40,000, the applicant seeks only an order for
vacant possession. As there is no monetary claim,
s 24(2) does not operate
to exclude the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.
15. The term
“residential tenancy agreement” is defined in s 3(1) of the RT
Act to mean “an agreement ... under
which a person grants another person,
for valuable consideration, a right ... to occupy premises for the purpose of
residence”.
The operation of that definition needs to be considered in
conjunction with s 5 of the RT Act which provides that the Act does not
apply to certain specified classes of agreement. Two of the classes of agreement
referred to in s 5(1) are relevant to the present
Paragraph 5(1)(d) excludes the following agreements from the jurisdiction of the
(d) an agreement conferring a right to occupy premises for the purpose of
residence but under which no rent is payable; or
an agreement under which families exchange houses for an agreed period would
not be a residential tenancy agreement if no rent were
payable under the
17. A further exclusion is found in paragraph 5(1)(e),
(e) an agreement for the sale of land that confers a right to occupy premises
for a period of 28 days or less on a party to the agreement;
clear that paragraph 5(1)(e) does not apply in the present circumstances. The
right of occupancy conferred upon Mr McColl
under the agreement with
Mr Hearse was for 12 months. The exclusion in paragraph 5(1)(e) is limited
to rights of residence not exceeding
28 days. I infer that the purpose of this
exclusion was to ensure that an arrangement whereby the vendor of a home was
to remain in occupation for a short period after settlement was not
treated as a residential tenancy agreement.
19. Clause 2 of the agreement
provides that Mr McColl is to reside in the property rent free for 12
months. That clause is directly
relevant to paragraph 5(1)(d) of the RT Act
which provides that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction over an agreement under
rent is payable for the right to occupy premises for the purpose of
residence. If that clause was considered in isolation from the
balance of the
contract, then the agreement would clearly lie outside the jurisdiction of the
20. An agreement will be a “residential tenancy
agreement” if the right to occupy premises for the purposes of residence
is granted for valuable consideration. Whether Mr McColl has agreed to
provide consideration for the right to reside in the property
is not easy to
determine because of the many drafting deficiencies in the agreement. I have
given much thought to that question but
have concluded that it is not necessary
to decide the issue.
21. As I have already noted, it is an essential
element of the definition of “residential tenancy agreement” in
that valuable consideration has been given to secure the right to
occupy premises for the purpose of residence. The concept of “valuable
consideration” has been defined to mean “some right, interest,
profit or benefit accruing to one party, or some forbearance,
detriment, loss or
responsibility given, suffered or undertaken by the
That definition makes
clear that valuable consideration may be something other than the payment of
money or a promise to pay money.
22. At common law it was not necessary
that rent be paid in money. Rent might be paid by way of services, such as
ploughing the owner’s
land, or the provision of crops or
That definition is
somewhat narrower than that of “valuable consideration”. Thus, for
example, an act of forbearance
would constitute valuable consideration but would
not appear to be rent at common law.
23. It is also necessary to consider
whether the RT Act has departed from the common law meaning of rent. The term
is defined in s 3(1) to consist of “(a) the amount
payable under a residential tenancy agreement for the right to occupy premises
for a period of the tenancy”. While the definition also includes a
paragraph (b), that clearly does not apply in the present
I consider that the meaning of “rent” has been narrowed under the RT
Act from that which applied at common law. That
is because the reference to
“the amount payable” clearly contemplates the payment of money
rather than any other form
of valuable consideration. If that was not the case,
paragraph 5(1)(d) would be largely, if not entirely, otiose.
example that appears following paragraph 5(1)(d) of the Act provides a practical
example of the point I have just made. It
also serves to explain why the
legislature has included in the definition of “residential tenancy
agreement” a requirement
that there be valuable consideration but has then
excluded from the application of the Act agreements that do not provide for the
payment of rent. The example refers to an agreement under which families
exchange houses for an agreed period without payment of
rent. But for the fact
that paragraph 5(1)(d) excludes from the application of the Act agreements under
which no rent is payable,
such an agreement would be a residential tenancy
agreement because the exchange of mutual promises whereby each family is given
right to occupy the other family’s house for an agreed period would
constitute valuable consideration. Clearly, as a matter
of public policy, it was
not thought appropriate for such arrangements to be subject to the Act and the
26. Mr Hearse suggested during the course
of the internal review hearing that he had paid $50,000 less than the market
value of the
property for its purchase. That discount represented the value to
Mr McColl of the right to reside in the property and could be regarded
payment of rent. There are several difficulties with that contention. I do need
not address those difficulties because the
alleged arrangement contradicts the
express provision in the contract that no rent is payable. That latter fact
alone is sufficient
for me to determine that no rent is payable under the
27. I consider it clear that even if valuable consideration
did pass between Mr McColl and Mr Hearse with respect to the right to
reside in the premises, the fact that no rent was payable under the agreement
has the result that the Act does not apply. That is
the clear effect of
paragraph 5(1)(d).
28. Because of my finding that the RT Act does not
apply to the agreement between Mr Hearse and Mr McColl, I set aside
the decision
granting vacant possession of the subject property to
Mr Hearse with effect from 22 June 2016.
29. I urge the parties to
reach a mutually agreed settlement to give effect to their bargain. If they
cannot do so, the matter will
need to be resolved in an appropriate court. I
also suggest that the parties would be greatly assisted if they were to obtain
professional
legal advice.
Currie v Misa
10 Ex 162, Lush J.
Woodfall’s Law of Landlord and Tenant
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.18 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter