URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRComm/2016/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Amalgamated ASU (SA) State Union v Chief Executive, Department of the Premier and Cabinet (Department of Environment, Water and Natural Resources) [2016] SAIRComm 1 (15 April 2016)
Amalgamated ASU (SA) State Union v Chief Executive, Department of the
Premier and Cabinet (Department of Environment, Water and Natural
] SAIRComm 1
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION (SA)
AMALGAMATED ASU (SA) STATE UNION
CHIEF EXECUTIVE, DEPARTMENT OF THE PREMIER AND CABINET (DEPARTMENT OF
ENVIRONMENT, WATER AND NATURAL RESOURCES)
S 202 Reference of Question for Determination by the
Commission - Preliminary Points
5558 of 2013
HEARING DATES:
21 October 2014 and 3 February 2015
JUDGMENT OF:
Commissioner PJ McMahon
DELIVERED ON:
15 April 2016
CATCHWORDS:
Notification of dispute - Jurisdictional objection - Referral to
Commission for determination - Application by union on behalf of
three of its
members - Is there an alternative impartial dispute resolution process
available? - Commission’s general jurisdiction
examined - Nature of
registered associations and status under the Act considered - Ability to begin
proceedings in the Commission
considered - Nature of orders sought considered -
S 194(2) objection dismissed - S 194 Fair Work Act 1994, s 62 Public Sector Act
Public Service Association of South Australia v Industrial Relations
Commission of South Australian and Anor
[2012] HCA 25
(2012) 249 CLR 398
Services Union SA & NT Branch v Port Pirie Regional Council
SAIRComm 18
Conditions of Employment for DECS and DFEEST (TAFE) Employees
Decision No 2
[2010] SAIRComm 7
Ambulance Employees Association of
South Australia and Etherington v Chief Executive, Department for Health and
Aging (SA Ambulance
[2015] SAIRComm 11
Ridgeway v R
[1995] HCA 66
Bulner & Wright v Carter Holt Harvey
[2012] SAWCT
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr M Ats
Respondent: Mr A
Solicitors:
Applicant: Lieschke and
Respondent: Crown Solicitor’s Office
Introduction
Chief Executive, Department of Premier and Cabinet (“the
respondent”) raised a jurisdictional objection in relation
to the orders
sought by the Australian Services Union (“ASU”) in a dispute
notification filed by the ASU on behalf of
three of its members.
substantive matter of the dispute notification was made by the ASU on behalf of
three of its members, Mr Cummings, Mr Hutchens
and Mr Mitchell. All three
members were initially employed as Local Authorised Officers by various animal
and plant boards. In January
2006 their employment was transferred to the
Natural Resources Management Board (“NRM Board”).
or about 1 July 2012 the members employment was transferred to the Department of
Environment, Water and Natural Resources (“DEWNR”)
This occurred as
a consequence of reforms to the management of natural resources by the South
Australian Government. The members
continue to be employed by DEWNR and each
hold the title of Natural Resources Officers. Mr Mitchell is currently located
in the Northern
and Yorke region and Mr Hutchens and Mr Cummings are both
employed within the SA Murray-Darling Basin region.
their employment each member has enjoyed commuter use of a work vehicle to and
from their homes. In each of the transfers
of employment referred to above the
members received various written and oral assurances as to the continuation of
the existing terms
and conditions of employment including the rights to commuter
use of a work vehicle.
after reviewing the employees use of their work vehicles DEWNR determined that
the three employees were not entitled to continued
commuter use of each of their
work vehicles. This lead to the ASU filing a dispute notification under s 194 of
Fair Work Act 1994
(“the Act”) on 4 November 2013.
Section 194 relevantly states:
“194—Applications
to the Commission
(1) Proceedings before the Commission are commenced by an application made to
the Commission—
(a) if, in the Minister's opinion, it is in the public interest that the
matter be dealt with by the Commission—by the Minister;
(b) by an employer, or group of employers; or
(c) by an employee, or group of employees; or
(d) by a registered association of employers; or
(e) by a registered association of employees; or
(f) by the United Trades and Labor Council.
(2) A natural person may bring an application as of right if the application
is authorised under some other provision of this Act
but otherwise must
establish to the satisfaction of the Commission—
(a) that the claim arises out of a genuine industrial grievance; and
(b) that there is no other impartial grievance resolution process that is (or
has been) reasonably available to the person.”
ASU’s notification sought the continued use of the government vehicles for
commuter use for the three members and the continued
location of Mr Hutchens and
Mr Cummings base office. This is an issue that has arisen as the applicants were
uncertain as to where
they might be based in the future.
it became apparent that the respondent had a jurisdictional issue with the
dispute application, the ASU provided an amended dispute
notification under s
194(1)(d) on 29 August 2014, that being an application before the Commission by
a registered association of
content of the amended application was similar in nature to the original
application except that the amended application clarified
the application was
being made by a registered organisation on behalf of its
Orders sought by the applicant
the proceedings it became apparent that the jurisdictional matter had been
referred for hearing without the subject matter
of the conference being referred
for determination by the Commission. The hearing was adjourned and referred back
to compulsory conference
to allow orders to be drafted for determination. At the
Compulsory Conference convened on 11 November 2014 the following draft orders
were referred for determination:
“1 On and from 21 days after the date of this Order, the
employer shall provide each member of the group of employees (Messrs
Hutchens and Cummings) with a car, at the employer’s expense in all
respects, for commuter and reasonable incidental
use to and from work, which is
suitable for use by the relevant employees in their daily work.
the day of this Order:
Cummings’ employment shall be based at the employer’s premises at Mt
Barker; and
Hutchens’ employment shall be based at the employer’s premises at
Mitchell’s employment shall be based at the employer’s premises at
3. Orders 1 and 2 have effect until the earlier of:
the relevant employee and the Applicant file a document in the Commission
consenting to the vacation or variation of these Orders
or part thereof; or
the relevant employee ceases to occupy their current position (other than
through position restructuring where the relevant
employee continues to occupy a
substantially similar position); or
respect of Order 2 only, until the respondent ceases to operate premises at that
The jurisdictional issue
The respondent’s position
respondent’s position is that s 194(2) of the Act provide proceedings
before the Commission that may be commenced by application
by natural persons
where that person can establish to the satisfaction of the
Commission:
“(a) that the claim arises out of a genuine industrial grievance; and
(b) that there is no other impartial grievance resolution process that is (or
has been) reasonably available to the
respondent asserts these proceedings arise out of the grievances the three
members of the ASU have with employment decisions made
in respect of each
individual. Each of the members are entitled pursuant to s 62 of the
Public Sector Act 2009
(“PS Act”) to apply to the appropriate
review body for review of an employment decision of which they are aggrieved.
a result of this, the three members would not be entitled to commence
proceedings in this Commission by application pursuant to
s 194 (2) of the
respondent states that Parliament intentionally excluded natural persons in
positions of Mr Mitchell, Mr Hutchins and Mr Cummings
from persons entitled to
commence proceedings under s 194(2) because an alternative impartial dispute
resolution process is available
to them and parliament wanted recourse to that
alternative process in preference to the Commission under the Act.
grievances arising in respect of each of the three members relate to the
conditions of employment of each individual. The grievances
are, on the face of
the amended notice of dispute, in fact disputes as to the existence of specific
terms of each individual’s
contract of employment.
respondent states that the commencement of proceedings in the name of the ASU is
no more than a device to avoid the intended effects
of s 194(2) and as such an
abuse of process.
respondent asserts that s 194 of the Act addresses the process for commencement
of proceedings and provides limitations as to
who may make application and in
what circumstances.
26 of the Act sets out the jurisdiction of the
Commission:
“26—Jurisdiction of Commission
The Commission has—
(a) jurisdiction to approve enterprise agreements regulating remuneration and
other industrial matters; and
(b) jurisdiction to make awards regulating remuneration and other industrial
matters; and
(c) jurisdiction to resolve industrial disputes; and
(d) jurisdiction to hear and determine any matter or thing arising from or
relating to an industrial matter; and
(e) any other jurisdiction conferred by this or any other Act (including on
account of a referral of a matter or an application under
Training and
Skills Development Act 2008
It includes at s 26(c) the ability to resolve industrial disputes and at
s 26(d) to hear and determine any matter or thing arising
from or relating
to an industrial matter. It is agreed by both parties that the subject matter of
this dispute is an industrial matter.
respondent states that an industrial matter is defined broadly but includes a
matter affecting both employer(s) and employee(s)
in both the collective and
singular sense. It does not however, provide powers to determine and enforce
rights under existing contracts
of employment. That is a judicial function
beyond the scope of the Commission’s general arbitral function. This
applies equally to disputes as to contractual rights to remuneration
as it does to other assertions of contractual entitlements.
In any event
remuneration does not include the non-salary or unknown allowance benefits to
which the individuals assert an entitlement.
true nature of the matters raised by the applicant relates to the terms and
conditions of employment of each of the individual
employees in the singular
sense. The relief sought is enforcement of alleged entitlement by the employees
individually. The Commission,
the respondent states, has no power to order the
relief sought by the applicants. Moreover the relief sought is contrary to the
of the PS Act.
exception to the limitation on the Commission’s general function to that
of arbitration as referred to above, is where a
specific function has been
granted to the Commission, for example unfair dismissal. The only specific
function granted to the Commission
which could be relevant in these
circumstances is pursuant to s 62(8) of the PS Act; the review of a prescribed
decision. A prescribed
decision is defined to
62—External
(8) In this section—
prescribed decision
(b) any decision to reduce an employee's remuneration level;
reduction in remuneration level is a reference to a decision pursuant to s 53 of
53—Reduction
in remuneration level
(1) A public sector
agency may reduce the remuneration level of an employee of the agency without
the employee's consent on any of
the following grounds:
(a) the employee is
excess to the requirements of the agency at the higher remuneration level;
(b) the employee’s
physical or mental incapacity to perform duties satisfactorily at the higher
remuneration level;
(c) the employee’s unsatisfactory performance of duties at the higher
remuneration level;
(d) the employee’s
misconduct;
(e) the employee’s lack of an essential qualification for performing
duties at the higher remuneration level.
(2) A public sector agency may not reduce an employee’s remuneration
level under
subsection (1)(a)
the agency has made reasonable endeavours to find, but has failed to find, other
suitable duties in the agency, or other public
sector employment (to which this
Part applies), to which the employee might be assigned or transferred on
conditions that maintain
the employee’s substantive remuneration
(3) If an employee’s remuneration level is reduced under
subsection (1)(a)
the employee is entitled to supplementation of the employee's remuneration in
accordance with the relevant provisions of an award
or enterprise agreement or,
if there is no award or enterprise agreement covering the matter, in accordance
with a scheme prescribed
by the regulations.
(4) The power to reduce an employee’s remuneration level under this
section includes (without limitation) power—
(a) to reduce an employee’s remuneration level to a remuneration level
from a classification structure, or different classification
structure, fixed by
a determination of the Commissioner under
(b) to reduce an employee’s remuneration level to a remuneration level
for a class of employees not subject to a determination
of the Commissioner
(c) to reduce an employee’s remuneration level as a preliminary step to
assigning or transferring the employee to other duties
in the agency or other
public sector employment (whether or not employment to which this Part
respondent submits the decisions that are the subject of the grievances are not
decisions pursuant to s 53 of the PS Act.
regards to the ASU’s position that the respondent is seeking summary
dismissal there is agreement summary dismissal is a
rejection of the case
without hearing the substance of it. This generally occurs on any assessment of
a case where there can be no
successful argument. It is generally a question
disclosed provide an arguable case. The respondent states that they
are not seeking summary dismissal because summary dismissal requires
respondent submits that if the Commission accepts that they are not seeking
summary dismissal then the submission as to whether
there is an arguable case is
irrelevant because we do not get that far. In the absence of jurisdiction you
cannot hear whether or
not there is any substance to the underlying
if it is determined there is an industrial matter or industrial dispute there
still has to be something that gives rise to jurisdiction.
The parties cannot
consent to jurisdiction where none exists.
respondent contends that while this dispute was originally a simple matter it
has become far more complex in terms of the relief
that the applicant now seeks.
Originally the dispute was framed in contractual rights but is now a dispute
which could conceivably
come within jurisdiction. The applicant has sought to
change the nature of what is before the Commission which is the apparel of
future rights and the notion of industrial fairness. It is the respondent's
position that industrial fairness is no more than a concept.
It is a position
put forward by the union to say it's fair to grant new rights to the individuals
but no substance is provided as
to why this notion of fairness is something
which grants jurisdiction.
at the orders individually, the first order seeks that the respondent provides
the three members with blue plate cars. This
is an injunctive relief which is
beyond the statute of the Commission. The type of injunctive relief provided by
the Commission is
that mandated such as relief for unfair dismissal. That is a
statutory power granted by the Commission. What is being sought is different
a case such as an award classification. That is a determination of fact as to
what classifications they are at. That is not an
injunctive remedy, by law you
are obliged to pay employees at the appropriate classification level at which
they are determined to
second order sought prohibits the respondent from moving the individuals from
their current locations except where the employer
ceases operating from the
identified location in accordance with the third order sought. By its very
nature this is an injunctive
remedy and is therefore beyond the power of the
Commission.
respondent submitted that the applicant in raising the framework of whether this
matter is industrially fair in attempting to
gain jurisdiction where there would
not normally be jurisdiction. If this concept was accepted, no industrial
matter would be beyond
the jurisdiction of the Commission. While fairness may be
at the heart of every industrial dispute the mere concept may have nothing
with determining jurisdiction.
fairness is an umbrella term for a collection of distinct but related principles
that underlie at the end of the day how
principles are to be applied in
achieving industrial fairness. An example of this is s 108 of the Act which
deals with the questions
to be determined at an unfair dismissal hearing. Was
the dismissal harsh, unjust or unreasonable? This is a specific application
the concept of industrial fairness. In an unfair dismissal application it is not
enough to simply say the dismissal was unfair,
you need to provide a claim for
unfair dismissal within the principles of s 108.
respondent asserted that although this is an industrial matter, there are
industrial matters that are beyond the jurisdiction
of the Commission. Some
matters are exclusively in the province of the Court. It is clear that as an
arbitral body the Commission
cannot determine and enforce rights and this is not
disputed. The Commission must satisfy itself that it has jurisdiction. How this
is done is best set out by the High Court in the matter of
Public Service
Association of South Australia v Industrial Relations Commission of South
Australian and
Commission must look beyond the notice of dispute to the facts that are in issue
and then determine whether those facts attract
its jurisdiction.
relation to this matter the Commission has two preliminary points to determine,
one is to satisfy the question as to jurisdiction
and the other relates to the
question of whether the parties have standing in regard to this particular
matter to bring it before
the Commission. Section 194 identifies who has
standing before the Commission. It does that in two practical ways. The party
have standing in the particular matter before the Commission, not just
standing in the sense that they are a party. This is where
the issue of
collectivity comes into question. It is accepted that you do not need to have
collectivity for a matter to come before
the Commission. This case seeks to give
a notion of collectivity to what the three individual employees are seeking.
While the applicant
has put on the clothing of collectivity to justify the use
of s 194(1) the nature of this application fits squarely under s 194(2).
the union having standing to bring this particular matter before the Commission
then the matter cannot proceed.
Employer asserts that when parliament crafted s 194(2) they decided that the
Commission would be a place of recourse for natural
persons in limited
circumstances. They put limitations on natural persons bringing a matter before
the Commission where there is
no other impartial grievance resolution process
available. If the applicant's case is accepted that an association can take
on behalf of a member or in this case three members then what parliament
intended when it created s 194(2) dealing with natural persons
alternative avenues has been undermined. In this matter there are three
individuals in similar but not identical circumstances
affected by an
administrative decision in regards to the blue plate vehicles. It is not
disputed that each member had an entitlement
to go to the Public Sector
Grievance Review Commission to seek relief based on their individual
circumstances. If this matter is
within jurisdiction a decision would need to be
made based on the individual circumstances of each employee. The same applies to
the claim for each employee to remain at their base of operation. The natures of
the orders sought are clearly for each individual
worker and not for the three
collectively. One employee could achieve a favourable outcome which may not be
reciprocated to the others.
There is no collective character to the disputes in
the fundamental sense.
union is seeking orders that mandate the provision of vehicles and to prohibit
the movement of workers until further order from
the Commission. This in essence
is an injunctive remedy. You do that until the circumstances change. Until then
this is what has
to be done. For example from the date of this order Mr
Cummings’ employment shall be based at the employer’s premises
Mount Barker unless or until there is an order of this Commission that it is
not, or until the relevant employee and the applicant
file a document and the
Commission consenting to an alternative location. This must be done until a new
agreement is reached. This
is beyond the jurisdiction of the Commission. The
Commission cannot limit the decision of the department in terms of how many blue
plate cars they keep. The respondent argues that the orders being sought to
provide the individuals with blue plate cars and to prohibit
the movement of
employees is beyond the jurisdiction of this Commission.
The ASU’s position
is the ASU’s position that s 194(2) is irrelevant. This section commences
with the words “a natural person may”
which does not apply in these
circumstances. No application has been made by a natural person It must be noted
is in the singular, not a group of a natural persons as is
provided for in s 194(1)(c). This should be the end of it as the application
not brought by a single person.
the Parliament made amendments to the Act in 2005 to allow natural persons to
bring applications to the Commission it was not
the intention of Parliament to
confine the operation of the jurisdiction by the amendment at the time. In fact
the reverse is the
case. Previously s 194 required for there to be an element of
collectivity to create jurisdiction. In creating s 194(2) Parliament
intended to
extend jurisdiction to natural persons. It did not intend to restrict
the time the amendment was
introduced to Parliament, the Commonwealth government’s “Work
choices” legislation was
in the background. The s 194(2) amendments were
crafted on the basis of capturing constitutional corporations.
it is understood that local councils and public sector employees who are
included in the state jurisdiction would have access
to an impartial grievance
review process, employees for example in small businesses or who were award free
may not have had an impartial
grievance dispute resolution process available to
them. It is the ASU’s view that the change made to s 194(2) was created to
expand the jurisdiction to include natural persons such as these, it was not
parliaments intention to reduce the jurisdiction.
the respondent’s outline of argument it accepts the proceedings were
initiated by the ASU. In doing so it therefore accepts
that the application was
initiated by a non-natural person being a Registered Association. This ought to
be the end of the matter.
ASU has sought the assistance of the Commission in both the amended and the
original dispute notifications to resolve the matters
in dispute. What more
proper purpose could there be for a union to bring the matter to the Commission
seeking assistance in resolving
matters that are agreed to be industrial and
evidence that there has been an abuse of process by the union bringing
this matter before the Commission as alleged by the respondent.
union submits that the employers actions amount to them seeking to summary
dismiss the application. It is requesting the proceedings
go no further and that
there be no hearing of evidence or the merits. The principles for summary
dismissal were discussed in
Bulner & Wright v Carter Holt
“The employer, being the person seeking summary dismissal must clearly
demonstrate that the worker has no arguable
ASU is seeking a proper hearing about this matter. The employer’s position
in seeking to dispatch the application is manifestly
and clearly
inadequate.
the respondent’s outline it submits the application in the name of the ASU
is no more than a device and is an abuse of process.
The ASU referred to the
decision of
“an abuse of process occurs when the process, in this case of the
commission is put in motion for a purpose which it is not
intended to serve or
which it is incapable of
decision of
, when discussing proceedings instituted for an
improper purpose, discusses the issue of proceedings that are frivolous
or oppressive. There can be no suggestion that this matter is
frivolous vexatious or oppressive.
ASU brought this dispute on the papers before the Commission because its members
had a concern. It is seeking the assistance of
the Commission in both the
amended and the original dispute notification to resolve the matters in dispute.
The ASU is simply seeking
a fair hearing before the Commission on a matter that
is properly brought on behalf of its members.
regard to the matter of judicial power, the ASU referred to the decision in
Australian Services Union SA & NT Branch v Port Pirie Regional
contends that the same arguments as discussed in that decision apply in this
matter. Paragraph 25 of the applicant’s
outline identifies the issues in
contention that are in addition to pre-existing legal rights. They include
matters such as “practical
matters”, the employer’s
“inconsistent approach”, the factual circumstances presently
existing, the “feasibility”
of the consequences of the
employer’s decision, the “facilitation” of the work of the
employer, the need for “positive
relationships” and having regard to
such matters, the benefits “ought to be continued”.
decision the Deputy President made factual findings that
were greater than the enforcement of pre-existing rights. The Deputy President
took into account other factors that relate to industrial fairness. In that case
as in this, the Commission is not bound to do simply
what the parties ask for,
it can make orders as it sees fit, provided there is procedural fairness. It is
clear from the correspondence
placed before the Commission the union is seeking
a remedy which is a lot more than just pre-existing legal rights. The union is
asking the Commission to provide a remedy as a matter of industrial fairness
consistent with the approach endorsed by the Full Commission
AEU submits that the employer is seeking the application be dismissed without a
trial involving evidence and submissions as a
result of an abuse of process. If
an abuse of process is found the remedy is a stay of proceedings yet the
employer asserts that
they are not seeking a stay. This should not be granted
for the reasons asserted by the ASU.
their closing submissions the ASU indicated that while the
decision was not referred to by the respondent, the decision is squarely on
point with what has to be determined here. In this matter
orders are being
sought to settle the dispute and those orders ought to be industrially
employer, in alleging that the union is seeking injunctive remedies is clearly
wrong. It is very different to make an order an
employee is to be paid a
particular rate of pay until further order or circumstances change. What is
before the Commission here is
no different. The respondent sought to contrast
this matter with a classification matter on the basis that a dispute about
classification
was about what one was entitled to. That was the employer’s
submission in the Port Pirie matter, which was comprehensively
dismissed. It is
not in this jurisdiction about what one is entitled to; it is whether in
settlement of a dispute, the Commission
grants new rights.
relation to the commuter use of vehicles, the employer asserts the remedy
available to the workers is to go off and use another
process. That may be well
and good but it is not a process available to the union and it is the union that
is the applicant. No matter
how much the employer dislikes this it is the fact
of the matter and you cannot go behind that.
Act makes it clear that the union has standing. Parliament has determined to
allow unions to bring applications without limitations.
Section 194(2) was
created to allow an individual to bring a dispute to the Commission if they
chose to act by themselves if they
have no other alternative grievance review
these circumstances the three affected employees were within their rights to
seek the union’s assistance in resolving this
matter. This is simply an
attempt to stop people accessing their rights as union members to be
represented. The employer is simply
seeking to pick and choose what grievance
process the employees access. They employer does not want the employees to use
their union
and is seeking to pick the employees off one by one using an
individual process that suits them better.
Further written submissions provided by the ASU 12 March 2015
the hearing the ASU submitted that the respondent raised the issue for the first
time that it did not believe the Commission
had jurisdiction to grant the orders
sought and that the Commission has no power to confine or fetter the
employer’s managerial
discretion in the manner set out in the orders
sought. It was agreed by the parties that the ASU were able to provide further
submissions in relation to this matter.
ASU submit that all orders of the Commission granting new rights inherently
fetter or constrain the scope and exercise of managerial
discretion, in that any
such orders require the employer to conduct itself in a particular way rather
than the employer being free
to choose how it will act. The ASU assert the
employer did not raise any particular statutory power granted to the employer
overrode the power otherwise entrusted to the Commission. As such a
detailed analysis of statutes that operate concurrently cannot
be undertaken, as
it has been in reported cases when this allegation has been raised before.
ASU referred to the most recent decision of the full Commission on the issue,
Conditions of Employment for DECS and DFEEST (TAFE) Employees Decision No 2
where the Full Commission said:
“It does not seem likely
that Parliament, having given the Commission the jurisdiction and machinery to
resolve industrial disputes,
intended to exclude that jurisdiction in the case
of an employer and a category of employees in respect whom disputation as to the
conditions of employment has occurred. If there is evidentiary material which
demonstrates that a group of employees are not receiving
fair play the purpose
of the FW Act is to override managerial
discretion.”
the Commission considers that a particular statutory power invested in the
respondent is relevant to this matter and cannot be
fettered in the terms sought
in the orders applied for, the applicant seeks to be heard on the matter. The
ASU is of the view that
the proposal put by the employer is wrong and all of the
respondent’s jurisdictional objections should be
Considerations
first matter to be determined jurisdictionally is whether it is appropriate for
the union to make an application before the Commission
under s 194(1)(e) on
behalf of its three members or whether the respondent is correct in their view
that the relief sought relates
to three individual employees whose circumstances
stand alone and as such should be dealt with under s 194(2) of the Act.
it is found that the union has acted appropriately in making an application on
behalf of its three members then the second matter
to be determined would be
whether the Commission has jurisdiction to provide the orders sought by the
union. It is appropriate to
deal with the first matter, that being whether it
was appropriate for the ASU to make an application on behalf of its members Mr
Cummings, Mr Hutchens and Mr Mitchel.
role of registered associations is well established in the Commission. Section 4
4—Interpretation
(1) In this Act, unless the contrary intention
registered association
means an association (which may include
an organisation or branch) registered under
(Associations)...”
the purposes of the Act it is apparent that the ASU is a registered association.
This fact is not disputed by the parties.
4 of the Act deals with matters relating to Associations generally. The ASU is a
duly registered association.
3 of the Act relevantly states the
(1) The objects of this Act are—
(k) to provide for absolute freedom of association and choice of industrial
representation, and...”
a general principal the objects of the Act identify that employees who find
themselves in industrial disputation with their employer
have the right to
choose who they want to represent them.
ASU’s position that parliament’s intention was to expand s 194 by
the inclusion of s 194(2) has merit. This was at
the time of “Work
Choices” and s 194(2) ensured that natural persons who had a genuine
industrial grievance and who did
not have an impartial grievance resolution
process reasonably available to them would not be denied access to the
Commission. It
is a logical conclusion to find that Parliament’s intention
was to expand the jurisdiction to allow natural persons to seek
redress in the
Commission. Its purpose when expanding s 194 would not have been intended
to reduce the rights of an employee or their
union to bring an application to
the Commission on their behalf as was originally intended.
15 February 2016 the unions representative Mr Ats wrote to the Commission
advising of the decision of Deputy President Bartel in
the matter of the
Ambulance Employees Association of South Australia and Etherington v Chief
Executive, Department for Health and Aging (SA Ambulance
(“Etherington”)
ASU submitted that decision dealt with the same jurisdictional objection that is
currently being dealt with in this matter and
unless the Commission is of the
view that that decision is plainly wrong then the member is obliged to follow
that decision as a
matter of comity.
decision dealt with the jurisdictional objection raised by the respondent
regarding a dispute notification filed by the Ambulance
Employees Association of
South Australia (AEA) on behalf of its member Mr Etherington and related to
a final warning the member received.
Two matters were identified. The first
being the warning to the applicant and the second being the overall effect of
the disciplinary
procedure. As is the case in this matter the respondent argued
that the relief sought was specific to Mr Etherington’s circumstances.
AEA putting their name on the application cannot turn the matter into a
collective dispute which sidesteps the operation of s
194(2) of the Act.
AEA argued that as the application before the Commission was brought by a
registered association the Commission does not need
to consider s 194(2) because
the applicant is not a natural person. The Deputy President found that the fact
the AEA was the applicant
for the notification means that it was more than the
applicant’s representative in the pursuit of his application before the
Commission.
her decision the Deputy President states:
“The AEA can pursue,
in its own right, an industrial dispute before the Commission involving one of
its members. A registered
association which commences proceedings to bring a
dispute before the Commission brings with it the support of members of the
association.
As Starke J stated in the
Burwood Cinema Case
albeit in a
different statutory context, a registered organisation is not a mere agent of
its members: it stands in their stead;
acts on their behalf and is
representative of the class associated together in the organisation.
I do not accept the respondent’s submission that the AEA’s status
as an applicant for the proceedings is a device to circumvent
the operation of s
194(2) of the Act. The AEA’s involvement in Mr Etherington’s
grievance is not a recent event - it
has been representing Mr Etherington in the
workplace in the course of the investigation into the allegations against him.
to have revoked the warning that was issued to him. When this was
refused by the SA Ambulance Service, the Secretary of the AEA filed
Notification.
The respondent’s submission also fails to recognise the role and status
of employee organisations under the Act. The inclusion
of the AEA as an
applicant in its own right, and not just as a representative of Mr Etherington,
means that the dispute between Mr
Etherington and the SA Ambulance Service has a
collective quality - Mr Etherington’s circumstances are a matter of
to AEA members generally. This is hardly surprising given the nature of
the broader dispute between the AEA and the SA Ambulance
The inclusion of Mr Etherington as an applicant for the notification and the
amended Notification is of no practical effect or consequence
in circumstances
where his association is acting on his behalf and is an applicant for the
dispute in its own right. The same matters
could be agitated by the AEA on Mr
Etherington’s behalf and the same relief sought if the AEA was the sole
applicant for the
Notification and amended Notification. In my view this
underscores why the amended Notification should not be seen as an application
an employee under s 194(1)(c) of the
(Paragraph numbering and footnotes removed)
AEA’s position was that it was concerned about the effect the
respondent’s treatment of Mr Etherington would have
on its members
generally and that was what brought on the collective nature of the dispute.
This position was not put by the ASU
in the present case. However the Deputy
President went on to state:
“In my view, the categories of
persons that can commence proceedings under s 194(1)(c) and (d) of the Act are
employees and
employers, in the singular or plural, where no registered
association is involved in the application.
Accordingly, by virtue of Mr Etherington’s membership of the AEA and
its status an applicant for the proceedings, the matter
falls within the scope
of s 194(1)(d) of the Act and s 194(2) of the Act does not apply.
The circumstances of the present matter can, in any event, be distinguished
, where there was no involvement of a registered
association and no argument that the application by Mr Krasowski was other
application by an employee under s 194(1)(c) of the
(Paragraph numbering removed)
Etherington
as is in the present case, the applicant chose to have his
union make application on his behalf under s 194(1)(e) even though the
respondent argued that the applicant could have accessed an alternative
impartial grievance resolution process that was available
to him. The finding of
the Deputy President was that the matter fell within the scope of s 194(1)(e) of
the Act and therefore s 194(2)
of the Act does not apply.
Deputy President concluded that the respondent’s jurisdictional objection
be dismissed on the basis the AEA were legitimately
able to make application on
behalf of its member under s 194(e).
considered the decision of the learned Deputy President and the requirement that
a member of the Commission will provide comity
when determining matters I find
that the respondent’s jurisdictional objection regarding the ASU’s
application being
a ruse as the application should have been made under s 194(2)
is dismissed.
Are the orders sought by the ASU within the Commission’s jurisdiction to
orders sought by the ASU are the ongoing commuter use of the work vehicle for
the three members identified and the employees continued
employment at the
current workplaces until there is an order from the Commission, an agreed
position between the parties or the relevant
employee ceases to occupy their
present position.
parties agree that the subject matter of the dispute is an industrial matter.
The respondent argued that just because a matter
is an industrial matter it does
not automatically mean that the Commission has jurisdiction to hear the matter.
The respondent also
raised the issue of what does the term industrially fair
mean. Industrial fairness does not operate in a vacuum. It must have some
context to it, such as that in a claim for unfair dismissal. When determining
whether a dismissal is harsh, unjust or unreasonable
the Commission needs to
determine whether the dismissal was industrially fair and if not, to provide a
remedy to the applicant.
the hearing the ASU sought an opportunity to respond to the respondent’s
position prior to the Commission making a determination
as to whether the orders
sought by the ASU are beyond the jurisdiction of the Commission because they
fettered the managerial prerogative
of the employer.
is agreed by the parties that the orders now sought by the ASU are framed in
such a way that the Commission needs to determine
whether it is industrially
fair as to whether to grant the affected employees future rights in terms of the
orders sought. While
I agree with the respondent that the concept of industrial
fairness does not operate in a vacuum I am also mindful that in the interest
fair play that before determining whether the Commission has the power to grant
the orders sought by the ASU it would be appropriate
to hear the merits of the
is the Commission’s view that the merits of the case should be heard to
determine what orders (if any) are appropriate for
Mr Cummings, Mr Mitchell
and or Mr Hutchens. The parties will be notified of a directions hearing in due
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
It is the practice of this Commission to publish its reasons for decision in
full on the Internet. If any party or person contends
that these reasons for
decision should not be published in full the party or person must make an
application within seven days of
the delivery of these reasons. The application
shall be by an Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should
addressed to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within
the time specified these reasons will be published
in accordance with the
Commission’s usual practice.
(2012) 249 CLR
at para 56.
[2012] SAWCT
[2013] SAIRComm
[2014] SAIRComm
[2010] SAIRComm
[2015] SAIRComm
para’s 46-49.
para’s 54-56.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (251 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter