URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRComm/2016/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Australian Education Union (SA Branch) v Chief Executive, Department of the Premier and Cabinet (Department for Education and Child Development [2016] SAIRComm 8 (22 August 2016)
Australian Education Union (SA Branch) v Chief Executive, Department of
the Premier and Cabinet (Department for Education and Child
Development
] SAIRComm 8
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION (SA)
AUSTRALIAN EDUCATION UNION (SA BRANCH)
CHIEF EXECUTIVE, DEPARTMENT OF THE PREMIER AND CABINET (DEPARTMENT FOR
EDUCATION AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT)
s 202 Referral to the Commission
2648 of 2013
HEARING DATES:
1 and 22 September 2015
JUDGMENT OF:
Commissioner P McMahon
DELIVERED ON:
22 August 2016
CATCHWORDS:
Industrial Dispute - Referral of a dispute to the Commission for
determination - Whether the qualifications required by the employer
industrially fair and appropriate - Whether DECD in determining qualifications
is a condition of employment - Whether Commission
has jurisdiction to determine
the matter - Whether this dispute is a private arbitration -
Qualifications as determined by DECD is a condition of employment - Not a
private arbitration - Commission lacks jurisdiction to
determine matter in
accordance with s 82(2)(b)(i)- Ss 3, 82, 84, 85, 202, Chapter 3 Part 2 of
the Fair Work Act 1994
Australian Services Union, SA & NT Branch v Port Pirie Regional
SAIRComm 18
Port Pirie Regional Council v Australian
Services Union, SA & NT Branch
[2014] SAIRComm 3
Penrice Soda
Products Pty Ltd v Australian Workers Union & Construction, Forestry, Mining
and Energy Union
[2000] SAIRComm 40
Conditions of Employment for DECS
and DFEEST (TAFE) Employees Decision No 2
[2010] SAIRComm 7
Hospitality and Miscellaneous Union v Southcorp Wines Pty Ltd
SAIRComm 36
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v The
Australian Industrial Relations Commission & Anor
[2001] HCA 16
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr M Ats
Respondent: Mr A
Solicitors:
Applicant: Lieschke and Weatherill
Respondent: Crown
Solicitor’s Office
Introduction
matter relates to a dispute between the Australian Education Union, South
Australian Branch (“AEU”) and the Department
for Education and Child
Development (“DECD”). The dispute relates to the application of
Clause 6.4 of the South Australian
School and Preschool Education Staff
Enterprise Agreement 2012 (“the Agreement”). The clause is a new
clause first appearing
in the 2012 Agreement. Provided is the relevant
“CLAUSE 6.4 CRITERIA BASED INCREMENT APPLICABLE TO
SSOs, ECWs AND AEWs
6.4.1 A new criteria based increment will apply above the current top
increment at each SSO-1 and SSO-2; ECW-1 and ECW-2; and AEW-1
operative from the commencement of the 2013 school year (ffpp on or after 24
January 2013 – rates in Schedule 1.4
(AEW), Schedule 1.5 (ECW) and
Schedule 1.6 (SSO)) as follows:
(a) An employee classified at level 1 or level 2 SSO, ECW or AEW is eligible
to apply for progression to the new criteria-based increment
subject to the
(i) the employee has attained the relevant qualifications as required by
(ii) the employee has completed 12 months at the current top step of the
relevant level; and
(iii) is not currently subject of unsatisfactory performance management
(b) The operative date for a successful application will be the first full
pay period on or after the date of lodgement of the application
except where an
applicant provides evidence that he or she met the criteria before the
commencement of the 2013 school year, in which
case, the operative date will be
first full pay period on or after 24 January 2013.
(c) If an eligible employee’s application is not successful then the
employee may lodge a grievance with the Chief Executive
(or their delegate) in
the first instance OR the employee may lodge a grievance in accordance with the
existing procedures for preventing
and settling disputes at clause 3.1.
6.4.2 DECD will make available a list of recognised qualifications and will
consult with the AEU and PSA about applicable qualifications
as varied from time
to time to meet operational or program needs. DECD will establish an on-line
application process for employee
applications.”
initial dispute notification by the AEU indicated that DECD were introducing
qualifications required for applicants to achieve
the new criteria based
increment without having proper consultation with the AEU.
new criteria based increment applies to School Support Officers
(“SSO”), Aboriginal Education Workers (“AEW”)
Childhood Workers (“ECW”). Throughout the course of the dispute the
AEU’s position changed to the extent
that they were now seeking the
Commission's assistance in determining whether the qualifications required by
DECD were industrially
fair. The matter did not resolve through conciliation and
on 10 April 2014 at a compulsory conference the subject matter of the dispute
was referred for determination by the Commission. They subject matter of the
conference referred for determination is as follows:
industrially fair and appropriate, in all of the circumstances, for the employer
to require SSO and ECW step 2 employees,
pursuant to clause 6.4.1(a)(i) of the
agreement, to possess:
certificate IV qualification; or
certificate III qualification; or
qualification”.
position of DECD is that the Commission does not have jurisdiction to determine
this matter as it would require the Commission
to make findings in relation to a
condition of employment that is a subject matter of the Agreement. This, the
DECD submit, is excluded
by s 82(2)(b)(i) of the
Fair Work Act 1994
(“the Act”) which
“82—Commission’s
(1) An enterprise agreement cannot limit—
(a) the Commission’s powers of conciliation; or
(b) the Commission’s powers to settle industrial disputes between the
employer and the employees bound by the agreement.
(2) However—
(a) before the Commission intervenes in an industrial dispute between an
employer and employees bound by an enterprise agreement,
the Commission should
ensure that the procedures laid down in the agreement for settling industrial
disputes have been followed and
have failed to resolve the dispute; and
(b) a determination made by the Commission in settlement of such a
(i) must not be made in relation to a condition of employment that is a
subject matter of the agreement (unless the determination
is to correct an
ambiguity or uncertainty in the agreement); ...”
AEU had previously raised the issue of apprehended bias and that matter was
dealt with at the hearing held on 1 September 2014.
Having determined that it
was inappropriate to disqualify myself from hearing the matter, the issue of
whether the Commission has
for hearing on 22 September 2015.
The employer’s position
employer submitted that cl 6.4(a)(i) of the Agreement is what the parties are
primarily interested in. It specifically relates
to the employees having
obtained relevant qualifications as required by DECD to access the new criteria
based increment. It is this
term of the Agreement that is relevant to the
question before the Commission today. This is principally a statutory
interpretation
argument. The Commission must be bound by the provisions of the
Act in terms of dealing with the dispute before it.
employer raised the reference made in the applicant’s outline of argument
to this matter being a private arbitration. This
is not a private arbitration
and if it were, the first thing to be determined would be what the terms and
limits of that arbitration
are. This is clearly arbitration under the Act. It
can only be arbitration under the Act absent a great deal more agreement as to
some alternative process which would be adopted. This dispute is absent any
clear basis for giving the Commission power to go beyond
the Act to act in a way
which would potentially be inconsistent with the provisions of the Act.
employer's position is quite simple, there is an enterprise agreement, and the
agreement obliges DECD to set criteria to identify
relevant qualifications for
eligibility for classification at the new criteria-based increment found at cl
6.4.1 of the Agreement.
DECD has done so and has complied with its obligations
under the Agreement. Having listed the requirements, those requirements become
part of the Agreement. This has not been challenged by the AEU. This dispute has
arisen because the AEU are unhappy with DECD’s
exercise of its discretion
in compliance with the Agreement.
the applicant’s outline of argument they state:
approach set out by the Full Commission in
requires that the
first question that the Commission ask itself is whether the requirement to hold
a certificate IV qualification,
a certificate III qualification, or some other
(specific) qualification are conditions of employment under the
agreement.”
respect, that is not the question. The question is, is an express term of the
agreement that DECD will identify the requirements
for eligibility for
classification at the new criteria based increment because that is the term of
the Agreement at cl 6.4.1? Has
DECD fulfilled the term of the Agreement? The
answer to that is yes, DECD has fulfilled the terms of the Agreement. The
qualifications
determined are DECD’s discretion. With respect it is not
for the AEU or the Commission to go behind the exercise of that discretion
simply because the AEU do not agree with it.
AEU correctly identified that you do not find the certificates set out in the
Agreement. That is because the Agreement makes it
clear that DECD will publish
its requirements in due course and that is why they are not contained in the
Agreement. It is left for
DECD to determine
cl 6.4.1. It would have been no
utility if the criteria had already been determined. If the criteria had already
been determined you
could have eliminated cl 6.4.1 and simply listed the
application is nothing more than an attempt to revise the Agreement because the
AEU is now unhappy with the outcome. Perhaps
the AEU should not have agreed to
the clause in the Agreement. Perhaps that was a poor decision on their part.
Perhaps there are
reasons that the AEU agreed to it in the form that it was
agreed to. What is clear is that this clause in the Agreement was agreed
enterprise agreement was approved. Having been agreed and approved, there being
no doubt as to what it means, no confusion
and ambiguity in that term. The
applicant cannot now contrive to revisit the Agreement through linguistic
gymnastics by formulating
a question which is not the question on the face of
the Agreement.
employer’s view is that there is an Agreement which is in force. The
Commission does have power to rectify conditions of
employment that contain an
ambiguity or uncertainty in the Agreement but that is not what is being sought
by the AEU. There is no
uncertainty or ambiguity to correct. The AEU cannot
simply come along and say well lets go back and have another look at that
one party is unhappy with it.
AEU reference the
That application was made by someone seeking re-classification. That must be
looked at differently to this application.
This is a dispute about the
fundamentals of the enterprise agreement and what's been agreed to. That arises
directly out of s 82
of the Act. In the
decision the issue of
private arbitration was dealt with:
“There is nothing in the
clause which indicates that the Commission is to exercise dispute settling
powers other than in accordance
the procedures set out in Division 3, Part 3 of
Chapter 5 of the
Deputy President indicated that the Act is what limits the authority of the
Commission. You cannot go beyond the Act. You cannot
grant fresh enlarged
here. All disputes must be
resolved in accordance with the Act. This was
reiterated in the
which states:
“...Once the approval process is completed, then
(given the three sections set out above) the jurisdiction and powers of the
Commission are limited thereby.”
is the same case that we have here, it is not a private arbitration it is an
arbitration under the Act. If that was not the case,
what do the sections in the
Act mean when it states at s
“82—Commission’s jurisdiction to act in
disputes under an enterprise agreement”.
84 of the Act states:
“84—Power of Commission to vary
or rescind an enterprise agreement”.
85 of the Act states:
“85—Commission may release
party from obligation to comply with enterprise agreement”.
application is not seeking to release the parties from obligations to comply
with the Agreement. What do these sanctions mean
if they do not constrain and
place limitations on the Commission’s power to deal with a matter such as
this? If you were able
to simply go to the other provisions of the Act such as s
202 and avoid the limitations of s 82 through to s 85 then there would
utility in having those sections in the Act. Any party who did not want to be
bound by the specific limitations could simply
indicate on their application
where they were going using the other powers of the Act and ignoring the other
be clear, this dispute is not about whether the criteria for classification have
been applied in any particular case, nor is it
a grievance about the
application. It is a dispute about the setting of the criteria under the
Agreement and DECD’s discretion.
If one or more employees applied for
classification under the new criteria and are aggrieved by the manner in which
the criteria
were applied, that would be a different issue. This dispute is not
dealing with the application of the criteria, it is dealing with
whether or not
those criteria are criteria that the DECD is entitled to require.
para 27 of the AEU’s Outline of Argument, the AEU suggest the clause is
not capable of enforcement, this is clearly not the
case. If DECD did not
publish the list of requirements under cl 6.4.1(a)(i) then the AEU could come to
the Commission and say that
the Agreement is not being complied with and seek to
require the DECD to publish the list of required qualifications. That is not
case here, a list has been produced and the requirements have been
next question is can there be enforcement of the criteria? If an individual was
disgruntled about the way the criteria applied
to them the Commission will be
asked to enforce the requirement of the criteria in the particular case and
there is nothing to indicate
the Commission could not do so. The question
regarding enforcement is wrongly framed. The question in terms of enforcement
be; should DECD not set requirements under the Agreement, can it be
compelled to? The answer to this question is yes, it can be compelled
with the terms of the Agreement.
is a clear distinction between this matter and the situation in the appeal of
Port Pirie Regional Council v the
decision dealt with the classification of a particular worker. This distinction
is made at paragraph 28 of the decision:
“On the face of the
agreement that was being considered in that case there is no condition of
employment regarding the classification
criteria. The matter is expressly and
exclusively dealt with in the award. The agreement acknowledges this where it
states in cl
6.1 that certain matters remain to be dealt with by the award and
not by the agreement.”
is in clear contrast with the case before the Commission now. The agreement does
deal with the classification criteria. While
it does not specify them clearly,
it sets out the process in which the criteria will be set and that is it will be
set by the requirements
set by DECD. The enforcement being sought by the AEU is
for the Commission to override the Agreement, it is the employer's view that
cannot. This is a straightforward case of the AEU seeking a variation of the
Agreement and it is a direct attack on the terms
of the agreement whereby the
DECD set the requirements for classification.
paragraph 30 in the AEU Outline of Argument refers to the
Conditions of
Employment for DECS and DFEEST (TAFE) Employees Decision No
which states
the following:
“If there is evidentiary material which
demonstrates that a group of employees are not receiving fair play the purpose
FW Act is to override managerial discretion.”
on its own, it appears to be giving a very broad scope to the Commission
irrespective of the limitations in s 82 to s 85 of
the Act but that was not
being dealt with in that the
Conditions of
The case was about setting the terms of the agreement because the parties were
in dispute. It was not about defining, clarifying
and dealing with the terms of
this agreement, it was about setting them. When two parties are in dispute about
the terms of an agreement
and it comes before the Commission one would expect
fair play at that point. That is not to say fair play will not be applied in
this case, which is the impression that the AEU is seeking to give. Fair play
did occur in this case because the parties negotiated
the Agreement. Both sides
agreed to the terms of the Agreement. It came before the Commission and was
approved by the Commission.
That is fair play. The AEU cannot now say hang on I
don’t like that term of the Agreement, I don’t think we should agree
to that. This is nothing more than the AEU having a second bite of the cherry.
This is not a question of fair play because the opportunity
was given and taken
to agree to the Agreement.
AEU raised the Objects of the Act and particularly s 3(1)(d) which
“(d) to encourage enterprise agreements that are relevant, flexible and
appropriate;”
clause of the Agreement in question does provide flexibility and is entirely in
keeping with the Agreement that the DECD can meet
its requirements from time to
time by setting a list of the requirements for classification which is
consistent with s 3(1)(i) under
the Objects of the Act, which
“(i) to ensure compliance with agreements and awards made for the
prevention or settlement of industrial disputes, and to
ensure compliance with
any obligations arising under this Act.”
cannot be a dispute that what we are dealing about here is compliance with an
s 3(1)(j) of the Act, the Objects state:
“(j) provide employees with an avenue for expressing employment-related
grievances and having them considered and
remedied....”
that is a purpose of the Objects of the Act, it is not a purpose in and of
itself and is separate from the limitations found
in the Chapter 3 Part 2 of the
Act. Employees have an avenue including negotiating agreements through their
unions. The Agreement
was freely entered into and in effect the purposes of the
Act and fair play are both being met. In this application the AEU is seeking
override the discretion given to the DECD because they do not approve and they
hope that the Commission does not approve either.
This is not the purpose of the
Act, the purpose of the Commission in dealing with an agreed and approved
enterprise agreements.
employer recognises that the subject matter of a dispute may evolve during the
dispute resolution process, the point the employer
is making is not a question
of whether or not the dispute can evolve. When the dispute was listed, the
Commission had been asked
to resolve a dispute about an obligation to consult.
We are well away from that now where we are actually seeking to override the
employer’s express entitlement to determine qualifications as set out in
the Agreement. This, the employer contends, is not
an evolution of the question
for a resolution before the Commission.
last matter the employer seeks to address with the Commission is the AEU’s
application does not reference s 202(3)(b) of
the Act. It does not make
reference to the limitations or the restrictions on the Commission not to affect
the terms of the agreement.
If the Commission is to override the criteria set
down by the employer in compliance with the clause in the Agreement, the
must clearly be affecting the terms of the Agreement. This is not
addressed by the AEU because the restrictions on the Commission
not to affect
the terms of the Agreement cannot be overcome.
The AEU’s submission
main argument for the Commission to consider is whether or not the clause meets
the criteria to say that the Commission cannot
go there but even if it does, it
does not bring an end to the matter. Even if the Commission did find that it was
prohibited from
dealing with the matter because of s 82(2)(i) of the Act.
Section 82(3) of the Act, if the Commission found that this is a question
the application of the Agreement, the Commission is still empowered to consider
the merits of the matter and if it thinks fit,
to override managerial
discretion. These are the central issues in question.
AEU agree with the DECD that the application is not an application to vary the
Agreement and that has not been put by the AEU.
It is also agreed the Commission
cannot deal with pre-existing rights which is reserved for courts to consider.
decision referred to by the employer, has no application in this matter as that
decision is an argument about what employees are
entitled to. Distinct from
the Commission's role as an arbitral body in granting new rights.
the heart of the employer’s argument is the position that the Commission
cannot determine what qualifications are required.
In essence, the AEU does say
the Commission can determine what qualifications are relevant for progression to
a new increment and
that the Commission can preclude the employer from
determining what specific qualifications are relevant. The AEU are not seeking
that the employer agrees with the AEU about the qualifications. The
employer’s position that specifying the appropriate qualifications
purpose of the clause would have the effect of varying the Agreement is not
agreed with by the AEU. The test of what is meant
in s 82(2)(b) of the Act by
the expression “condition of employment” is set out in the
para 25 of the AEU’s Outline of Argument they
“The expression ‘condition of employment’
is not defined in the Act however it appears (as “conditions of
employment”) in a number of provisions including in the definition of
industrial matter (s 4) and the Enterprise Agreement
approval requirements of s
79. In our view, the expression must mean, at least in the present context, an
express term within the
Agreement directly concerning the relevant employment
relationships and which is capable of being enforced. In our view, the mere
mention of an issue within an Agreement, where such is not dealt with by way of
an express and enforceable provision, would not attract
the constraints of
s 82(2)(b) of the Act. Such an approach is consistent with the evident
purpose of s 82(2) of the Act as we have
found it to be, and sits comfortably
with the use of that expression within the other provisions of the Act
pertaining to Enterprise
Agreements.”
relation to the employer's position that if no qualifications were published,
the AEU could seek an Order of the Commission requiring
the employer to publish
those qualifications. They disagree with this as that would be seeking
injunctive relief compelling the Crown
to do something as distinct from
refraining from doing something. The
Crown Proceedings Act
would prohibit that.
employer has indicated that having published the list, the list becomes part of
the Agreement. There is nothing to support this
proposition and it is wrong. The
Agreement is a document that stands alone. It is varied only by Order of the
Commission. The employer
tells the Commission that when the Commission is
conducting an interpretive exercise, it can only look at the thing as it is
brought into existence, you cannot have regard to things that happen later
except for a full variation approved by the Commission.
In this matter the
Commission can have no regard to the fact the list has been published in
determining jurisdiction. All the lists
relate to merit that is not what we are
here to deal with today. The Commission cannot be guided in the interpretation
of an agreement
by something which came into the event subsequently. That would
mean the agreement could change on a day by day basis as the employer
and republishes list. This cannot be so. The AEU states that employer’s
submission on this matter must therefore
be set aside.
that the qualifications are not pinned down in the agreement gives the
Commission jurisdiction to deal with the matter. The
AEU agrees with the
employer’s submission that the
conditions of
decision was in a different context but it does not take away from what this
Commission exist to do. The Commission has basically
two functions, for example,
in relation to enterprise agreements its role is to ensure that certain criteria
are being fulfilled
and if satisfied it approves the agreement. The other key
function, as long as the Commission finds that clause doesn’t meet
criteria set out in
which would prevent the Commission from dealing with it, must deal with the
The question today is if the AEU makes out their factual case, can the
Commission give the orders they want which is fundamentally
no qualification
greater than a Certificate III being required. The AEU said that the
employer’s discretion in matters before
the Commission is not absolute. If
the Commission finds that it is not pinned down by the agreement the Commission
can do what it
thinks is right to cure unfairness if it accepts that it
employer's outline of argument at paragraph 32
“Alternatively, any such determination would
materially affect the terms of the 2012 Enterprise Agreement as it would
the respondent’s entitlement to determine the qualifications it
requires under Clause 6/4/1(a)(i); and therefore would be beyond
Commission’s jurisdiction: s 202(3)(b) of the FW Act.”
determination about what qualifications are appropriate would restrict the
employer determining what it requires. The AEU says yes
it would. The Commission
exists to provide oversight to the exercise of managerial discretion, to the
extent that that does restrict
the employer's discretion that is what Parliament
employer’s submission raised that it was the AEU who drafted the proposed
question for referral. While that is true the
referral is the Commission's own
Order. Whether or not a particular party referred it is irrelevant.
is the AEU’s submission in order to resolve the question before the
Commission today, it is unnecessary to determine whether
the Commission is
exercising a statutory part of arbitration or whether as the AEU submits in
addition as opposed to instead of,
it is exercising a power of private
arbitration.
arbitration results from an agreement between two entities or more to submit
their differences to someone else for resolution.
The critical distinction is
between that, where it is done by agreement or consent, and in an exercise of
state power. The classic
example of the exercise of state powers setting up a
statutory arbitration in the making of a contested award.
issue of private arbitration was dealt with in the
Construction, Forestry,
Mining and Energy Union v The Australian Industrial Relations Commission &
which makes the point that when a non-consent award is made, which has dispute
resolution powers within it, is not private in
character because it is
compulsion. It is the state obliging this to occur. You have two parties
agreeing for themselves “we
are going to submit our differences to someone
else” that is, by definition, a private arbitration.
has been suggested that if it were to be a private arbitration the constraints
in terms of those in the Act are out the window.
This is not the case. The
express constraints cannot be overridden. The difference is that constraints
which are not expressed are
not relevant to a private arbitration. In the above
case the high court found that non allowable award matters even though they were
not within the jurisdiction of the commission were not prohibited. For a private
arbitration all that is required is that parties
agree to submit their
differences to someone else for resolution. That is exactly what the parties
have done in cl 3.1.13 of the
employer raised s 3(1)(i) the Object of the Act that deals with compliance. We
are not talking about compliance, the AEU are saying
that the exercise of
discretion does not afford employees fair play, whether that is right or not is
not relevant today, it is not
a condition of employment. Therefore the AEU seek
orders that it be not higher than Certificate III as that is a fair and
employer indicated that they did not raise s 202(3)(b) of the Act which states
an order of the Commission where parties to the
industrial dispute are bound by
the enterprise agreement may not affect the terms of the agreement. This is true
and is plainly to
be read consistent with s 82 (2)(b) of the Act. Similarly, the
employer does not raise s 82(3) of the Act which states the Commission
acting under this section, settle a dispute over the application of an
enterprise agreement. The AEU submit that s 82(3)
of the Act is not to be read
subject to s 82(2) what it plainly means is if something is dealt with in an
agreement and there is
a disagreement about how it applies in practice the
Commission can deal with that. Section 3 gives the Commission jurisdiction to
hear the matter even if the Commission finds against the AEU at s 82(2) of the
the Commission finds in the AEU’s favour, the Commission could make an
order of the kind that the AEU is seeking. This is
not a final order it is a
step in a process. Reference was made to the
SA Government (Public Sector
Salaried Employees) Salaried Interim Award 2004
no extra claims provisions.
The claim before us today relates to a claim for reclassification and would not
be caught by a no extra
claims provision as identified in the above decision.
Quite plainly there is a relationship between a reclassification and the
qualifications
which are required to obtain the reclassification. This setup
makes the point that this is not rewriting the Agreement, the Agreement
the employer a discretion but it was never an absolute discretion. Pursuant to
the Act it always remains subject to the Commission's
oversight and if the
employer's discretion were not subject to the Commission's oversight this place
may as well pack up and go home.
summary, the AEU makes two points, the clause as defined in their outline is not
a condition of employment that is the subject
matter of the Agreement for the
purposes of s 82(2)(b)(i) of the Act and as such must follow the authority of
the Full Commission
Finally this is a dispute over how discretion has been applied and pursuant to s
82(3) of the Act there is no barrier to the Commission
exercising its power to
resolve that dispute.
Considerations and findings
subject matter of the conference referred for determination is as
“Is it industrially fair and appropriate, in all of
the circumstances, for the employer to require SSO and ECW step 2 employees,
pursuant to clause 6.4.1(a)(i) of the agreement, to possess:
a) a certificate IV qualification; or
b) a certificate III qualification; or
c) some other
qualification”.
to determining whether it is industrially fair for Step 2 SSO’s and
ECW’s in all of the circumstances to possess
either a Certificate IV
qualification, a Certificate III qualification or some other qualification it
is necessary to determine
whether the above requirements can be deemed to be a
condition of employment that is a subject matter of the agreement.
AEU argue that as the qualifications in question were not determined by DECD at
the time the Agreement was made, the qualifications
therefore cannot be deemed
to be a condition of employment that is a subject matter of the Agreement. It
follows from there that
s 82(2)(b)(i) of the Act does not preclude the
Commission from hearing the matter.
support this position, the AEU rely upon the
Port Pirie Regional Council v
substantive matter in this decision relates to an application to reclassify an
employee. In that case it was found that
the classification structure was not
dealt with in the enterprise agreement. The matter was dealt with wholly in the
award. The application
to re-classify the employee was therefore not found to be
a condition of employment that was a subject matter of the agreement. Arising
from that it was found that s 82(2)(b)(i) of the Act did not prohibit the
learned Deputy President from dealing with the matter at
decision can be differentiated to this decision in that the classification
structure that was the condition of employment in that
decision was found to be
an award matter, not a matter arising from the enterprise agreement. In this
matter it needs to be determined
whether the relevant qualifications as
determined by DECD is a condition of employment that is the subject matter of
this agreement
given that the qualifications were not determined at the time the
enterprise agreement was made.
determine this, an examination of cl 6.4.1 of the agreement is required. The
opening paragraph provides the following;
“6.4.1 A new
criteria based increment will apply above the current top increment at each
SSO-1 and SSO-2; ECW-1 and ECW-2;
and AEW-1 and AEW-2 operative from the
commencement of the 2013 school year (ffpp on or after 24 January 2013 –
rates in Schedule
1.4 (AEW), Schedule 1.5 (ECW) and Schedule 1.6 (SSO)) as
opening paragraph of cl 6.4.1 identifies that a new criteria based increment
will apply above the current top increment for SSO,
ECW and AEW employees at
Step 1 and 2. This is not in contention between the parties that a new criteria
based increment will apply
above the top increment.
6.4.1(a) of the Agreement deals with employees who are eligible and sets the
necessary criteria:
“(a) An employee classified at level 1 or level 2 SSO, ECW or AEW is
eligible to apply for progression to the new criteria-based
increment subject to
the following:
(i) the employee has attained the relevant qualifications as required by
(ii) the employee has completed 12 months at the current top step of the
relevant level; and
(iii) is not currently subject of unsatisfactory performance management
processes.”
6.4.1(a) allows for eligible employees to apply for progression to the new
criteria based increment subject to three conditions.
They are that the employee
has obtain the relevant qualifications as required by DECD; the employee has
completed twelve months at
the current top step of the relevant level and; the
employee is not currently subject of unsatisfactory performance management
6.4.1(a)(i) relates to the employee having to attain the relevant qualifications
as required by DECD and is relevant in dealing
with this dispute. Clause
6.4.1(a)(ii) relates to the employee being required to complete twelve months at
the current top step of
the relevant level and cl 6.4.1(a)(iii) relates to the
employee not currently being subject of unsatisfactory performance management
processes. Clause 6.4.1(a)(ii) and (iii) are not relevant. The only criteria
that is relevant is cl 6.4.1(a)(i) which relates to
the employee having attained
the relevant qualifications as required by DECD.
6.4.1(b) of the Agreement provides the
“(b) The operative date for a successful application will be the first
full pay period on or after the date of lodgement of
the application except
where an applicant provides evidence that he or she met the criteria before the
commencement of the 2013 school
year, in which case, the operative date will be
first full pay period on or after 24 January
The operative date is not in
contention.
6.4.1(c) of the Agreement states:
“(c) If an eligible employee’s application is not successful then
the employee may lodge a grievance with the Chief Executive
(or their delegate)
in the first instance OR the employee may lodge a grievance in accordance with
the existing procedures for preventing
and settling disputes at clause
Clause 6.4.1(c) is not in contention.
6.4.2 of the Agreement states:
6.4.2 DECD will make available a list of recognised qualifications
and will consult with the AEU and PSA about applicable qualifications
from time to time to meet operational or program needs. DECD will establish an
on-line application process for employee
applications.”
6.4.2 of the Agreement identifies that DECD will make available a list of
recognised qualifications and will consult with the
AEU and PSA about applicable
qualifications as varied from time to time to meet operational or program needs.
DECD will also establish
an online process for employee applications.
argue that its actions have been entirely consistent with what it agreed to do
at the time of making the Agreement. It has identified
the list of recognised
qualifications required for eligible employees to progress through the new
criteria based increment after
consulting with the AEU and PSA about the
applicable qualifications as varied from time to time to meet the operational or
cl 6.4.1(a)(i) of the Agreement, the new criteria based increment relies upon
the eligible employee having attained the relevant
qualifications as required by
DECD. Once DECD has determined the relevant qualifications required, cl 6.4.2
requires DECD to make
available a list of recognised qualifications and will
consult with the AEU and PSA about the applicable qualifications as required
from time to time to meet operational or program needs. DECD argue that their
actions have at all times been consistent with cl 6.4.
They have determined the
relevant qualifications required and have made that list available after
consultation with the AEU and PSA.
DECD’s actions have been entirely
consistent with the clause.
submit the argument put forward by the AEU, that as the qualifications are not
spelled out in the Agreement at cl 6.4, they are
not a condition of employment
that is the subject matter of the agreement should be dismissed. The Agreement
clearly identifies that
an eligible employee must gain the relevant
qualifications as required by DECD once DECD has make available a list of
qualifications after consultation with the AEU and the PSA.
cl 6.4 of the Agreement it is clear the relevant qualifications have not been
determined at the time the Agreement was struck.
However, it is also clear that
the intentions of the parties at the time the Agreement was negotiated was that
there was agreement
for relevant qualifications to be determined at a later date
as required by DECD. Prior to doing so it is a requirement for DECD
available a list of recognised qualifications after consultation with the AEU
AEU referred to the
decision where the Full Bench expressed a view that the term “condition of
employment” relates to an express term of
an agreement, not just the
mention of an issue within an agreement. For the reasons identified above it is
the Commission’s
view that cl 6.4 traverses well past the point of the
matter of the qualifications just being mentioned. It identifies the process
that is to be followed in determining what the relevant qualifications are.
Accordingly,
I find that the actions of DECD in determining the relevant qualifications after
consultation with the relevant unions
and publishing a list of qualifications is
entirely consistent with cl 6.2 and is a condition of employment that is a
subject matter
of the Agreement.
found that DECD have acted consistent with the Agreement in identifying the
relevant qualifications after consultation with
the AEU and PSA, the
qualifications as determined by DECD are a condition of employment that is a
subject matter of the agreement.
In consideration of s 82(2)(b)(i) of the Act
which states:
82—Commission’s jurisdiction to
act in disputes under an enterprise agreement
(1) An enterprise agreement cannot limit—
(a) the Commission’s powers of conciliation; or
(b) the Commission’s powers to settle industrial disputes between the
employer and the employees bound by the agreement.
(2) However—
(a) before the Commission intervenes in an industrial dispute between an
employer and employees bound by an enterprise agreement,
the Commission should
ensure that the procedures laid down in the agreement for settling industrial
disputes have been followed and
have failed to resolve the dispute; and
(b) a determination made by the Commission in settlement of such a
(i) must not be made in relation to a condition of employment that is a
subject matter of the agreement (unless the determination
is to correct an
ambiguity or uncertainty in the agreement);
parties agree this application does not seek to correct an ambiguity or
uncertainty in the Agreement, therefore, consistent with
s 82(2)(b)(i) of the
Act, I find that the subject matter for referral is a condition of employment
that is a subject matter of the
Agreement and as such the Commission cannot make
a determination in settlement of the dispute.
AEU further submitted that if I find that s 82(2)(b)(i) of the Act applies, then
s 82(3) of the Act in itself would give the Commission
the application of the matter in question.
Section 82(3)
“(3) The Commission may, in acting under this section, settle a dispute
over the application of the enterprise
agreement.”
AEU submit the Commission is empowered to settle disputes over the application
of enterprise agreements irrespective of whether
the disputes about the
application of the agreement relates to a condition of employment that is a
subject matter of the agreement
or not. The AEU contends that the dispute is
that the employer has applied the Agreement in a matter that is industrially
and inappropriate in the way it has exercised its discretion. For that
reason the Commission should determine what the relevant qualifications
am of the view that the AEU’s position that s 82(3) of the Act gives the
Commission the ability to settle a dispute over the
application of an enterprise
agreement without giving due regard to the rest of s 82 of the Act is incorrect.
I form that view on
the following basis. The simple reading of s 82(3) of the
Act is as follows:
“(3) The Commission may, in acting under
this section, settle a dispute over the application of an enterprise
82(3) clearly identifies that the Commission may,
in acting under this
(my emphasis
settle a dispute over the application
of an enterprise agreement. Section 82(3) of the Act must be read in
conjunction with the rest
of s 82 of the Act. It cannot be read in isolation of
the rest of the clause.
Consequently,
having found that s 82(2)(b)(i) of the Act prohibits the Commission from hearing
the matter on the basis that the qualifications
relate to a condition of
employment that is a subject matter of the agreement, s 82(3) of the Act does
not provide the AEU with an
alternative path to deal with the matter at hand.
if s 82(3) could be read in isolation, cl 6.4.1(a)(1) of the Agreement
identifies that DECD will determine the qualifications
as required, after
consultation with the AEU and the PSA. DECD have done all that it was required
to do and has met its obligation
under the enterprise agreement. DECD has
provided a list of relevant qualifications after consultation with the unions.
82(3) did give the AEU another path to proceed to have this matter
determined, it would not be appropriate for the Commission to
interfere in this
matter as the Agreement did not constrain what the employer could deem to be
relevant qualifications.
AEU also submitted that there are two separate distinct current sources of power
in the Commission to make orders to resolve a
dispute between the parties.
Clause 3.1 of the Agreement and in particular
cl 3.1.13 empower the
Commission to arbitrate disputes between the parties. As a matter of law, the
AEU submit the power granted to
the Commission to arbitrate disputes between the
parties in cl 3.1 of the Agreement is a power of private arbitration in addition
to the Commission’s ordinary arbitral powers.
AEU submit that a private arbitration results from an agreement between two
parties or more who submit their differences to someone
else for resolution. The
employer submits that this is not a private arbitration and if it was,
considerable more work would have
gone into determining what the terms and
limits of the arbitration were. In the absence of any agreement from the
employer about
this being a private arbitration, it is the Commission’s
view that this dispute is not a private arbitration and without agreement
the employer to deal with this matter differently than what is allowed under the
Act, the constraints of s 82(2)(b)(1) applies
to the parties.
Accordingly,
the objection by the employer on the grounds that the Commission lacks
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
It is the practice of this Commission to publish its reasons for decision in
full on the Internet. If any party or person contends
that these reasons for
decision should not be published in full the party or person must make an
application within seven days of
the delivery of these reasons. The application
shall be by an Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should
addressed to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within
the time specified these reasons will be published
in accordance with the
Commission’s usual practice.
Statement of
Commissioner McMahon dated 10 April 2014.
Para 23 of the
applicant’s outline of argument.
Services Union, SA & NT Branch v Port Pirie Regional Council
[2013] SAIRComm
Australian Services Union, SA & NT Branch v Port Pirie Regional Council
[2013] SAIRComm 18
Para 10 Penrice
Soda Products Pty Ltd v Australian Workers Union & Construction, Forestry,
Mining and Energy Union
[2000] SAIRComm 40
Regional Council v Australian Services Union, SA & NT Branch
[2014] SAIRComm
[2010] SAIRComm
[2010] SAIRComm
Penrice Soda
Products Pty Ltd v Australian Workers Union & Construction, Forestry, Mining
and Energy Union
[2000] SAIRComm 40.
SAIRComm 40.
Hospital and Miscellaneous Union v Southcorp Wines Pty Ltd
[2004] SAIRComm
SAIRComm 7.
SAIRComm 36.
SAIRComm 36.
Statement of
Commissioner McMahon dated 10 April 2014.
SAIRComm 3.
SAIRComm 3.
SAIRComm 36
Bolding is the
Commission’s emphasis
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (258 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter