URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWPRP/2012/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:11:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
International Transport v WorkCover [2012] SAWPRP 8 (30 October 2012)
[2012] SAWPRP 8
WORKCOVER PREMIUM REVIEW PANEL
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
INTERNATIONAL TRANSPORT SERVICES
NOMINEES PTY LTD
No. E05631001 — File Reference 200718700)
(Applicant)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION
OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
REASONS FOR RULING
MADE ON 30 OCTOBER
Application for review — assessment of levies on basis of disputed
claims history — secondary disabilities alleged —
application
apparently out of time — the WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002
requiring reconsideration without regard
to extension of time issues —
whether “proper reasons” exist for departing from usual practice
to be taken into account — whether unreasonable diversion
of personnel and administrative resources —
(repealed),
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Cases referred to:
Adciv v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP 6
Alsco v. WorkCover
[2011] SAWLRP 2
Appearances:
Mr C.A. Sargent of counsel for the applicant employer, accompanied by Mr G.M.
Mr S.T. O’Flaherty of counsel for the respondent WorkCover, accompanied
by Mr S. Makai.
REASONS FOR RULING
applicant employer has lodged an application, dated 22 December 2011, seeking a
review pursuant to (then) section 72 of the
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1986
(“the Act”) of various decisions made by
the WorkCover Corporation of South Australia (“WorkCover”) in
to the assessment of the applicant employer’s levies dated 12
June 2002, 22 May 2003, 23 May 2008 and 16 June 2009. Each assessment
into account a claim the status of which is disputed by the employer. The
application also seeks a review of the employer’s
classification.
72, which was replaced by section 72M on 1 July 2012 (in substantially similar
terms), provided at the relevant time as follows:
72 — Review
(1) Where an employer considers that a
decision of the Corporation as to—
the estimate of remuneration that is to be used for the
calculation of a levy; or
the fixing or assessment of a levy; or
the imposition of penalty interest or a fine; or
the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead
to the imposition of a supplementary levy,
is unreasonable, the Board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a levy,
penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined
by the Board, by the Board itself, or by a committee
or person to whom the Board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the Board has an
absolute discretion as to
whether it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the Board may—
alter an estimate;
alter a levy or an assessment;
quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
quash or vary a condition imposed by the Corporation.
(5) An application under this section for review of a decision of the
Corporation—
must, if the decision relates to a class of employer, be made
within four months after notice of the decision was given; or
must, if the decision relates to an individual employer, be made
within two months after the employer was given notice of the decision,
unless the Board (or its delegate) allows an extension of time for making the
application.
Panel is the Board’s delegate under the section:
WorkCover Premium
Review Panel Determination 2012
South Australian Government Gazette
10 May 2012, p.1617). That Determination provides that applications for review
lodged before 1 July 2012 or involving financial
years before that date are to
be dealt with in terms of the revoked
WorkCover Levy Review Determination
South Australian Government Gazette
, 29 October 2009,
has been some to-ing and fro-ing between the parties as to which of the
workers’ claims referred to in the application
are actually disputed
between the parties. Mr Sargent’s instructions seem to have varied
somewhat over the time this application
has been before me as the fortunes of
the applicant have fluctuated. I am given to understand that the applicant is
now in external
administration, and Mr Sargent’s instructions have had to
come through the administrator. For present purposes, I propose to
deal with the
application in the terms in which it was made.
section 72(5)
above, it will be evident that each of the specific
decisions identified in the application is out of time to review. To take the
first mentioned, the time to lodge an application to review an assessment dated
12 June 2002 (assuming, for present purposes, that
it can be shown to have been
posted that day and delivered in the ordinary course of the post two business
) will have expired in
mid-August 2002, requiring an extension of time of approximately 9 years 4
months. The time for lodging an
application to review an assessment dated 22 May
2003 (making the same assumptions) will have expired in late July 2003,
necessitating
an extension of around 8 years 5 months. The time for lodging an
application to review an assessment dated 23 May 2008 will have
expired in late
July 2008, necessitating an extension around 3 years 5 months, and the time for
lodging an application to review
an assessment dated 16 June 2009 would have
expired in mid-August 2009, requiring an extension around 2 years 4 months.
application to review the applicant’s industry classification does not
seem to relate to any decision that has been identified
to me. However, it is a
matter that is said to relate to ongoing circumstances, so it will have to be
dealt with on its merits in
any event. It only faces extension of time problems
if the applicant seeks to apply any new classification back to past assessments.
For the time being, I put this part of the application to one side.
opposes any extension of time, and seeks an early ruling to that effect.
WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002
, the Board has determined
that certain pre-hearing processes should be followed for the promotion of
consensual resolution of disputes
under section 72. These largely reflect the
provisions of Part 6A of the Act applying to disputes in the Workers
Compensation Tribunal
and are to be found in clause 7 of the 2002 Determination
(substantially replicated in Part 5 of the 2012 Determination). It is
appropriate
to set out clause 7 in full:
7. Conciliation as
condition precedent to jurisdiction
(1) Upon receipt of any application lodged under section 72 (1) of the Act,
the registry of the Panel will forward a copy to the Corporation,
reconsider the decision (disregarding any question of whether the application is
out of time) and must inform the Panel
and the applicant within 14 days of the
result of the reconsideration (and its attitude to any question of an extension
(1AA) Where—
the applicant has sought an extension of time for the making of
the application or, in the opinion of the Corporation, the application
review is out of time, and
the Corporation intends to oppose an extension of time, and
the Corporation considers proper reason exists for considering the
extension of time before undertaking reconsideration,
the Corporation may request the application to be referred to the President
of the Panel to consider the extension of time.
(1AB) If an application is referred to the President under sub-clause (1AA),
the President may grant a provisional extension of time
and make such other
procedural directions as the President thinks appropriate, but only if the
President agrees that proper reason
exists for departing from the usual practice
under sub-clause (1). A provisional extension of time does not prevent the Panel
refusing an extension of time, if appropriate, when dealing with the
application for review on the merits.
(1AC) If the President refuses to make a provisional extension of time, the
applicant may request that the extension of time be referred
to the Panel for
final determination. A finding by the President that proper reason does not
exist for departing from the usual practice
under sub-clause (1) is not a
(1AD) In this clause, consideration of an extension of time includes
consideration of the question whether an application is in fact
out of time.
(1A) Where the Corporation considers it impracticable to complete
reconsideration within 14 days (and gives the registry of the Panel
appropriate
reasons for so considering), the registry may grant an extension of time for the
reconsideration.
(1B) Before granting an extension of time for reconsideration that exceeds
seven days, the registry must invite the employer to indicate
whether it has any
objections to the proposed extension of time for reconsideration and the reasons
for any objection. If there is
any such objection, the registry must refer the
question to the President of the Panel to determine.
the Corporation, on reconsideration of a disputed decision,
confirms the decision; or
the Corporation, on reconsideration of a disputed decision, varies
the decision and the applicant expresses dissatisfaction with the
the registry of the Panel must refer the dispute for conciliation by a
conciliator who will use his or her best endeavours to bring
the applicant and
the Corporation to an agreed resolution of the matters referred to in the
application, and the Panel may not hear
and determine any application unless it
is satisfied that conciliation has been attempted and failed or it is satisfied
attempts have no realistic prospects of success.
(3) If, during the hearing of any matter, it appears to the Panel that there
is a realistic prospect of a negotiated outcome being
achieved, it may refer the
matter back for further conciliation or the Panel may make such other attempts
to promote conciliation
as it thinks appropriate.
(4) In this clause ‘conciliation’ includes:
counselling;
neutral evaluation;
case appraisal;
conciliation; and
any combination of the above,
and the format of conciliation in any particular case shall be at the
discretion of the conciliator in consultation with the parties,
with the proviso
that any confidential information provided during conciliation may be withheld
from the Panel if the provider of
that information so requests;
and ‘the Corporation’ includes:
the operating unit of the Corporation that made the reviewable
decision to which an application for review relates, and
the General Counsel, Senior Lawyer, or other legal practitioner
employed by the Corporation.
Sub-clauses
(1AA), (1AB), (1AC) and (1AD) were introduced into the 2002 Determination in
2009. Before that, it was mandatory for the
Corporation to reconsider a
reviewable decision, disregarding any question of whether the application was
out of time, before, if
necessary, proceeding to conciliation and, if still in
dispute, to the Panel for hearing and determination. It is to be noted that
sub-clause (1AB) refers to this approach as “the usual practice”,
and that the procedure under sub-clauses (1AA) and
(1AB) constitutes an
exception to the usual practice.
first thing I have to consider, therefore, is whether WorkCover has discharged
its onus of demonstrating that “proper reason”
exists for departing
from the usual practice. Only if that onus is discharged, is it necessary to
proceed to consideration of the
substantive question of a provisional extension
Principles involved
has twice fallen to me to consider the circumstances in which proper reason will
be found to exist for departing from the usual
[2010] SAWLRP 6
Alsco v. WorkCover
, at [14], I said:
“The 2009 amendments to
the reconsideration process explicitly preserve the default position that
reconsideration should be
undertaken without regard to the extension of time
issue in the ordinary case. That default position is described as ‘the
practice’. For ‘proper reasons’ to exist as to why that
process should be reversed, it seems to me that circumstances
should be shown to
exist that take the matter outside the ordinary range of cases.”
sort of circumstances would take the matter outside the ordinary range of cases?
, at [36], I said:
“... it was relevant
to consider the length of the extension of time required, any explanation
advanced for the delay in seeking
review, any steps taken by the applicant to
resolve the dispute before the lodging of the application, and the extent to
which dealing
with the application would necessitate an unreasonable diversion
of personnel and administrative resources of the Corporation. That
obviously not exhaustive, just as the standard list of factors to take into
account on actually considering an extension
of time application is not
exhaustive.”
is to be noted that the purpose of considering the length of the extension of
time required and the explanation advanced for the
delay in seeking review is
not, as in other circumstances, to determine whether justice will be served by
extending time, but to
determine whether the matter is outside the ordinary
range of cases. Those are often critical factors in the final determination
to whether an extension of time will be granted, but we are not at that stage.
However, if it appears there is proper reason for
departing from the usual
practice, those factors will come into play again in deciding whether a
provisional extension of time should
be granted.
proper reasons are established, the enquiry shifts to whether a provisional
extension of time should be granted. In
, at [52], I
“A provisional extension of time is granted for the
purpose of allowing the processes relating to applications for review to
continue in the usual way. Its denial will,
prima facie
, put an end to
the proceedings. A provisional grant does not prevent the full Panel later
deciding to deny an extension of time;
conversely, its denial may be followed by
the full Panel later deciding to grant the extension. However, it has
potentially serious
consequences. While there is an argument to suggest a more
cursory approach should be taken in relation to a provisional extension
‘final’ one, I consider that regard should be had to the same sorts
of factors that are taken into account in
a non-provisional extension of time
acknowledged that a provisional extension of time is a precursor to a
continuance of the usual practice of consensus-focused
conciliation, there might
be something to be said in some cases for leaning towards that outcome. However,
every case must be individually
evaluated in the context of its own
Proper reasons for departing from the usual
is difficult to come to grips with WorkCover’s case for asserting that
there are proper reasons in this case for departing
from the usual practice. In
many ways the matter was argued as a standard extension of time case, and I was
left to infer what grounds
WorkCover might have for departing from the usual
] above, I have indicated the length
of the delay as calculated by me from the material on the face of the
application for review.
The longest is quite long, but from discussion with the
parties, it is not entirely clear to me whether the earliest claim is actually
the main concern in the case of each of the three workers. I have found that
lack of clarity somewhat frustrating, but I do acknowledge
Mr Sargent’s
attempted clarification of the issues in his extensive written submission.
add that I am indebted to both counsel for their lucid written submissions.
evidence about the circumstances in which the application was made was given by
Gary Mervyn Jackson, an injury management consultant
who was first consulted by
the employer in June 2010 when the employer developed concerns that the levies
seemed substantial. Apparently,
it took the employer some considerable time to
provide Mr Jackson with the information he needed to advise sensibly, partly
of personnel changes on the part of the employer in November 2010. It
seems contact was not first made with the claims agent about
these matters until
May 2011 — almost a year after Mr Jackson’s first involvement
— and agitation of these matters
has been reasonably continuous since
fact is that claims by only three workers are raised by the application for
review. It is true that multiple claims in the case
of each worker may need to
be considered in order to understand each worker’s situation, but that is
not unusual where a complaint
number of claims needing to be examined does not seem to me to be out of the
ordinary: indeed, the number seems quite modest compared
with many secondary
disability cases considered by this Panel over the past 12 years. I do not see
that the resources that would
need to be devoted by WorkCover to examining the
workers’ claims could be described as out of the ordinary or excessive in
the application for review at face value, the longest extension required is 9
years 4 months. This is certainly a significant
extension by comparison with the
time allowed under section 72(5), but it is far from the longest encountered by
the Panel. I do
not consider this factor alone takes this out of the ordinary
run of cases so as to establish proper reason for departing from the
no real reason for the delay (up to June 2010) has been advanced to me, which
may prove to be a significant problem at
a later stage, but this does not take
the application out of the ordinary run of cases so as to establish a proper
reason for departing
from the usual
am not satisfied that there is anything unusual about the application for review
lodged by the employer in this case. In particular,
nothing has been advanced to
satisfy me that proper reason exists for departing from the usual practice in
this reason, it is not necessary for me to consider whether I would be prepared
to grant a provisional extension of time in this
case. In fact, having reached
that conclusion, it is preferable that I
turn my mind to that
question, as I may be part of a Panel considering whether to grant a final
extension of time at a later stage,
and I would not wish to be thought to have
committed myself to any particular view without hearing the parties’ full
submissions on that subject.
is a consequence of my conclusion that proper reason has not been established
for departing from the usual practice, that the usual
practice should now be
followed. This requires WorkCover, if it has not done so already, to formally
reconsider its decisions the
subject of the application for review, and if the
parties remain in dispute after that, both parties should attend a conciliation
conference where endeavours will be made to narrow the issues and, if possible,
resolve them in a mutually satisfactory way.
this does not succeed, the application will return to the Panel for
determination of the extension of time issue and, depending
on the outcome of
that, determination of the substantive application for review.
I am not persuaded that proper reason exists for departing from the usual
practice in this matter.
is therefore not necessary to consider whether I would have been prepared to
grant a provisional extension of time.
Section 117 presumes the
delivery if the posting can be proven.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (200 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter