URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCA/2025/113.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MCFARLANE v THE KING [2025] SASCA 113 (2 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Court of Appeal: Criminal)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
MCFARLANE v THE KING
[2025] SASCA 113
Judgment of the Court of Appeal
(The Honourable President Livesey, the Honourable Justice David
and the Honourable Auxiliary Justice Bond)
2 October 2025
CRIMINAL LAW - APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - VERDICT UNREASONABLE OR
INSUPPORTABLE HAVING REGARD TO EVIDENCE - APPEAL DISMISSED
CRIMINAL LAW - APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - MISCARRIAGE OF JUSTICE - PARTICULAR
CIRCUMSTANCES AMOUNTING TO MISCARRIAGE
CRIMINAL LAW - PARTICULAR OFFENCES - OFFENCES AGAINST THE PERSON -
HOMICIDE - MURDER
CRIMINAL LAW - PARTICULAR OFFENCES - OFFENCES AGAINST THE PERSON - ACTS
INTENDED TO CAUSE OR CAUSING DANGER TO LIFE OR BODILY HARM
OR SERIOUS INJURY -
OTHER OFFENCES INVOLVING GRIEVOUS BODILY HARM OR SERIOUS INJURY - GRIEVOUS
BODILY HARM
The appellant was charged with one count of murder contrary to
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) (‘the CLCA’).
On 8 November 2019, the appellant stabbed Paul Tanzer (‘the
deceased’) with a pocket-knife to the upper left arm and the
right inner
thigh. The stab wound in the deceased’s arm penetrated the brachial artery
and the stab wound in his leg penetrated
the femoral artery, resulting in
excessive blood loss which ultimately caused his death.
The two central issues at trial were whether the prosecution had proved that
the appellant, at the time of inflicting the stab wounds,
was not acting in
self-defence and whether he intended to cause the deceased grievous bodily harm.
Both issues concerned the appellant's
state of mind.
Following a trial by jury, the appellant was found guilty of murder.
The appellant now appeals his conviction on two grounds: first, that the
verdict of the jury was unreasonable and cannot be supported
having regard to
the evidence; and secondly, that there was a miscarriage of justice.
In relation to the first ground of appeal, the appellant contends that on the
whole of the evidence, it was not open to the jury to
be satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt that the appellant intended to cause grievous bodily harm to
the deceased or that the appellant
was not acting in self-defence, and that the
jury, acting rationally, ought to have entertained a reasonable doubt as to his
In relation to the second ground of appeal, the prosecution tendered an audio
recording of the stabbing incident (recorded by the
appellant on his mobile
phone). A transcript of the audio recording was also provided to the jury as an
aide memoir. It was subsequently
discovered that there were words uttered on the
recording, allegedly spoken by the appellant ('the new words'), which were not
transcribed
and which neither counsel nor the trial Judge were aware of, nor
averted to during the trial. The appellant alleges this omission
was capable of
having a material effect on the jury’s consideration of the issues at
trial, particularly the question of whether
the prosecution had disproved
self-defence, resulting in a miscarriage of justice.
Held per the Court, granting permission to appeal but dismissing Ground 1 and
allowing the appeal on Ground 2:
to Ground 1, it was open to the jury to find the appellant intended to cause
grievous bodily harm to the deceased when he stabbed
him, and that he was not
acting in self-defence. It was therefore open to the jury to be satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt of the
appellant’s guilt of the offence of murder.
to Ground 2, the failure by both counsel to advert to the new words and the
omission of the new words from the trial Judge’s
directions on
self-defence was significant in the context of the issues at trial. The omission
of the new words had the capacity
to affect the jury’s reasoning in
respect of both limbs of the test for self-defence, and the reasoning of the
jury to its
verdict, and resulted in a miscarriage of justice.
3. The appeal is allowed and the matter is remitted for
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
, referred to.
Alford v Magee
[1952] HCA 3
(1952) 85 CLR 437
Brawn v The King
[2025] HCA 20
Brown v The King
[2025] SASCA 40
Butera v Director
of Public Prosecutions (Vic)
[1987] HCA 58
(1987) 164 CLR 180
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Cth) v Kola
[2024] HCA 14
(2024) 98 ALJR 632
[2007] HCA 55
(2007) 232 CLR 208
Libke v The Queen
[2007] HCA 30
(2007) 230 CLR 559
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
MFA v The Queen
(2002) 213 CLR
Mulkatana and Mulkatana v The Queen
[2010] NTCCA 4
[2020] HCA 12
(2020) 268 CLR 123
[2015] NSWSC 1206
[2002] HCA 12
(2002) 187 ALR 436
[2000] VSCA 128
(2000) 1 VR 416
[2002] NSWCCA 323
(2002) 140 A Crim R 1
R v Nehme (No 3)
[2024] NSWSC 515
[2005] NSWCCA 278
(2005) 63 NSWLR 628
R v O’Neill
[2001] VSCA 227
considered.
MCFARLANE v THE KING
[2025] SASCA 113
Court of Appeal – Criminal: Livesey P and David JA and Bond
The appellant was charged with one count of murder, contrary to
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) (‘the CLCA’).
On 8 November 2019, the appellant stabbed Paul Tanzer (‘the
deceased’) with a pocket-knife
to the upper left arm and to the right
inner thigh. The stab wound in the deceased’s arm penetrated the brachial
the stab wound in his leg penetrated the femoral artery, resulting in
excessive blood loss which ultimately caused his death.
The two central issues at trial were whether the prosecution had proved that the
appellant, at the time of inflicting the stab wounds,
was not acting in
self‑defence and whether he intended to cause the deceased grievous bodily
harm. Both issues concerned the
appellant’s state of mind when he stabbed
the deceased.
a trial by jury, the appellant was found guilty of murder.
appellant now appeals his conviction on two grounds: first, that the verdict of
the jury was unreasonable and cannot be supported
having regard to the evidence;
and secondly, that there was a miscarriage of justice.
relation to the second ground of appeal, the prosecution tendered at trial an
audio recording of the stabbing incident (created
by the appellant on his mobile
A transcript of the audio
recording was also provided to the jury as an aide memoir. It was subsequently
discovered that there were
words uttered on the recording, allegedly spoken by
the appellant (‘the new words’), which were not transcribed and
neither counsel nor the trial Judge were aware of, nor averted to during
the trial. The new words did not feature in any cross-examination
of witnesses
and were not the subject of any address by counsel. They did not form part of
the trial Judge’s directions to
the jury. The appellant alleges this
omission was capable of having a material effect on the jury’s
consideration of the issues
at trial, particularly the question of whether the
prosecution had disproved self‑defence, resulting in a miscarriage of
the reasons which follow, we uphold appeal Ground 2 and allow the appeal. We
dismiss Ground 1. We set aside the conviction and
remit the matter for retrial.
The evidence at trial
deceased and the appellant had known each other for 25 years. They both owned
and worked on blocks of land near each other in
prosecution case was that on 8 November 2019, the appellant and the deceased
engaged in a verbal altercation during which the
deceased knocked the
appellant’s mobile telephone from his hand. The appellant went to retrieve
his telephone from the ground,
and while the deceased was standing over the
appellant, and also trying to retrieve the phone, the appellant stabbed the
twice with his pocket-knife intending to cause him grievous bodily
was no dispute at trial (nor on this appeal) that the appellant deliberately
inflicted two stab wounds to the deceased which
caused excessive blood loss and
death. The contested issues at trial concerned the appellant’s state of
mind when he inflicted
the fatal stab wounds to the deceased. On the prosecution
case, the appellant was not acting in self-defence and intended to cause
deceased grievous bodily harm.
prosecution adduced evidence at trial from two eyewitnesses to the stabbing
incident: Leif Tanzer, the deceased’s son,
and Tony Walkington
(‘Walkington’), a friend of the deceased. The appellant’s
audio recording of the stabbing
incident was also tendered at trial and is the
subject of appeal Ground 2. In addition, evidence was adduced from a registered
at the Andamooka Medical Clinic, Ms Maria Alexander, who treated the
appellant. She gave evidence as to the appellant’s injuries
admission that he stabbed the deceased. Dr Simon Lockwood also examined the
appellant at the Roxby Downs Police Station and
gave some further evidence as to
his injuries.
that evening, the appellant was interviewed by the police and his record of
interview was tendered at trial. The prosecution
accepted that the
appellant’s account raised the issue of self-defence. Accordingly, the
prosecution bore the onus of proving
the appellant did not act in self-defence
when he stabbed the deceased.
to the criminal investigation, evidence was led of blood pattern analysis and
DNA extracted from various blood spots at the crime
scene. There was also
evidence from a forensic pathologist as to a post-mortem conducted on the
deceased, including evidence as to
the likely force necessary to inflict the
fatal wounds.
there was evidence adduced as to the history of the acrimonious relationship
between the appellant and the deceased, including
evidence of prior occasions of
aggression by the deceased towards the appellant. There was also evidence, more
generally, as to the
deceased’s purportedly violent character.
appellant did not give or call any evidence.
defence case at trial was that the prosecution had not established beyond
reasonable doubt the appellant’s requisite state
of mind to prove the
offence of murder. Defence counsel challenged the cogency of the eyewitness
evidence and emphasised the evidence
of the acrimonious relationship and prior
aggressive conduct by the deceased towards the appellant. Defence counsel
submitted to
the jury that they could not exclude that the appellant acted in
self-defence when he stabbed the deceased; or alternatively, that
intending to cause him grievous bodily harm.
turning to directly consider the appeal grounds, it is necessary to set out the
more significant aspects of the evidence adduced
at trial. This may be
structured into five main bodies of evidence: the relationship evidence, the
eyewitness evidence, the audio
recording, the forensic evidence and the record
of interview.
The relationship evidence
deceased and the appellant had known each other for 25 years. There was evidence
led of prior acts of alleged violence and aggression
by the deceased to the
appellant, and to the deceased’s neighbour, Ms Jensen. These included
allegations of two minor assaults
by the deceased on the appellant in 2017.
There were also allegations of the deceased’s family not paying the
appellant for
excavating work in August 2015, and the appellant spreading
rumours about them being bad creditors. Further, in the weeks leading
stabbing incident, investigators from the Department of Energy and Mining (SA)
had been investigating allegations made
by the appellant and Ms Jensen as to the
deceased and his family conducting illegal mining operations on Ms
Jensen’s block
of land and pushing excavated dirt onto her property.
the other side, there were allegations of the appellant tampering with mining
machinery owned by the deceased, and allegations
of Ms Jensen stealing
$700,000.00 worth of opals from the tray of the deceased’s utility.
was also evidence adduced of the deceased’s violent and aggressive nature,
more generally. The deceased had fought in
Vietnam as a mercenary. He had a
prior conviction in 1991 for having an unregistered gun. The deceased’s
partner, Ms Mordan,
gave evidence about various episodes of violence by the
deceased towards her and others.
was also evidence as to the deceased’s size at six foot, three inches
tall, weighing 117 kilograms and that his nickname
was ‘King Kong’.
By contrast, the appellant was five feet, nine inches tall and of a slimmer
Eyewitnesses to the stabbing incident
Tanzer and Walkington were eyewitnesses to the stabbing incident. There were
several aspects of their evidence which were not
in dispute. They are as
12:30pm on 8 November 2019, Leif Tanzer and Walkington saw the appellant
standing on the border between Ms Jensen’s
property and the
deceased’s block of land. One or both yelled out to him to leave. Leif
Tanzer then drove down the road, told
the deceased what he had seen and together
they returned to Ms Jensen’s block. Walkington arrived a short time later.
The appellant
came out to the front of Ms Jensen’s property and walked towards his
vehicle apparently intending to leave.
The deceased got
out of the vehicle and approached him. Words were exchanged during which the
deceased knocked the phone from the
appellant’s hand.
An altercation
ensued during which the appellant fatally stabbed the deceased.
The appellant
ran down the alleyway between Ms Jensen’s house and the shed whereupon
Leif Tanzer followed the appellant and
assaulted him.
Leif Tanzer then
took the deceased to the Roxby Downs hospital in Walkington’s
to the precise nature of the altercation between the two men during which the
appellant fatally stabbed the deceased, the prosecution
primarily relied on the
evidence of Leif Tanzer. He said that his father got out of his vehicle,
approached the appellant and asked
him what he was doing there. They were about
an arms’ length away from each other. The deceased said, ‘take this
and stay away from our property’. The appellant was on his
phone and waved it in the deceased’s face. The deceased deflected
appellant’s hand which was holding the phone, and it fell to the ground.
The appellant then dropped down to the ground
and grabbed the phone. The
deceased also dropped down. Leif Tanzer described the deceased as bent over and
hunched all the way over
in front of the appellant. He could not see what the
deceased was doing while he was hunched over the appellant. Leif Tanzer said
that the appellant swiped towards the deceased’s arm, and while the
deceased was still hunched over the appellant, swiped a
second time towards the
deceased’s groin.
Tanzer said that while the appellant was on his knees, he did not see the
deceased strike the appellant. He said that he ran
towards the two men,
whereupon the appellant ran off. He chased him to the gap between Ms
Jensen’s house and the shed on the
western side of the house. He said that
he confronted the appellant who said, ‘you fucken cunts deserve
this’. Leif Tanzer
said he kicked the appellant in the back causing him to
fall over and punched him two to three times to the face. The appellant made
swipes at him. Leif Tanzer said the appellant also threw a rock at him.
Tanzer said he went back to his car where the deceased was bleeding from his
arm, and he drove him to the hospital. During the
drive to the hospital, he
overtook the appellant’s vehicle and, when doing so, moved out and clipped
cross-examination, Leif Tanzer’s account changed as to when it was during
the altercation that the deceased dropped to
the ground. He initially said it
occurred after the phone, and the appellant fell to the ground. He later said it
was after the appellant
swiped the deceased’s leg.
counsel also cross-examined Leif Tanzer about an incident in July or August
2019 when he said Ms Jensen fell from a digger,
and sometime later, he found her
phone in the dirt, and handed it to police on 29 January 2021.
However, Leif Tanzer conceded in
cross-examination that this was untrue. Rather,
he had seen the phone fall from Ms Jensen’s pocket, immediately took hold
it and kept it for a couple of years before handing it to the police.
also gave evidence as to the stabbing incident. He said that as the appellant
walked to the front of the property where
the appellant’s vehicle was
parked, the deceased got out of his vehicle and headed towards the appellant. He
said the deceased
appeared quite annoyed. He said Leif Tanzer also got out of
the vehicle. Walkington said that there was a ‘a bit of a scuffle’
and there were ‘two grown men on the floor’.
said that Leif Tanzer chased the appellant towards the alleyway between Ms
Jensen’s house and the shed. Walkington
followed them. He said
Leif Tanzer struck the appellant to the face hard. Walkington said he saw a
knife in the appellant’s
hand when he was on the ground with Leif Tanzer
on top of him which he kicked out of the appellant’s hand. He then pulled
Tanzer off the appellant. Leif Tanzer and the deceased then left in
Walkington’s vehicle for the hospital.
picked up the appellant’s phone and pocket-knife, which he later handed to
police. The appellant’s phone contained
the audio recording of the
stabbing incident.
The audio recording
audio recording was extracted from the appellant’s mobile telephone. The
recording lasted for three minutes and 50 seconds.
The first two minutes and
54 seconds contains audio of footsteps and rustling. As mentioned earlier,
the recording was tendered at
trial and a transcript was provided to the jury as
an aide memoir. The recording captured the following exchange (noting that the
new words were on the audio but not transcribed):
[Deceased]:
“What’s this got to do with you Brian?”
[Appellant]: “Get away from me mate”.
Car door closes
[Deceased]: “Hey”.
[Appellant]: “Just get away”.
[Deceased]: “What’s this got to do with you?”
[Appellant]: “What’s it fucking got to do with you what I’m
[Deceased]: “What you doing sneaking up there, you’re up the
bloody back, you’ve been told where the boundaries
[Appellant]: “So fucking what”.
[Deceased]: “hey”.
[Appellant]: “I was on the”.
[Deceased]: “Hey havent you been”
[Appellant]: “Don’t fucking touch met man”.
[Deceased]: “You’ve been told where the boundaries are, so why
do, why do you fuckin’ persist. What were you doing
under the excavator
that time?”.
[Appellant]: “Oh yeah sure mate”.
[Deceased]: “What were you doing under there, you were, you were under
the excavator up there?”.
[Appellant]: “fuckin”.
[Deceased]: “Hey”.
[NEW WORDS]: ‘let go of me’ or ‘get off of
[Appellant]: “Fuck off”.
[Deceased]: “Hey”.
[Appellant]: “just fuck off’.
[Deceased]: “Hey”.
[Appellant]: “fuck off”.
[Deceased]: “fuck off”.
Sounds of apparent altercation can be heard – scuffling noises.
[Deceased]: “oi fucking cunt’.
[Appellant]: “Fucking cunts”
Forensic evidence
officer, Peter McKenzie, attended the crime scene. He specialises in blood stain
pattern analysis. He gave evidence of blood
stains located in the southeast area
of the block, which he considered were consistent with having been deposited by
a person experiencing
an arterial wound and walking from east to west or vice
versa. He also gave evidence that there were three blood spots found near
deceased’s large blood stains. The DNA extracted from the three blood
spots matched the DNA profile of the appellant. The
appellant’s counsel
submits that the presence and location of the appellant’s blood spots
indicate that the deceased
injured the appellant before, or proximate to the
time at which the appellant inflicted the fatal stab wounds.
Alexander, a registered nurse working at the Andamooka Medical Clinic on
8 November 2019, gave evidence of her interactions with
the appellant
shortly after the stabbing incident. She said he arrived at the Clinic at around
1:00pm, not long after she received
a phone call from the police regarding a
potential stabbing victim.
Alexander observed blood covering the appellant’s face and chest. She
documented his injuries as being lacerations to the
right side of the cheek, the
left corner of the eye, the right thumb and a haematoma on the right hand. She
took five photographs
The appellant told her
that he had stabbed someone and had been bashed by two men.
Simon Lockwood also examined the appellant and described his injuries in similar
terms to Ms Alexander, also noting that the appellant’s
speech and grip
strength were functioning normally.
forensic pathologist, Dr Charlwood, conducted a post‑mortem on the
deceased on 11 November 2019. She determined the cause
of death to be two
penetrating stab wounds, one to the right leg and the other to the left arm
causing arterial damage. The left
arm stab wound was horizontally oriented and
1.4cm in length and 6.5cm in depth. It severed the brachial artery which is a
limb artery. The right thigh stab wound was closer to the vertical plane
than horizontal and was 1.5cm in length and 5.5cm in depth.
It injured the
right femoral artery which is a major limb artery supplying blood to the lower
half of the body.
Charlwood considered that the difference in size between the wounds could have
been due to movement by the appellant or the deceased.
When asked as to the
force used to inflict the wounds, Dr Charlwood said that at least mild force had
been used to inflict the wounds.
However, she said that as the blade did not
penetrate cartilage or bone she could not determine if a greater level of force
cross-examination, Dr Charlwood agreed that potentially a ‘prod’ or
‘poke’ could have produced the
appellant’s record of interview – Exhibit P22
appellant was interviewed by police in the early hours of the morning on 9
November 2019.
the interview, it was suggested to the appellant that the deceased was murdered.
The appellant responded, ‘there was
no friggin intention, so get the big
arsehole off of me. ...Murder is when you try to kill someone. Not when some
idiot jumps on
top of you and tramples you to fucking pieces’.
appellant explained that the deceased threatened and assaulted Ms Jensen
and stole her camera and ‘it was just a repeat
of what’s happened
for 30 years’. He said Ms Jensen told him to go there, and then
‘they all came onto her property’.
He said, ‘I think they had
two vehicles there, so I was getting worried about getting out of there’.
to the stabbing incident, he said, ‘I [had] gone away and then I could
hear them all and they [had] all gathered here somewhere’.
‘I could hear them and I [was] thinking oh it’s not real flash to
get bailed up with them all around...[because]
I was there by myself. And yeah I
switched the recorder on when I was there’. He said the deceased came to
his vehicle and
‘wouldn’t let me in the car and that’s when he
dropped me...he knows martial arts and [was] trying to get my mobile
of me’. The appellant said he just wanted to get in the car and get out of
there. He said, ‘I was looking for
something to bloody belt him with or
something to get him away and I was saying to him don’t you touch me,
like I was just telling him do not. All I wanted to do was get
in the car and piss off’. The appellant said that he did not
know how he
ended up underneath him, but his phone was on the ground and the deceased was
trying to stomp on it. He said Leif Tanzer
or Walkington were yelling to
‘grab the fucking phone’. The appellant said he grabbed the phone
and took off.
appellant agreed that he had known the deceased for 25 years, and he said,
‘[the deceased] told me he was going to put
a bullet in me. He’s
told me three times.’ The appellant agreed he owned a knife. He then said,
really want to talk about it, all I want to say is I was
protecting myself’.
mentioned earlier, the appellant did not give evidence or call any evidence at
The appeal grounds
grounds of appeal (as amended) are particularised as follows:
verdict of the jury was unreasonable and cannot be supported having regard to
the evidence.
the whole of the evidence, it was not open for the jury to be satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt that the appellant intended to
cause grievous bodily harm to
[the deceased].
the whole of the evidence, it was not open for the jury to be satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt that the appellant was not acting
in self-defence.
jury, acting rationally, ought to have entertained a reasonable doubt as to
proof of guilt.
the audio recording of the incident which led to the acts causing death in
exhibit P19, there were additional words spoken which
did not appear in the aide
memoir transcript of that recording MFI P20 (the ‘New Words”). It is
open to conclude that
uttered by the appellant; and
“let go of me” or “get off of me”.
not made aware of the existence or possible contents of the New Words;
not hear cross-examination of any eye-witnesses concerning the existence and
content of the New Words; and
not given the benefit [of] counsel addresses or the learned trial Judge’s
summing up concerning the existence, content and
importance of the New Words;
given that the New Words and their possible content were
material to the defence of self-defence, then as a result, there was a
miscarriage
of justice.
Ground 2 – Audio recording and the new words
is convenient to commence with a consideration of appeal Ground 2, as a
determination of this appeal ground, and the effect of
the new words, will
inform a consideration of whether the verdict is unreasonable and cannot be
supported by the evidence.
way of background, after the appeal process had commenced, the appellant’s
solicitor listened to the audio recording and
formed the view that there were
words spoken by the appellant which were not averted to, at all, during the
trial, (the new words).
counsel at trial provided an affidavit in which he said he was unaware of the
No suggestion was made
on this appeal that defence counsel was aware of the new words and made a
tactical decision not to bring them
to the jury’s attention. It was also
common ground on appeal that the prosecutor was not aware of the new words.
notwithstanding those matters, the new words
appear in the
prosecution case statement filed with the court before the trial. This appears
to have been overlooked by both counsel
at trial and indeed, by the trial Judge.
this Court, the respondent concedes that the new words are spoken on the audio
recording, and they are not transcribed in
the aide memoir. Prior to the appeal
hearing, a document entitled
‘the Parties’ Contentions
concerning P19 and MFI P20’
was filed with the Court. The
respondent’s position as summarised in that document is as follows:
- It was open to
a jury to conclude that there were additional words spoken by the appellant in
the audio recording.
- The additional
words did not appear in the transcription provided to the jury as an aide
- If a juror or
jurors did conclude that there were words spoken on the audio that are not
contained in the transcript, it was open
to conclude that those words were
‘let go of me’ or ‘get off of me’ (or something else as
determined by the
jurors) (‘the new words’).
light of those matters, the appellant submits that this Court can proceed to
consider this ground of appeal on the basis that:
there were words
spoken on the audio recording that are not contained in the transcript;
it is open to
conclude that the new words:
- were uttered
by the appellant; and
go of me’ or ‘get off of me’.
amended transcript was provided to this Court showing an agreed position between
the parties as to when the new words were spoken,
as set out in paragraph [30]
of these reasons.
have listened to the audio recording and consider that the respondent’s
concessions were properly made; and further, that
a jury could find that it was
the appellant who uttered the new words at the point in time shown on the
amended transcript. That
is so because the new words are spoken at the same time
as the deceased is speaking, and only the appellant and the deceased are
talking on the audio recording. Further, the voice which utters the new words
has the same tone as the appellant’s voice
when he speaks at other times
during the recording.
also consider that it would be open to a jury to conclude that the appellant
used one of the two phrases referred to earlier.
Given the import of both
phrases is sufficiently similar, we do not consider it is necessary to reach a
concluded view as to the
precise words used.
this ground of appeal, it is the appellant’s contention that the fact
neither counsel nor the trial Judge adverted to
the new words, in any way,
during the trial resulted in a miscarriage of justice because the new words were
capable of having a material
effect on the jury’s verdict.
appellant submits that, without the new words, there remained ambiguity as to
whether the audio recording supported the defence
case that the deceased had
made physical contact with the appellant prior to the appellant stabbing him, as
opposed to the appellant
simply apprehending that the deceased would physically
harm him and warning the deceased not to touch him. This in turn was relevant
the issue of self-defence and the question of whether the prosecution had
disproved the appellant genuinely believed stabbing
the deceased was necessary
and reasonable for a defensive purpose; and whether the conduct was, in the
circumstances as the appellant
genuinely believed them to be, reasonably
proportionate to the threat that the appellant genuinely believed to
That is, the new words had
the capacity to impact both limbs of self-defence.
is the respondent’s contention that the omission of the new words has not
resulted in a miscarriage of justice. The respondent
emphasises that the new
words are on the audio recording which is the actual evidence properly before
the jury, and the omission
of the new words is confined to the transcript
(tendered as an aide memoir). That being so, the respondent submits that the
were not deprived of the ability to discharge its duty to consider all the
evidence against the appellant, and there is no miscarriage
of justice.
is to be accepted that where a recording of an event or interview is tendered at
trial, the actual evidence is what is heard when
the recording is
The transcript of the
content of the recording (in the absence of any further factor such as expert
translation of the content of
the recording) is not of itself
It is also true that it
is the practice of courts to provide a direction to a jury that the evidence is
the audio or audio visual
recording, and not the transcript of the recording,
and should there be any discrepancy between the recording and the transcript,
the recording must be preferred.
the context of written aides on legal issues provided to a jury during a summing
up (such as in relation to the legal elements
of an offence or the terms of a
defence), it has been observed that in determining whether a deficiency or
omission in the document
has resulted in a miscarriage of justice, the status of
the document and the ‘real issues’ are relevant. The issues must
determined in the context of the trial and summing up, considered as a
the present case, as set out earlier, the audio recording was tendered with the
transcript of the recording and was only provided
to the jury as an aide
At trial, neither counsel took any issue with the terms of the
aide memoir before it was provided to the jury. That is hardly surprising
neither counsel was aware of the new words. Irrespective, the omission in this
case was not confined to the absence of the new
words from the transcript or
aide memoir. Rather, the relevant omission extends to the fact that the new
words were not averted to
by counsel or the trial Judge at all during the trial.
For example, the eyewitnesses were not examined about the new words; trial
counsel did not address the jury on the new words; and the trial Judge did not
refer to the new words in the context of her directions
on the issue of
self-defence.
this ground of appeal to be made out, it must be established that the omission
of the new words from the aide memoir, and the
fact that neither trial counsel
nor the trial Judge averted to the new words, was material in the sense that the
omission could realistically
have affected the reasoning of the jury to its
the outset, the omission could have affected the reasoning of the jury in that,
as a result, they did not avert to the existence
of the new words or to their
significance. The defence case at trial was that the prosecution had not
disproved that the appellant
was acting in self-defence when he inflicted the
two stab wounds. The appellant explained during his police interview that the
‘dropped’ him, and he was protecting himself. In that
context, the evidence that the deceased had physically taken hold
physical contact with the appellant at a time close to when the appellant
inflicted the stab wounds had the capacity to
strengthen the defence case that
the appellant believed it was necessary and reasonable to inflict the wounds for
a defensive purpose.
The new words uttered by the appellant, whether they be
‘let go of me’ or ‘get off of me’, at the time they
uttered, and in the context of the whole of the audio recording, were capable of
constituting evidence that the deceased had
hold of the appellant. This in turn
had the potential to influence the jury’s consideration of both limbs of
the issue of self-defence,
namely the appellant’s state of mind and
whether his conduct was reasonably proportionate to the threat.
the new words also had the potential to affect the jury’s assessment of
the evidence of the two eyewitnesses (Leif
Tanzer and Walkington) that they did
not hear or see the deceased physically take hold of the appellant. Although, as
explained later
in these reasons, we do not consider the new words necessarily
had the potential to significantly undermine either witness’s
credibility
or reliability given the deceased had his back to each witness, and bearing in
mind the short space of time over which
the stabbing incident took place.
Furthermore, Walkington did, in fact, refer to a ‘scuffle’ between
the appellant and
the deceased.
relation to the trial Judge’s summing up, and the omission of the new
words from her directions on self-defence, it is well
established that it is the
trial Judge’s responsibility to explain the law to the jury in a manner
which relates the relevant
legal principles to the facts of the case and the
issues to be decided.
question of whether the prosecution had disproved self-defence was the central
issue in dispute during the trial and the focus
of the evidence and the
parties’ addresses.
is true that the trial Judge gave orthodox directions on the issue of
self‑defence about which there is otherwise no complaint.
It is also to be
accepted that her Honour gave the ‘standard’ direction to the jury
as to the correct approach to the
audio recording and the aide memoir in the
following terms:
...The evidence for you to consider is what you
hear in the recording. If you hear something differently as compared to
written down then disregard what’s written in the transcript
and rely instead on what you hear in the recording.
Notwithstanding
that the new words were in fact on the audio recording and properly before the
jury, and the trial Judge directed
the jury that should there be any discrepancy
between the recording and the transcript, to prefer the audio recording, the
were provided with no assistance as to the way in which the new words might
impact on the central issue of self-defence. The appellant’s
state of mind
and whether the prosecution had proved he was not acting in self-defence when he
inflicted the stab wounds was the
focus of the forensic contest at trial. The
new words had the capacity to affect the jury’s reasoning in respect of
of the test for self-defence. Accordingly, the failure by either
counsel to advert to the new words and the omission of the new words
Honour’s directions on self-defence was significant in the context of the
issues at trial and had the capacity to
affect the verdict.
those reasons, we are satisfied the irregularity could realistically have
affected the reasoning of the jury to its verdict and
was productive of a
miscarriage of justice. We uphold this ground of appeal.
this appeal ground, the appellant contends that the verdict of the jury was
unreasonable and cannot be supported by the evidence.
By amended grounds of
appeal, he contends that on the whole of the evidence, it was not open for the
jury to be satisfied beyond
a reasonable doubt that the appellant intended to
cause grievous bodily harm to the deceased or that the appellant was not acting
in self‑defence, and the jury, acting rationally, ought to have
entertained a reasonable doubt as to proof of guilt.
question for the Court when considering whether the verdict is unreasonable or
cannot be supported having regard to the evidence
is as stated by the High Court
notwithstanding that as a matter of law there is evidence to sustain a verdict,
a court of criminal appeal is asked to conclude
that the verdict is unsafe or
unsatisfactory, the question which the court must ask itself is whether it
thinks that upon the whole
of the evidence it was open to the jury to be
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty. But in answering
question the court must not disregard or discount either the consideration
that the jury is the body entrusted with the primary responsibility
determining guilt or innocence, or the consideration that the jury has had the
benefit of having seen and heard the witnesses.
On the contrary, the court must
pay full regard to those considerations.
(citations omitted)
reference to whether the verdict is ‘unsafe and unsatisfactory’ in
M v The Queen
is to be taken as ‘equivalent to the
statutory formula referring to the impugned verdict as
“unreasonable” or such
as “cannot be supported, having regard
to the evidence”’.
During the trial, there were several distinct challenges to the credibility and
reliability of various witnesses; in particular,
as to the evidence of Leif
Tanzer and Walkington as eyewitnesses to the stabbing incident. Accordingly,
when undertaking the task
of determining whether upon the whole of the evidence
it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the
was guilty, the appellate court must have regard to the jury’s
advantage of directly observing and hearing these witnesses.
As the High Court explained in
The function
of the court of criminal appeal in determining a ground that contends that the
verdict of the jury is unreasonable or
cannot be supported having regard to the
evidence, in a case such as the present, proceeds upon the assumption that the
of the complainant was assessed by the jury to be credible and
reliable. The court examines the record to see whether, notwithstanding
assessment – either by reason of inconsistencies, discrepancies or other
inadequacy; or in light of other evidence –
the court is satisfied that
the jury, acting rationally, ought nonetheless to have entertained a reasonable
doubt as to proof of
(citations omitted)
In this case, the assumption that the jury accepted the evidence of the
eyewitnesses needs to be tempered by the fact that they
were not questioned or
confronted by the new words nor did the jury have the benefit of counsels’
addresses on the topic or
the trial Judge’s directions.
Ultimately, the task for this Court is to determine, upon an independent
assessment of the evidence, both as to its sufficiency
and quality, whether it
was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the
appellant’s guilt, and whether
the jury must, as distinct from might, have
entertained a doubt as to the appellant’s
parties’ contentions
The appellant contends that it was not open to the jury to be satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that: first, the appellant intended
to cause grievous bodily
harm to the deceased when he inflicted the stab wounds; and secondly, that the
appellant was not acting
in self-defence.
In relation to the first contention, and whether it was open to the jury to
find proved beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant
intended to cause
grievous bodily harm to the deceased, the appellant relies on the following
evidentiary matters.
First, the evidence of the acrimonious relationship between the appellant and
the deceased; and that the deceased was angry with
the appellant when he
attended Ms Jensen’s block.
Secondly, the mechanism by which the fatal wounds were inflicted, namely by a
small pocket-knife used with minimal force potentially
by a prod or poke to
inflict two stab wounds to non-vital areas of the body.
In relation to the second contention, and the question of whether it was open
to the jury to find that the appellant was not acting
defensively when he
stabbed the deceased twice, the appellant relies on the following matters.
First, the evidence of the acrimonious relationship between the appellant and
the deceased and the growing tensions between them.
Secondly, it was the deceased who approached the appellant and instigated the
altercation. The appellant relies on the audio recording
(including the new
words) which he says supports his account that he was protecting himself.
Moreover, the appellant submits that
the fact he made the audio recording of the
incident can be seen as a protective measure. If he was the aggressor, why would
the incident?
Thirdly, the crime scene analysis and the presence of the appellant’s
blood (by way of three blood stains) in the vicinity
of the large pooling of the
deceased’s blood. The appellant submits this indicates that he was injured
before the deceased
went to the ground.
Fourthly, after the stabbing incident, Leif Tanzer and Walkington pursued the
appellant and attacked him at a time when they did
not know the appellant had
stabbed the deceased, which suggests a ‘continuum of violence’ by
the deceased, his son and
Walkington towards the appellant.
On the other hand, the respondent contends that it was open to the jury, on the
whole of the evidence, to be satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt of the
appellant’s guilt on the charge of murder. The respondent submits that
there was no ‘solid obstacle’
to the jury’s finding of guilt.
Consideration
Upon an independent assessment of the whole of the evidence, we are satisfied
that it was open to the jury to find the appellant
guilty of the offence of
After having regard to the whole of the evidence and bearing in mind the
appellant’s criticisms of the evidence as to the
appellant’s state
of mind, we have reached the conclusion that it was open to the jury to find
that the appellant was not acting
in self-defence for the following reasons.
First, it is to be accepted that the deceased had a long-held animosity towards
the appellant which provided him with a reason to
attack the appellant. Indeed,
in the weeks and months preceding the stabbing incident, tensions were rising
between the two men.
Furthermore, there was evidence of previous incidents of
aggression by the deceased towards the appellant, and there was evidence
deceased’s more general violent disposition. However, the hostility
between the appellant and the deceased was mutual.
Their acrimonious
relationship also provided the appellant with a motive to attack the deceased
intending to cause him grievous bodily
harm. On one view, the evidence of the
rising tensions between the two men undermined the defence case that the
appellant was simply
defending himself when he stabbed the deceased. As the
trial Judge observed, the evidence ‘cuts both ways’.
Moreover, the meeting between the deceased and the appellant was largely
spontaneous. Their interaction that day arose because Leif
Tanzer and Walkington
happened to observe the appellant standing close to the deceased’s block.
Leif Tanzer denied various
propositions put to him that he and his father
had earlier decided to confront the appellant. He maintained that their decision
confront the appellant was triggered only by seeing him near their block of
Secondly, as to the direct evidence of the stabbing incident itself, while it
is true that the evidence of Leif Tanzer and Walkington
needs to be considered
in the context of the audio recording (including the new words) and there were
various legitimate challenges
to the witnesses’ credibility and
reliability, both witnesses maintained a version of events which provided
material support
for the prosecution case. In particular, Leif Tanzer
appellant was holding the phone in his left hand, and as the phone fell to the
ground, the appellant also went to the ground ‘to
deceased bent over the appellant;
phone was pushed into the deceased’s face, the deceased deflected it, the
phone fell down, the appellant dropped down and
grabbed his phone and the
deceased then bent over him;
appellant took the first swing or swipe (to the arm) and then while the deceased
‘was standing with his legs parted, hunched
over’ he saw the second
‘swipe’ connect with the inside of his thigh;
did not see the deceased strike the appellant while the deceased was leaning
over the appellant;
denied the deceased stomped on the appellant; and
disagreed with the proposition that the appellant was trying to defend himself,
and that the deceased was at all material times
the aggressor.
Walkington also maintained throughout his evidence that he saw ‘a bit of
a scuffle and [the deceased] was on the ground.’
He conceded in
cross-examination that he could not recall whether the deceased pushed the
appellant to the ground. Nor could he recall
if the deceased was trying to stomp
Both Leif Tanzer and Walkington gave evidence to the effect that the physical
altercation between the appellant and the deceased
centred around getting hold
of, or retrieving, the mobile phone which was recording the incident between the
two men. Their evidence
was contrary to the defence case that the deceased,
angry and upset at the appellant’s presence near his block, approached
aggressively, pushed him to the ground and physically assaulted him; and it was
in the context of protecting himself that the
appellant stabbed the deceased.
The jury had the opportunity to see and assess each eyewitness over a
considerable period, albeit without having the new words in
the audio recording
put to either witness or the subject of comment by counsel or directions by the
trial Judge. After reviewing
their evidence, we do not consider the credibility
or reliability of either witness was undermined to such an extent that it was
not open to the jury to be satisfied of the crucial features of their evidence.
Turning now to consider the audio recording, we accept the appellant’s
submission that the new words lend some support to
the defence case. During the
recording, the appellant is initially telling the deceased to ‘Get away
from me mate’. This
persists: ‘Just get away’. A short time
later, he states: ‘Don’t fucking touch me man’. The new words
of ‘let go of me’ or ‘get off of me’, if uttered by the
appellant, demonstrate that the deceased had physical
before the appellant was on the ground or shortly after the appellant was on the
The appellant also submits that the new words demonstrate that the deceased had
physical hold of the appellant at a time proximate
to when the appellant
inflicted the stab wounds. Accepting that is so, this does not necessarily
undermine the evidence of the eyewitnesses
nor defeat the prosecution case. It
must be borne in mind that the incident occurred very quickly, the deceased had
his back to both
witnesses and the unchallenged evidence that the deceased was
As to the submission that it is unlikely the appellant would have made a
recording of the incident if he was the aggressor, and
as such it should be seen
as a ‘protective measure’, we do not consider this is necessarily
so. On a previous occasion,
the appellant made an audio recording when a
compliance officer from the Mines Department attended Ms Jensen’s property
24 October 2019. The audio recording on that occasion captured exchanges
between the deceased and Ms Jensen.
In relation to the appellant’s submission that Leif Tanzer’s
actions in attacking the appellant after the stabbing incident
‘continuum of violence’ perpetrated by the deceased, we do not
agree. It may well be that at the time Leif
Tanzer attacked the appellant, he
did not know the appellant had stabbed the deceased. However, it must have been
readily apparent
to both Leif Tanzer and Walkington that the altercation between
the appellant and the deceased had become heated and further, Leif
Tanzer said
he observed the appellant ‘swipe’ twice at the deceased.
Moreover, the appellant’s comments to Leif Tanzer that ‘you fucken
cunts deserved this’ does not speak of defensive
Thirdly, we have also had regard to the appellant’s exculpatory
statements in his record of interview wherein he stated that
the deceased
dropped him to the ground in an attempt to obtain his mobile telephone and was,
in effect, the aggressor throughout
the altercation. In a disjointed interview,
the appellant made the following comments which supported the defence case that
acting in self‑defence:
- There was no
friggin intention, so get the big arsehole off of me.
- They all came
onto her property.
- I think they
had two vehicles there [...]So I was getting worried about getting out of there.
- I could hear
them and I’m thinking oh it’s not real flash to get bailed up with
them all around...cause I was there
by myself. And yeah I switched the recorder
on when I was there...
- and come down
here to the car and [the deceased] come up and wouldn’t let me in the car
and that’s where he dropped
me...he knows martial arts.
- ...and trying
to get my mobile phone off me.
- Just wanted to
get in me car and get...out of there.
- I was looking
for something to bloody belt him with or something to get him away and I was
saying to him don’t you touch me,
don’t you, like I was just telling
him do not. All I wanted to do was get in the car and piss off.
really know but I ended up underneath him and my phone was on the ground and he
was trying to stomp on it.
- Walkington or
Leif Tanzer are yelling at the other ‘grab the fucking phone’.
- Grabbed the
phone and took off
- [The deceased]
told me he was going to put a bullet in me.
told me three times.
Towards the end of the interview the appellant was asked about the
pocket‑knife used to stab the deceased. He said:
Q: All right
might as well get straight to the point. Do you own a knife?
Q: Yep. Can you describe the knife to me.
A: Ah you got it.
I don’t really want to talk about it
Q: You don’t really want to talk about it. All right.
A: All I want to say is I was protecting myself.
Q: Yep yep. Alright so you don’t want to talk about the knife except to
say we’ve got it.
A: Well I don’t know.
Q: That’s why I need you, if you don’t mind to describe it to me.
A: Yeah not really
Q: Not really
A: I said I didn’t want to talk about it
Q: Okay so you don’t want to talk about what happened there. All right.
A: I want to go there with you and show you what happened.
During the trial, the prosecution accepted that the appellant’s
statements in his police interview raised the issue of self-defence,
prosecution bore the onus of proving that the appellant was not acting in
self-defence when he inflicted the two stab wounds
to the deceased. While the
appellant does not explicitly say that, at the time of inflicting the two stab
wounds, he genuinely believed
it was necessary and reasonable to do so for a
defensive purpose, he does provide an account from which the jury could infer
this was his state of mind. Further, when asked about the knife he said
that he was ‘protecting [himself]’.
Notwithstanding those exculpatory statements and having regard to the whole of
the evidence (including the new words), we are satisfied
that it was open to the
jury to find that the appellant did not act in self-defence when he stabbed the
deceased twice. While accepting
the evidence as to the deceased’s physical
build, character and his animosity towards the appellant, the fact remains that
when the deceased approached the appellant, the appellant still had the
opportunity to leave in his vehicle. Furthermore, there was
unchallenged
evidence that the deceased was not, at any stage, holding any object or weapon.
Notwithstanding the challenges to the evidence of the two eyewitnesses, they
maintained that the appellant went to the ground to
retrieve his phone, and they
did not see the deceased physically assault or take hold of the appellant
– rather, the deceased’s
focus was on retrieving the phone. Even
accepting that the new words indicate the deceased may have had physical hold of
the appellant
and bearing in mind that the deceased was not armed, it was open
to the jury to find, in the circumstances of this case, that the
appellant did
not believe it was necessary and reasonable to stab the deceased twice for a
defensive purpose; and the conduct was
not, in the circumstances as the
appellant believed them to be, reasonably proportionate to the threat.
On our independent review of the whole of the evidence, we are also satisfied
that it was open to the jury to find that the appellant
intended to inflict
grievous bodily harm to the deceased when he stabbed him. As mentioned earlier,
there was no dispute at trial
that the appellant inflicted two penetrating stab
wounds that caused major arterial damage and significant blood loss resulting in
cardiovascular collapse. As summarised earlier, the left arm wound had a surface
length of 1.4cm and a depth of 6.5cm; and the right
thigh wound had a surface
length of 1.5cm and a depth of 5.5cm. These were not minor wounds.
While Dr Charlwood opined that the force required to inflict the two wounds was
as ‘at least mild force’ consistent
with a ‘prod or a
poke’, the wounds did not penetrate any cartilage or bone, and it was
therefore not possible to say
whether a greater level of force was used to
inflict the stab wounds. Furthermore, the appellant stabbed the deceased twice
manner described by Leif Tanzer as involving a ‘swipe’. That
mechanism is consistent with a level of force greater than
The weapon used by the appellant to stab the deceased was a pocket-knife which
had a significant blade length of 8cm.
In relation to the three blood spots from which the appellant’s DNA was
extracted, apart from describing the blood spots as
‘three near circular
stains’, the crime scene examiner could not say anything about how or when
they were deposited.
Accordingly, while the blood spots could have been
deposited before the deceased was stabbed (as postulated by the appellant), they
could equally have been deposited by the appellant after being assaulted and
injured at the rear of the property by Leif Tanzer.
The evidence was equivocal.
In summary, the fact that the appellant used a pocket-knife with an 8cm blade
to inflict more than one wound to the deceased in
the context of a long-standing
acrimonious relationship, and his subsequent comment to Leif Tanzer that
‘you fucken cunts deserved
this’ was sufficient to prove an
intention to commit grievous bodily harm. For those reasons, and upon our own
independent
assessment of the whole of the evidence, we are satisfied that it
was open to the jury to find the appellant intended to cause grievous
harm when he stabbed the deceased.
Accordingly, we are satisfied that it was open to the jury to be satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt of the appellant’s guilt
of the offence of murder.
This was not a case where the jury must, as distinct from might, have
entertained a doubt as to the appellant’s
We dismiss this ground of appeal.
We make the following orders:
permission to appeal but dismiss Ground 1.
permission to appeal and allow the appeal on Ground 2.
aside the conviction and remit the matter for retrial.
Trial Exhibit P19.
Trial Exhibit P23.
Affidavit of Christoher James
Kummerow of counsel affirmed on 14 June 2024.
Criminal Law Consolidation
Butera v Director of Public
Prosecutions (Vic)
[1987] HCA 58
(1987) 164 CLR 180
at 189 (Mason CJ, Brennan and Deane
Gately v The Queen
[2007] HCA 55
(2007) 232 CLR 208
at 237 (Hayne J)
[2025] SASCA 40
(Livesey P).
R v O’Neill
[2001] VSCA 227
, [82], [84]-[85].
See, for example,
[2002] NSWCCA 323
(2002) 140 A Crim R 1
[2005] NSWCCA 278
(2005) 63 NSWLR
[2015] NSWSC 1206
Nehme (No 3)
[2024] NSWSC 515
[2000] VSCA 128
(2000) 1 VR 416
and [30] in the context of an erroneous aide
on the topic of the partial defence of provocation. See also
Mulkatana and Mulkatana v The Queen
[2010] NTCCA 4
Brawn v The King
(Gageler CJ, Gordon, Edelman, Steward, Gleeson, Jagot and
Beech-Jones JJ).
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Cth) v Kola
[2024] HCA 14
(2024) 98 ALJR 632
Alford v Magee
[1952] HCA 3
(1952) 85 CLR 437
at 466, cited in
[2002] HCA 12
(2002) 187 ALR 436
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
(Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson and Toohey JJ).
MFA v The Queen
(2002) 213 CLR 606
at [58] (McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ).
[2020] HCA 12
(2020) 268 CLR 123
(Kiefel CJ, Bell, Gageler, Keane, Nettle, Gordon and Edelman JJ).
Libke v The Queen
[2007] HCA 30
(2007) 230 CLR 559
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (484 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter