URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACAT/2025/69.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:53:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dunne v Abilities Occupational Therapy Service [2025] SACAT 69 (14 July 2025)
Gareth Dunne
Abilities Occupational Therapy Service
NEUTRAL CITATION
Dunne v Abilities Occupational Therapy Service
[2025] SACAT 69
Senior Member Lazarevich
14 July 2025
HEARING DATE
SACAT FILE NO.
2024/SA003737
The applicant lodged a disciplinary complaint under the
Building Work
Contractors Act 1995
(‘BWC Act’) against the respondent,
Abilities Occupational Therapy Service
The applicant contended that the respondent is a building work contractor
or a building consultant pursuant to ss 3 and 20 of the
Consequentially, the applicant contended that the respondent is required to be
licensed and was subject to disciplinary
action under the BWC Act. The
applicant’s contentions were made on the basis that the respondent carries
on the business of
performing building work or gives advice in respect of
building work, in that it provides advice in relation to home support
modifications,
prepares drawings, assists in obtaining quotes from contractors,
and furnishes reports.
The respondent submitted that it is a firm of occupational therapists and
is neither a building work contractor nor a building work
consultant as defined
in the BWC Act and therefore, the Act does not apply to it.
Held, dismissing the complaint:
The respondent
was not a building work contractor under the BWC Act. The respondent making
recommendations, organising quotes, and
assisting in obtaining NDIS funding did
not constitute the performance of building work as contemplated by the BWC Act.
The respondent
was not a building work consultant under the BWC Act. The respondent might, as
part of its work, comment on whether
building work achieves the functional aims
of the recommendations that the occupational therapist made. That is not the
as carrying on business as a building consultant who writes reports
setting out whether the building work complies with the relevant
warranties, regulatory requirements or requirements of the Building Code.
Parliament did
not intend that an occupational therapist who is regulated under the National
Law and subject to that disciplinary
regime, to also be subject to disciplinary
sanction under the BWC Act that is concerned with regulation of the building
rather than conduct of health professionals.
Building Work Contractors – Complaints against building work
contractors – Complaint by consumer – Proper cause
for disciplinary
action – Acting unlawfully, improperly, negligently, or unfairly in the
course of conducting the business
of the contractor – Application
LEGISLATION CONSIDERED
Building Work Contractors Act 1995
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
CASES CONSIDERED
Duncan v Bert Farina Constructions Pty Ltd
[2024] SASCA 67
Woolworths Group Limited v Jackermis
[2023] SASCA 31
REPRESENTATION
Ms K Dunne appeared in person for the applicant
Ms K Fitzgerald with Ms M Eaton, Gilchrist Connell, appeared for the
REASONS FOR DECISION
respondent is a corporation that carries on the business of providing services
of occupational therapy.
director, Timoth Gransbury, is a registered occupational therapist.
applicant has brought disciplinary proceedings against the respondent.
Occupational
therapy is a ‘health profession’ as defined in the Health
Practitioner Regulation National Law (‘National
Law’). The National
Law is contained in Schedule 2 to the
Health Practitioner Regulation National
Law (South Australia) Act 2010
Boards may refer disciplinary proceedings against a health practitioner for
hearing before the Tribunal.
applicant is not a National Board.
proceedings are not brought under the National Law.
these are disciplinary proceedings brought under the
Building Work
Contractors Act 1995
(‘BWC Act’).
have listed the matter for a preliminary determination as to whether the
disciplinary provisions of the BWC Act have application
to a firm of
occupational therapists.
applicant contends that the respondent either carries on business as a building
work contractor, and therefore should be licenced
under the BWC Act, or
alternatively falls within the definition of a building consultant under the BWC
Act and is thereby able to
be the subject of disciplinary action under the BWC
Act. The respondent contends that it is a firm of occupational therapists and
neither a building work contractor nor a building work consultant as
preliminary hearing involved a combination of affidavit evidence, oral evidence,
receipt of documentary evidence, written submissions
and oral submissions. The
preliminary hearing did not descend into the detail as to whether the
allegations which are said to amount
to cause for disciplinary action in fact so
amount. Rather, the focus of the preliminary hearing was on what work the
does, what kind of work was done in relation to the applicant, and
whether the nature of the work is such that the disciplinary provisions
BWC Act are enlivened.
the reasons that follow I find that the respondent is neither a building work
contractor nor a building consultant as defined
by the BWC Act.
Statutory Framework
3 of the BWC Act provides for a number of definitions. I have underlined the
particular parts of the definition that are important
to the applicant’s
building work contractor
(a) a person who
carries on the business of performing building work for
(b) a person who carries on the business of performing building work with a
view to the sale or letting (whether by lease, licence
or other agreement) of
land or buildings improved as a result of the building work;
" includes a wall or structure and part of a building or
building work
(a) the whole or part of the work of constructing, erecting, underpinning,
altering, repairing, improving, adding to or demolishing
a building; or
(b) the whole or part of the work of excavating or filling a site for work
referred to in paragraph (a); or
(c) work of a class prescribed by regulation;
", in relation to building work, includes—
(a) cause building work to be performed; or
(b) organise or arrange for the performance of building work;
applicant places emphasis on the words ‘organise or arrange for the
performance of building work’ in relation to the
definition of
6 of the BWC Act contains an obligation on a building work contractor to be
licenced. Subsection (1) provides:
(1) A person must not—
(a) carry on business as a building work contractor except as authorised by a
licence under this Part; or
(b) advertise or otherwise hold himself or herself out as being entitled to
carry on business as a building work contractor unless
authorised to carry on
business as such a contractor by a licence under this Part.
of the applicant’s contentions is that the respondent
organises or
for the performance of building work, in that the respondent
provides advice as to what modifications a person with a disability should
for their home; proceeds to prepare drawings; assists to obtain funding under
the National Disability Insurance Scheme (‘NDIS’);
and helps obtain
quotations from and introductions to building work contractors for the
performance of that work. In this case the
respondent introduced the applicant
to a contractor called Dave’s Bathrooms. The applicant complains about the
quality of work
performed by Dave’s Bathrooms, and asserts amongst other
things that contracts prepared did not comply with the requirements
Act. For present purposes the point of the argument is that by carrying on a
business which is said to include organising
or arranging for the performance of
building work, the applicant says that this leads to the requirement to be
licenced under the
BWC Act, and the failure to hold that licence amounts to a
breach of the BWC Act thereby amounting to unlawful behaviour justifying
disciplinary action.
4 of the BWC Act deals with disciplinary proceedings.
20 contains a number of definitions that apply in respect of Part 4.
building work contractor
" includes—
(a) a former building work contractor; and
(b) a person licensed as a building work contractor, whether or not carrying on
business as a building work contractor; and
(c) a person formerly licensed as a building work contractor under this Act or
as a builder under the repealed Act;
building consultant
" means a person (other than a registered architect)
who carries on the business of giving advice or furnishing reports in respect
of domestic building work
(whether being work already performed, work in
progress or work that may be required in the future), and includes a former
consultant;
(Emphasis added)
definition, for the purposes of Part 4, of building work contractor is
suggestive of someone who used to be a building work contractor,
currently holds
a builder’s licence or used to hold a licence as a building work
contractor. That would seem unlikely to include
the respondent as a firm of
occupational therapists.
definition of a building consultant is a matter I return to later in these
reasons. For present purposes, the applicant’s
proposition is that by
giving advice as to what modifications should be made to a house to accommodate
a person with a disability,
the respondent is carrying on the business of a
building consultant.
was not alleged that the respondent is a building work supervisor. For
completeness, I note the definition in s 20 of a building
work supervisor
building work supervisor
" includes—
(a) a former building work supervisor; and
(b) a person registered as a building work supervisor whether or not acting as
a building work supervisor; and
(c) a person formerly registered as a building work supervisor under this Act
or the repealed Act;
respondent is not and never has been registered as a building work supervisor.
Nor does it supervise the carrying out of building
21 of the Act provides that:
21—Cause for disciplinary action
(1) There is proper cause for disciplinary action against a building work
contractor if—
(a) licensing of the contractor was improperly obtained; or
(b) the contractor has acted contrary to an assurance accepted by the
Commissioner under the
Fair Trading Act 1987
(c) the contractor or another person has acted contrary to this Act or
otherwise unlawfully, or improperly, negligently or unfairly,
in the course of
conducting, or being employed or otherwise engaged in, the business of the
contractor; or
(d) the contractor has failed to comply with an order made by a court under
(e) events have occurred such that the contractor would not be entitled to be
licensed as a building work contractor if the contractor
were to apply for a
(2) There is proper cause for disciplinary action against a building work
supervisor if—
(a) registration of the supervisor was improperly obtained; or
(b) the supervisor has acted unlawfully, improperly, negligently or unfairly in
the course of acting as a building work supervisor.
(3) There is proper cause for disciplinary action against a building consultant
(a) the consultant has acted contrary to an assurance accepted by the
Commissioner under the
Fair Trading Act 1987
(b) the consultant has acted unlawfully, improperly, negligently or unfairly in
the course of acting as a building consultant.
(4) Disciplinary action may be taken against each director of a body corporate
that is a building work contractor or building consultant
if there is proper
cause for disciplinary action against the body corporate.
(5) Disciplinary action may not be taken against a person in relation to the
act or default of another if that person could not
reasonably be expected to
have prevented the act or default.
(6) This section applies in relation to conduct occurring before or after the
commencement of this section.
applicant’s complaint focuses on the respondent being alleged to have
unlawfully, improperly, negligently or unfairly in the course of acting
either a building contractor or a building consultant. Amongst other
things, the applicant alleges that the respondent traded without
licence, the Dave’s Bathroom’s contract did not comply with the
statutory requirements for building contracts,
and that the purported charging
of variations to the contract amounted to some kind of NDIS fraud of which the
respondent was complicit
by ‘subcontracting to Dave’s
Bathrooms’ and providing a letter of support for Dave’s Bathrooms
was a dispute about non-payment by the applicant of Dave’s
Bathrooms’ invoice. The applicant says the respondent committed
offence by telling the NDIS that the work was compliant when the applicant said
it was not.
the respondent is not a building work contractor or a building consultant, then
the proceedings cannot succeed and should be dismissed.
respondent submits that the proceedings should be so dismissed on the basis that
the BWC Act does not apply to it.
applicant also sought to rely on s 59(1) of the BWC Act:
(1) In proceedings in respect of an offence against this Act, if it is proved
that a person performed building work for another for
fee or reward, the person
is, unless the contrary is proved, to be taken to have been carrying on business
as a building work contractor.
59 is not of assistance to this matter. There are a number of provisions of the
BWC Act the contravention of which constitute
an offence. Proceedings for an
offence under s 58 cannot be commenced except by the Commissioner, an
authorised officer under the
Fair Trading Act 1987
or a person who has
the consent of the Minister to commence the prosecution (none of which apply to
the applicant). Disciplinary proceedings
are not the same thing as
a prosecution for an offence under
accordingly has no
application to this matter. In any event the onus would still be on the
applicant to prove that the respondent
‘performed building
the purposes of the preliminary argument the facts are largely non contentious.
The respondent reserved its position as to whether
documents tendered without
objection on the preliminary argument might be objected to at a final hearing on
the merits.
applicant is a person requiring assistance with speech, mobility, and personal
care due to Motor Neurone Disease. He was assisted
by his wife in these
proceedings who was articulate and both caring and passionate in her support of
her husband. On the basis of
a medical report from Associate Professor Kneebone
of 1 October 2024 and a series of questions asked at an earlier directions
the Tribunal was satisfied that notwithstanding the evidence of a
degree of cognitive difficulty, that the applicant had sufficient
capacity to
make decisions, understood the risks of proceeding with this matter, did not
require a litigation guardian to be appointed,
and that it was appropriate that
his wife be permitted to assist him in presenting his case. Nonetheless it is to
be born in mind
that the applicant has a degree of vulnerability.
NDIS has a website, which amongst other things contains information relevant to
registration. Some of that appears on the webpage,
and some parts of the webpage
has links to pdf documents to download. The applicant cut and pasted parts of
the website into an email.
I have gone to the full website to make sure the
references are complete and accurate. The applicants draw attention to the
registration process for the NDIS requires a provider to choose a
‘registration group’. The application form requires
specification of registration groups or classes of support that are being
applied for.
the case of the respondent, the respondent is registered under the NDIS. Its
status is “approved”.
are no conditions on the registration.
registration is for the groups:
36.1. Therapeutic Supports; and
36.2. Home modification.
of the website has a link to a pdf document called “Provider Registration
Guide to Suitability”. Part of that document
describes Home and Vehicle
Modification Groups.
0111 is “Home Modification Design and Construction (Home
Modification).
This registration group, incorporates design and subsequent changes to the
participants home. Home modification design and construction
installation of equipment or changes to building structures, fixture, or
fittings to enable participants to live as independently
as possible or to live
safely at home.
0111 contains a list of professions. In addition to builders, architects,
electricians are, amongst other things, Occupational
Therapists and
Rehabilitation Engineers. Under the box “additional guidance” it
Experience and understanding of concepts and limitations of AS1428 and other
disability access standards and their application in
accordance with a persons
needs and specifications of plans.
Must hold current license or registration
in the relevant State or Territory
(Emphasis added)
list of professions relevant to registration group 0111 is set out as:
Inspector/Works Assessor
Building Work
Building Work
Project Manager
Carpenter/Joiner
Electrician
Plumber/Gas
Fitter/Drainer
Occupational
Rehabilitation
the heading “Professional Qualifications” the guide states:
Some supports must be delivered by people with specific qualifications,
experience or licensing. Some professions (e.g., those regulated
under AHPRA)
also require registration or certification independent of any requirements
relating to disability services. The table
below outlines a list of professions
and the usual expectation about qualifications or credentialing, for
registration purposes.
For example, where the profession is listed as
“Physiotherapist”, the provider is declaring as part of the
registration
process that they are a qualified and AHPRA registered
Physiotherapist. Some states and territories will also require professions
meet other additional requirements for some registration groups. You can find
further information in the relevant state or territory
section in this guide.
You can contact provider.registration@NDIS.gov.au for advice about
qualifications or experience not listed.
The following health professions are regulated and must hold current AHPRA
registration:
Occupational
Psychologist
Physiotherapist
The following professions must meet the registration or certification
requirements of the relevant State or Territory:
Inspector/Works Assessor
Building Work
Building Work
Project Manager
Carpenter/Joiner
Electrician
Plumber/Gas
Fitter/Drainer
Professional qualifications or membership (all qualifications and memberships
must be current)
Profession name - Professional qualifications or membership (all
qualifications and memberships must be current)
Audiologist - Audiology Australia accredited Audiologist or Audiologist member
Dietitian - Accredited Practising Dietitian with the Dietitians Association of
Orthoptist - Registration with the Australian Orthoptic Board
Orthotist - Membership with the Australian Orthotic Prosthetic Association
and/or recognition by a state/territory orthotic program
as a qualified orthotic
practitioner
Pedorthist - Registration with the Australian Register of Pedorthists
Prosthetist - Membership with the Australian Orthotic Prosthetic Association
and/or recognition by a state/territory prosthetic program
as a qualified
prosthetic practitioner
Speech Pathologist - Practicing membership with Speech Pathology Australia
Audiometrist - Membership with the Hearing Aid Audiometrist Society of Australia
or audiometrist member of AC
Art Therapist - Membership with the Australia New Zealand Arts Therapy
Association (ANZATA) Developmental Educator - Full membership
of Developmental
Educators Australia Inc (DEAI)
Exercise Physiologist - Accredited exercise physiologist with Exercise and
Sports Science Australia (ESSA)
Interpreter/Translator - Certified or Recognised Practising Interpreter or
Translator with the National Accreditation Authority for
Translators and
Interpreters Ltd (NAATI)
Music Therapist - Active “Registered Music Therapist” with the
Australian Music Therapy Association
Social Worker - Membership with Australian Association of Social Workers
Rehabilitation Counsellor - Membership with the Australian
Rehabilitation Counsellors Inc or equivalent
Welfare Worker - Membership with the Australian Community Workers Association or
Counsellor - Membership with the Australian Counselling Association or
Personal Trainer - Personal training qualification, Certificate III, IV or
Diploma in Fitness or equivalent
Accountant/Book-keeper - membership with ATMA, AAT, CBK, ACCA, ABAL, CPA, ICB,
IPA or CAANZ or equivalent
Rehabilitation Engineer - Chartered Professional Membership with Engineers
Aboriginal Health Worker - Registration with the Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Health Practice Board of Australia.
applicant says the requirement to hold a licence or registration in respect of
registered in the category of
do not agree. The document refers to health professions having to hold current
AHPRA registrations, and other professions having
registration or certification
requirements under State Law. Whether or not a professional with a licence
relevant to their profession
also has to have a builders’ licence will
depend on exactly what work they are doing.
part of the guide relating to home modifications contemplates an occupational
therapist being a relevant profession – occupational
therapists hold
registration under the National Law. It also refers to architects. In South
Australia there is an Architectural Practice
Board pursuant to which
architectural businesses are registered. Rehabilitation Engineers are referred
to, and their requirement
relates to registration membership with Engineers
Australia. A Rehabilitation Engineer is defined on that bodies’ website
A rehabilitation engineer is a professional engineer applying informed theory
and practice, including specialised knowledge and application
of technologies,
to safeguard and improve the quality of life of people who use, or would benefit
from, AT, often in collaboration
with a multidisciplinary team
(AT stands for Assisted Technology).
Rehabilitation
Engineers do, amongst other things related to posture, mobility, clinical
movement, brain computer interfaces, mobility
aids, “home
accessibility”, “work site modifications”.
if architects are not registered under the BWC Act, engineers are not registered
under the BWC Act, and occupational therapists
are not registered under the BWC
Act in relation to the usual work they do, then the NDIS registration
requirement in the website
box is more likely to refer to having registration to
practice in the particular profession as opposed to a requirement to be
under the BWC Act. Supporting that inference is the table I
summarised above. Also supporting that inference would be the fact that
did approve the respondent’s registration as an NDIS support provider
which I infer was without requiring proof of
the holding of a builder’s
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
(‘NDIS Act’) provides that the Commissioner may only register a
person as a registered NDIS provider if certain
criteria are satisfied. One of
those criteria is that the Commissioner is satisfied that the applicant is
suitable to provide supports
or services to people with disabilities, and is
satisfied that the key personnel are suitable.
NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission website has an audit and verification
process attached with applications and renewal of
applications. In relation to
registration group 0111 the audit requirement is described as
‘verification’.
regard to the fact that the respondent is registered as an NDIS provider I infer
that the Commissioner was satisfied that the
relevant criteria for registration
NDIS website discusses home modifications.
Minor home modifications are home modifications that don’t change the
structural parts of the home or cost more than $20,000.
They have 2 categories:
Category A minor
Category B minor
modifications to a bathroom floor. These
are funded using a set NDIS budget
based on current market costs in MMM1 locations using the Modified Monash Model
Complex home modifications usually need building approvals or permissions, and
certification of work such as plumbing and electrical
works. They may involve
highly complex or technical works, or impact several areas of a
participant’s home.
The NDIA needs sufficient evidence to decide which home modification supports
are reasonable and necessary to include in a participant’s
Plans include funding for a home modification assessment and should also include
advice on the scope of the home modification to
be assessed (for example,
improved access to the bathroom).
A home modifications assessor is an occupational therapist with skills to
provide detailed and complex home modifications assessments
The NDIA expects that a home modifications assessor required for Category B
minor home modifications and complex home modifications
should demonstrate:
Professional
qualifications and meet the registration requirements as an occupational
understanding of the scope and purpose of the NDIS, particularly as it relates
to the goals and use of supports in a participant’s
plan to achieve agreed
completion of post graduate education and/or training specifically on the
assessment, specification and implementation
of complex home modifications that
may include at least one of the following:
Occupational
Therapy Australia peer reviewed education and/or training on Complex Home
Modification
Member or above of the Association of Consultants in Access Australia (ACAA)
– professional credential
completion of Nationally Recognised Training modules CPPACC4020 and
at Senior Clinician level specifically responsible for Complex Home Modification
assessment.
registered providers who successfully completed NDIA-authorised training in
Complex Home Modification assessment during the trial
phase of the NDIS prior to
30 June 2016.
(Emphasis added)
website then goes on to provide links for guidance for home modifications
are also separate links for guidance for “builders and
designers”.
both home modification “assessors” and “builders and
designers” the guidance documents cross reference
AS 1428 which deals with
design for access and disabilities.
NDIS information on the website describes the process of funding home
modifications. It has a section relating to permits and
States and territories have different rules about building approvals and
permissions and when you need a building contract. You and
your builder are
responsible for making sure you have the right approvals and permissions for
your building works.
You’ll need to check your local council requirements for your home
modifications. Most local councils will have information
on their website or you
can call them.
We’ll tell you if you need to give us written confirmation that you have
the appropriate building approvals and certifications.
We might need this before
we can make certain payments to you or the provider. You’ll need the
necessary certifications for
the completed work before we can pay or approve the
final stage payment for home modifications.
Minor home modifications may also need trade certifications, such as an
electrical certificate of compliance. Or plumbing certification
for changes that
affect the ‘wet seal’, such as modifications to a bathroom floor or
lower walls.
You are responsible for making sure your home modifications meet the legal and
administrative requirements. Your building works project
manager can help you
check your home modification complies with the required standards.
What are your responsibilities for contracts?
You, or the homeowner, will sign the building contract and enter into a legal
agreement with your builder
. We are not a party in this contract or involved
in this agreement.
Your commitments are the same as if you were paying for the work with your own
money. This includes making sure you or your providers
comply with any local
authority regulations for the modifications.
(Emphasis added)
relation to the topic of adding to home modifications there is this reference to
the role of the occupational therapist:
Your occupational therapist or home modification assessor needs to approve
any changes to your recommended supports
. They need to check the
modifications will still meet your needs.
(Emphasis added)
is also this explanation of the difference between the role of the occupational
therapist and the role of the builder:
recommend more detailed home modifications supports.
They will review your
functional needs and goals in your home
Your home modification assessor will recommend the specific home modification
supports you need and explain
how they relate to your disability and
. You should make sure your assessor understands what you want the home
modification to achieve.
They can also help identify if you’ll need additional supports while your
modifications get done, like hire facilities or temporary
accommodation.
Your home modification assessor
may work with a building construction
practitioner
. They will work together to complete the home modification
assessment report and submit this to us. We have assessment templates
Your home modification assessor should be independent from your builder.
When your home modification is complete, your home modification assessor may
review your NDIS funded home modification supports.
For complex home
modifications they will do another assessment with you after you’ve been
using your new supports.
This is to make sure the home modification meets
your disability support needs
Builders construct your home modifications
. Builders are responsible for
meeting all legal and administrative requirements, like the National
Construction Code and Australian
Standards. They are responsible for making sure
the building site is safe when home modification works are underway, and for
their work if they get it wrong.
You should have a service agreement with your builder. Or you can use a building
contract if your state or territory building authority
requires one. The service
agreement or building contract details what modifications will be done and how
much they will cost.
It should outline which providers are responsible for the work, and how and when
your modifications will be completed. The service
agreement or building contract
should also outline:
builder is responsible for
- what you are
responsible for
- who will be
liable if things go wrong
- how risks will
be managed.
If you have complex home modifications, it’s best they are managed by only
one builder. This is important when your home is
a building site. It means one
builder will manage all the trades in your home and is responsible for safety
requirements. It’s
also usually better value for money.
A building works project manager can help you check your contract and
arrangements with your builder.
Building construction practitioners
Building construction practitioners have building knowledge and expertise to:
- give advice on
the design and cost of home modifications
- outline the
scope of work
drawings so builders can give quotes on the works.
They could be an architect, engineer, builder, or other building related
practitioner. They should be independent from any of the
builders who provide
quotes for your job.
A building construction practitioner will work closely with you and your home
modification assessor to help plan the home modification.
They will make sure
the home modification supports recommended by your assessor are possible in your
. They will also work out how the modifications can be done in the most
effective way.
Your building construction practitioner will review your property and home. They
will give information to support the home modification
assessment. They will
also identify if any preliminary works by building specialists like engineers,
surveyors or architects, are
needed to help plan your modifications.
You can ask your building construction practitioner to also be your building
works project manager if they have the right skills
and if we have funded
You can ask your building construction practitioner to help you check builder
credentials and get builder quotes.
Building works project managers
If you have a very complex home modification, we’ll include funding for a
building works project manager. This could be because
the work is high risk, or
if you need extra help to manage the home modification.
Your building works project manager is independent from your builder. They can
with your builder.
[The document goes on to also refer to Independent Building Certifiers]
Other building professionals
Some complex home modifications may need building professionals with special
skills, like engineers, surveyors, or other building
experts. We can only fund
these services if they meet the NDIS funding criteria.
Your building construction practitioner will identify if a building professional
is needed to help plan your home modification, or
during or after
construction.
If we don’t fund a building professional, you can choose to pay for this
based on your individual needs.
In some cases, NDIS funded home modifications may be part of your larger
building project. You’ll need to decide whether to
hire professionals with
special skills to manage the risks involved in your own building project.
We’ll only fund building
professionals related to the NDIS funded building
works. We don’t provide funding related to your private works.
(Emphasis added)
in the field of home modifications, the NDIS scheme contemplates multiple
professionals potentially being involved. The role
of the occupational therapist
recommending
what supports are required is different to the role of,
say an engineer, architect or project manager, and that in turn is different
the role of
the builder
who actually organises and performs the building
work. I note that in oral evidence Mr Gransbury, by reference to that document,
he performed the role of ‘home modification assessor’.
conclusion that the registration process is such that the NDIS needs to be
satisfied that the person applying for registration
holds appropriate
professional qualifications, and what those qualifications are will turn on the
work they do. What the NDIS registration
process requires is not determinative
of whether the respondent had to hold a builder’s licence under South
Australian legislation
to do the work they did. Whether they did or did not need
to hold a licence falls for determination on whether the BWC Act requires
to hold a licence, not what the applicant’s interpretation of the NDIS
registration process requirements are. The NDIS
clearly distinguishes between
the role of the occupational therapist and the role of the builder. That there
is a registration category
of ‘home modification’ which an
occupational therapist can be registered in does not mean that the occupational
is a builder or holds themselves out as a builder – indeed as I
set out below in this matter the respondent was
the builder –
the builder was Dave’s Bathrooms.
applicant says that the respondent advertises itself as a builder and points to
the respondent’s website, where details
He has a passion for rehabilitation, assessing and prescribing complex home
modifications and is one of a small number of therapists
in the state with
specialist NDIS training to complete major home modifications.
applicant says that this is Mr Gransbury advertising himself out as being
entitled to carry on business as a building work contractor.
The first part of
the quotation suggests that he assesses and prescribes complex home
modifications (which is a different thing from
performing building work). The
second part refers to NDIS training to complete major home modifications. I set
out below the details
of that training course. The words ‘complete major
building work. But there is a danger in drawing too big an inference words from
an isolated section of the website. I have had a
look at the website page as a
whole which explains that the respondent is a firm of occupational therapists
and have formed the view
that no reasonable person would draw the inference from
the website that the respondent is holding itself out as being entitled to
on business as a building work contractor. The extract comes from a page
entitled ‘Your therapists at Abilities OT’.
applicant refers to a letter from the respondent’s solicitor dated 2
August 2024 to Mr and Mrs Dunne which states in part,
We refer to a
series of complaints you have raised with our client regarding its involvement
in recommending home modifications and
building works that followed
and says that is an admission that the respondent is a building consultant
within the meaning of the Act.
is no dispute that the respondent does provide recommendations about what
modifications should be made to houses for people
with disabilities. I return to
this topic below when I address the question of whether the respondent is a
building consultant for
the purposes of the BWC Act. The email referred to is
not a binding admission that the requirements of the section of the BWC Act
made out. It was a letter asking for all correspondence about the complaint to
be directed to the solicitors for the respondent
rather than the respondent
correct process is to look at the facts of what the respondent does in its
business and what it did on this occasion. I expand
on those facts before
returning to the argument of the applicant that the respondent advertises that
it does building work.
Gransbury sets out in his affidavit that he is a registered occupational
therapist with AHPRA registration.
says that the respondent provides occupational therapy services. Part of the
work that the respondent does is in the area of home
modifications.
oral evidence Mr Gransbury described his work in relation to home modifications
as follows:
A complex home modification assessment involves myself making an appointment
with a particular client. I will then attend the home
of that particular client.
We will talk through their background. It might be their disability or
particular illness that they have.
We will talk through and given my
registration as an occupational therapist, I have an understanding of their
disability. I then
will talk through what their future goals are, whether it be
they wish to remain in their house until they pass away, or as their
may continue to degenerate.
I then make a series of recommendations based on
that person, based on their home environment and based on what they choose to do
and their goals
. And, then come up with a series of recommendations and put
that into a report.
(Emphasis added)
Gransbury has completed a training therapy course for the NDIA – Advanced
Practice and Application of Home Modifications
over two days in 2016.
of the course are set out in the book of documents. The course description
Many NDIS participants report difficulty managing everyday activities in their
others – a lack of
equipment or minor home modifications such a simple ramps and rails. For a
limited view, there may be a
need for complex home modifications: those
requiring structural changes to the dwelling.
Whilst any Occupational Therapist is able to prescribe simple home
modifications for National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) participants,
National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA) has introduced a process where the
prescription of complex home modifications is
limited to expert Occupational
Therapists. These therapists review the participants functional performance and
thoroughly investigate
all options to assist them to access and use essential
areas of their home prior to the prescription of complex modifications
Participants have a choice of these OT’s from a list in each region, and
are assured that these therapists are experts in
this practice area and have
been trained in working with the NDIA i.e., considering all alternatives,
understanding reasonable necessary
and providing the justification documentation
This two-day training package has been designed in collaboration with the NDIA
day to address the specific challenges and issues
that have been identified for
occupational therapists who wish to assess participants with complex home
modification requirements
and develop concert plans for NDIS participants ...
(Emphasis added)
Gransbury deposed that the respondent does not carry on the business of
building, construction or building consultancy. He says
builder’s licence, nor does the respondent, but says there is no need to
have one as no building work is performed.
In oral evidence he said he knew a
lot of occupational therapists, but did not know of an occupational therapist
that held a builder’s
oral evidence he said he did not have training or any kind of building work
qualification. He does not have a ‘huge amount’
of familiarity with
the Building Code of Australia. He said he might make recommendations about what
work is required, but not about
how the work should be done:
I certainly don't tell them how to do it. So, from an occupational therapist
perspective our expertise comes from function. So we
have an understanding of
their medical condition, we understand how that is going to change over time,
how it may evolve. We then
work alongside those builders to say: yes, we need to
widen it to this point because we need to have a wheelchair fit through it.
that is certainly where it finishes.
was familiar with AS1428.1:
So I do reference the Australian Standard as AS1428.1. So, I will within my
report and certainly within those diagrams, I have always
drawn up the ramp. So
I use specific software to allow me to do that and that is purely based so that
I can give the builder a really
clear understanding of what needs to happen. I
don't tell them how to actually construct it. I just tell them it needs to be a
length. It may need to be longer than the Australian Standards as well,
depending on their function and their disability. So, I can
stray from it, based
on their actual clinical function and their predicted future function.
is a standard that relates to disability access.
might say what items are needed to be built in a bathroom, but not how to build
I have no idea about where plumbing goes and everything like that. Quite often,
with those complex modifications we’re talking
Because the average standard house is fairly small. So, more often that not,
I’m recommending walls be
removed, but I’m not getting to the level
of detail as far as relocating plumbing or electrical work because I don't have
knowledge about that.
said that if a builder raised difficulties with what he recommended, then he
would follow the builder’s advice and amend
his recommendations
accordingly.
oral evidence he described how he arranged NDIS funding:
So, in relation to NDIS funding, that particular report you’re referring
to, which has got the recommendations based on all
the photographs and things
like that, the NDIS have an assessment template that we fill out that provides a
bit more about the medical
background and what our recommendations are. So that
basically the NDIS can look at the application form and form their judgment
document with the photos, that they can make a decision
as to how much or how
little funding they will contribute to that person’s application.
referred to the NDIS Service Agreement entered between the respondent and the
applicant. It had a commencement date of November
2022. Its terms included:
The NDIS and this Service Agreement
This Service Agreement is made for the purpose of providing supports under the
Participant’s National Disability Insurance
Scheme (NDIS) plan.
The Parties agree that this Service Agreement is made in the context of the
NDIS, which is a scheme that aims to:
• support the independence and social and economic participation of people
with disability, and
• enable people with a disability to exercise choice and control in the
pursuit of their goals and the planning and delivery
of their supports.
Schedule of supports
The Provider agrees to provide the Participant
occupational therapy
and intervention.
[under the heading of consents]:
I consent to having an
Occupational Therapy assessment and intervention
undertaken of my function and/or home environment. I understand that this is
being done to provide recommendations and advice regarding
my ongoing safety and
independence.
I consent to having photographs taken of my home in order to improve the
accuracy of possible
recommendations
if indicated.
(Emphasis added)
schedule of supports is attached to the agreement and includes – an
initial assessment; investigations; preparation of a
report; NDIS paperwork and
Gransbury said that on 12 December 2022 he, on behalf of the respondent, did a
complex home modification assessment with the applicant
in his home. He said
that the purpose of the assessment was to assess how the applicant functions
within his home, and whether he
requires any further support/modifications to
the home to improve his current and future functional independence. The
findings are finalised in a report entitled “Home Modifications
Form” dated 22 December 2022.
22 December document includes the following
recommendations
80.1 Installation of automated swing dates
to enable independent wheelchair access into and out of the front access;
80.2 Installation of a retrofitted automatic door opener;
80.3 Changes to the lounge access to enable wheelchair access including
removing an existing doorway, widening the opening and replacing
door, relocating light switch.
80.4 Changes to the bathroom and toilet areas: removing a lined cupboard;
adding an external sliding door and widen bathroom; remove
walls between toilet
bathroom shower bath and existing vanity; changes to alcove; retiling; regrading
of floor to provide stepless
entry and sufficient fall back to shower waste; new
basin; L shaped rail in shower alcove; supply and install bidet; handheld shower
hose on sliding rail; mixer tap with extension handle in shower alcove; angles
rail on left side of toilet; install mirror above
part of the assessment process Mr Gransbury completed a home modification
diagram which was submitted to the NDIS for funding approval
modification form shows a diagram with the floor plan showing certain things in
red which appear to relate to access points for
various rooms, and a series of
photographs with annotations such as – in relation to the photo of the
sliding doors, ‘side
access to become only access into home’; on a
photo of a door yellow arrows suggesting that the door be widened and power
consequently relocated.
assessment document filled in includes the following:
Mr Gareth Dunne is a 51 year old male who resides with his wife and three
children in the own home in the regional township of Roseworthy,
Gareth received a diagnosis a Motor Neuron Disease (MND) in June 2022 following
noticing reduced strength in his left knee. MND is
a rapidly progressing
neurological disease that affects the motor neurons.
Gareth has been informed by his neurologist that he has a life expectancy of
approximately 2 years.
Gareth currently presents with the following physical impairments:
- bilateral leg
weakness (right worse than left)
- feelings of
heaviness of limbs and lack of control
- stiffness in
both hands - Gareth reports these ‘lock up’
- twitching and
cramps in hand, back and feet.
(muscle wasting) of the hips
- Voice changes
– slight raspy/hoarse voice
Gareth has co-existing conditions of asthma and anxiety.
The nature of MND means that Gareth’s mobility and independence will
progressively worsen and he will require total assistance
in all aspects of his
Gareth is well supported at home by his family. It is Gareth and his
families’ wish that he resides at home throughout this
journey of MND.
document then sets out the applicant’s goals. It then sets out detailed
findings from the functional assessment. These go
to current status, and
expected future level of independence. I don’t set that out in full, but
it refers to the future independence
requiring wheelchair dependence, and hoist
transfers being necessary for bed chair toilet and car. The assessment spans
several pages.
then makes a series of recommendations, and explains why they are necessary by
reference to clinical evidence, addressing the relevant
NDIS criteria. By way of
example, in relation to front access, the current situation of two step entry is
identified; the cost of
a ramp is estimated at $10K to $15K but the ramp is not
recommended because of the cost and the ability to make an alternative
recommendation.
Again, this part of the report is very detailed and explains
precisely what was recommended and why from an occupational therapist’s
viewpoint, having regard to the NDIS criteria about what will and will not be
funded. The recommendations are about what modifications
are suggested rather
than telling the builder
from a building or engineering point of the
view the builder is to carry out the work.
report then shows the recommendations are reviewed by a Building Construction
Professional – here, David Martin.
assist with the process of obtaining NDIS funding he suggested that David Martin
and Welcome Home Enterprises provide quotations
for the home modification works.
These were then submitted to the NDIS.
NDIS then determined the level of funding and selected the builder to undertake
the complex home modification works. In oral evidence
the applicant said it was
the NDIS’ decision to go with David Martin, and that was largely to do
with him having better availability
than the alternative person who quoted.
Gransbury said he did not ‘subcontract’ the builder. He expected the
builder would have entered into a written contract
with the applicants. He said
that if this did not happen, it was nothing to do with him.
Gransbury said that the type of NDIS funding the applicant obtained was
‘self-managed’, where the applicant received
funds from the NDIS to
pay Mr Martin. In the events that happened, Mr Martin was not paid. Ultimately
Mr Martin has brought proceedings
in the Magistrates Court of South Australia,
and the applicant in turn has brought separate disciplinary proceedings against
which are separately before the Tribunal.
tax invoices rendered by the respondent include the following work:
assessment completed at client’s home
- Minor home
mods drawing and seeking quote
- Review Tryex
website for ramps and ease of purchase and email communication with client
- Email to Home
Care Equipment seeking quote for toilet surround
- Forwarding
quote from Garry Cindy re rail installation
- Reviewing
quote for rail installation
- OT major home
mods review
- Review and
saving of Hiline Hardware quote
Hi-Line requesting adjustment of quote
- Liaising with
Autoslide re sliding door
- Forwarding
Hi-Line hardware quote for consideration/action
- Major home
mods submitted to builders x 2 for quoting
- Liaising re
- OT review with
- Liaison re
vehicle mods
- Arranging ECU
- Joint visit
with builder 2
- Commence CHM
forms for major modification recommendation
- CHM report
continued following quotes being received
- Finalising
email of 17 July 2023 the NDIS asked Mr Gransbury a number of questions about
what had been recommended. They include asking Mr
Gransbury “
with a building construction professional whether the shower is compliant with
Australian Standard 3740
”, and his response
checking with
the builder. There are numerous questions in that email where the NDIS asks
questions seeking Mr Gransbury’s opinion
from an occupational
therapists perspective
, and then asking him to check with a building
construction professional on other aspects. This suggests that Mr
Gransbury’s
role was as on occupational therapist, not a building work
contractor.
documentation and evidence of Mr Gransbury shows that the respondent made
recommendations
; organised quotes; helped obtain NDIS funding, but does
not show that the respondent actually performed the building work or organised
the building work – that was done by the builder. The applicant appears to
equate the arranging of the quote with the arranging
of the building work. I do
not consider the organising of a quote for a builder to do recommended work is
the same thing as performing
building work within the meaning of the BWC
27 February 2024 the respondent wrote to the NDIS about the applicant and
provided information that the applicant had issues with
the width of the basin
and height of shower curtain. The respondent said:
These specific items were discussed in a home visit on Wednesday the 31st of
January 2024 whereby Kate and Gareth were both consenting
to the 500mm wide wall
hung basin alongside the position of other fittings.
Following completion of all works, Kate communicated via SMS that that she was
wanting the above issues rectified (despite previously
communicating verbal
consent). A further home visit was then completed on Monday the 19th of February
to their home however neither
of them was able to or wished to be present, and
therefore OT, Dave’s bathrooms’ owner (Dave) and employee (Kurt)
the only one’s present. A review of Kate and Gareth’s
outstanding issues were reviewed and discussed but due to the owners
OT reviewed both the basin and curtain rail height, and they both comply with
. Discussion occurred on site about how to rectify the situation but
given Gareth or Kate were not present, an email outlining potential
actions was sent to Kate & Gareth on Monday the 19th of February 2024 at
3:02pm. This included information that the shower
curtain height and vanity meet
the Australian Standard requirement.
They were advised and acknowledged that any additional tile height (required to
enable greater height of shower curtain) would need
to be self-funded.
Since this email, Kate has not been willing to engage in further conversation
regarding OT’s reply to reach an outcome where
all parties are satisfied.
At no stage throughout the entire build process did Kate raise any issues with
me as the OT.
I have reviewed the completed home modifications and feel the work has been
completed to a high standard
The work is
clinically appropriate
for Gareth current and future
, and I support full payment of Dave’s bathrooms outstanding
Please note that the original recommendations, and minor adjustments to the
scope of works have been made in consultation with the
following documents, and
the completed modifications also adheres to all of the below documents.
1) NDIS Complex Home Modifications Operational Guidelines Dated 09 August
2) Australian Standard 1428 Design for Access and Mobility Part 1 (General) (AS
3) NDIS Home Modifications – Guidance for Builders and Assessors
4) The reasonable and necessary criteria outlined in National Disability
Insurance Agency Act 2013, section34(1)(a)-(f) 2013.
(Emphasis added)
28 February 2024 the respondent wrote to Dave’s Bathrooms in the following
I am writing to provide clear evidence to the invoice that will be submitted for
payment to Kate & Gareth Dunne who self-manage
Gareth’s NDIS plan.
Mr Gareth Dunne is a 51-year-old Male who resides with his wife, Kate and
children in their own home in Roseworthy, SA. Gareth has
a primary diagnosis of
Motor Neuron Disease, which affects mobility and ability to perform activities
of daily living.
I have been providing OT services until recently for Mr Gareth Dunne.
As all parties have discussed throughout the journey there are items that have
unexpectedly come up that were not included in your
original quote/scope of
works and thus we have requested that the family fund these out of a different
budget line.
I am placing this request with consideration of the NDIS reasonable and
necessary principles
(Section 34
National Disability Insurance Scheme
Must be related
to a participant’s disability, goals and aspirations.
Will assist the
participant to undertake activities, so as to facilitate the participant’s
social and economic participation.
Should represent
value for money.
Must be likely
to be effective and work for the participant.
Should consider
support given to you by other government services, your family, carers, networks
and the community.
That it should
not be covered by alternative funding bodies.
The following items are clinically recommended
outside of the major home
modifications scope of works:
1) Supply and fitting of an RPZ valve.
Note that the plumber initially stated that the RPZ valve was not required but
when you went to purchase it, the supplier stated
that it was essential.
2) Supply and fitting of a towel rail and towel hook.
3) Widening of both bathroom door and opening between lounge and dining room
It was noted in the original scope that the following recommendation was
Add external sliding door (to match existing) and widen into bathroom to 850mm.
During the quoting phase, it was noted that the current
opening would achieve
this width and thus did not require widening. During an additional home visit
once the bathroom and external
walls had been partially demolished, it was noted
that the opening would not be sufficient and widening of the this entrance was
essential. All parties also agreed that a 920mm hinged door would be supplied
and fitted. I understand that supply and fitting has
been included in the
initial quote but there would be a small additional charge to widen the door and
It should also be noted that this Tax Invoice has been modified since sending it
to the Dunne’s with the removal of the rails
as these should have been in
the original cost.
(Emphasis added)
Gransbury said he did not supervise the building works. He did not
‘certify’ the works. He said his role was to ensure
Dunne’s current and future function would allow him to continue to live
within his own home safely and easily and that
would be achieved by
making sure that the modifications that the builder made would be
appropriate for him. So, the doorways were wide enough, the shower
big enough,
so that as his condition deteriorated he would be able to continue to live
safely there
were some text messages explained which show that Mr Gransbury attended on site
to discuss issues with either Mr and Mrs Dunne
or certain tradies. He said that
he was trying to ensure that Mr and Mrs Dunne were happy with the modifications.
He explained that
he sent the letters referred to above to Mr Martin following
complaints being made by Mr Martin that he had not been paid. He expected
Mr Martin might provide that letter to the NDIS and that might facilitate Mr
Martin getting paid. Part of the applicant’s
complaint is that the
reference to extra work is some kind of fraud on the NDIS.
Gransbury said he did not do any physical work on the applicant’s
property. All of that work was done through the builder.
on the evidence summarised above I conclude that the
respondent:
99.1 Carries on business as a firm of occupational
therapists.
99.2 Does not perform building work.
99.3 Does not organise the performance of building work in the sense
contemplated by the BWC Act. It does arrange quotes from a builder
so that the
builder in turn organises and supervises the building work.
99.4 Was not a building work contractor as defined by the BWC Act.
99.5 Does not hold itself out or advertise that it was entitled to carry on
business as a building work contractor, but rather does
hold itself out as a
firm that can provide services where an occupational therapist will make
recommendations about what building
work is recommended from an occupational
therapist’s perspective.
99.6 Was not required to hold a building work contractor’s licence.
next question is whether the respondent was a “building
consultant”.
question is a little more difficult to answer.
set out earlier, the definition of a building consultant is a person (other than
a registered architect) who carries on the business
of giving advice or
furnishing reports in respect of domestic building work (whether being work
already performed, work in progress
or work that may be required in the future),
and includes a former building consultant.
respondent, at one level, does give advice or furnish reports that concern
domestic building work. That advice is given from the
perspective of an
occupational therapist. The question is whether the intention of Parliament, as
expressed in s 20, is to extend
the operation of disciplinary proceedings
under the BWC Act to such an occupational therapist where the role of an
occupational therapist
is otherwise not regulated under the BWC Act but is
regulated under the National Law, and where the types of reports they prepare
relate to what modifications are clinically recommended as opposed to whether
the building work is or will be compliant with the
contract drawings,
specifications, statutory warranties, building codes or other regulatory
requirements from a technical or qualitative
perspective.
role of a Court (or Tribunal) is to construe, by the application of accepted
canons of construction, the intention of the legislature
through the words used
in a statute.
starting point is often the “literal approach”. In more recent times
however, the approach has been for the courts to
ascertain the intention of the
legislature through the object or purpose underlying the legislation and to
ascertain the meaning
of the words in light of that object or purpose. Such an
approach consequently allows the court far more latitude in departing from
literal or grammatical meaning and extends to any situation where the literal
reading does not conform to the legislative intent
as ascertained from the
provisions of the statute, including the policy that may be discerned from those
provisions. However, a Court
or Tribunal must not refuse a construction merely
because it results in an inconvenient result, or produces anomalies, or because
the Court or Tribunal disapproves of the provision or considers it
unreasonable.
have been several recent cases in the Court of Appeal of South Australia which
have summarised the principles applicable to
statutory construction. One example
Woolworths Group Limited v Jackermis
[2023] SASCA 31
where the Court
[25] The applicable principles are well understood. In any exercise of statutory
interpretation, it is necessary to start with the
language of the provisions.
Those provisions must be construed in the context of the language of the statute
as a whole. In Project
Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority, the
plurality explained that the primary object of statutory construction:
... is to construe the relevant provision so that it is consistent with the
language and purpose of all the provisions of the statute.
The meaning of the
provision must be determined “by reference to the language of the
instrument viewed as a whole”. In
Cmr for Railways (NSW) v
, Dixon CJ pointed out that “the context, the general purpose
and policy of a provision and its consistency and fairness are
surer guides to
its meaning than the logic with which it is constructed”. Thus, the
process of construction must always begin
by examining the context of the
provision that is being construed.
[26] The Court is to give the words used the meaning that the legislature is
taken to have intended them to have. That will ordinarily
correspond with the
grammatical meaning of the section. However, the context, the consequences of a
particular construction and the
purpose of the statute may sometimes require a
non-literal interpretation to be adopted. Further, absent an examination of
and purpose, a literal interpretation may be impossible, or
meaningless.
[27] Having said that, as the appellant emphasised, considerations of context
and purpose do not amount to an invitation to rewrite
the legislation. As French
CJ and Hayne J said in
Certain Lloyds Underwriters v Cross
The purpose of legislation must be derived from what the legislation says, and
not from any assumption about the desired or desirable
reach or operation of the
relevant provisions.
[28] To that end, as the plurality said in In Taylor v Owners — Strata
Plan 11564:
The question whether the court is justified in reading a statutory provision as
if it contained additional words or omitted words
involves a judgment of matters
of degree. That judgment is readily answered in favour of addition or omission
in the case of simple,
grammatical, drafting errors which if uncorrected would
defeat the object of the provision. It is answered against a construction
fills gaps disclosed in legislation or makes an insertion which is “too
big, or too much at variance with the language
in fact used by the
legislature”.
(Footnotes omitted)
Duncan v Bert Farina Constructions Pty Ltd
[2024] SASCA 67
the Court of
Appeal said:
[39] The fundamental task of the Court in construing legislation is, of course,
to give the words used in the relevant provisions
the meaning that the
legislature is taken to have intended.
[40] The contemporary approach to this task is conveniently summarised in the
following passage from the reasons of Kiefel CJ, Gordon
and Nettle JJ in
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration & Border Protection
The starting point for the ascertainment of the meaning of a statutory provision
is the text of the statute whilst, at the same time,
regard is had to its
context and purpose. Context should be regarded at this first stage and not at
some later stage and it should
be regarded in its widest sense. This is not to
deny the importance of the natural and ordinary meaning of a word, namely how it
is ordinarily understood in discourse, to the process of construction.
Considerations of context and purpose simply recognise that,
understood in its
statutory, historical or other context, some other meaning of a word may be
suggested, and so too, if its ordinary
meaning is not consistent with the
statutory purpose, that meaning must be rejected.
[41] Similarly, in
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club Ltd
Brennan CJ, Dawson, Toohey and Gummow JJ emphasised that context in its widest
sense and statutory purpose are to be considered
from the outset, and not only
when an ambiguity might be thought to arise on the text. This may include
consideration of matters
such as the existing state of the law, and the mischief
which the legislation was intended to remedy.
[42] In the case of South Australian statutes,
Legislation
Interpretation Act 2021
(SA) expressly provides that the interpretation that
best achieves the purpose or object of the Act (even if not expressly stated
the Act) is to be preferred to any other interpretation.
[43] Any inconvenience or improbability in the result of a construction may
indicate a meaning other than the literal meaning of
the relevant provision.
Whether a particular construction assists or interferes with the coherent
operation of the relevant legislation
scheme may also be a relevant
consideration.
[44] At the same time, contextual and purposive indications may not be used to
rewrite the legislation; the meaning derived must
be consistent with the
language in fact used in the relevant legislation. Further, the purpose must be
one which may be discerned
from the legislation itself, read in the context of
any relevant extrinsic material. Legislation must not be construed on the basis
of some a priori assumption as to the statutory purpose, or as to the desirable
reach or operation of the relevant provision.
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration & Border Protection
J described the task as one involving “constructional choice”
between the competing meanings that may be available:
The constructional choice presented by a statutory text read in context is
sometimes between one meaning which can be characterised
as the ordinary or
grammatical meaning and another meaning which cannot be so characterised. More
commonly, the choice is from “a
range of potential meanings, some of which
may be less immediately obvious or more awkward than others, but none of which
ungrammatical or unnatural”, in which case the choice
“turns less on linguistic fit than on evaluation of the relative
of the alternatives with identified statutory objects or policies”
(Footnotes omitted)
context within which the phrase “building consultant” appears
includes the following.
2 of the BWC Act deals with the licencing of building work contractors. For the
reasons set out earlier the respondent is not
a building work contractor.
3 of the BWC Act deals with the registration of building work supervisors. The
applicant did not argue that the respondent was
a building work supervisor
within the meaning of the BWC Act (though it did suggest that aspects of the
work performed involved an
element of supervision). The respondent was not a
building work supervisor and did not supervise the performance of the building
work. At its highest the respondent attended some meetings to discuss home
modifications from a functional perspective, but not a
perspective.
5 of the Act regulates building work contracts, provides for statutory
warranties, and has provisions relating to building indemnity
1 to 6 of Part 5 operate in various ways to ensure minimum standards in the
allocation of contractual risk between builders
and house owners. None of that
is relevant to an occupational therapist.
provisions of Division 1, amongst other things, impose various requirements in
relation to the formalities and content of domestic
building contracts,
including the determination and specification of the price and payment terms.
Division 2 contains the statutory
warranties the subject of the underlying
proceeding. Divisions 3 (insurance), 4 (termination) and 6 (harsh and
unconscionable terms)
provide other protections.
5 gives the Court (not this Tribunal) certain powers in respect of domestic
building work.
in the Act regulates the role of an occupational therapist.
would be surprising, and indeed incoherent, in those circumstances, where an
occupational therapist is regulated under the National
Law, and subject to the
disciplinary regime established by the National Law, to consider that Parliament
intended an occupational
therapist to be subject to disciplinary sanction under
the BWC Act. The intention of the BWC Act is to regulate conduct in the building
industry rather than to regulate the conduct of health professionals whose
conduct is governed by the National Law.
do concede that the words “in respect of” at face value are
potentially words of wide import.
reading the phrase, as a whole, which refers to someone who “carries on
the business of giving advice or furnishing
reports in respect of domestic
building work” leads to a conclusion that the intention of “in
respect of” does
not have a meaning at large that might connote that any
report about anything to do with a building makes a person a building
consultant.
consider that a building consultant typically will have a background in building
work or construction, and will, in their report,
be addressing technical,
structural and regulatory aspects of buildings. This will include addressing
questions such as:
119.1 Whether the work is or will be in
compliance with building codes and regulations such that it is structurally
sound, compliant
and properly implemented.
119.2 Whether the work is or will be done in accordance with the
119.3 Whether the building work has or will be performed in a way that
complies with statutory warranties, and this focuses on issues
design, quality and compliance rather than simply functional needs.
occupational therapist on the other hand will typically assess an
individual’s physical, cognitive and emotional needs to
physical daily activities safely and independently. In the context of home
modification that will include working
out the functional needs of the
individual, the making of recommendations to support independence such as grab
rails, ramps, or accessible
bathrooms. It will include considerations about
ergonomics, safety and individual health conditions. It may involve
collaboration
with a builder, or building professional, but the occupational
therapist themselves is not responsible for ensuring the structural
adequacy of
the work or to assess building compliance.
examples given in this case illustrate the point. The respondent might utilise
the Australian Standards relating to disability
access and make recommendations
in accordance with that standard. That leads to the respondent making
recommendations about whether
the client needs a ramp, wider doorways or a
particular kind of shower for safe mobility and independence. But that is not
thing a building consultant would advise on. The building consultant
might determine how a ramp would be constructed to meet the
building codes, what
needs to be done to ensure the structural integrity of the wider doors, or how
the waterproofing, plumbing and
tiling should be done to implement the suggested
changed to the bathroom. The consultant might advise whether the work carried
to achieve the functional aims complies with the terms of the building
contract or meets the statutory warranties.
the context of this case, the 27 February 2024 letter summarised above
illustrates the distinction between reporting on matters
from an OT perspective,
and getting input from the building professional and matters to do with whether
the work is compliant from
a builder’s perspective.
way of looking at it is to ask these questions. What business does the
respondent carry on? Answer – it is a firm of
health care professionals,
carrying on the business of occupational therapy. Does it furnish reports on
domestic building work? Answer,
it provides reports about the functional needs
of individuals, which may include reports about what home modifications are
recommended
to meet those needs, but not about the construction or quality of
building work from the perspective of someone with building expertise.
not evaluate workmanship, code compliance or structural issues (though it might
consider compliance with the Australian Standard
dealing with disability access
from a functional perspective). It does not certify building compliance. It does
not engage in construction
related decision making. Its reports relate to client
needs rather than building standards. Does the respondent have technical
construction
knowledge or qualifications? Answer, no, its staff have training in
occupational therapy which relates to health and rehabilitation
construction. It might make recommendations, but these are clinical in nature
and not technical assessments of construction work.
The reports relate to the
needs of the person rather than the technical assessment of the construction
find that the respondent carries on business as a firm of occupational
therapists and does not carry on business of giving advice
or furnishing reports
in respect of domestic building work. That is so even though part of the work of
the respondent relates to
recommendations about home modification supports. That
is not the same thing however as recommending how the building work is to
done or whether it has been done properly. The respondent might, as part of its
work, comment on whether the building work achieves
the functional aims of the
recommendations that the occupational therapist made. That is not the same thing
as carrying on business
as a building consultant who writes reports setting out
whether the building work complies with the relevant statutory warranties,
regulatory requirements or requirements of the Building Code.
accordingly find that the respondent is not a building consultant for the
purposes of s 20 of the BWC Act.
accordingly find that the disciplinary provisions of the BWC Act do not apply to
the respondent.
applicant’s claim must accordingly be dismissed.
note that the respondent’s written submissions intimate that it intends to
seek an order for costs. If the respondent wishes
to make such an application,
then it should provide written submission in support of that application within
14 days, and the applicant
may provide written submissions in opposition to that
application within a further 14 days after receipt of the applicant’s
submissions and the Tribunal will make its decision on costs on the
Orders of the Tribunal
complaint against the respondent will be
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.42 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter