URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRC/2017/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Angodawidanelage v Leedall Presentation Systems Pty Ltd [2017] SAIRC 4 (24 January 2017)
Angodawidanelage v Leedall Presentation Systems Pty Ltd
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT
ANGODAWIDANELAGE, Gayan
LEEDALL PRESENTATION
SYSTEMS PTY LTD
Fair Work Act 2009
9779 of 2015
HEARING DATES:
16 August and 20 September
JUDGMENT OF:
Industrial Magistrate SM Lieschke
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Claim for unpaid sales commissions
relating to sales of goods and services – Dispute over how employment
contract provided for
quarterly commissions to be calculated - Whether
entitlement was calculated on the basis of sales contracts concluded or paid for
within each quarter –
: Attained sales were to be added to the
commission calculation when they were completed by the delivery of goods and the
of services, not when the final invoice was paid in full –
Applicant entitled to commission and interest.
Sale of Goods Act 1895
Mt Bruce Mining Pty Ltd
v Wright Prospecting Pty Ltd
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr J
Respondent: Mr I Colgrave
Solicitors:
Applicant: Johnston
Respondent: Wallmans Lawyers
applicant claims $65,289 as unpaid commission entitlements, plus interest. The
respondent disputes the full claim but concedes
it owes the applicant $7,091.
The claim arises from the applicant’s employment with the respondent
between 1 May 2013 and 27
October 2015.
dispute falls under
Fair Work Act
, being a claim for an
unpaid incentive-based payment, with the main issue being determination of how
the commission entitlement is
calculated in accordance with the contract of
employment, and exactly how much is owing to the applicant.
applicant’s role was to sell a range of audio visual display systems to
organisations. The sales included hardware sourced
from third parties, and a
range of technical services to make the hardware functional. The applicant was
entitled to qualify for
sales commissions accrued on a quarterly basis subject
to targets being met.
entitlement issue centres on whether the commissions were to be calculated on
the basis that the applicant’s sales contracts
were agreed to, were
delivered and performed, were invoiced or were paid for within the quarter. The
issue arises from a dispute
over the meaning of the phrase “successful
attainment of sales targets.” Timing of sales is a significant variable in
determining quarterly commission, given some gaps of months between a sale
agreement, and delivery and performance, with potential
for variation of scope
of work and final price from the quoted price, and a usual 30 day credit term
for payment. There is no issue
that payment of a commission entitlement was to
be made only after receipt of payment for the sale by the respondent.
further complication was the respondent’s practice of sending invoices and
agreeing to part payments for a single sale, which
applied to the largest sale
secured by the applicant and which is central to the dispute.
was a large sale of goods and services to the Adelaide Convention Centre for
either $411,019 or $386,474, plus GST. A written
sales contract was entered into
by the respondent and ACC in September 2014 but not produced by the respondent
in these proceedings.
In accordance with that contract a payment of $104,500 was
made in October 2014, well before anything was delivered. Completion of
was on or shortly before 31 March 2015. But payment and invoicing arrangements
were staggered in three parts over three quarters
as determined by Mr Skene
and the ACC.
applicant’s case regarding the ACC sale is that the gross profit of the
whole sale should to be credited to him at the time
of completion, being 31
March 2015.
respondent submits the three part payments received from the ACC for the single
sale are to be factored into the three different
quarters in which they were
addition there are secondary disputes over non-payment of $1,042 of commission
from the July to September 2014 period, and over
the quantification of sales
profit resulting from the sale of goods described as ‘PADS’.
respondent maintained another significant issue up to the point of the
proceedings when the respondent’s owner Mr Skene
gave oral evidence.
Through its obtuse amended Answer, further and better particulars and
cross-examination of the applicant, it
asserted the respondent was contractually
entitled to add unspecified or discretionary business overhead expenses, when
calculating
gross profit on the applicant’s sales.
Mr Skene however
agreed throughout his evidence that no additional costs or expenses other than
the cost of goods and services sold
were to be factored into the profit
calculation.
rights and liabilities of the parties regarding commission are to be determined
objectively by reference to the contract’s
text, context (including an
attached explanatory document and other relevant sales records) and purpose. If
the method of calculating
the commission entitlement is ambiguous or susceptible
of more than one meaning, I must consider the evidence of objective surrounding
events and circumstances external to the contract in order to resolve the
ambiguity. But “evidence of the parties' statements
and actions reflecting
their actual intentions and
expectations”
admissible for this purpose.
of the commission structure were not provided by the respondent to the applicant
at interview, but some were provided in writing
attached to a letter of offer
sent on 23 April 2013. The applicant signed and returned the offer on 24 April
without further communication.
letter of offer described the applicant’s title as Business Development
Manager, and his duties in the following terms:
“As a Business Development
Manager the primary function of your position will be to generate new business
sales for Leedall
Presentation Systems. Sales will be generated through a
combination of developing existing client relationships, responding to inbound
sales enquiries, partner leads and prospecting new clients.” The
letter’s only reference to commission was: “Commission
payable on successful attainment of sales targets.”
to the letter was the following explanation of the commission structure:
“Commission structure will commence once Net
Profit contribution has been
achieved for the financial quarter. Once target has been achieved commission
will be paid quarterly.
(or pro-rated for new staff). Commission Plan is
un-capped.”
document required the applicant to achieve a ‘gross profit
contribution’ of $52,500 per financial quarter (an average
of $17,500 per
month) before any commission was payable. A percentage of the quarterly
‘net profit contribution’ of profits
above this level was then paid
as commission: 20% below $22,500 or 40% if at or above $22,500. Gross profit was
calculated on pro
forma software provided by the respondent. The gross profit of
a sale was the excess of the selling price (ex GST) over the cost
of goods and
services supplied, with the cost of services provided by the respondent’s
employees or subcontractors determined
by the respondent at a level that
incorporated various employee and sub-contractor related overheads. Gross profit
was not finally
determined until a job had been completed and any adjustments
made to the anticipated cost of goods and services provided. Total
sales and the
percentage of gross profit to total sales were also recorded.
applicant’s testimony is that he earned commissions of $79,069 for the
January to March 2015 quarter, based on including
the ACC sale in this period.
He did so because the job was finalised on or shortly before 31 March 2015. (The
completion date is
not disputed by Skene, and corresponds to a
‘closed’ status on the records provided to the applicant by the
respondent).
Mr Skene responded to the claim by telling the applicant he was not
going to pay that much commission and instead said he would make
payment $15,000 and they would discuss the rest. On 8 July 2015 the respondent
paid the applicant a net amount of $9,000
from a $15,353 gross payment. Sometime
later Mr Skene offered the applicant an additional $30,000 gross to finalise his
claim. Mr Skene never challenged or queried any aspect of the detail
of the commission claim until after the legal action was launched,
despite there
being weekly sales meetings and more regular discussions between the applicant
and Mr Skene regarding work issues.
In particular, Mr Skene never suggested to
the applicant that he had attributed the ACC sale or any part of it to an
incorrect quarter,
and he never mentioned any type of cost blowouts on the
cross-examination the applicant confirmed Mr Skene told him commissions were
paid only after the money had been received, but firmly
denied that Mr Skene had
ever told him commissions were also to be calculated at that point. His first
commission claim, for July
to September 2014, was never questioned by Mr Skene
regarding timing of attributing sales, despite it being based on the dates
were sent upon the completion of jobs.
respondent’s usual practice was to send an invoice when all goods and
services had been provided in full on a sale’s
completion. The applicant
used the point of invoicing as an indicator of when he had successfully attained
former Business Development Manager, Stuart Johnson, also gave evidence at the
hearing. He was employed between October 2014
and July 2016. He received the
same contract documentation as the applicant, bar a minor variance regarding
base salary. All of the
respondent’s sales figures provided to him were
based on the date of invoice. He was not given data as to the date payments
received by the respondent. He only earned commissions in one quarter, January
to March 2016. In response Mr Skene offered him
a much smaller amount which he
justified by changing the method of calculation to the date of payment of
invoices. Mr Skene told
him his commission claim would be recalculated on the
basis that commissions were only counted when payments were received. Mr Johnson
occasionally saw some part invoices. I accept Mr Johnson’s unchallenged
Skene did not give evidence of ever having any specific discussion with the
applicant that commissions were to be calculated only
based on the date of
payment of the relevant sale invoice, nor was any document, letter or email to
this effect ever sent to the
Skene said the business’ normal practice was that a sale doesn’t go
into the commission calculation until the project
has been delivered and paid
But he accepted that was not
the practice used during the period of employment to analyse the
applicant’s two written commission
claims. He later said “we pay on
Skene confirmed that the ‘closed’ notation for a sale included on
the records provided to the BDM’s did not indicate
the relevant invoice
had been paid, despite initially suggesting the contrary.
the invoices for the ACC sale, he confirmed the first invoice was raised but
then later effectively ‘reversed out’
with a credit applied to the
ACC. He said he could not explain the invoices in detail: he instead deferred to
his employed finance
officer who did not give evidence.
respondent’s banking record shows that an initial payment of $104,500
inclusive of GST was made to the respondent on 3 October
‘credit’ as Mr Skene described the payment, but before any goods or
services were delivered or performed. A second
payment of $285,500 inclusive of
GST was required to be made on delivery of the goods, and was paid on 29 January
2015. A final payment
of $62,121 was due on completion of installation services
and was made on 23 April 2015. The total sale was for $452,121 comprising
$411,019 plus GST.
respondent created and sent at least three invoices to the ACC. The first
cancelled invoice was dated 3 October 2014 for $386,474
plus GST for all
anticipated goods and services. A second invoice for $330,000 plus GST was dated
3 January 2015. A final invoice
for $56,474 plus GST was dated 31 March 2015 by
when the whole job had been completed.
infer a further invoice was sent as the totals paid exceed the total of the
first, or the duplicated combined second and third invoices
by $24,545 plus GST.
Neither party addressed this discrepancy.
respondent’s ‘Sales [Salesperson Summary]’ report for January
to March 2015, printed on 10 September 2015, records
a sale amount of
$391,053.77 plus GST to the ACC, and shows the sale as
corresponding sales record for the previous quarter also shows a reversal of a
sale of $386,474 to the ACC with no sale resulting,
and no ACC sale in the April
to June 2015 quarter.
respondent’s ‘Analyse Sales [Salesperson]’ report for January
to March 2015, also printed from the respondent’s
MYOB system on 10
September 2015, records the ‘sales’ of eight listed people, and
credits the applicant with the highest
This sum matches the
applicant’s total sales to all customers in the corresponding ‘Sales
[Salesperson Summary]’
sales records treat sales as concluded or attained upon completion and before
final payment.
respondent also produced a record of paid
but the applicant denies
ever seeing it while employed.
found the applicant’s evidence to be clear, thorough and detailed. In
contrast Mr Skene’s evidence, including in respect
of the disputed $1,042,
was unsatisfactory. His evidence was evasive and surprisingly vague as to
detail, especially as the respondent’s
owner and managing director, with
him seemingly more focused on arguing his preferred commission structure rather
than focusing on
what actually took place. Where his evidence conflicts with the
applicant’s evidence I prefer and accept the applicant.
applicant claims unpaid commission of $1,042 arising from his claimed commission
entitlement of $15,414 in the period July to
September 2014. The claim for
commission was made in November 2014. By 16
of January 2015 the
applicant asked Mr Skene by email for payment, given that none of it had yet
been paid. The claim was in the
form of the respondent’s commission
calculator pro forma and was fully supported by all relevant costings and
invoices. On
the 19 February 2015 Mr Skene emailed the applicant to say he would
pay $10,000 gross of that amount, but was silent as to the balance.
On 13 March
2015 Mr Skene said he would approve a further $4,372 gross, but with no
explanation as to the shortfall.
is no evidence of any correction, error, mistake or issue ever being raised in
writing by the respondent regarding this commission
applicant’s evidence is that when he raised the unpaid commission Mr Skene
justified the reduction by saying he had some
role in the AMCOM sale within this
period. The applicant submits the respondent does not have any discretion under
the terms of the
employment contract, to unilaterally reduce commissions on this
or any other subjective basis. He secured the sale and so should
be credited
with the relevant contribution to the commission goal. There is no other
evidence to justify withholding this $1,042.
Skene offered different explanations for this non-payment. In evidence he first
suggested that he only made a part payment because
he had to wait for costings
to come in or for a MYOB report to be
That explanation was not
supported by any detail and was not plausible given the lengthy delays. He next
suggested the commission
claim may have been reduced because some of the sales
were not paid until the following
despite that resulting
in even less commission than was paid and the complete absence of any records
consistent with this possibility.
He then vaguely suggested adjustments had to
be made, and there were “mitigating
but could not
identify any. Finally, Mr Skene tried to justify his broader practice of general
reductions of earned commissions by
saying the business had to carry the
applicant at times when he did not reach his sales target, (despite the evidence
showing him
to be the top
salesperson).
Ultimately Mr
Skene offered no cogent reason for underpaying the applicant. I find the
respondent, through Mr Skene, deliberately
underpaid the $1,042 contrary to the
applicant’s contractual entitlement.
the event the applicant is entitled to a payment of commission for the ACC job
the respondent submits a foreign exchange error
resulted in understated expenses
of $15,225, and that the applicant’s qualifying ‘gross profit’
should be reduced
by a corresponding amount. This error arises from the cost of
supplying a large number of ‘PADS’ units.
respondent relies on a payment of $47,953 in February 2015 to its supplier Net
Display Systems in the Netherlands, in order to
prove that the costing error
resulted in an additional unbilled expense on the ACC job. The error is said to
be the difference between
the quoted Australian dollar amount used in billing
the ACC and the cost of goods that were actually bought in US dollars. The
of additional expenses is the difference between $47,953 and $32,728. It
submits this amount should be removed from the applicant’s
credited gross
profit in the period in which it properly falls
applicant accepts that the cost of goods supplied was not converted to US
dollars before the goods were billed to the ACC, at
a very substantial mark-up.
This is because incorrect cost figures were provided by Mr Skene to the
applicant submits however that the respondent’s explanation is incorrect,
and substantially overstates the additional expense
incurred by the respondent.
The additional expense is the difference between the sum the respondent paid Net
Display on its invoice,
based on the prevailing foreign exchange rate at the
time the payment was due, and $32,728. The applicant submits the payment of
$47,953 in February 2015 does not correspond with Net Display’s invoice,
and must have been for different or additional goods.
Display’s invoice asked for payment direct to its bank account within 30
days, and that the invoice number be used for reference.
The $47,963 payment
recorded on the respondent’s bank statement has a reference number that
includes the figure US$35,049 and
does not match the relevant invoice number.
none of the data matches, I infer the payment was likely for different or
additional goods, which were not supplied to the ACC.
I therefore find that the
$47,963 payment does not correspond to the invoice for the cost of goods
supplied to the ACC. As the full
purpose of that payment has not been explained
by the respondent it is not a reliable guide to the true cost of its additional
most accurate measure of the additional expense of the ACC job is derived from
the Australian dollar cost of paying the invoice
when it was due on 29 November
2015. Given that foreign exchange rates fluctuate, using the exchange rates at
some later time may
have increased the Australian dollar payment. So that if the
respondent chose not to pay the invoice when due, and some additional
incurred due to a falling dollar value, that would be a cost of the
respondent’s payment practices and not of the
Accordingly,
I have used A$1 = US$0.8878, the foreign exchange rate applicable on 29 November
2015 as published by the Australian
Taxation Office. The cost of goods supplied
was therefore $36,864 and not $32,728: a difference of $4,136. This amount
reduced from the applicant’s ‘gross profit’ before
his commission is calculated at the rate of 40%.
applicant’s position is that his commission entitlement should have been
calculated on delivered and performed sales within
a quarter, as usually
indicated by the respondent sending its full invoice at that point. By the time
of delivery and final performance
the sale had been successfully attained,
payment of the sale price was enforceable and the profit of the sale was
ascertainable.
time of the sale agreement being reached is premature, as the goods had not been
delivered and the services had not been performed.
At that point there was only
potential profit from the sale in the event of delivery of the goods together
with satisfactory and
successful performance of the services. Until then there
was also the possibility a contract was cancelled or avoided in part.
time of the payment of the invoice is too late as the sale had already been
successfully attained and completed. Timing of payment
is also determined by
commercial credit arrangements solely within the control of the respondent or
its customer, and as such is
not a relevant or achievable sales target.
respondent submits that the contentious phrase “successful attainment of
sales targets” is ambiguous and so I am entitled
to take account of the
broader objective circumstances. These in turn should lead to the conclusion
that a sale had not been successfully
attained until the respondent’s
invoice had been paid in full. The respondent did not specifically address how
the commission
structure treated part invoices and pre-payments.
first consider the text, context and purpose of the employment contract’s
commission terms to determine if there is ambiguity
of meaning.
my opinion the plain words of the text mean that the applicant had to
successfully reach a pre-determined target of sales before
he could qualify for
any commission. The central focus is on sales’ contracts, not on payment
of invoices.
my opinion the context includes the commission calculator attached to the letter
of offer. This document is solely based on ‘monthly
sales’ and uses
the term ‘sales values’, being the retail contract prices. It used a
notion of profit as the margin
between a sale price, and the costs of goods and
services supplied for that sale, as determined by the respondent. It also used
notions of ‘expenses’, ‘costs’,
‘net’ and ‘gross profit’, and ‘finance
But notably it omitted any reference to any concept that conveys
of meaning of sales only being concluded or attained when the final
invoice was
paid: such as ‘receipt/s’, ‘income’,
‘banked/ing’, ‘payment/s’ or ‘takings’.
my opinion the calculator was solely focused on a concluded sale agreement and
not on the timing of payment of the sale price.
context includes sales reports provided to or made available to the applicant
and BDO’s. These included the notation of
a sale being
‘closed’ when it was completed and invoiced. Invoice payment data
was not provided to the applicant.
context also includes the legal meaning of a contract for the sale of goods and
services where property is not transferred upon
the sale agreement being entered
into. As these sales contracts were for later delivery of goods sourced from
third parties and for
the performance of services by the respondent or its
sub-contractors, to make the delivered goods functional, the sale agreements
were fully concluded or fully attained upon delivery and
performance.
The sales contracts
were not treated in law as being completed only on later payment.
purpose of the commission term was to set out an uncapped incentive based system
of reward, and what the applicant had to do to
qualify for commission in his
role as a BDM or sales representative. It encouraged him to work hard at selling
the respondent’s
considering the text, context and purpose of the contractual term I conclude
there is no ambiguity of meaning. The employment
contract provided for concluded
sales to be included in the commission calculation at the point of completion,
and not when the invoice
or part invoices are paid. It follows that the
applicant’s interpretation is correct.
my conclusion is wrong and the contract term is ambiguous or legally capable of
two meanings, I next consider the following surrounding
objective events and
circumstances.
the sale as attained when it is completed and finally invoiced, but before
payment, is consistent with basic, conventional,
accrual accounting standards,
which apply to the respondent’s own accounting obligations.
date of invoicing, and whether it be in full or part, and whether before any
performance or after part or full performance, was
solely within the control of
the respondent. Similarly, the determination of commercial credit terms was
solely within the respondent’s
control. These variables were not capable
of being influenced by the applicant’s sales work efforts.
I take account of the complete absence of any evidence of the respondent ever
counting a sale as being concluded only when
its invoice was paid in full,
during the period of this claim, and despite weekly sales meetings, unilateral
reductions of commission
and many opportunities for this issue to have been
raised by the respondent. This method first arose in the case of Mr Johnson,
after the applicant had left the job and well after these proceedings had
my opinion the broader objective circumstances support my initial construction
of the term, and the result is the same.
commission is payable? The ACC sale should be counted in full on 31 March 2015
together with the other sales of that quarter,
but with a reduction of $4,136
from the gross profit due to the PADS costing issue. The applicant is also
entitled to the outstanding
$1,042, and interest on the total to be calculated
from the date of filing the summons. The respondent does not get the claimed
for the discretionary 2014 Christmas gift of $500. I invite written
submissions within 14 days as to the terms of final
Tr pp 146, 176 & 177.
Mt Bruce Mining Pty Ltd v
Wright Prospecting Pty Ltd
[2015] HCA 37
As described on an invoice of 3
Exhibit A7.
Exhibit A6.
Exhibit R2.
Sale of Goods Act
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (174 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter