URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACorC/2025/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:55:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
RAINES, Edward John ([2025] SACC 15) [2025] SACorC 15 (20 May 2025)
CORONERS COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
EDWARD JOHN
[2025] SACC 15
Inquest Findings of her Honour Coroner Giles
20 May 2025
CORONIAL INQUEST
Examination of the cause and circumstances of the death of an 86-year-old
man, Edward Raines, who was involved in a collision on the
Karoonda Highway.
The inquest examined the circumstances in which Mr Raines came to be
driving given that he had been identified
as not competent to hold a licence by
a police officer approximately three weeks earlier.
John Raines, aged 86 years of Mindarie, died at Halidon on 12 April 2019 as a
result of multiple injuries.
Circumstances
of death as set out in these findings.
Recommendations made.
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
EDWARD JOHN RAINES
[2025] SACC 15
Introduction and reason for inquest
Edward John Raines was born on 27 October 1932 and died on 12 April 2019 in a
motor vehicle collision. He was 86 years of age.
collision occurred at approximately 1:15pm on Friday 12 April 2019 on Karoonda
Highway, Halidon. The collision involved a 1998
gold Daihatsu Pyzar sedan
registration number WFC253, driven by Mr Raines,
and a prime mover
of semi-trailer configuration, namely a 2015 white Volvo prime mover SB13KU,
towing a Freightliner semi-trailer
SY45AJ, which was fully laden with hay.
collision occurred when Mr Raines, who was travelling in a southerly
direction along Karoonda Highway, failed to properly negotiate
a left-hand bend
in the roadway, causing his car to cross onto the incorrect side the road. At
that time, a semi-trailer prime mover
was proceeding in a northerly direction on
Karoonda Highway and negotiating a right-hand bend when the two vehicles
collided head-on,
with the point of impact being driver’s side to
driver’s side.
sustained fatal injuries and was declared deceased at the scene.
death of Mr Raines was a ‘reportable death’ as defined in the
Coroners Act 2003
(SA). A reportable death includes deaths by
‘unexpected, unnatural, unusual, violent or unknown cause’. An
inquest was
held to explore the circumstances of Mr Raines’ death.
circumstance of Mr Raines’ death was that he had been witnessed by a
police officer driving in a dangerous manner approximately
three weeks prior to
the fatal collision. The SAPOL officer who witnessed the driving on that
earlier occasion, Sergeant Mark Wright,
later that day sent a form to the
Department for Transport and Infrastructure (DIT) suggesting that DIT require
Mr Raines to undergo
a medical assessment to determine his fitness to
drive. Whilst DIT had sent a letter to Mr Raines to set into motion a
medical assessment
to determine his fitness to drive, as at the date of the
fatal collision that medical assessment had not yet occurred, and Mr Raines
was still driving. The dangers associated with Mr Raines’ driving
led to a tragic outcome for Mr Raines, but also had potential
significant harm or death to other road users.
reason for the inquest was to explore the delay that exists between DIT issuing
a letter to a driver requiring them to have a
medical assessment to determine
their fitness to drive, and any action being taken if that is not acted upon.
The inquest also considered
whether SAPOL and/or DIT have, or should have, the
ability to suspend a driver in the interim until DIT can be satisfied by medical
assessment that the driver is in fact safe to drive.
Evidence at inquest
witnesses were called to give evidence at the inquest:
Sergeant Mark
Wright - In 2019 Sergeant Wright was stationed at the Berri Police Station and
was at the relevant time the Traffic
Manager for the Murray Mallee Local Service
Area. Sergeant Wright first encountered Mr Raines on Friday 22 March
2019 when he witnessed
him driving in what he considered to be a dangerous
manner. Sergeant Wright’s next encounter with Mr Raines was when he
at the scene of the fatality on 12 April 2019.
Gilbert - At the time of giving evidence Mr Gilbert was the Director of
Regulation for DIT, a position he had held for just
over 5 years. He had been
employed by DIT (or its predecessor) since the mid-1980s.
addition to the oral evidence of those witnesses, affidavits were received into
evidence from the following people:
Ms Tammy-Lee
Hissey, daughter of Mr Raines
Langlois, Consultant Forensic Pathologist, Forensic Science SA (FSSA)
Lauren Geirer,
Forensic Scientist, FSSA
Trobbiani, Forensic Scientist, FSSA
Graeme Morris,
civilian witness
Jansse, civilian witness
Craig Dunkin,
civilian witness
Kenton Millikin,
driver of the prime mover
Justin Cooper,
Brevet Sergeant, SAPOL
Samuel Petters,
Senior Constable, SAPOL
Brevet Sergeant, SAPOL
Court also received into evidence the SAPOL Major Crash Investigation Unit fatal
collision report.
this Finding I shall not summarise all the evidence tendered or heard at the
inquest but refer to it only in such detail as appears
warranted by its forensic
significance and the interests of narrative clarity. It should not be inferred
from the absence of reference
to any aspect of the evidence that it has not been
considered.
standard of proof to be applied in making coronial findings is the civil
standard, the balance of probabilities. In considering
making findings which
imply or express criticism of individuals, I am guided by the principles
enunciated in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
and I shall not make such a finding unless the evidence leads me to a
comfortable level of satisfaction that the finding should be
Mr Raines’ background
was a father to eight children, and a grandfather and great-grandfather. He
lived in a caravan on the property of his daughter,
Tammy-Lee Hissey, for 27
years. The property was on the Karoonda Highway in Mindarie.
Hissey provided an affidavit to the
She stated that her father
needed some extra assistance in the months leading up to his death. She noticed
he had lost some weight
and was becoming unsteady on his feet and had begun to
have falls. He was beginning to forget things and his personal hygiene was
beginning to become challenging. Mr Raines reportedly only drove his
vehicle once a fortnight into Berri for shopping.
reportedly wore prescription glasses from the age of about 16 years old,
including for driving. He had a medical history
hypercholesterolaemia, hypertension, osteopenia and prostate cancer.
The fatal collision
Highway is a semi-rural highway, which extends generally north-south between
the north and Murray Bridge to
the south. In the
vicinity of the collision scene, Karoonda Highway has two lanes, one southbound
and one northbound. It was constructed
of bitumen and generally in a reasonable
state of repair. At the time of the fatal collision, the speed limit for that
road was signposted at 100 kilometres per hour (km/h).
was the driver and sole occupant of the Daihatsu sedan. The other vehicle
involved in the collision was the Volvo prime
mover. Whilst there were no
independent witnesses to the actual collision, a number of civilians observed
Mr Raines’ driving
in the lead up to the collision.
Graeme Tonkin
Tonkin from Queensland observed Mr Raines’ vehicle driving slowly
along the Karoonda highway in a generally southerly direction,
driving over onto
the dirt shoulder of the road and also across the white lines in the centre of
the road. Mr Tonkin quickly overtook
Mr Raines, not feeling safe driving
behind him. As he passed, he observed Mr Raines driving hunched forward
close to the steering
wheel. Mr Tonkin soon observed Mr Raines rapidly
approaching from behind. In his estimate Mr Raines was travelling at about
km/h. Mr Raines overtook Mr Tonkin, without slowing down, causing two
vehicles coming in the opposite direction to swerve to their
left to avoid
colliding with him. Mr Tonkin then saw Mr Raines drive away, increasing
the distance between them. Mr Tonkin saw
Mr Raines cross the centre lines
onto the wrong side of the road on about six more occasions.
Mr Raines’ vehicle was lost
to view, but shortly after Mr Tonkin came
upon the collision where Mr Raines had collided head-on with a truck coming
from the opposite
Ms Catherine Janssen
Janssen from Loxton was driving north along the Karoonda Highway. As she drove
up a slight incline, she was forced to brake heavily
and veer off to the side of
the road to avoid Mr Raines’ vehicle which had drifted over onto the
wrong side of the road and
was rapidly approaching her. She did not see
Mr Raines make any effort to avoid her or correct his
Dunkin was driving a Toyota Prado towing a large camper trailer from Adelaide in
a northerly direction along the Karoonda Highway,
having just passed through
Halidon. As he drove around a right-hand bend he observed Mr Raines’
vehicle coming towards him,
on the wrong side of the road across double white
lines. Mr Dunkin was forced to veer off the road to the left to avoid
who gave no indication that he had even seen
Mr Dunkin’s
Millikin was the driver of the truck that was involved in the collision with
Mr Raines. He was driving a Volvo prime mover with
a semi-trailer loaded
with hay bales along the Karoonda Highway in a northerly direction when he
observed Mr Raines’ vehicle
approaching. He initially thought
Mr Raines was on the wrong side of the road but could not be sure as he was
observing Mr Raines’
vehicle from around a bend and slightly over a
crest. Mr Millikin deactivated the cruise control and the exhaust brakes and
the foot brake. As Mr Raines rounded the bend of the road towards
Mr Millikin, it was clear he was entirely on the wrong side of
the road. Mr
Millikin steered left off the road to avoid Mr Raines’ vehicle, but
was unable to completely leave the roadway
due to a one metre drop-off on the
side of the road. He observed Mr Raines steer to the left, back towards
the correct lane, however
it was too late to avoid a collision. The front right
corner of each vehicle struck the other, and Mr Millikin’s truck rolled
and came to a stop on the highway. Mr Millikin was able to extricate himself
from his truck through the front windscreen, shaken
by the collision but not
seriously injured.
vehicle suffered catastrophic damage to the front right side. Mr Raines
was located deceased in the driver’s
post mortem examination was conducted at Forensic Science South Australia by
forensic pathologist, Dr John Gilbert. Dr Gilbert
identified the cause of death
as ‘multiple injuries’. I so find.
Gilbert opined that it was possible that Mr Raines’ aberrant driving
might have resulted from ischaemic heart disease. However,
Mr Raines’ driving history, the observations of Sergeant Wright on 22
March 2019, the observations of other drivers on this
day, and the opinion of
his daughter that he was never a very good driver, would suggest that his
driving on this day was not the
result of any acute heart issue, and was not an
isolated incident.
did not detect any alcohol or drugs in either
SAPOL Major
Crash Investigation
Constable Petts of the Heavy Vehicle Enforcement Section of SAPOL attended the
collision scene and examined the semi-trailer
involved and conducted an
examination of the work diary used by the driver, Mr Millikin. Senior Constable
Petts concluded that Mr
Millikin was not driving beyond his requirements for
work safety, fatigue was not an issue, nor was the truck
overloaded.
Sage is a qualified mechanic who was at the relevant time a Vehicle Examiner
attached to the SAPOL Major Crash Investigation
Section. He carried out an
examination of both vehicles involved in the collision and concluded that both
vehicles had been in a
reasonable condition prior to the collision. He could
find nothing mechanically wrong that would have caused or contributed to the
Sergeant Zilm conducted the major crash investigation and crash reconstruction.
He collated data from road markings, vehicle
positions and debris, as well as
witness statements. The approximate point of impact between the vehicles was in
the approximate
centre of the northbound
The road condition was fair
and dry. Brevet Sergeant Zilm concluded that the collision occurred when
Mr Raines’ vehicle crossed
onto the incorrect side of the road when
negotiating the left bend, and into the path of Mr Millikin’s prime
mover. I so find.
Mr Raines’ driving in March
22 March 2019, some weeks before the fatal collision, Mr Raines’
driving came to the attention of Sergeant Mark Wright of
SAPOL. Sergeant Wright
gave evidence at the inquest and described his interaction with Mr Raines
on this occasion as follows:
‘....I was travelling, the
section of the road is called Bookpurnong Road in Loxton, it's on the outskirts
of the township.
I was travelling south into the township. It's an
80-kilometre zone bitumen road. That Saturday, a junction there is where there
is a BP On The Run, a service station. So as I was approaching that service
station, heading south towards the township of Loxton,
travelling at 80 km/h,
doing the speed limit, I saw Mr Raines' vehicle. He was on my left, where
the service station was. He was
- I could see him at the end of the forecourt,
what's known as the forecourt, at the end of a BP - of a service station, which
of borders the edge of the road. So basically, as I was driving, I could
see him at the edge of that forecourt about to turn left
onto Bookpurnong Road.
As I got closer, probably within, you know, 30 metres, maybe closer, from
memory, Mr Raines drove out, pulled
out onto Bookpurnong Road to turn left
to go further south, so he pretty much pulled in front of me, caused me to brake
I had to swerve so that I didn't cause a T-bone collision. Otherwise,
I would have collected him probably somewhere near the driver's
side or near the
rear of his car. So braked heavily, avoided the collision, and Mr Raines
continued further down the road where
I proceeded to stop
evidence was that he travelled behind Mr Raines for approximately one
kilometre, with his lights activated in an attempt to get
Mr Raines to pull
over, before Mr Raines
Wright’s impression was that Mr Raines simply had not realised that
he was behind him, attempting to pull him over,
until just before he obeyed that
Wright’s evidence was that once Mr Raines had pulled over, he had a
conversation with him about what had occurred.
As far as Sergeant Wright was
aware, he had not had any prior dealings with Mr Raines. He described
Mr Raines as looking a bit
dishevelled and untidy. He said that he
explained to Mr Raines that the reason that he had stopped him was because
he had pulled
out in front of him and nearly caused a collision. Mr Raines
stated that he had had not seen Sergeant Wright’s car when he
pulled out.
Mr Raines showed Sergeant Wright his licence, which Sergeant Wright noted
had some medical conditions endorsed on it.
Sergeant Wright also observed that
Mr Raines was wearing glasses at this time. This interaction lasted for
Wright cautioned Mr Raines for failing to give way. In addition, Sergeant
Wright decided he would submit a form known as
a PD596 referral for
Mr Raines. A PD596 is a form entitled ‘Referral for a medical review
for SA driver’s licence’
that is used by SAPOL officers to refer
drivers to DIT if an officer is concerned that a medical condition is affecting
fitness to drive.
Wright explained that he completed the PD596 at the end of his shift that day
and that his reason for doing so was:
‘I guess the main thing
is his inability to recognise that I was coming towards him down the road and I
guess the judgement
of him not being able to determine the distance and
travelling time of another vehicle coming towards him. Having some - once I
realised - he had some medical conditions as well, there's a possibility that
maybe that medical condition could have contributed
to his reaction time or the
way he perceives the traffic on the road. I guess just generally him being
unaware of my position on
the road and then the position after that where it
took him some time to recognise a police vehicle behind him even with - even
I was in an unmarked car - with all the lights and everything flashing
they are still very quite prominent on the road. And when
you see someone - you
know generally as a rule - you know I've stopped lots of people over time in an
unmarked police vehicle with
the lights going and most people are fairly
respondent within a quick point of time
Wright expressed that the driving he observed by Mr Raines was
‘absolutely a danger to the
Yet, despite that,
he formed the view that the driving he observed by Mr Raines did not
satisfy the elements of the offence of ‘driving
in a manner
dangerous’. Sergeant Wright’s evidence was that, having formed the
view that Mr Raines had not committed
an offence for which immediate
suspension of his licence was a potential consequence, he had no power or
authority to immediately
prevent Mr Raines from
but if he did have that
power, he probably would not have let Mr Raines drive
Wright did not see Mr Raines on the road again until the day of the fatal
collision. On that day, 12 April 2019, Sergeant
Wright was tasked to a fatal
collision on Karoonda Highway and he arrived at 2:45pm. When he arrived, he
observed a prime mover
with a single flatbed trailer attached carrying large
square bales of hay. The trailer was tipped on its left side with the hay
remaining secured by strapping and the prime mover remained upright on its
wheels. Approximately 30 metres southwest of this vehicle
was a gold Daihatsu
sedan registration WFC253 lying on its driver’s side. Sergeant Wright
identified this as the vehicle belonging
to Mr Raines. Mr Raines was
present in the front of the vehicle, obviously deceased. Sergeant Wright
assumed Forward Commander
responsibilities at the scene and assisted with the
removal of Mr Raines from the vehicle.
Registrar of Motor
Vehicles - power to ensure fitness to drive
Registrar of Motor Vehicles has functions and powers which aim to ensure that
drivers are medically fit to drive, and capable
of driving safely.
accordance with
Motor Vehicles Act 1959
, the Registrar
may require a driver to undergo tests, or to furnish evidence of their ability
or fitness to drive in certain circumstances.
Motor Vehicles Act 1959
Ability or fitness to be granted or hold licence
(1) If in the opinion of the Registrar it is desirable that the ability or
fitness of an applicant for the issue or renewal of a
licence or learner's
permit, or of the holder of a licence or learner's permit, to drive a motor
vehicle, or a motor vehicle of a
particular class, should be assessed, the
Registrar may require the person to undergo such assessments or to furnish such
of ability or fitness to drive as the Registrar directs.
(1a) The Registrar may, with the approval of the Minister, direct that all
applicants for the issue or renewal of a licence or learner's
permit who are of
a particular class, or all holders of a licence or learner's permit who are of a
particular class, must undergo
such assessments, or furnish such evidence as to
ability or fitness to drive a motor vehicle, or a motor vehicle of a particular
class, as the Registrar may require.
(1b) The Registrar may, in directing a person to undergo an assessment under
this section, require that the assessment be undertaken
at a particular location
or by a particular person or body determined by the Registrar.
(2) For the purposes of this section, an assessment undertaken to assess a
person's ability or fitness to drive a motor vehicle, or
motor vehicle of a
particular class, must comply with guidelines published or adopted by the
Minister by notice in the Gazette and
the results of such an assessment must be
applied by the Registrar in accordance with any policies published or adopted by
the Minister
by notice in the Gazette.
(a) a person fails to comply with a requirement of the Registrar under this
section; or
(b) the Registrar is satisfied—
(i) after considering the results of assessments or evidence required under this
section; or
(ii) from information furnished to the Registrar by a health professional or
from any other evidence received by the Registrar, that
a person is not
competent to drive a motor vehicle or a motor vehicle of a particular class,
the Registrar may—
(c) refuse to issue a licence or permit to the person; or
(d) refuse to renew the person's licence or permit; or
(e) suspend the person's licence or permit for such period as the Registrar
considers necessary in the circumstances of the case,
or until the person
satisfies the Registrar, in such a manner as the Registrar directs, that the
person is competent to drive a motor
vehicle; or
(f) remove a classification assigned to the person's licence, or substitute for
a classification assigned to the person's licence
another classification.
(3) The Registrar may issue to any person who has been required to undergo
assessments, or to furnish other evidence of ability or
fitness to drive a motor
vehicle, a temporary driving permit authorising that person, subject to such
conditions and restrictions
as may be specified in the permit, to drive motor
(4) A temporary driving permit has, subject to any conditions and
restrictions specified in the permit, effect as a licence.
(5) A person must not contravene any condition or restriction of a temporary
driving permit.
Maximum penalty: $1 250.’
at March and April 2019, DIT had policy in place called ‘Licencing Topic
38 – Medical
That policy
stated that licence holders were required to undertake a medical examination and
provide a certificate of fitness in
the following circumstances:
On the initial
issue of a learner’s permit or driver’s licence, where the applicant
has declared a medical or physical
condition or that they are taking medication
that may impair driving;
Generally, where
the applicant or holder of a learner’s permit or driver’s licence is
taking medication for treatment
of a medical condition;
Where the holder
of a driver’s licence is aged 70 years or more.
policy stated that ‘licence holders aged 70 years or more are required to
submit a certificate of fitness each year’.
The policy further states
that ‘essentially, the determination of a person’s fitness to drive
rests with the medical
practitioner’.
a medical test is required,
section 80(2)
Motor Vehicles Act
that the tests must be undertaken as outlined in guidelines approved and
published by the Minister.
Guidelines for Assessing Fitness to
guidelines for Assessing Fitness to Drive (AFTD) contain the medical standards
for licensing and clinical management guidelines
and is published by Austroads.
Austroads is governed by a Board consisting of senior executive representatives
from each of its
member organisations, including each State and Territory in
Australia, the Commonwealth, and New Zealand. The AFTD are accepted
and used in
all Australian States. The National Transport Commission undertakes reviews of
the guidelines periodically. The guidelines
for AFTD have been approved and
gazetted by the Minister in South Australia for the purpose of the
Vehicles Act 1959
guidelines for AFTD allow medical practitioners to establish the relevance of
certain medical conditions and the impact these
conditions have on a
person’s ability to drive. They also assist licensing authorities in
making licensing decisions. The
guidelines for AFTD set out the steps involved
in assessing a person’s fitness to drive, including specific
considerations
for the assessment of people with multiple medical conditions or
age-related change.
Mr Raines’ licence
2006 Mr Raines had annually submitted medical certificates to DIT to verify his
medical fitness to drive, as mandated for drivers
over the age of
Mr Gilbert’s evidence
was that documentation held by DIT suggested that Mr Raines was very
compliant with that requirement
and indicated he would attend the same clinic in
Loxton in September/October each year to obtain his certificate.
2006 until 2018 Mr Raines was assessed by a medical practitioner as being
fit to hold a driver’s licence.
final medical assessment to determine fitness to drive prior to Mr Raines’
death was on 3 September 2018. The Medical Practitioner’s
Declaration (MPD) from this consultation, completed by Dr L Mackinnon of Loxton,
records that Mr Raines met the relevant driving
standard, that he did not
require a practical driving test, that glasses or contacts were not required for
driving, and that his
licence should not be subject to a
This is a curious
outcome given that the MPD from 12 months prior stated that Mr Raines did
require glasses or contacts for driving,
and recommended a condition that he
must wear corrective glasses when driving. In fact, that had been the outcome
of each of the
fitness to drive medical assessment for Mr Raines since
the fact that the MPD of 3 September 2018 stated that Mr Raines did not require
glasses or contacts for driving, and that
he did not need a condition on his
licence of such, appears to have been of no consequence. When Sergeant Wright
pulled Mr Raines
over on 22 March 2019, he noted he was wearing
glasses and recorded on the PD596 that Mr Raines’ licence, which was
valid until
1 September 2020, had a condition that he wear corrective lenses.
Thus, despite what was recorded in the MPD of 3 September 2018,
that condition
remained on Mr Raines’ licence, and he seemingly continued to wear
glasses when driving. I am also satisfied
that Mr Raines was wearing
glasses at the time of the fatal accident as Mr Craig
described seeing
Mr Raines wearing ‘black rimmed glasses’ as he avoided a
collision with him shortly before the fatal
Ultimately,
the inquest did not focus on the previous assessments of fitness to drive or the
adequacy of those previous assessments,
as Mr Raines had not had an
assessment for more than seven months prior to his death. It is not helpful to
speculate whether any
new medical conditions may have presented, or previously
identified medical conditions deteriorated since that time. Indeed, it
possibility that any deterioration in his health post his last assessment was
significant, given his daughter’s description
of his general decline over
the months leading up to his death. This illuminated the issue of what occurs
when it comes to the attention
of SAPOL that a person with a current certificate
of fitness to drive from a medical practitioner may no longer be fit to drive.
note, the evidence revealed that Mr Raines had likely not undertaken a
practical driving assessment since first obtaining his licence.
The MPD form
contains a box which states ‘requires a practical driving
assessment’ with a ‘yes’ or ‘no’
tick box option.
In relation to the MPD provided to DIT for Mr Raines from 2006 onwards,
‘no’ was ticked on every occasion.
The evidence from Mr Gilbert was
that if the medical practitioner does not recommend a practical driving
assessment, then DIT does
not mandate one at any other time for a licence
holder, unless they are over the age of 85 and looking for a class of licence to
drive a vehicle other than a car (which Mr Raines was not). Indeed, there
was nothing to suggest that Mr Raines had had a practical
assessment at any time other than when he first got his driver’s licence.
Powers of SAPOL officers when observing driving of
SAPOL is not expressly permitted, or required, under
to refer drivers
to DIT for the purpose of requiring the driver to undergo a medical assessment
or produce evidence of their ability
or fitness to drive, the PD596 serves as
the mode of communication of concern about an individual’s medical fitness
from SAPOL to DIT if an officer is concerned that a medical condition
is affecting a driver’s fitness to drive.
officers are required to complete a PD596 where:
a driver who is
of or above 70 years of age is at fault in a collision (not including property
only collisions reported online); or
it is suspected
that a medical episode or other medical condition might have caused or
contributed to a collision (regardless of a
person’s age).
officers may also complete and submit a PD596 referral if they suspect a
person’s medical condition is affecting that
person’s driving
fitness, as Sergeant Wright did in relation to Mr Raines.
police officers have the power to suspend a person’s driver’s
licence in certain circumstances, that does not include
a situation where they
suspect a person’s medical condition is affecting that person’s
fitness to drive. In the circumstances
where a police officer may issue an
immediate suspension of licence, such as in respect of speeding and drink/drug
driving offences
Road Traffic Act 1961
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
, the prerequisite to the exercise of the power is,
typically, that the SAPOL officer believes or suspects that a relevant offence
has been committed. For example, if a driver submits to a drug screening test
which indicates the presence of a prescribed drug
in the person’s blood or
oral fluid, the SAPOL officer is able to form a reasonable suspicion that a
relevant offence has been
committed. It is clear that, based on the
Order, Immediate Loss of Licence
dated December 2018 that as the time of his
interaction with Mr Raines on 25 March 2019, Sergeant Wright did not have the
issue an immediate loss of
following submission of a PD596 to DIT in March/April 2019
at March 2019, DIT had a policy in place called Licencing Topic 38 –
Medical Review.
The following
sets out the procedure at that time once a PD596 was sent from SAPOL to
would email the PD596 directly to DIT Licence Regulation. The Senior Regulation
Officer (SRO) would triage the emails received
to that inbox each day as they
were received.
SRO would assess all received PD596 forms.
57 Upon review
of the PD596, the SRO would place a message on the relevant client's record in
the Transport Regulation User Management
Processing System
and the record would be
frozen to prevent the client from transacting any business with
letter was created and sent to the client requesting them to contact Licence
Regulation within seven days of the date of the letter
to advise the details of
their treating doctor (first letter).
the client did not respond to the letter within seven days, a further letter
(second letter) was sent to the client providing them
with a further seven days
from the date of the letter to advise the details of their treating doctor.
the client responded to either letter and provided Licence Regulation with
details of their treating doctor, a letter would be
sent to both the client and
their treating doctor requesting a certificate of fitness be completed and
provided within 14 days of
the date of the letter. A blank certificate of
fitness and a copy of the PD596, with the details of the reporting police
and any witness details redacted, was provided with the letter to the
client's treating doctor only.
the client did not respond to the second letter, a further letter (third letter)
was sent to the client advising that if they did
not provide the details of
their treating doctor within seven days of the date of the letter their driver's
licence would be suspended.
The suspension would not be lifted until the
completed certificate of fitness was provided.
the client did not respond to the third letter, a further letter would be sent
to the client advising that the suspension of their
driver's licence would
commence 10 days from the date of the letter.
a certificate of fitness was received within the requested timeframe, the
following actions were taken by the SRO:
An entry was
made in the client's record in TRUMPS and their record was unfrozen, allowing
them to transact any business with DIT.
certificate of fitness indicated the client was not fit to drive, their driver's
licence was suspended and the client and the
treating doctor were advised by
certificate of fitness indicated the client was medically fit, but required a
practical driving assessment, the client was
notified by letter providing the
steps to undertake the assessment.
certificate of fitness indicated the client was medically fit, the client was
notified by letter that no further action was
certificate of fitness indicated that the client was medically fit, subject to
ongoing review due to medical conditions, the
client was notified by
SRO maintained a spreadsheet where the client's details were recorded for the
purpose of monitoring those clients who had not
responded to their letters.
letters sent by Licence Regulation as part of this process were sent by
Australia Post’s regular mail service to the client’s
postal address as recorded on the client’s record in TRUMPS.
Actions taken regarding the PD596 submitted by Sergeant
PD596 completed by Sergeant Wright was received by DIT on 25 March 2019. Within
24 hours of its receipt DIT sent a letter to
Mr Raines indicating that they
had received a report from SAPOL raising concerns about his fitness to drive and
requiring him to
provide contact details for his treating doctor.
letter was sent via regular mail. DIT utilises regular mail as its primary
method of communication, primarily due to the fact
that DIT does not have email
addresses for all clients and, in any case, not all clients possess an email
address. In fact, Mr Gilbert
gave evidence that DIT holds email addresses
for fewer than 48% of drivers aged over 70 years. I do observe that relying
on regular mail to convey important messages, such as a requirement to
undergo a medical assessment or an associated license suspension,
may present
several issues. Mail sent via regular post can be subject to delays in
delivery, or sometimes even loss, such that the
intended recipient may not
receive the message in a timely manner, or at all. Furthermore, there is no
guaranteed confirmation that
the recipient has received or read the letter.
the scene of the fatality, Sergeant Wright located in Mr Raines’
vehicle a letter from DIT stating that he needed to have
a medical assessment to
assess his fitness to drive. Thus, whilst I am satisfied that Mr Raines
clearly received the letter from
DIT, there is no evidence upon which I can be
satisfied as to the date of receipt of that letter.
at the date of the fatal accident, 12 April 2019, 17 days had passed since
Sergeant Wright had issued the PD596, and 16 days since
DIT sent the first
letter to Mr Raines. DIT has no record of a response to that letter from Mr
According to the DIT
process in place at the time, once seven days passed from the first letter with
no contact from Mr Raines,
a second letter should be sent. DIT has no
record of a second letter being sent to Mr
I am satisfied that a
second letter was not sent to Mr Raines, despite the fact that 17 days had
elapsed since the first letter.
is unhelpful to speculate on how events might have unfolded had a second letter
been sent to Mr Raines. It remains unknown when
Mr Raines received
the first letter, whether he had sufficient time to act upon it and, had a
second letter been sent, when it may
have arrived or been opened by him.
a result of the process in place as at March and April 2019, there was a minimum
period of 31 days between sending of the first
letter and the suspension of a
licence in circumstances where the licence holder failed to provide a medical
certificate confirming
their fitness to drive. Mr Raines’ case
clearly illustrates that, in some instances, that timeframe may be surpassed.
this period the licence holder would be permitted to continue driving.
That is a significant period of time to have a driver on
the road in
circumstances where SAPOL have flagged their concerns about that person’s
fitness to drive. In some circumstances,
such a driver may place themselves and
other road users at risk of death and/or serious injury each time they get
behind the wheel
while awaiting completion of the medical review process.
Was it appropriate for Mr Raines to be driving in the
Motor Vehicles Act
does, and did as at March and April 2019, vest in
the Registrar the power to suspend a driver’s licence in various
In particular, in accordance with
Section 80(2a)(b)(ii)
Registrar is satisfied from information furnished to the Registrar by a health
professional or from any other evidence received
by the Registrar that a person
is not competent to drive a motor vehicle or a motor vehicle of a particular
class, the Registrar
may do a number of things including suspending the
person’s licence or permit for such period as the Registrar considers
in the circumstances of the case, or until the person satisfies the
Registrar, in such manner as the Registrar directs, that the
person is competent
to drive a motor vehicle.
the ambit of that section of the Act, it was open to the Registrar to review the
PD596 submitted by Sergeant Wright and suspend
Mr Raines’ licence
until the Registrar was satisfied in such manner as the Registrar directs, that
Mr Raines was competent
to drive a motor vehicle. That could have entailed
suspension pending a medical assessment, or a practical driving assessment, or
both. Whilst Mr Gilbert agreed that the legislation gives the Registrar the
discretion to take such action, his evidence was that
it is not something that
is done by DIT in accordance with its policy
evidence provided by Sergeant Wright to DIT about Mr Raines’ driving
ability should have caused concern to any reader about
Mr Raines continuing
to drive for a period of a medical review playing out. Sergeant Wright recorded
on the PD596, under the heading
‘SAPOL Recommendation’, that he
formed the opinion that Raines is not a competent driver, cannot react
quickly and has no perception of his driving
explored this concern further with Sergeant Wright, it may be that the threshold
for a decision by the Registrar under
section 80(2A)(ii)
would have been
satisfied, if indeed it was part of the policy of DIT at the time to contemplate
whether any interim action needed
to be taken pending the outcome of a medical
review. As it was not, those concerns of Sergeant Wright were simply taken on
as a reason to refer Mr Raines for a medical fitness to drive
assessment, which occurred. Consideration was not given to whether
his licence
should be suspended in the interim, despite the fact that information suggested
that he posed a risk to himself or others
by continuing to drive, simply because
DIT policy was such that that was not the way the process worked.
I am not definitively stating that Mr Raines’ licence should have been
temporarily suspended pending a medical assessment—and
I acknowledge that
more evidence than what Sergeant Wright recorded on the PD596 would be needed to
inform such a decision—I
am of the view that the Registrar does have the
legislative power to suspend a licence upon receipt of concerns reported by the
until the Registrar is otherwise satisfied of that person’s
fitness to drive. However, the DIT process at the time for responding
notices did not (and still does not) involve a consideration of whether any
interim measures need to be taken while the
medical review process following
submission of a PD596 unfolds.
Changes to the PD596 process
since Mr Raines’ death
process that occurs within DIT upon receipt of a PD596 has gone through various
changes since the time of Mr Raines’ death.
The procedure currently
followed by Licence Regulation staff when processing a PD596 is detailed in the
document entitled ‘How
to process a Referral for Medical Review For SA
Driver's Licence (SAPOL)’.
This process was implemented in June 2023.
this process, SAPOL emails the PD596 referral directly to Licence Regulation. A
Licence Regulation Coordinator or Team Leader
then triages incoming emails daily
to assess whether each case involves what is considered to be a high-risk or
low-risk client.
The risk assessment is based on the information available at
the time. For example, a low-risk case may involve a minor incident
car park bump or scratch, with no prior medical concerns. In contrast, a
high-risk case may involve serious factors such
as injury, risk to life, mental
health concerns, significant vehicle damage, prior medical issues on record, or
if the client holds
a heavy vehicle licence.
triaged, the PD596 referral is allocated to a Licence Regulation team member for
action. The team member reviews the PD596 and
places a message on the client's
record in the TRUMPS system. The client’s record is then frozen to
prevent them from transacting
with DIT until a certificate of fitness is
provided. If the client holds a Passenger Transport Driver Accreditation, a
notification
is also sent to DIT’s Passenger Transport Accreditation team
to inform them of the medical review requirement. Licence Regulation
generates a letter advising the client that they are required to undergo a
medical assessment and have their treating doctor
complete a certificate of
fitness. A blank certificate of fitness form is enclosed with this letter.
the client is assessed as low risk, the PD596 is not included with the letter.
These clients are required to return the completed
certificate of fitness within
28 days of the letter's date.
high-risk clients, the letter includes a redacted version of the PD596 which
outlines only the offence, particulars of the incident,
a brief description and
the doctor’s details (if available). This redaction ensures that
irrelevant or sensitive information,
such as personal details or witness
information, is not shared with the treating doctor. These clients are also
required to return
the completed certificate of fitness within 28 days of the
letter's date.
Regulation staff use a spreadsheet to track client responses. Clients are
listed on either a high-risk or low-risk follow-up
sheet. This enables staff to
monitor compliance. When a completed certificate of fitness is received within
the required timeframe,
the client’s record in TRUMPS is updated and the
freeze is lifted. This allows them to resume transactions. If the certificate
states that the client is not currently fit to drive, their licence is
suspended, and they are notified by letter. If the client
is deemed fit or fit
subject to ongoing medical review, they are advised accordingly.
DIT does not receive a certificate of fitness within the specified timeframe, a
suspension notice is sent to the client advising
that their licence will be
suspended 10 days from the date of the letter. The suspension remains in effect
until the certificate
is received. All correspondence issued by Licence
Regulation as part of this process continues to be sent via regular post to the
client’s postal address on file in TRUMPS, and each letter is signed by a
delegate of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
note is that under the 2019 process, it would be a minimum of 31 days between
DIT notifying someone of the requirement to undergo
a medical assessment and
their licence being suspended if a certificate of fitness to drive was not
received by DIT. Under the new
process, that minimum timeframe has now
increased to 38 days. These additional days represent an increase in the amount
a potentially unsafe driver may remain on the road, heightening the risk
to both themselves and other road users. In my view, this
amplifies the need
for DIT to consider whether any interim measures need to put in place for the
protection of the driver and other
road users.
Summary of findings
died in a collision which occurred at approximately 1:15pm on Friday 12 April
2019 on the Karoonda Highway, Halidon.
collision involved a 1998 gold Daihatsu Pyzar sedan registration number WFC253,
driven by Mr Raines,
and a prime mover of semi-trailer
configuration, namely a 2015 white Volvo prime mover SB13KU, towing a
Freightliner semi-trailer
was observed by multiple road users to be driving in an unsafe manner in the
minutes leading up to the fatality.
caused the collision which resulted in his death.
were no roadway or weather conditions which contributed to the accident and both
vehicles were mechanically sound.
cause of death was multiple injuries.
had been observed driving in a dangerous manner approximately three weeks prior
by Sergeant Mark Wright.
Wright formed the view that, as of that date, Mr Raines was not a competent
Wright advised DIT of his concerns about Mr Raines’ fitness to drive
by submitting a PD596 that afternoon.
responded to the receipt of the PD596, in accordance with their policy in place
at that time, by sending Mr Raines a letter advising
him to provide his
doctor’s details as he was required to undergo a medical assessment to
assess his fitness to drive.
had received this letter by 12 April 2019.
did not receive any response to that letter from Mr Raines.
letter was located in Mr Raines’ vehicle at the time of the fatality.
Recommendations
Section 25(2)
Coroners Act 2003
I am empowered to make recommendations
that in the opinion of the Court might prevent, or reduce the likelihood of, a
of an event similar to the event that was the subject of the inquest.
potential recommendation that was explored through the inquest was whether SAPOL
should have the power to temporarily suspend
a licence following observation of
concerning driving until DIT is satisfied of the person’s fitness to
drive. I received
into evidence a
behalf of the Commissioner of Police addressing this. SAPOL were opposed to any
such legislative change, noting that it would
require police officers to assess
whether a driver is medically impaired—a determination they are neither
trained nor equipped
to make, particularly based on brief interactions or
second-hand information. SAPOL also expressed concern over the lack of
safeguards, including the potential for appeals or court reviews of
immediate suspensions, which could strain resources and increase
appearances and prosecutorial workloads. Additionally, SAPOL noted the risk of
civil claims from drivers who lose employment
due to suspension, particularly in
light of 2024 data indicating that a significant number of suspensions may later
be withdrawn.
SAPOL submitted that the current process is preferable, that is,
that SAPOL submit a PD596 in defined circumstances allowing the
Registrar or
Licensing Regulation Manager at DIT to make informed decisions, including
referrals for medical assessment or the imposition
of licence conditions such as
driving restrictions.
that the discretion exists for DIT to temporarily suspend a driver’s
licence pending receipt of a medical certificate
of fitness to drive, it seems
that there is no need for SAPOL to have that power, particularly in light of the
concerns raised by
SAPOL as detailed above. A PD596 notification can serve as a
means of SAPOL communicating to DIT concerns they have about a driver’s
fitness to drive. The Registrar can then consider that information pursuant to
Section 80 (2a)(b)(ii) in making a decision about
what action needs to be taken,
including suspending the person’s licence or permit for such period as the
Registrar considers
necessary in the circumstances of the case, or until the
person satisfies the Registrar, in such manner as the Registrar directs,
the person is competent to drive a motor vehicle. I note that the guidelines
for Assessing Fitness to Drive seem to contemplate
that this could occur, as
those guidelines specifically state that ‘the driver licensing authority
will consider reports provided
by health professionals, police, and members of
the public, as well as crash involvement and driving
histories’.
it is not current practice within DIT to consider, following receipt of a PD596,
whether interim action needs to be taken prior
to the medical assessment of
fitness to drive being completed, I
that the Minister for
Infrastructure and Transport reconsider their current practice, and incorporate
into their policy within DIT
that consideration be given to whether the
Registrar should exercise their discretion to suspend a person’s licence
the receipt of a medical certificate of fitness to drive in
circumstances where SAPOL raises concerns about a driver’s competence.
address the issue the delay between when a driver is advised they need to
provide a medical certificate of fitness to drive, and
when a person’s
licence is suspended for non-compliance, Counsel Assisting urged me to make a
recommendation that the agencies
collaborate to enable faster sharing of
information to promptly identify high-risk drivers in need of assessment, and to
enable more
rapid and efficient communication between DIT and their clients. In
relation to information sharing, when SAPOL comes into possession
addresses, telephone numbers, alterative addresses and the like, that should be
shared with DIT to ensure they have the
most current an expeditious means of
Counsel for DIT
submitted that the only recommendation I should make is that
SAPOL and DIT consult with each other and review their processes with
expediting and improving the current PD596 process.
The evidence of
Mr Gilbert was that he agreed it would be ‘good to improve on that
discussions to attempt to do so are underway with
I am of the view that
reducing that timeframe is of importance. I therefore make the following
recommendation
directed to the Minister for Police and the Minister for
Infrastructure and Transport:
That SAPOL and DIT consult and review
their processes with a view to expediting and improving the current PD596
process. Part of that
consultation should be improved processes for information
Assisting urged me to make a recommendation that DIT amend its current policy to
require a mandatory practical driving assessment
for all drivers over the age of
85 years, regardless of the class of licence held. I was advised by DIT
that 1500 licence holders
in South Australia that would be included in that
criteria. The desirability or feasibility of such a change was not explored in
any detail, nor with any expert during the course of the inquest. Therefore, in
the absence of further information, I decline to
make this recommendation.
it is my view that DIT should transition from relying solely on postal
communication to utilising email addresses, or a combination
of both, when
communicating critical information about fitness to drive and licence
suspension. Electronic communication provides
a faster, more reliable and
traceable method of communication. Particularly in relation to suspension
notices, it is my view that
if electronic communication is not feasible (for
example, due to the lack of a client’s email address), then police should
be tasked with personally delivering the notification to ensure that the
individual is properly notified, and public safety is upheld.
I appreciate
there are some challenges involved in process changes such as this, and as this
issue did not directly arise in this
inquest (as Mr Raines had at some point
received the hardcopy letter he was sent), I will not make a prescriptive
recommendation
on this topic. However, I urge DIT to contemplate ways to move
beyond regular post.
Keywords: Motor Vehicle Collision; Fitness to Drive
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
Exhibits C3 and
Exhibit C12 at
Transcript, page 13
Transcript, page 19
Transcript, page 19
Transcript, page 18
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page 30
Motor Vehicles Act
section 80(2)
- South Australian Government Gazette, No. 92, 29 September 2003,
The evidence of Mr Gilbert
was that earlier certificates had possibly also been provided, but that DIT were
able to locate certificates
from 2006 onwards (Transcript, page 38)
Exhibit C21
Exhibit C20
An IT system which stores
the register of drivers’ licences and vehicle registrations, among other
things. It is used to process
applications, calculate fees and it has business
rule validations to ensure compliance with legislative and policy
requirements.
Transcript, page 55
Exhibit C18
Exhibit C19,
Assessing Fitness to
Drive 2022, page 26
Transcript, page 60
Transcript, page 60
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (466 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (315 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter