URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SARTT/2014/5556.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:04:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
South Australian Housing Trust v Halstead [2014] SARTT 5556 (30 October 2014)
REASONS FOR ORDER OF THE TRIBUNAL MADE ON 30 OCTOBER
Hearing 29 October 2014 at Kadina
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN HOUSING TRUST v
HALSTEAD (RT14/5556)
SAHT brings application to RTT seeking vacant possession on the basis of
multiple breaches by the tenant – most significantly
animal hoarding. RTT
makes an interim order requiring the tenant to “clean up”.
This is the determination of an application lodged with the Tribunal on 30
September 2014 by the landlord seeking an order for vacant
possession.
RESIDENTIAL TENANCY AGREEMENT DETAILS
14 Symons Street Moonta Bay SA 5558
South Australian Housing Trust
Kirsten Halstead
Tenancy Commenced:
4 August 2012
Term of Tenancy:
$60.40 per week, payable fortnightly
Sworn or affirmed evidence was given by
The landlord’s representative: Todd Wierenga
Tenant Kirsten Halstead
Witnesses for the landlord: Paul Phillipps
Kaye Sanford
Julie Davey
The tenant was assisted by two advocates from Uniting Care Wesley, Cheryl
Brizzi and Michelle Cameron.
This is a residential tenancy under the Residential Tenancies act, 1995
The application
This is an application under Section 87(1) of the Act. A copy of Section
87(1) is annexed to this decision.
The grounds of the application are stated to be:-
Housing SA has identified that Ms Halstead has breached multiple
conditions of her tenancy agreement, namely the following conditions:
6(c) keep the premises and any surrounding area clean and in good
tenantable condition, free from vermin and clear of refuse.
or permit any interference with the reasonable peace, comfort or
7(g) keep animals or birds on the premises other than those
permitted by the appropriate local authority or permit any dog to be
unrestrained
when any person authorised by the Trust is on the premises.
As a result of these breaches, Housing SA is seeking to have Ms
Halstead’s tenancy terminated under Section 87(1) of the Residential
Tenancies Act
The evidence and submissions of the parties
The evidence and submissions of the landlord’s
representative
Mr Wierenga gave evidence that the tenant has lived at the property since
August 2012 and since then there have been multiple complaints
to the South
Australian Housing Trust (the Trust) and the local council about the poor
condition of the property. He referred to
letters of the council which had been
written about this issue on 25 September 2012, 13 September 2013, 4 December
2013 and 26 May
2014. Mr Wierenga also gave evidence of numerous attempts by the
Trust to address the issue with Ms Halstead.
Mr Wierenga said that the complaints from the neighbours have been about the
number of animals kept at the property, the smell emanating
from the property,
the fact that the animals escape regularly and the fact that Ms Halstead has
entered her neighbours’ properties
on a number of occasions to retrieve
various animals without their knowledge. He also said that there have been
complaints about
the untidy condition of the property.
Mr Paul Phillips also of the Trust said that he has been involved with the
issues arising from this tenancy for some time and in particular
he attended at
the property for an inspection on 20 June 2014 and then also on 27 August 2014.
He said that despite having been warned
to clean up the property at the
inspection on 20 June 2014, the condition of the property was worse on 27 August
particularly in
the back room (the sun room).
Mr Paul Evans gave evidence. He lives at the property at 19 Symons Street. Mr
Evans said that having Ms Halstead as a neighbour had
been a “nightmare
from hell”, her animals regularly escaped onto his property and on one
occasion a ferret got into his
house through a doggy door and urinated on his
carpet. He submitted photos which he had taken of Ms Halstead’s property 2
ago. He said that it had not changed much in that time. The photos show a
significant amount of rubbish in the yard. He also complained
of the smell from
the property.
Mr Les Sanford and Mrs Kaye Sanford who live at 17 Symons Street each gave
evidence of Ms Halstead’s animals escaping from her
property from time to
time and coming to their property. They said that at one stage she also had 2
pigs and a goat at the property.
They said that Ms Halstead’s yard was
very untidy.
Ms Julie Davey gave evidence. Her mother in law lives at 16 Symons Street.
She said that she visits her mother in law 2 or 3 times
a week and they have had
to extend the fence to try to keep Ms Halstead’s animals out of their
property. She also complained
Ms Deborah Lockwood gave evidence by phone. Ms Lockwood lives at 15 Symons
Street. She said that on average, Ms Halstead’s animals
roam onto her
property once a week. She said that Ms Halstead sometimes comes onto her
property at odd times to retrieve the animals
without her permission.
The evidence and submissions of the tenant and her advocates
Ms Halstead said that she has currently reduced the number of animals on her
property and at the moment she has
She also currently has 2 fish, 4 turtles, some chooks and ducks.
Ms Halstead was visibly upset during the hearing. She said that she did not
realise the impact of her behaviour on her neighbours.
She said she wanted
another chance to address the problem. Ms Halstead said that she had been in a
relationship with a violent man
and had avoided being at the property for some
time so that she could avoid him, but she was now back at the property.
Ms Brizzi and Ms Cameron submitted that Ms Halstead suffers from significant
mental health issues including Post Traumatic Stress
Disorder, Anxiety and
Depression and the early stages of a psychotic disorder. They said that she is a
hoarder of animals. They said
that they have applied for intensive tenancy
support and believe she will receive that assistance.
Conclusions and Findings
Is there sufficient evidence for an order to be made under Section 87(1)
of the Act?
I am satisfied that the evidence establishes on the balance of probabilities
that the tenant’s actions are a serious breach
of her tenancy agreement
for the following reasons.
She has kept numerous animals on the property – the letter from the
council dated 13 September 2013 identifies:-
10 rabbits;
In addition, I accept that the tenant has looked after 2 pigs and a
goat at the property for a while. Furthermore, she has also kept
ferrets at the
I accept Mr Phillipps’ evidence that on 20 June 2014 Ms Halstead was
given notice to:-
Remove animal
Mop and clean
all floors, woodwork, doors, skirting boards and windows;
Remove or clean
any items causing animal urine odour.
I accept Mr Phillipps’ evidence that when he attended the
property at the subsequent inspection, these issues had not been addressed.
I accept the evidence of the neighbours about the disruption caused to them
by Ms Halstead’s behaviour.
Taking into account all of the evidence, should an order be made
terminating the tenancy?
I consider that the Trust has given Ms Halstead multiple opportunities to
clean up the property and remove animals from the property.
Early on in the
tenancy I consider that Ms Halstead was able to clean up the property to an
appropriate standard, however, that was
12 months ago and even then the
Council’s letter makes it clear that there was further work to be
Since then I consider that the tenant has been unable to maintain the
property appropriately. She has kept too many animals there,
she has permitted
them in the house and the house is now in a poor condition. She has been unable
to keep the animals contained in
her yard and they have escaped regularly
disturbing her neighbours. The back yard needs substantial work to remove all of
the rubbish.
However, taking into account her mental health issues, unfortunate personal
circumstances, and the possibility that she may be able
to continue to live in
the property if she changes her behaviour and cooperates with support networks,
I will allow the tenant one
last chance. However, if she is unable to clean up
the property and reduce the number of animals to an appropriate level during the
next 6 weeks, then I will terminate her tenancy. I will conduct a further
hearing in 6 weeks’ time to monitor her progress.
tenant must reduce the number of animals at her property to:-
by Monday 8 December 2014.
tenant must remove the following rubbish from her back yard by Monday 8 December
pieces of timber;
sheets of corrugated iron;
such as old tables, benches, disused air conditioners, old lounge and other
furniture and broken pallets.
tenant must make appropriate arrangements for the animals to remain outside the
house (except for the fish and the turtles) by
Monday 8 December 2014.
tenant will not enter any of her neighbour’s properties without their
permission.
tenant must clean up inside the house particularly the sun room, by Monday 8
December 2014.
tenant will permit a representative of the South Australian Housing Trust to
inspect the property at 11.00am on Monday 8 December
consideration of the application is adjourned to 11.00am on Wednesday 10
December 2014 at the Kadina Court house. Notices
of hearing will be sent to the
parties and the tenant’s advocates.
Presiding Member
Section 87(1) of the Act states:
(1) The Tribunal may, on application by a
landlord, terminate a residential tenancy and make an order for possession of
the premises
if satisfied that–
(a) the tenant has committed a breach of the residential tenancy agreement;
(b) the breach is sufficiently serious to justify termination of the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.26 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter