URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCT/2016/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nguyen v Inghams Enterprises Pty Ltd [2016] SAWCT 7 (24 February 2016)
Nguyen v Inghams Enterprises Pty Ltd
[2016] SAWCT
WORKERS COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL (SA)
NGUYEN, Xuan Thi
INGHAMS ENTERPRISES PTY LTD
Judicial Determination
1347, 1348, 1417, 1505 and 8173
436 and 2506 of 2015
HEARING DATES:
11, 12 May, 23, 24, 25 September and 26 November
JUDGMENT OF:
Auxiliary Deputy President M
DELIVERED ON:
24 February
CATCHWORDS:
Judicial determination - Issue of
worker’s incapacity - Claim for weekly payments and medical expenses -
Various determinations
made rejecting claims of injuries to right elbow, right
shoulder, left shoulder, psychological injury as a sequelae to her physical
injuries and permanent impairment - Allegation of no injury - Issue of
credibility -
: Worker a credible witness - Injuries sustained by
worker to right elbow, right shoulder and left shoulder - Incapacity for work
No suitable duties offered - Partial incapacity deemed total - Worker has a
permanent impairment - Entitled to a payment pursuant
to s 43 of the Act -
Worker has suffered a psychological injury being a sequelae to her physical
injuries - Determinations set aside
- Orders to be made after hearing further
from the parties - Ss 32, 35 and 43 Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
Arrowcrest Group Pty Ltd v Nguyen
[2000] SAWCT
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr S
Respondent: Dr R Gray
Solicitors:
Applicant: Tindall Gask
Respondent: Minter Ellison
Introduction
Thi Ngoc Nguyen (“the worker”) was born in Vietnam, attended school
in Vietnam and came to Australia in 1995 when
she was 34 years of
worker first obtained work with Boral which involved process work. She worked
for Boral between 1997 and 2001 and at that time
was retrenched along with a
number of other workers.
July 2001 she commenced employment with Inghams Enterprises Pty Limited
(“Inghams”) firstly on a casual basis boning
and trimming chicken
pieces. After about six months she was made a permanent employee.
or about 2005 or 2006 the worker was promoted to leading hand position. She
remained a leading hand until September 2013.
number of determinations under the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
(“the Act”) were made by Inghams as a selfinsured
employer under the Act. The worker seeks judicial determinations of
the disputed
claims that arise from those determinations.
The disputed determinations
On 20 February 2014 Inghams accepted the worker’s claim for right tennis
elbow sustained on 16 October 2013 for a closed one
day period from 2 December
2013 to 2 December 2013.
Notice of Dispute dated 7 March 2014 the worker disputed that part of the
determination accepting her claim for incapacity and
weekly income maintenance
for a closed period only. The worker contended that she continues to suffer an
incapacity both in relation
to the duties she is able to undertake and the hours
she is able to work and asserted a continuing entitlement to weekly income
maintenance.
Inghams on 19 March 2014 confirmed the decision it made on 20
February 2014.
On 20 February 2014 Inghams accepted the worker’s claim for what was
described as left shoulder pain sustained on 16 October
2013 for ongoing medical
expenses only stating that the worker was fit to perform her pre-injury
By a Notice of Dispute
dated 7 March 2014 the worker disputed the determination and asserted an
incapacity for work (and disputed
the assertion that she is fit to perform
pre-injury hours) and an entitlement to weekly income maintenance payments.
Inghams confirmed
the decision of 20 February 2014 on 19 March 2014.
On 4 March 2014 Inghams rejected the worker’s claim for compensation for
weekly payments in relation to the dates of 6 February
2014 to 11 February 2014,
12 February 2014 to 21 February 2014 and 22 February 2014 to 8 March
The worker alleged in three
claim forms dated 25 February 2014 that she sustained incapacity for work in
relation to her right elbow
and left shoulder. By a Notice of Dispute dated 12
March 2014 the worker disputed the determination and asserted an incapacity for
work and an entitlement to weekly income maintenance payments. Inghams
confirmed the disputed decision on 19 March 2014.
On 10 March 2014 Inghams rejected the worker’s claim for compensation for
weekly payments with reference to the claim made
by the worker dated 5 March
The worker in a claim form
dated 5 March 2014 made a claim for weekly payments in relation to the
dates of 9 March 2014 to 21 March
2014. The worker in the claim for
compensation dated 5 March 2014 alleged she had an incapacity for work in
relation to her right
elbow and left shoulder. By a Notice of Dispute dated 17
March 2014 the worker disputed the determination made on 10 March 2014
asserted that she suffered incapacity for work as a result of her right
elbow/arm and left shoulder disabilities and suffers
an ongoing incapacity for
work. Inghams on 26 March 2014 confirmed its determination dated 10 March 2014.
On 18 November 2014 Inghams rejected the worker’s claim for compensation
for alleged injuries to her right shoulder and arm
as alleged in the
worker’s claim for compensation dated 21 May
By a Notice of Dispute dated
21 November 2014 the worker disputed the determination to reject her claim for
right shoulder and arm
disability. The worker alleged an ongoing incapacity for
work. The worker further alleged that Inghams has not been prepared to
the worker with duties in accordance with restrictions on work duties and hours
of work as certified by the worker’s
treating medical practitioners. The
worker further stated that for the period since 26 March 2014 she has been
certified wholly
unfit for work. Inghams by notice dated 27 November 2014
confirmed its decision of 18 November 2014.
On 19 January 2015 Inghams rejected the worker’s claim for compensation
for an alleged psychological injury suffered as a
sequelae to her alleged
physical injuries to her right elbow, right shoulder and left
By a Notice of Dispute
dated 21 January 2015 the worker disputed the determination to reject her claim
and asserted that her psychological
disability arises as a result of her claimed
physical disabilities and resultant persistent symptoms and continuing
incapacity for
work. Inghams on 27 January 2015 confirmed its determination of
19 January 2015.
On 9 April 2015 Inghams in relation to the worker’s claim for a lump sum
payment pursuant to s 43 of the Act determined to
assess the worker’s
entitlement to a lump sum payment pursuant to s 43 of the Act as
By a Notice of Dispute dated
10 April 2015 the worker disputed the decision to assess a nil entitlement
pursuant to s 43 of the
Act. The worker asserted that she has suffered
permanent impairment. Dr C Brown assessed the workers condition as having
maximum medical improvement and assessed a degree of permanent
impairment in excess of the statutory threshold. The worker asserted
is entitled to an assessment of lump sum compensation for a permanent impairment
under s 43 of the Act. Inghams by notice
dated 20 April 2015 confirmed the
decision made on 9 April 2015.
The hearing – the evidence of the worker
worker as previously mentioned was born in Vietnam, went to school in Vietnam
and came to Australia in 1995 at which time she
was 34 years of age. She
required and used the services of an interpreter when giving her evidence and
during cross-examination.
worker’s statement appears in the Trial Book, Exhibit A1, pages 7379
inclusive. By leave of the Tribunal evidence was led
from the worker outside
the parameters of her statement.
July 2001 when the worker commenced employment with Inghams the work she did was
boning and trimming chicken pieces. She performed
this work on the line.
2005 or 2006 the worker was promoted to the position of leading hand. She
described this position as involving organising other
workers namely allocating
duties and also rotating the duties of the workers. The worker’s position
was that in her role as
leading hand she was not required to do as much physical
work although occasionally she would fill in on the line. This contention
by the worker was disputed and I will return to it
first time she sustained an injury at work was in April 2012. The register of
injuries number 21406 refers to the date of injury
being 9 April 2012. A
description of how the injury occurred was:
“Stock mover hit overhead chute and it fell onto
The worker received first aid treatment comprising an icepack and her arm was
bandaged. The worker’s position was that she
did not have time off work
and was able to continue her work as a leading hand. A medical certificate
dated 18 April 2012 issued
by Dr Pham indicated that the worker was fit for
modified duties for the period 18 April 2012 to 18 May 2012 involving work
the right arm. Dr Pham’s opinion was that the worker was
suffering “tear of the common extensor tendon insertion”.
worker in her statement
that the injury did not stop her working. She did continue to have pain and her
husband and daughter helped more with
the housework.
worker agreed that she saw both a doctor from Inghams and also her general
practitioner as well as a physiotherapist who was paid
for by Inghams. She
accepted that following treatment, which included massage and medication, her
elbow improved.
She stated that
she returned to her normal work by October
agreed that she made no further complaints or report of injury as regards her
right elbow or her shoulders from October 2012 through
to September 2013. She
maintained that with the help of medication and working in her leading hand role
this meant no report of
Overtime worked and the duties involved from October 2012 to
September/October 2013
worker agreed that from October 2012 she did perform overtime. She said such
overtime did not involve working on the line but
was simply looking after the
other workers in her role as a leading
The worker maintained
that her overtime did not involve working in the line but then conceded that she
did so “but very, very
worker agreed that from October 2012 up until September 2013 she did work
overtime and often more than two hours per day when
she did perform overtime. In
a supplementary statement Troy
described his position
since 2013 as a Production Shift Manager. He indicated that as part of the
Enterprise Bargaining Agreement
employees are required to work a reasonable
amount of overtime and are paid for those at overtime rates. In relation to the
he stated that she consistently worked overtime throughout 2013 until
September 2013. Further the worker frequently performed overtime
prior to the
commencement of her usual shift. Any overtime worked following the completion
of the worker’s usual shift work
formed part of her leading hand role.
Any overtime performed before commencement of her shift was voluntary and
elected by the worker.
He referred to the start time for the worker’s
usual shift as being 1:36pm. Annexed to his
was a copy of the
timecard relating to the worker for the period 11 May 2013 to 11 May 2014. The
records indicate the worker starting
earlier than the usual start time of her
shift over that period of time.
Lawson maintained that throughout 2013 until September 2013 the worker
consistently worked overtime and when performing overtime
the duties the worker
performed included:
products – involves breaking up a chicken carcass using a knife. Each
production worker is required to stand in
a certain position along the
production line and is assigned a particular part of the chicken to break off
the carcass.
products – involves trimming with scissors bloodspots, skin and fat from
the pieces of chicken.
Packing products
– involves placing chicken into trays or bulk cartons.
timecard annexed to the supplementary statement of Mr Lawson indicates that the
last date the worker worked overtime was Wednesday
18 September 2013. An
analysis of the time card reveals that from 14 May 2013 until 18 September
2013 (a period of eighteen weeks)
the worker attended work prior to her usual
start time of 1.36pm on 23 occasions. This is not two days a week as
claimed by Mr Lawson.
On each of the occasions the worker clocked on at 12.42
that is to say about one hour before her start time. During this one hour
unchallenged that the worker performed the various duties described by Mr
Lawson. I make the comment that performing for one
to two hours the variety of
duties as described, is far removed from a full shift on the production
Demotion of the worker from position of leading hand
worker’s description of the incident which resulted in her demotion
appears at par 12 of her
“In May 2013 there was an incident at work. I was
kicked by a coworker. I fainted. An ambulance was called and I was taken
Lyell McEwen Hospital. I was away from work for a week. I took sick leave. I
did not want to make a fuss or make trouble for
anyone else. After a week off I
went back to work and continued my usual role as a leading hand. A couple of
months later I received
an account for the ambulance and I took it to work. I
was told by Inghams they were not responsible. There was then an investigation.
The result of this was that I was given a warning for not having reported the
full details of the incident.”
worker was extensively cross-examined as regards the incident at work on 17 May
2013. She recalled receiving first aid from Dr
Ali before the ambulance was
called. She recalls telling Dr Ali that she felt heavy in the chest and could
not breath well. She
denied telling Dr Ali that she was experiencing chest
pains. She denies the suggestion that she did not tell Dr Ali that she had
the time this incident occurred a co-worker Hon Huynh was involved to the extent
that he conversed with the worker. During the
course of the investigation about
the incident Mr Huynh advised Inghams representatives that the worker did not
tell the ambulance
officers what had happened and said to him in Vietnamese that
he was not to tell anyone about the fact that she had been kicked in
another worker.
worker denied that she told Mr Huynh not to tell anyone.
worker’s version of events was that she was collecting boxes and another
leading hand for no reason came up and kicked
her return to work she said she performed her work as usual and did not report
to her supervisor that she had been kicked in the
leg. She agreed that she did
not report the kicking to the leg because she did not want to get into
Further she did not
report the incident because she did not want to get the other person into
the ambulance bill arrived and the worker presented the same to Inghams it was
only then that she reported the incident to the
worker initially denied that she made a worker’s compensation claim in
relation to the May 2013 incident. She was then
shown a claim form bearing the
date of August 2013 with respect to the May 2013 incident and agreed that she
did submit this form
asking for a few hours of pay that was missed and also for
the ambulance bill to be
worker said she recalled a meeting with Mr Lawson on 20 September 2013 and
that during the course of this meeting she was informed
of the outcome of
Inghams’ investigation into the incident. That as a result she was to be
removed from her position as a
leading hand effective
immediately.
further agreed at that meeting on 20 September 2013 she was advised that Inghams
would recognise her compensation claim following
the incident and cover the
expenses associated with her ambulance transfer on 17 May 2013.
after the meeting on 20 September 2013 the worker advised Mr Lawson that she was
feeling unwell and requested permission
to leave early which was granted.
20 September 2013 was a Friday. On Monday 23 September 2013 the worker came to
work and performed her shift as a process worker.
The worker’s evidence
of the events that occurred on Monday 23 September 2013 was as
“I went back to work on the Monday, the
. And when I come back, hundreds of other workers, they approach
to me and ask me why it’s happened like that; and it makes
stressed. I don’t know how to answer them. I can’t copy (sic) with
that, because a lot of people approached
to me and keep asking me question and
it’s so stressful for me that I feel headache; I feel
worker agreed that she did not suffer any further injury as a result of the one
shift on 23 September 2013.
24 September 2013 the worker telephoned Inghams and advised that she was unwell
and as she was seeing the doctor that afternoon
she was unsure whether she would
be at work the next day.
things eventuated the worker remained off work either taking sick leave and when
sick leave ran out, annual leave was brought forward
for the period 30 September
2013 to Friday 4 October 2013. Monday 7 October 2013 was a public holiday.
The worker returned to work
on Tuesday 8 October 2013 to her normal duties as a
process worker.
worker identified a letter dated 9 October 2013 that she provided to
She said she wrote
that letter with help from her husband.
worker agreed that the letter was an attempt by her to be reinstated to the
position of leading hand. The worker agreed that
Inghams responded to her
letter of 9 October 2013 by letter dated 28 October
worker agreed that on Tuesday 8 and Wednesday 9 October 2013 she performed
duties as a process worker.
Thursday 10 October 2013 she agreed that she was provided with a document
entitled “Record of Employee Discussion
The worker said
she was asked to sign the document but did not do so. Initially she was unsure
whether the document was given to
her on Thursday 10 October 2013 but then
confirmed that it was given to her on the same day that she went to first aid
and complained
of sudden pain in the right elbow.
presentation to first aid on Thursday 10 October 2013 was documented in a
register of injuries.
was put to the worker that the reason that she reported an injury to her right
elbow occurring on 10 October 2013 was an attempt
by her to get her leading hand
position back. She denied that this was so. She accepted that she was upset
a leading hand. She also agreed that she did not want
to go back to work as a process worker following her demotion. She mentioned
that as a leading hand that if she felt pain anywhere she could take a break but
as a worker she could not take a break from the
line and that was a reason that
she felt it was not fair.
was also put to her that for several months prior to October 2013 without any
mention of pain in the right elbow she volunteered
to undertake overtime that
involved working on the line. Her position was that she did not work on the
line and as a leading hand
only went there and set up and looked after the
workers. The extent and nature of the duties she performed when working
has been detailed in paras 21 to 24 inclusive.
worker said that on 10 October 2013 when she reported to first aid, she advised
that she had previously had an accident on her
right arm and now with the
repeated jarring it was sore again. She said the first aid person showed her
how to do some exercises.
She agreed that this was the first time that she had
experienced pain in the right elbow since the accident and resultant injury
had occurred in 2012.
worker was shown the subpoenaed notes of her general practitioner Dr Pham. Her
attention was drawn to the entry made by her doctor
on Tuesday 24 September
2013. The history, as noted by the doctor in the notes, was:
“Sueing (sic) work to pay her ambulance fees, as
she fainted at work after someone kicked her in the leg – too much pain.
Now has a warning that she covered up and did not report the incident but no one
asked her to report and now she was no more leader
hand (sic). Was leader hand
>10 years, went to work every other workers were asking her why that happened
she did not sign as
yet but she now worked as a normal worker. Too much stress
– headache and could not sleep after working 1 day, boning chicken
pain again on her Right tennis elbow – tennis elbow was better as she did
not do manual work.”
confronted with the note she accepted that she did report on 24 September
to her general practitioner that she was experiencing
a problem with her right
elbow. Initially she said she only reported her stress about being demoted to
her general practitioner.
She also agreed that she did not report the right
elbow problem to Inghams until 10 October
worker agreed that after 10 October 2013 she received light duties and continued
to work such duties for the balance of
She also agreed that she
did not make a claim for compensation in respect of the right elbow injury until
January 2014.
worker said that she was referred by her treating general practitioner to Dr C
Brown. Following this she was placed on light
duties that involved packing
chicken pieces onto a tray. Her recollection was that Dr Brown advised her to
only work four hours
recalled seeing Dr Oppermann in February 2014. She agreed that
Dr Oppermann advised her that provided she was performing light
could undertake normal hours of work per day.
worker described the light duties that she was performing in January and
February 2014, which involved picking up pieces of chicken
kebab and putting it
in a marinade and then placing it on a tray, the tray being on the line. This
involved work at waist height.
agreed that when she was doing four hour shifts performing kebab tray pack
duties that her leading hand advised her that if she
had pain she could stop and
agreed that she did not attempt to perform these work duties for more than four
hours per day. She also agreed that she refused
to attend the workplace at all
when she was asked to perform an eight hour
worker lodged a claim in February 2014 for her left shoulder. She saw Dr Brown
concerning her left shoulder in 2014. She agreed
that she did not tell Dr Brown
that she could only
remember the injury to her right elbow in October
agreed that she did not approach Inghams about paying her travel costs
associated with attending return to work meetings. What
she did raise with
Inghams was the fact that she was not receiving weekly payments of compensation.
She agreed that if Inghams paid
her travel costs to attend return to work
meetings she could attend such
Her position was that
attending such meetings was not worthwhile. When she did attend they asked her
how she was going and when
would she return to work. As she was not being paid
her weekly payments and no treatment was being provided she stopped
worker when asked was uncertain as to her ability to perform the light duties in
the kebab tray section. She said she currently
lived on medication. She was
not having any treatment in the way of physiotherapy. She had a shoulder
problem and thought if she
had treatment she may get better then would be in a
position to try light
was put to her that the distress that she experiences is not related to her
alleged injuries to her right elbow and shoulders.
Her answer was:
“Yes, the stress that I suffer now is involve
(sic) my injured because when I feel sore it’s very, very bad, it’s
very serious and I don’t know what to do with it. I don’t know how
to face it. I don’t know – I cannot
avoid the pain in my shoulder
and my elbow and I’ve been working – I been with the factory for
many years and now –
the way they treated
agreed that she demonstrated in Dr Oppermann’s office the posture she had
to adopt for a Buddhist ritual
Non-medical evidence
Carly Schroder the Return to Work coordinator at Inghams was called to provide
evidence and to undergo cross-examination. The worker
did not require the
attendance of other lay witnesses who provided statements for cross-examination.
The other persons to provide
statements were:
“Gary” Singh Superintendent employed by Inghams;
Troy Lawson
Production Shift Manager employed by Inghams;
Alastair James
Wheaton Physiotherapist who was subcontracted to provide physiotherapy on site
at Inghams for the period 2010 to
Singh in his supplementary
refers to the fact
that he was the worker’s supervisor at the time of her demotion and prior
to that. He stated that in October
2013 the worker reported to him that her
right arm was sore and he referred her to first aid. By reference to first aid
notes he confirms that the date the worker attended first aid in
October 2013 was 17 October.
recalled that sometime in February 2014 the worker advised him that she was too
sore to continue working in the boning section.
As a result he reported the
matter to Ms Schroder who suggested to him that the worker be moved to tray
pack. The worker was then
moved to the tray pack section which involves placing
five kebabs into a tray.
Carly Schroder who described herself as the Rehabilitation/Return to Work
Coordinator with Inghams identified her statement contained
in the Supplementary
Trial Book.
Schroder was asked about the hours of work that the worker was offered. As at
January 2014 the worker was performing normal hours.
This changed in February
2014. The worker then went to four hours a day and this continued for about a
month. She said the worker
then stopped coming to work on the basis of her being
unfit for work.
At this time the
worker was being offered full hours of work.
Schroder referred to the fact that she was notified of an alleged injury
sustained by the worker wherein the worker had suddenly
felt pain in the right
elbow which radiated down to the forearm and hand. It was on 8 November
2013 that she was provided with a
copy of Inghams’ register of injuries
dated 7 November 2013.
30 January 2014 she wrote a letter to the worker advising the worker that she
had arranged a return to work meeting on 4 February
2014 at Inghams’
Bolivar site. She prepared the Rehabilitation and Return to Work Plans (RRTWP)
for the worker. She said the
responsibility to provide the worker with suitable
duties in accordance with the RRTWP’s would have been assigned to the
direct supervisor Mr Singh. She said the worker did not attend
work or engage in any duties from 5 March 2014. Despite the worker
to attend work, rehabilitation meetings continued to occur and the worker
continued to be offered duties in accordance with
RRTWP’s prepared by
Schroder underwent cross-examination. She was referred to the RRTWP with a
commencement date of 4 March
She agreed that the RRTWP
of 4 March 2014 was for working normal production hours on normal production
days. This plan was for the
period 4 March 2014 to 18 March 2014. It stated
that restrictions were from “current WMC” (WorkCover Medical
Certificate
(“WMC”)). This was qualified by her agreeing that what
in fact was being offered was not the restriction from the WMC
restrictions came from the independent medical examiner’s
restrictions referred to in the plan were stated to be:
“As per IME report – avoid heavy repetitive
wrist flexion and extension with right hand. Avoid work at extended reach
above chest height with the left arm. Duties which permit the left elbow to be
kept by the side would generally be considered
Schroder was referred to the report of Dr Oppermann dated 20 February
She was referred to
paragraph 12 of Dr Oppermann’s report wherein he stated:
“Ms Nguyen is fit for return to work on modified
duties. She should avoid heavy repetitive gripping and repetitive wrist flexion
and extension of her right hand. She should further avoid work at extended reach
or above chest height with her left arm. Duties
which permit the left elbow to
be kept by the side would generally be considered suitable. If the provided
duties are suitable then
in general a restriction in working hours should not be
necessary.”
Ms Schroder agreed that what was contained in the various RRTWP prepared by
her was an almost direct quotation from Dr Oppermann’s
Schroder was taken to that part of the RRTWP prepared by her which is headed
Responsibilities
She agreed that this set
out the obligations of the worker under the plan and that these were obligations
imposed upon the worker
by Inghams.
the heading there were several dot points and her attention was directed to dot
points 3 and 4 which dot points state:
“• To abide by all medical restrictions
certified by your medical practitioner and be aware that medical restrictions
apply 24 hours per day, 7 days per week.
To only do the
duties certified by your medical practitioner and as offered by
She agreed that this imposed an obligation on the
worker under the plan prepared by Inghams to comply with the restrictions
by that person’s own treating doctor. Further that the worker was
only to do the duties as certified by the worker’s
medical practitioner
and as offered by Inghams.
Schroder was directed to the WMC dated 20 May 2014 prepared by Dr
She agreed that the
certificate indicated that the worker was unfit for work for the period 20 May
2014 to 20 July 2014. She further
agreed that this imposed an obligation on the
worker to comply with the restrictions set out in this medical certificate. In
the worker was unfit for work. She was asked whether she took into account
the restrictions imposed by the worker’s treating
medical practitioner
when she prepared the RRTWP number 5 for the period 30 May 2014 to
26 June 2014. She indicated that she did
not take into account those
restrictions.
position was that in preparing the plans she took into account the views of the
independent medical examiner Dr Oppermann but
not the views of the
worker’s own medical
practitioner.
was referred to Dr Oppermann’s report of 28 July 2014. She said she did
not pay attention to Dr Oppermann’s opinion
contained in the report when
preparing plan number eight. She indicated that she based it on
Dr Oppermann’s first report. She
was unsure whether this report had
been provided to her by the claims department. In the normal course her
rehabilitation department
would be provided with updated medical reports but
apparently this did not
Medical evidence
now turn to consider the medical evidence. This comprised of medical reports and
oral evidence from:
Dr Mary Christine Brown Occupational Physician
– reports dated 7 February 2014, 3 April 2014, 3 June 2014, 30
November 2014;
Paul Cummins Psychologist – reports dated 25 July 2014, 1 October 2014
and 12 February 2015;
Dr Anthony Davis – report dated 27 March 2015;
Dr Brett Oppermann – reports dated 20 February 2014, 4 July 2014,
28 July 2014, 2 February 2015, 22 September 2015;
Dr Alan Cotton – report dated 2 December 2014.
worker following her demotion and her commencement of duties back on the line as
process worker consulted with her general practitioner
Dr Pham on Tuesday
September 24 2013. According to Dr Pham’s notes, which were the
subject of a summons to produce documents,
Dr Pham referred the worker to Dr
Brown following a consultation with the worker on Monday 2 December 2013. Dr
Brown was therefore
seeing the worker as a treating occupational physician and
not solely for medico-legal reasons.
to Dr Pham’s notes on Tuesday 24 September 2013 the worker not only
presented as being stressed, headache and unable
to sleep as a result of the
demotion, but she also advised the doctor that after working one day boning
chicken she had experienced
pain again in her right tennis elbow. It was at this
time that the worker was provided with a certificate to remain off work on sick
leave and when such leave ran out, according to the statement of Mr Lawson,
annual leave was brought forward at the worker’s
request for the period 30
September 2013 to 4 October 2013. The worker for this period was not
alleging that she had a workplace
consultation with Dr Pham on 30 September 2013 referred to trouble sleeping and
tension in her head and now had right knee pain
on the medial side where she was
kicked. The next recorded consultation with Dr Pham was 21 October 2013 where
the history was that
she was working as usual and she had experienced right
elbow pain for two weeks and was taking Norgesic. Thereafter the notes of
Pham indicate complaints concerning the right elbow, left shoulder and
subsequently the right shoulder.
Brown when giving evidence was referred to the various reports that she had
compiled. She indicated that she still held to the
views that she had expressed
in those various reports. Her last report was dated 30 November 2014 but
subsequent to that she had
examined the worker on several occasions. Following
those examinations she had provided WMC’s dated 16 December 2014, 30
2015, 27 February 2015, 10 April 2015, 10 July 2015 and 28 August
In those WMC’s she
certified the worker unfit for work. She indicated in those certificates that
the worker was suffering from
right lateral epicondylitis and bilateral shoulder
impingement together with an adjustment disorder. Dr Brown stated that her view
was that the worker was totally incapacitated for work on the basis of her
physical complaints.
requested information from Dr Brown in February 2014 as regards the issue by Dr
Brown of a WMC on 6 February 2014. The questions
posed and the responses
from Dr Brown were:
“1. Could you please advise why the worker
has been certified unfit from work?
Acute pain in both arms on 5/2/14 – right elbow, left shoulder.
Ultrasound left shoulder on 31/1/14 showed left supraspinatus,
tendonosis and
tear, bursitis and impingement. Right elbow, chronic tendonosis and tear of
common extensor tendon complex.
note on the certificate you advise that the worker has a tear in her left
shoulder. Could you please advise on the mechanism of
injury which led to the
worker suffering from a tear to her shoulder?
Boning and trimming
off line using mainly left arm (to reduce use of sore right arm) involved reach
and abduction with left shoulder
and frequent left shoulder activity.
note the worker has been on suitable duties since 21 October 2013. The
worker has been coping with her suitable duties since this
time in relation to
her right elbow. Could you please advise if the worker was certified unfit for
work in relation to the tear in
her shoulder?
The worker used mainly
her left arm for trimming and boning to spare her right elbow. The left shoulder
injury is a sequelae to the
right elbow injury. Both right elbow and left
shoulder are now painful.
you please advise what treatment the worker requires?
Hand therapy
for right elbow and left shoulder. SA hand therapy suitable. Physio West Grant
Taylor too far away – also sports
physio approach too vigorous.”
Brown agreed that she had regard to x-rays and ultrasounds which provided
objective signs of disability which underpinned her clinical
cross-examination Dr Brown, when referring to the right elbow, indicated that
there was a radial tunnel component to the injury
which she thought was
precipitated by an acute event, which she understood to be something hitting the
right elbow falling from above.
An ultrasound was performed soon after the acute
event, namely on 18 April
Brown said that the worker, following the injury to her elbow in 2012, was still
able to work quite well given that she was a leading
hand and that she was not
doing a lot of manual work. At home she was having problems with housework and
doing much less housework
than previously. In October 2013 the worker was put
back on process work which meant repetitive activity with both hands. Although
she was given light duties (working off line) she still found that her right
elbow became painful and there was intermittent numbness
and paraesthesia in the
dorsal right hand and she was attempting to use mainly her left arm doing those
Brown’s understanding of the problem was that the worker did have a
lateral epicondylitis as a result of the incident in
October 2012 and this was
aggravated by the return to repetitive work.
asked whether this aggravation would only occur after a number of shifts Dr
Brown’s response was:
“I don’t think it would take very much and I
say that for two reasons. One is that she told me that she hadn’t been
able to get back to normal housework and secondly that you know I now know that
there was this radial tunnel component to it which
is something which is often
the cause or I don’t know what the right word is of pain anyway it’s
something that complicates
lateral epicondylitis quite a lot and it’s a
neuropathic condition it’s caused by an irritation of a nerve okay? And
it’s – you know, is very hard to get that to settle
was asked whether at February 2014, provided suitable duties were provided,
could they be performed for normal hours. Dr Brown
indicated that she was going
to wait and find out what was available and would allow the worker to
demonstrate her capacity and,
if she coped, she would go along with that and
keep assessing and treating her. If she was unable to cope then she would
the duties or conditions or whatever they were.
thought the duties involved in putting chicken kebabs onto a tray and working
self-paced were acceptable work for the worker to
was aware that the worker was angry about her demotion and felt this would
probably make her more tense and make her more likely
to develop an injury, but
the cause of the injury in her view was the physical conditions that she was
working under.
her knowledge the worker did not tell her that she had previously had an
ultrasound of the left shoulder and a steroid injection
into that shoulder in
at February 2014 she was happy for the worker to try the tray pack duties on a
part-time basis but she was unsure whether she would
build up to fulltime light
duties. Her assessment of how the worker was coping was gained from what the
worker would tell her and
what she would find upon examination and further
investigation.
Brown stated that she saw the worker on 23 September 2015 the day before giving
her evidence and that the impingement test on the
right side she thought was
negative. In other words it seemed fine to her. Her explanation for that was
that she accepted this as
a result of the worker resting a lot more. Impingement
tests still vary because they are to do with chronic pain or irritation of
person. Also apart from resting the right arm she had seen a physiotherapist who
taped her elbow and shoulder. Whilst the right
shoulder, which was very tender
and sensitive, was less sensitive and the impingement test of the right was
negative, it was still
positive on the left shoulder as at 23 September
Brown agreed that a graduated return to work would require the engagement of
both the employer and the worker. She said the worker
would have to be in
control and she would need to be supervised by a very trusting and responsive
supervisor who would allow the
worker to gradually upgrade her duties. If that
was not available the worker was permanently unfit for factory process work at
and anywhere else.
Brown whilst agreeing that you can get radiological findings that are
asymptomatic indicated that, in her opinion, the radiological
findings in
combination with the clinical signs were quite
convincing.
Cummins Psychologist saw the worker and provided her with treatment upon
referral from her general practitioner Dr Pham. He indicated
that he held to the
opinions he expressed in his reports as regards diagnosis and capacity.
cross-examined Mr Cummins conceded that he did not take a history as regards the
onset of psychological symptoms as he was focussed
on the worker’s
immediate position and treatment and he was about to take some leave. He did
indicate that when he first saw
the worker she was experiencing a severe level
of anxiety and depressive symptoms including panic attacks.
position was
that there were a
number of stressors that were contributing to the worker’s distress. He
did not agree that the significant
factor was the demotion from the position of
leading hand. He said it was the pain coupled with the fact that she had no
or income provided by Inghams. He said the injury or pain stemmed from
when the cage fell on her arm and then she was put on the
process line and found
that the repetitive physical work aggravated the pain and created pain in both
Cummins indicated that he did not agree with the opinion of the psychiatrist Dr
Cotton, wherein Dr Cotton expressed the view that
the psychological symptoms of
the worker were transitory. The basis of his disagreement stemmed from the fact
that, in his view,
the worker has physical injuries and chronic pain and that
this prevents her from not only working and deriving an income from work,
also her ability to undertake the ordinary activities of daily living.
Cummins did not agree that the worker when reporting symptoms to him had a
tendency to over exaggerate and embellish the symptoms.
He further said that
whilst the worker was clearly angry about the actions of her employer “it
was the pain that she complained
of, the things she couldn’t do, her loss
of status and her feeling of being useless because she couldn’t do all of
things not just at work but also in the rest of her life that were upsetting
Anthony Davis psychiatrist saw the worker at the request of her solicitors and
examined the worker on Friday 13 March 2015 and
following that prepared a report
dated 27 March 2015.
indicated that he stood by the views expressed by him in that report.
cross-examination Dr Davis indicated that taking a history from the patient is
critical. The first task really is to establish
the onset of symptoms, the
progression of factors that influenced it and the factors that contributed in
the background and perpetuating
Davis indicated that following the demotion the worker felt aggrieved and
distressed and thereafter described the evolution of
a number of psychological
Davis said that he thought on balance the worker was capable of returning to
work with certain limitations. He agreed that those
limitations related to
matters, not of a psychological nature, but concerned appropriate duties.
Brett Oppermann saw the worker on 12 February 2014 for the purposes of an
independent medical examination and then followed the
report of 20 February
He stated at para 12 of
that report that his view was the worker was fit to return to work on modified
duties. He indicated that
provided the duties were suitable “then in
general a restriction in working hours should not be necessary”. He said
at the time he prepared this report he had an opportunity to review Dr
Brown’s assessment. He said the history provided to
him was that the
worker had previously been at work for eight hours. On the day prior to seeing
him the worker was due to start work
at four hours effective immediately
performing modified duties.
his report of 28 July 2014 Dr Oppermann indicated that he felt the worker was
fit to return to work on modified duties and expressed
a range of restrictions
and indicated that he considered the worker to have capacity to work four hours
a day five days a week. He
said at that point in time, because the worker had
been away from work for some three months, it was appropriate to have a period
of work hardening to achieve a resumption of normal working hours over a six to
eight week period.
Oppermann’s attention was directed to the certification made by
Dr Brown on 20 May 2014 on the basis that no modified duties
provided and therefore she certified the worker as unfit for work. His opinion
was that the certification was not based
on capacity
far as his assessment of permanent impairment was concerned, when he saw the
worker on 22 January 2015 for a permanent impairment
assessment and report, he
noted that the range of motion values are mostly worse than that observed by him
on previous assessments
of the worker. He said he questioned the worker and the
worker reported recent aggravation of her bilateral shoulder complaints due
the requirement for Buddhist ritual prayer for two hours per day for three days
followed by prayer for four hours on the fourth
day following the death of her
mother in the week prior to her assessment. The worker demonstrated the posture
required and in doing
so placed her shoulders into a position of extension far
greater than that observed at the time of the prior assessment carried out
moments earlier. His view was that the discrepancy between the range of motion
of the bilateral shoulders observed in the test and
non-test scenario resulted
in an unreliable estimate of the true and accurate range of motion possible.
Oppermann in a further report dated 22 September 2015 indicated that he believed
that there was “some functional behavioural
overlay was again evident on
physical examination”.
said that the worker’s presentation made it difficult to arrive at a
precise assessment of capacity.
assessment of her work capacity, given that he understood her symptoms to have
remained unchanged since 12 February 2014 when
the worker was performing four
hours per day of modified duties, was that she was fit to resume such work which
she had previously
demonstrated capacity to
further went on to say that based solely on her physical symptoms he considered
that ultimately the worker had capacity to return
to her fulltime working hours.
considered it unwise for the worker to progress directly to fulltime hours given
the length of time since she was last at work.
His view was that the worker
could have achieved fulltime work since March 2014 if she had remained at work.
In arriving at this
conclusion he has taken into account only the restrictions
imposed by her physical
said the worker reported to him that she had an increase in symptoms at the time
she undertook the position for the Buddhist prayer
ritual in his rooms. She
also reported a worsening of symptoms in general mirroring her mood, so when her
mood was particularly
low, her pain was at its worst.
said the inconsistency between the test and non-test and the functional symptoms
shown on examination “serve only to give
an impression that the capacity
is greater than what the worker is
selfreporting”.
Notwithstanding this he indicated that if he was treating the worker his
recommendation for a return to work would be for four hours
a day with the
possibility of building up to fulltime.
Alan Cotton psychiatrist was called by the respondent. He was referred to his
report dated 2 December 2014 and indicated that he
adhered to the contents of
that report and the opinions expressed
said taking a history from a patient as to the onset of symptoms is critical in
coming to a proper assessment of the symptoms.
indicated that there was no history of any psychological symptoms prior to the
time when she was demoted. As a result the demotion
is an important factor in
the onset of her symptoms.
Cotton said that he had regard to the letter the worker wrote to Inghams in
which she expressed the fact that she had experienced
anxiety and depression as
a result of the actions of Inghams in demoting
Cotton said that the history he obtained from the worker indicated to him that
the worker was educated, intelligent and competent
and highly regarded at
Inghams prior to the incident which led to her demotion as a leading hand.
Cotton referred to his notes and stated that the worker indicated to him that Dr
Brown had cleared her for four hours a day three
days a week and if Inghams was
happy to have her back and there was suitable light duties she would be happy to
his report he indicated that the worker’s psychological symptoms are quite
transitory. He thought she suffered from a fluctuating
emotional state depending
on circumstances.
considered that given that the worker had a good pre-morbid personality that
once the medico-legal focus has been removed she will
become more settled and
there will be no psychiatric impediment to her returning to any suitable light
duties that might be available
cross-examined Dr Cotton agreed that her adjustment disorder is contributed to,
at least in part, by her pain and its consequent
effects upon her ability to
work and her ability to lead a normal pre-injury
said when talking about a graded return to light duties he was taking into
account both her physical and psychological
suggestion of four hours per day three days a week initially while she builds
her confidence is an arbitrary thing. It really
depended on how the worker
responded to the situation.
Cotton agreed that the worker would need to be supervised by a supervisor who
had a trusting and responsive relationship with her
and would allow her to limit
and gradually upgrade her duties as
Respondent’s submissions
respondent submitted that there was no injury. The worker’s evidence
should not be accepted.
worker was subjected to a searching cross-examination. At times during the
course of the cross-examination the worker did not
answer directly the questions
being put to her. At all times the worker’s evidence was taken through an
interpreter, although
from time to time the worker would express herself in
English. The worker’s approach to answering questions in
cross-examination
was in contrast to her responses given when being examined in
impression I had was that the worker seemed to be very guarded and even slightly
antagonistic towards counsel for the respondent
when being cross-examined. I
accept that the worker is extremely disappointed by her demotion. In addition I
accept that the worker’s
trust as regards the respondent has been severely
diminished by the view taken by those responsible for rehabilitation, namely
the worker must undertake a normal shift of eight hours or not attend work
at all. The worker in her
“From when Dr Brown first restricted my hours from
6 February 2014 I have only been paid for the hours I actually worked. I
not worked at all since 4 March 2014 which is when Inghams told me I had to work
eight hours or not at all. The fact that I
still have pain and still cannot do
what I was previously able to do is frustrating. I feel depressed. I am sad
that I have not
been able to continue at work. It has been difficult for me not
being able to do all of my housework.”
credibility of the worker was also attacked in relation to the presentation made
to Dr Oppermann. The worker’s presentation
to Dr Oppermann, in
particular the demonstration of the position she needed to adopt for the
Buddhist prayer ritual, was the subject
of comment by the respondent. The
worker, by demonstrating what it was that caused her to suffer a recent
aggravation of her symptoms,
did demonstrate a greater range of motion than she
had previously done in a test situation. It was a singular demonstration
extended range of motion but this, she claimed, caused an increase in
do not consider that such a presentation in context means that the worker is
exaggerating her symptoms, pain and range of movement.
I accept the worker as a credible witness.
written submissions the respondent contended:
The worker must
establish that the injury gave rise to an incapacity for work. The evidence
does not support this claim. The worker
had the capacity to work.
In relation to
the psychological claim the worker must establish that the employment was a
substantial cause of the injury and that
the injury did not arise wholly or
predominantly from reasonable administrative action taken in a reasonable manner
by the employer
to demote or discipline the worker.
psychological stress experienced by the worker did not prevent her returning to
In the event
that the Tribunal was to find that the worker had suffered a compensable injury
giving rise to an incapacity, the respondent
submits any incapacity has only
being established on the evidence to exist for a closed period, that is prior to
the assessment by
Dr Brown which demonstrated that the worker had no
impingement.
With respect to
the claim for a lump sum payment pursuant to the provisions of s 43 of the Act,
the Tribunal should accept the opinion
of Dr Oppermann and find that an
assessment could not be undertaken due to the worker’s inconsistent and
embellished presentation.
The evidence of Dr Oppermann does not support such a
finding (of further impairment) and further there is the evidence of Dr Brown
indicating a finding of no impingement, that being the medical finding upon
which a s 43 entitlement is based for the worker’s
alleged injuries.
Consideration
worker asserts that she has the following physical injuries:
a right tennis
psychological
sequelae to her various physical injuries;
entitlement to
lump sum compensation pursuant to s 43 in relation to her right elbow, left
shoulder, right shoulder and arm.
evidence is clear that the worker suffered an injury at work in April 2012 which
is not the subject of any dispute before the
Tribunal. The injury occurred when
a stock mover hit an overhead chute and part of that metal chute dropped down
and fell onto the
worker’s right arm. The worker received first-aid
treatment comprising of an icepack and her arm was bandaged. She also received
treatment from a physiotherapist who attended the
treating general practitioner, Dr Pham, was of the opinion that the worker
suffered a “tear of the common extensor tendon
insertion”.
worker indicated that the injury did not stop her working, having been certified
fit for modified duties involving work not using
the right arm. She did however
continue to have pain and her husband and daughter helped more with the
housework. By October 2012
she had resumed her usual work as a leading hand.
Her evidence was that with the help of medication and the nature of the duties
that she had to undertake as a leading hand this meant that she was able to
persist at work.
Brown made reference to an ultrasound of the worker’s elbow being carried
out on 18 April 2012 and stated that the appearances
were in keeping with an
acute tear of the common extensor tendon insertion.
incident occurred at work in May 2013 which has been referred to in detail
herein. The end result of the investigation into the
incident by Inghams
resulted in the worker being demoted from her position as a leading hand and she
was thereafter required to work
as a process worker on line. The demotion
occurred at a meeting held on 20 September 2013. The 20 September 2013 was a
The worker left early that day and returned to work on Monday 23
September 2013 and worked a shift as a process worker. On this
occasion she was
approached by a number of workers who asked of her why she had been demoted.
She said this caused her stress and
she was unable to work properly. She said
she experienced a headache and felt sick.
the next day, Tuesday 24 September 2013 the worker telephoned Inghams and
advised that she was unwell and that she was seeing her
doctor. She remained
off work on 24 September 2013 and by taking a combination of sick leave and
annual leave returned to work on
Tuesday 8 October 2013, Monday 7 October 2013
being a public holiday.
notes of the worker’s general practitioner Dr Pham, in particular the
entry made on 24 September 2013, made reference to
the demotion and the
worker’s stress headache and inability to sleep, but also referred to the
fact that the worker experienced
pain in her right tennis elbow which had been
better as she did not do manual work. It is clear that the main reason the
saw her doctor was because of the stress and headaches associated with
the demotion but she also made reference to pain in the right
elbow after one
day performing her duties as a process worker.
Brown, the worker’s treating occupational physician, considered that the
worker had lateral epicondylitis as a result of
the incident in April 2012. She
considered that this condition was aggravated by the return to repetitive work
and thought that
it would not take very much to “stir up” the
worker performed duties as a process worker on Tuesday 8 and Wednesday 9 October
2013. She presented to first-aid on Thursday
10 October 2013. Mr Singh,
the worker’s supervisor, said in October 2013 the worker reported to him
that her right arm was
sore and he referred her to first-aid.
10 October 2013 the worker performed light duties which involved processing work
but off line.
notes of her treating general practitioner Dr Pham reveal that at the consult
that took place on Monday 21 October 2013 the worker
indicated that she
experienced right elbow pain for two weeks and was on Norgesic. On Thursday 31
October 2013 a further consultation
with Dr Pham saw the worker being
referred for diagnostic imaging in relation to her right elbow. The results of
the diagnostic
imaging appear at p 83 of the Trial
The ultrasound report
indicates that the appearances are indicative of a partial tear deep within the
common extensor tendon complex
most probably long standing. This would seem to
equate to the 2012 injury. The comment made in the report is that “the
appearances
are in keeping with chronic tendinosis of the common extensor tendon
insertion”.
report of the ultrasound is objective diagnostic evidence of an underlying
problem which, in my opinion, has been aggravated by
the return to the
repetitive work involved in the process work undertaken by the worker. The WMC
issued by Dr Pham on 21 October
2013 makes mention of the fact that the worker
is, in her opinion, suffering from right tennis elbow and the stated cause is
to be the repetitive movements of the right arm boning chicken. Dr
Pham’s comment as to fitness for work is that the worker
is fit to return
to modified duties from the 21 October 2013 to 22 November 2013 on light
duties. Further medical certificates follow
for the balance of 2013. The light
duties, according to the worker, consisted of still working on the line but
doing a less amount
January 2014 the worker became aware of pain in her left shoulder and reported
this to Dr Pham. In turn Dr Pham sent the worker
for diagnostic imaging of the
left shoulder. The notes of Dr Pham on Thursday 23 January 2014 make
mention of the worker working
with one arm, namely the left arm, and for one
week experiencing pain with respect to her left shoulder. It was at this time
the worker was using a knife for boning and scissors for trimming with her
results of the left shoulder x-ray and ultrasound which were carried out on 31
January 2014 state the following conclusion:
“Supraspinatus insertional tear. Subacromial
Impingement.”
worker first consulted with Dr Brown, Occupational Physician following a
referral from Dr Pham. The first consultation occurred
on 16 January
Brown saw the worker for the second time on 6 February 2014. She reported to Dr
Pham on 7 February 2014.
Brown in her report to Dr Pham notes that the worker indicated to her that
she was boning and trimming chicken off the line,
having been given this work
because it was known that her elbow was painful. Right elbow pain increased.
There was no specific
treatment and no claim had been submitted for the elbow.
She also noted that the worker advised her that she had developed pain
left shoulder girdle and left side neck associated with doing much more of the
work with the left arm. She was boning and
trimming with the left arm. Dr
Brown indicated she assessed the worker as “suffering from a chronic right
lateral epicondylitis,
with a possible posterior interosseus nerve component.
Additionally there was musculoligomentous strain in the left shoulder girdle
musculature”. Dr Brown then makes mention of the left shoulder x-ray
and ultrasound that was performed on 31 January
Dr Brown noted that the
worker had developed an acute left shoulder tendinosis, bursitis and bursal
impingement. She put the worker
off for a few days to allow the acute symptoms
to settle (6-11 February 2014 inclusive). She thought at the time the left
posed a series of questions to Dr Brown in response to the WMC issued to the
worker by Dr Brown on 6 February 2014. The questions
posed and the
responses from Dr Brown have been set out herein namely para 81.
this time, namely February 2014, the worker had been offered suitable duties
within the kebab’s department. According to
between 12 February 2014
and 4 March 2014 the worker performed reduced hours of work at four hours per
day. Apparently Inghams’
doctor reviewed the worker on 12 February 2014
although no evidence was advanced concerning this review. It would seem that
to that review the worker performed the kebab duties four hours per
worker then was advised in early March 2014 that she had to work eight hours a
day or not at all. At that stage Inghams had rejected
her claim for weekly
payments. Her right elbow and left shoulder claims were accepted for medical
expenses only.
RRTWP with a commencement date of 4 March
was for normal production
hours, normal production days for the period of 4 March 2014 to 18 March
2014. Whilst it stated that restrictions
were from “current WMC” Ms
Schroder’s evidence on this topic was that the restrictions were not from
the WMC but
came from the independent medical examiners report. Dr Brown on 18
February 2014 had issued a WMC which indicated that the worker
was fit to return
to modified duties from 22 February 2014 up to 8 March 2014 and made reference
to the restriction of four hours
per day together with further restrictions.
Dr Brown issued a further certificate dated 5 March 2014 for the period of
9 March 2014
to 21 March 2014 restricted to four hours per day and the same
restrictions as applied in the previous medical certificate. On 18
Dr Brown issued a further certificate restricting it to four hours per day
together with the further restrictions. Then
followed on 26 March 2014 a
certificate from Dr Brown indicating that the worker was unfit for work for the
period 26 March 2014
to 3 April 2014.
wrote to the worker by letter dated 24 March
The author of the letter
was Mr Campos, Production Shift Manager. The topic was the worker’s
absence from work and Mr Campos
“Following our meeting on 4 March 2014, you were
stood down from your duties without pay, for refusing to comply with reasonable
work instructions.
You are now no longer stood down from your duties and you are directed to return
to work immediately to resume your ordinary roster.
You are expected to attend
for work for your ordinary 2.30pm commencement time on Wednesday 26 March
The worker had sought legal advice and her solicitors responded by letter
dated 25 March 2014.
worker’s solicitors indicated in the letter to Inghams that the worker
remained ready, willing and available to undertake
suitable duties within the
restrictions which had been certified by Dr Brown in a WMC issued by Dr Brown
dated 18 March 2014. The
WMC dated 18 March 2014 indicates restrictions
including four hours per day together with other restrictions. On 26 March
Dr Brown certified the worker unfit for work for the period 26 March 2014
to 3 April 2014.
response to the worker’s solicitor’s letter was a letter dated
27 March 2014 from Ms Wendy Carey, Workers Compensation
Claims Officer at
Ms Carey states in
that letter:
“We advise suitable duties are available in
accordance with the enclosed Rehab and Return to Work Plan Number 3 dated
18/3/2014.”
No specific job is referred to in the RRTW of 18 March 2014 and the
restrictions are those imposed by Dr Oppermann and not by the
WMC issued by her
treating medical practitioners.
worker was cross-examined about her ability to work eight hours a day doing the
kebab tray pack duties. Her response to the question
posed namely:
“Q: If you are given breaks as required when doing
those duties, would you have been able to complete an eight hour
“A: No, I don’t think I can work eight
She also indicated that she did not try to work more than four hours because
of the pain. She said she did not attend the workplace
after the beginning of
March 2014 because Inghams told her she was to do eight hours. If she did not
then she was not to go to
evidence supports an entrenched view by Inghams that the worker was required to
go from four hours per day performing the kebab
duties to eight hours per day.
It would appear that no account at all was taken of the views of her treating
general practitioner
and her treating occupational physician.
a result the worker has been absent from work. Dr Oppermann as at 28 July 2014
was of the view that the worker was fit to return
to work on modified duties
with a range of restrictions and a capacity to work four hours a day, five days
a week. This was due
to the fact that the worker had been away from work for
some three months and it was appropriate to have a period of work hardening.
collective evidence indicates that the worker has a partial incapacity for work.
The work that was offered to her from 4 March
2014 was for eight hours per day
and I accept that at that point eight hours per day was beyond the worker as she
was only coping
with four hours per day with restrictions and a sympathetic
supervisor.
RRTWP since April 2014 all refer to normal production days, normal production
hours. There is no certification from the worker’s
treating medical
practitioners (nor as from 28 July 2014 from Dr Oppermann) that the worker
is fit for full time hours.
find that in the absence of suitable work since 4 March 2014 the worker is
entitled to weekly payments from that date. The injuries
underpinning her
incapacity being:
right tennis
right shoulder
and right arm.
The various determinations made by the
respondent rejecting the worker’s claims for these injuries and consequent
for work must be set aside.
the worker suffer from a psychological injury suffered as a sequelae to her
physical injury? Mr Cummins, the worker’s
treating psychologist indicated
that in his opinion there were a number of stressors that were contributing to
the worker’s
distress. He was of the view that the most significant
stressor was the pain from her physical injuries which were causing
psychological
complications.
Davis, Psychiatrist, thought that following the demotion from leading hand the
worker felt aggrieved and distressed and thereafter
described to him the
evolution of a number of psychological symptoms. Dr Davis considered that the
worker’s chronic adjustment
disorder is a consequence of multiple
contributing factors. He thought the demotion was the major contributing factor
to the emergence
of the adjustment disorder. Subsequently the worker developed
severe pain in the right elbow and both shoulders. His view was:
“These physical symptoms contributed to further
psychological disturbance, as she confronted her inability to work or to
actively at home. She struggled to cope with her sense of
invalidity, having previously worked effectively and been a major contributor
Dr Davis thought that the worker had been incapacitated for work, at least
partially, as a result of both physical and psychological
conditions. He
thought the physical symptoms were the predominant contributors to ongoing
working capacity although those symptoms
were “clearly influenced by her
psychological state”. He stated:
“I consider that to some extent the current work
incapacity is related to psychological factors, which in part are a consequence
of work related
Alan Cotton in his report of 2 December
indicates in his view the
worker suffers from fluctuating symptoms of an adjustment disorder with anxiety
and depression.
cross-examined Dr Cotton agreed that the worker’s adjustment disorder is
contributed to, at least in part, by her pain
and its consequent effects upon
her ability to work and her ability to lead a normal pre-injury
Dr Cotton also stated
that his reference to a graded return to light duties expressed in his report
took into account both her physical
and her psychological disorder.
worker claims that the physical injuries that she has sustained resulted in
complications of a psychological type as determined
by both Dr Davis and Dr
Cotton and also by Mr Cummins. The worker is not alleging a disability
consisting of an illness or disorder
of the mind, in other words s 30A of the
Act. It is the underlying physical condition that has resulted in the
psychological injury.
find that the worker has suffered a psychological injury being a sequelae to the
physical injuries to her right elbow, right shoulder,
left shoulder and right
arm. The respondent’s determination rejecting this aspect of the
worker’s claim for compensation
must be set aside.
remaining claim made on behalf of the worker relates to a claim for a lump sum
payment pursuant to the provisions of s 43 of the
Act. The respondent submits
that the Tribunal should accept the opinion of Dr Oppermann and find that
an assessment could not be
undertaken due to the worker’s inconsistent and
embellished presentation. I have referred to the worker’s demonstration
of the position adopted by her in the Buddhist prayer ritual and how I view that
demonstration. I am not satisfied that the worker
has been inconsistent and
embellished her presentation. The respondent also makes reference to the
evidence of Dr Brown wherein
she stated that at a recent examination she
could find no impingement. This arose from the cross-examination of Dr
Dr Brown said that
she had examined the worker on 23 September 2015, the day before she gave her
evidence at the Tribunal. She
indicated that the impingement test on the right
side was negative but still positive on the left. She put this down to the fact
that the worker had been off work for quite some time and had been resting the
right arm. Also she had seen a physiotherapist who
taped her elbow and
shoulder. Dr Brown indicated that impingement tests do vary because they are to
do with chronic pain or irritation
of the person.
Brown was not asked whether this finding on examination, namely the impingement
test on the right being negative, had any bearing
as far as her assessment of
permanent impairment was concerned, made in her report of 30 November
My view is that the
negative impingement test on the right observed by Dr Brown on 23 September 2015
has no bearing on her permanent
impairment assessment. Dr Brown was the
treating occupational physician. I regard her permanent impairment assessment as
appropriate assessment and my finding is that the worker is entitled
to an assessment of lump compensation for a permanent impairment
of the Act based upon Dr Brown’s assessment.
impairment assessment in Dr Brown’s report of 30 November 2014 refers
to the right upper extremity and breaks that down
to right shoulder range of
movement and right elbow peripheral nerve disorder, radial tunnel syndrome and
posterior interosseus nerve
compression. The combination of findings of the
right upper extremity in Dr Brown’s opinion result in 8% WPI. She then
the left shoulder and talks of left shoulder range of movement and
comes up with a figure of 7% WPI. In her report the combination
of 8% right
upper extremity combined with 7% left shoulder results in 14% WPI. Dr
Oppermann’s position was that maximal medical
improvement cannot reliably
be determined although he then proceeded to assess the WPI value as being 25%
with the caveat that this
is likely to represent a significant over estimate of
the worker’s true underlying degree of permanent impairment. With
I reject the opinion of Dr Oppermann for the reasons I have expressed
will hear the parties on the form of orders to give effect to the findings that
I have made at a date to be determined in court
as in chambers.
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are advised that if a party wishes to appeal against any part of this
decision which is appealable pursuant to s 86(1) of
the Act such appeal must be
filed with the Registrar in accordance with the form titled Notice of Appeal
within 14 days of the delivery
of this decision and must be served on all
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
practice of this Tribunal to publish its reasons for decision in full on the
Internet. If any party or person contends that
these reasons for decision should
not be published in full the party or person must make an application within
seven days of the
delivery of these reasons. The application shall be by an
Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should be addressed
to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within the time
specified these reasons will be published in accordance
Tribunal’s usual practice.
Exhibit A1 – Trial Book
(TB) – Witness Statement of Worker – p 73-79.
Exhibit A1 – TB 27
– Action no. 1347 of 2014.
Exhibit A1 – TB 32.
Exhibit A1 – TB
Exhibit A1 – TB
Exhibit A1 – TB
Exhibit A1 – TB
Exhibit A1 - TB 65-69.
Exhibit A1, TB 75 at para
Exhibit R7.
Exhibit A1 – TB
Exhibit R2 –
Supplementary TB 25.
Exhibit R2 –
Supplementary TB Annexure TL9, p 39.
Exhibit R2 Supplementary TB
Annexure TL11 p 47.
Exhibit A1 – TB 253,
Exhibit A1 – TB
Exhibit A1 TB 10, 11 –
Claim for compensation dated 17 January 2014.
Exhibit R6 Statement of
Alastair James Wheaton.
Exhibit R2 Supplementary
Trial Book pp 513-516.
Exhibit R2 Supplementary
Trial Book pp 399-407.
Exhibit A1 – TB
Exhibit A1 TB 89-95.
Tr p 131, 132.
Exhibit A3.
Exhibit A1 TB –
Tr pp 101, 102.
Tr p 107, 108.
Exhibit A1 TB pp
Exhibit A1 TB pp 89-95
Exhibit A1 TB p 113.
Exhibit R4 report of Dr B
Oppermann 22 September 2015 p 4.
Exhibit A1 TB pp 124-132
report Dr A Cotton 2 December 2014.
Exhibit A1 TB pp 209-210
letter from the worker to Inghams dated 9 October 2013.
Exhibit A1 – TB
Exhibit R6 – Statement
of Alastair Wheaton.
Exhibit A1 – TB
Exhibit A1 – TB 76
para 16 Statement of worker.
Exhibit A1 – TB
Exhibit A1 – TB
Exhibit A1 – TB
Exhibit R7 –
Supplementary statement of Troy Lawson paras 15, 16.
Exhibit A1 – TB
Exhibit A1 – TB
Exhibit A1 – TB 229
– letter 25 March 2014 Tindall Gask Bentley Lawyers to Mr Campos,
Production Shift Manager.
Exhibit A1 – TB
Exhibit A1 – TB 153
– Report of Dr Tony Davis 27 March 2015 para 4.
Exhibit A1 – TB 154
– Report of Dr Tony Davis 27 March 2015 para 5.
Exhibit A1 – TB
Tr 151 line 33-35.
See generally
Arrowcrest Group Pty Ltd v Nguyen
[2000] SAWCT 121.
Tr 101, 102.
Exhibit A2.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (328 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter