URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRComm/2016/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Montgomery v Ryan�s Family Bakehouse Pty Ltd [2016] SAIRComm 3 (27 May 2016)
Montgomery v Ryan’s Family Bakehouse Pty Ltd
] SAIRComm 3
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION (SA)
MONTGOMERY, Matthew
RYAN’S FAMILY BAKEHOUSE PTY LTD
S 65 Training Skills and Development Act 2008
7904 of 2015
HEARING DATES:
12 and 13 January 2016
JUDGMENT OF:
Commissioner PJ McMahon
DELIVERED ON:
27 May 2016
CATCHWORDS:
Dispute between parties to a training contract - Application by apprentice
seeking re-employment or compensation - Consideration as
to whether apprentice
was intimidated into signing the mutual termination form - Whether apprentice
was bullied or harassed - Consideration
as to whether apprentice was suitably
supervised - Held training obligations were breached - Re-employment not
appropriate Termination
of the Training Contract was unlawful - Compensation
awarded for unlawful termination of the training contract - Training contract
terminated - Ss 52,53and 65 of the Training and Skills Development Act 2008
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: In Person with Mr T Newton (Office of the Training
Respondent Mr B
Solicitors:
Applicant: N/A
Respondent: N/A
Introduction
is an application made under s 65 of the
Training and Skills Development Act
(TSD Act) by Mr Matthew Montgomery (the apprentice). The apprentice
commenced a Certificate III in Retail Baking at Bakers Delight
North Adelaide in
November 2012. The applicant’s conditions of employment are covered by the
General Retail Industry Award 2010
. At the time Mr Bevan Pope was the
franchisee and Mr Ben Ryan was the baker.
February 2014 Mr Pope purchased another bakery and
Mr Ryan purchased the
Baker's Delight North Adelaide store under the company name Ryan’s Family
Bakehouse Pty Ltd (the employer).
The apprentice chose to continue at Bakers
Delight North Adelaide and consequently on 5 March 2014 the Training Contract
was transferred
to Ryan’s Family Bakehouse Pty Ltd.
bakery was busy through to Easter and the apprentice was advised he would start
learning new tasks after the busy period. Nothing
had occurred by mid-June so
the apprentice asked the employer when he would start learning the new tasks.
This caused arguments and
escalated to the point where the employer allegedly
threatened to sack him in August 2014.
apprentice advised the employer that he had jury duty in January 2015. On his
first day of jury duty he noticed he had a missed
call from the ABC. It was a
recorded message converted to text advising that the media want to talk to him
He later realized that it was Mr Ryan’s mobile
phone number, and it was acknowledged by the employer that he made the
apprentice alleges numerous other incidents occurred in the ensuing period such
as the employer yelling at him for not working
fast enough and for producing
what he considered were poor quality products.
two months prior to his termination the apprentice started working the early
shift with the employer. The apprentice alleges
he would commence at 2.00am but
as soon as he arrived, Mr Ryan would go to sleep in the office leaving him to
run the shift unsupervised.
late July 2015 the apprentice took a few days annual leave to go interstate with
his family. He alleges he advised Mr Ryan four
weeks prior and he was told to
organise swapping shifts with another employee Mr Adam Hellier. He did this and
Mr Hellier advised
him that he would sort it out with the employer.
the day the apprentice was to start his leave the employer told him he
couldn’t leave and that he had to keep working. The
apprentice called his
mother around 8.00am to advise her of the situation and he asked her to talk to
the employer in an attempt
to convince him to let him leave work. After speaking
with the apprentice’s mother the employer allowed the apprentice to leave
at 10.00am. The situation left the apprentice feeling scared and
embarrassed.
the morning that the apprentice was to return to work (28 July 2015) the
employer texted the apprentice and asked him to attend
a meeting with himself at
11.00am that day. The apprentice attended work at about 10.55am and was asked to
wait in the café
area next to the bakery. The apprentice alleges that Mr
Ryan attended the meeting with an unidentified person who he presumed was
the Training and Skills Commission. At the meeting the employer indicated that
it was not working out and it would be in everyone’s
best interest if he
signed a Training Contract Termination form. The apprentice alleges that he was
intimidated into signing the
an outcome the apprentice is seeking the following:
reinstated to his position as an apprentice.
Payment from
the time of termination until the Commission determines the matter.
Arising from
the alleged intimidation in relation to signing off his apprenticeship The
apprentice is seeking the employer be fined
in accordance with s 53(2)(d) of the
to exert undue influence etc in relation to training contracts
(2) A person must not exert undue influence or pressure on, or use unfair
tactics against, a party to a training contract in relation
(d) the termination or suspension, or purported termination or suspension, of
the contract.”
supervision and training and to be treated properly by the employer.
If there is no
order for reinstatement, he is seeking payment of wages previously requested and
a further three month’s pay
to allow time to seek a new
apprenticeship.
If there is no
order for reinstatement, the employer should be penalised pursuant to s 65(2)(l)
in that the employer’s registration
to train apprentices and trainees be
suspended or cancelled.
employer be refrained from making any disparaging comments about the apprentice
to any potential employers.
The jurisdiction
accordance with the TSD Act Part 4, Division 4, the South Australian Industrial
Relations Commission is vested with the jurisdiction
to hear grievances and
disputes between the parties to training contracts. Section 65 of the TSD
Act states:
65—Other matters to be dealt with by
Industrial Relations Commission
(a) a dispute arises between parties to a training contract; or
(b) a party to a training contract is aggrieved by the conduct of another
party, a party to the contract may apply to the Industrial
Relations Commission
for consideration of the matter.
(2) The Industrial Relations Commission may, if it thinks fit, by order,
exercise 1 or more of the following powers in relation to
a matter before the
Industrial Relations Commission:
(a) it may make recommendations to the Commission about the assessment of the
skills of an apprentice/trainee and, if appropriate,
the granting of an
appropriate qualification under the AQF;
(b) it may reprimand a party in default;
(c) it may suspend the employment of an apprentice/trainee (for a period not
exceeding 4 weeks) commencing on a date specified in
(d) it may confirm, extend (for a period not exceeding 4 weeks) or revoke a
suspension imposed by an employer under section 64 and,
in the event of
revocation—
(i) order the employer to pay any remuneration, or compensation for any
non-monetary benefit, to which the apprentice/trainee would,
but for the
suspension, have been entitled; and
(ii) order the employer to treat the period of suspension as service for
specified purposes;
(e) it may extend or reduce the term of, or otherwise vary, a training
(f) it may terminate a training contract as at the date specified in the
(g) it may order an employer to pay any remuneration to which an
apprentice/trainee is entitled;
(h) it may order an employer to pay compensation for any breach of the
training contract;
(i) it may order a party to a training contract to take any other action
that, in the opinion of the Industrial Relations Commission,
the party is
required to take under the contract or under this Part;
(j) it may excuse a party to a training contract from performing 1 or more of
his or her obligations under the contract;
(k) it may order that, for the purpose of computing the period of training
that has been served by an apprentice/trainee, a specified
period or specified
periods be excluded;
(l) it may vary, suspend or cancel the registration of an employer granted by
the Commission under this Part;
(m) it may order an employer not to employ any apprentices/trainees in
addition to those named in the order without the approval of
the Industrial
Relations Commission;
(n) it may make any consequential orders that the Industrial Relations
Commission thinks necessary or expedient.
(3) The Commission may, without further inquiry, accept and act on any
recommendation of the Industrial Relations Commission under
this Division.
(4) The term of a training contract must be computed and the contract must
be construed and must apply in accordance with an order
made by the Industrial
Relations Commission under this Division.
(5) The cancellation or suspension of the registration of an employer by the
Industrial Relations Commission under this Division
may relate to a particular
apprentice/trainee or to all apprentices/trainees employed by the employer.
(6) Notice must be given by the Industrial Relations Commission to the
Commission of the outcome of any application or reference
of a matter under this
(7) A person must not contravene an order of the Industrial Relations
Commission under this Division.
Maximum penalty: $5 000.
(8) An application to the Industrial Relations Commission under subsection
(1) must be made during the term of the relevant training
contract or within 6
months after the expiry, termination or cancellation of the relevant training
(9) The Industrial Relations Commission may extend the time within which any
such application may be made.
(10) In this section—
to a training contract or party includes a person who was
formerly a party to a training contract. The powers vested under section
comprehensive and wide ranging. They include but are not limited to making
findings about the employer's suitability to employ
apprentices and to order an
employer to pay compensation for any breach of the training contract.”
The proceedings
the matter did not settle at conciliation the matter was referred on for
hearing. Being a dispute under s 65 of the TSD Act the
parties were
self-represented. Mr Thomas Newton from the Office of the Training Advocate
assisted the apprentice.
principal witnesses were the apprentice, and Mr Ben Ryan, the owner of the
Bakers Delight North Adelaide store.
The applicant’s evidence
apprentice provided evidence that he commenced employment on
5 November 2012
at Bakers Delight North Adelaide. He had to learn quickly before the Christmas
rush. He learnt to make products such
as pizzas, cheese and bacon and Italian
rolls. He was also making dough and learning to prepare for the following day.
few mistakes at the start but by the time he had his first leave in
October 2013 his work had become more consistent.
the apprentice returned from his leave he was advised that Mr Ryan was going to
buy the North Adelaide store and Mr Pope was
going to buy another bakery. He
decided to stay with Mr Ryan as he thought he was the better baker. The
changeover to the Ryan’s
Family Bakehouse Pty Ltd occurred in February
the changeover, Mr Ryan employed Mr Hellier, a baker who he had worked with
previously. It was busy leading into Easter and
the employer advised the
apprentice that he would learn lots of new skills after the busy period. As this
did not happen he asked
the employer in mid-June when he would learn to make
other products. This was the first of many arguments whenever he inquired about
his training. The apprentice alleges that the employer would make belittling
statements that he was not good enough to ever own his
own bakery and stated
“Why should I teach you?”
arguments occurred two or three times a week from mid-June until late August
2014 when he was due to go on holidays to the Gold
Coast. The day before he went
on holidays the employer threatened to sack him for not being a team player.
This was only the second
holiday the apprentice had since his commencement in
November 2012.
the apprentice returned from leave his shift was changed from
6.00am, the apprentice believes this was done so that neither the employer nor
Mr Hellier could continue to teach him. This
lasted for a few weeks.
the weeks leading up to Christmas 2014, the apprentice notified the employer
that he was required to do jury duty in January 2015.
He alleges that the
employer did not like this but because it was busy it seemed that he had
forgotten about it. On the first day
on jury duty he noticed he had a missed
call from the ABC which was converted to text. The text message
“Listen it’s John Laws (?) from The ABC. Just enquiring about the
case(?) you’re(?) working (?) on.”
apprentice reported this to the Jury Officer. After a few phone calls he
realised it was Mr Ryan who had made the call. The next
day the apprentice told
Mr Ryan that the consequences could have been serious. He alleges that the
employer laughed and said if anything
happened to him he would be sacked.
Sunday 27 February 2015 the apprentice had an argument with the employer about
dressing up as the Bakers Delight mascot at a street
market because he wanted to
attend his mother’s birthday. The employer did not believe him and made
him work the following
day which he thought was punishment.
May 2015 the employer employed another apprentice Mr Kyle O’Connor who was
from another Bakers Delight Store, the apprentice
was subsequently asked to have
a week off. When he returned from leave the employer advised him that was going
to be taught how to
do starts as he would be attending a conference in Hobart at
the end of September.
the eight weeks prior to his termination the apprentice estimates he did about
20 early starts. He acknowledged he was a bit slow
at first with some products
being under-cooked and some over-cooked but he felt confident that he would get
the hang of it. The apprentice
felt that in his employer’s eyes it was not
good enough and that he was not going at the speed he should have been. It is
that he would yell and say “you should know all the times and the
temperatures on the ovens”. It was during this period
the apprentice
alleges that the employer would let him into the bakery and the employer would
proceed to go to sleep either in the
office or at home. This happened regularly
until his termination.
apprentice states that as he had only just started learning he made mistakes
which did not please the employer. He felt like he
was teaching himself. One day
when he came to work the employer ripped his temperature and time book and
kicked it across the room.
He would regularly swear at him and tell him how bad
he was at everything.
weeks prior to taking leave in July 2015 he reminded the employer that he was
going away. The employer complained that he did
not know about the leave and had
to be reminded that he had already been advised. The employer told him to ring
Mr Hillier to swap
shifts. He did that and Mr Hillier said he would talk to the
employer about it. This seemed to make the employer angrier.
day before he was scheduled to take his leave the apprentice advised the
employer he would start work early on the first day of
his leave but would have
to leave at 9.00am to make sure he got home to get changed and get to the
airport on time. When he told
the employer this he thought he was going to
physically attack him. The apprentice did not want to go into work the next
but did anyway.
next day he went in early and everything was okay until about
7.00am when
Ben told him he could not take time off even though he was flying out to
Melbourne that day with his family. He had to
get his mother on the phone to
talk to the employer to tell him that he was going away with the family and was
not making it up.
The apprentice alleges the employer yelled at him and called
him a liar in front of other staff and customers before telling him
leave at 10.00am. The day he left for holidays was the most scared and
embarrassed he had ever felt.
the apprentice was on leave his mobile was turned off and when it was turned
back on there was eight missed calls one after
the other from the employer. He
texted the employer when he returned home asking when he wanted him to start. He
did not get a reply
so he decided to go to work on the early shift. He got up
and went to work but when he parked his car at 1:45am he read a message
employer advising him to come in at 11.00am to have a chat.
the apprentice entered the bakery that morning he was told to sit in the
café area next to a person who was waiting there.
He was not introduced
to the person. At the meeting the employer said he had lied to him about the
holiday and that he had cost the
company nearly $10,000 in lost stock. The
employer then produced the mutual termination form and the apprentice was asked
it. He wanted to take the document home but was told it was in his best
interest to sign it straight away and if he did not agree,
he was not going to
receive his two weeks holiday pay. He felt intimidated and reluctantly signed
the document.
apprentice signed against the advice of his father who had texted him just prior
to the meeting advising him not to sign anything.
A copy of the text message
record between the apprentice and his father was provided. The apprentice stated
that he only signed the
document because he believed the other person was from
the training apprenticeship organisation who advised him that it was in his
interest to sign. He believes that if he had a support person present with him
he would not have signed the document.
leaving the meeting the apprentice told his mother that he was forced to sign
the termination papers and there was nothing he
could do. He believed he was
made to sign the document under duress which he thought was an offense under s
53 of the TSD Act. After
being terminated he called Ms Sarina Russo of the
apprenticeship centre, Bakers Delight head office and the Fair Work Commission
who all said there was nothing they could do to help.
cross-examination the apprentice was asked why he did not contact his trainer,
Robert from the Independent Institute of Food Processing.
He responded that
everyone told him to call his training provider, Ms Russo. The apprentice
indicated that he had not received a
written warning during this time at Bakers
Delight. The text that the apprentice received from the employer at 1:45am the
of his dismissal did not say anything else except to come in at 11.00am
for a chat.
The evidence of Leesa Montgomery
Leesa Montgomery is the applicant’s mother. Ms Montgomery’s evidence
was credible. She gave evidence that the apprentice
wanted to be a chef for a
long time, that he is generally quiet and shy when meeting new people and was a
good kid. She stated that
he was happy when he started working for Bakers
Delight. She remembered that one night after coming home from work in June 2014
apprentice complained he had an argument with the employer about not being
Montomery indicated that on the first night after the apprentice had been on
jury service he told her about a call he received
from a person identifying
himself as John Laws, a journalist inquiring about jury service. He told his
mother he was going to report
it to the jury manager as that is what he was told
to do. She remembers he was upset and worried. He thought it might have been the
employer making a joke and when he confronted him, he admitted it.
remembers an incident on 27 February 2015 as that date is her birthday. Bakers
Delight were having a stall that day and she asked
the apprentice to tell the
employer he could not work as they were going out for dinner that night. When
the apprentice told the
employer he needed the day off, he did not originally
agree until another staff person offered to do it. The apprentice told her
the employer made him come in the next day to work which he thought was
punishment. The apprentice told her the employer had
accused him of lying and
she offered to give the apprentice her birth certificate to show him it was her
Ms Montgomery rang Ms Russo from the apprenticeship centre as she
was concerned about the apprentice’s welfare. It was so bad
she felt the
apprentice was going to commit suicide. Although she thought she had been
listened to, she also felt she was “fobbed
off” because she was the
apprentice’s mother.
April 2015 the apprentice was upset again when the employer employed a new
apprentice as he thought it would slow down his training.
He was baffled by this
and could not understand why the employer would employ another apprentice when
he wasn’t even being
Montgomery states that during this period the apprentice never seemed to have a
life, it was put on hold for about 18 months as
he was always on call and they
did not know when the employer was going to call him into work. The employer
always texted the apprentice
late so he never went out. It was always difficult
for the apprentice to take leave and on the last occasion he volunteered to work
that morning as they were not leaving until lunchtime. It was just to keep the
the morning the apprentice was supposed to go on leave she thought it was
sorted. She got a call out of the blue at about 7.30am
to 8.00am from the
apprentice advising her that the employer would not let him take leave. She
asked to speak to Mr Ryan and advised
him the apprentice had to leave no later
than 9.30am to get to the airport on time. The employer refused and said
production was
running behind. Finally he agreed to allow the apprentice to
leave at 10.00am. She said they just made it to the airport on time.
believed Mr Ryan was having a power trip. She did not believe the employer liked
the apprentice having a life. After Mr Ryan
took over running Bakers Delight she
could only describe the time as chaotic. Everything was done by text messaging,
come in, don’t
come in, the apprentice never knew what day he had to come
in to work. His shift times were constantly changing.
the holiday in July 2015 Ms Montgomery stated that she took the
apprentice’s mobile and put it in her bag because they were
on holidays
and she did not want him to worry about work. The next morning she checked the
apprentice’s mobile and found a
message from Mr Ryan saying words to the
effect “how dare you do this to me?” There were eight missed calls
in a matter
of minutes from him. They started at
6:30pm the previous night,
one after the other. After that she turned the mobile off.
the apprentice advised her that the employer was leaving him alone to work the
oven she was mortified. She stated that she wanted
to go down to the store and
verbally slap Mr Ryan to wake him up.
the Monday night when the apprentice returned from leave she said they did not
know when the apprentice was supposed to start work
so the apprentice texted Ben
at about 6:40pm asking what time he wanted him to come in. He did not receive a
reply so they decided
the apprentice should start on the early shift at 2.00am.
The apprentice went to bed at 9.00pm that night. At 4.00am when the
apprentice’s
father got up to go to work they realized the apprentice was
still in bed. They woke him and he advised them that Mr Ryan had told
come for a meeting at 11.00am.
the morning she woke the apprentice and asked him if he wanted her to come with
him to the meeting. He said no he can handle it,
she believed he thought that
because there was nothing in the message to indicate anything was wrong.
apprentice rang her sometime after 12 noon and advised her that the employer had
terminated his apprenticeship. The apprentice
told her about another person
being present at the meeting. He did not know who he was. He said Mr Ryan told
him he cost the business
$10,000 in lost stock, that he had lied about his
holidays and how bad he was at everything. When she asked why he didn’t
take the papers away he said they would not let him. He thought the other
guy was from the apprenticeship organisation and both Mr
Ryan and the other
person present told him it was in his best interest to sign the documents
straight away otherwise he would not
be paid his two weeks holiday pay. She rang
her husband and they were going to talk about it that night. They were all in
it was probably a couple of days later before they could discuss
two weeks after the termination the apprentice called the Training and Services
Commission and was advised that the Training
Contract termination form had not
been lodged. The apprentice was upset and angry about the situation he was in.
He had to go to
Centrelink to receive unemployment payments but he was not
entitled to any payment without the termination form being processed.
apprentice advised her that the employer had contacted him the day before asking
him to return his uniform. The apprentice indicated
he would go to the store to
drop off the uniform and enquire about the termination form.
her knowledge the apprentice has never applied for a groundskeeper position.
When she read the employer’s response that the
apprentice had advised him
he had applied for a groundskeeper position she thought it was hilarious. The
apprentice has never been
interested in gardening. Since his termination the
apprentice has only ever applied for bakery positions. The apprentice has
for other Bakers Delight positions and although on one occasion he was
advised he would be given a trial, they did not call him back.
The apprentice
told her that one of Bakers Delight staff members advised him that as he was
taking Bakers Delight to the tribunal
he should not employ him. The apprentice
is a bit lost at the moment and not sure what he wants to do.
cross-examination Ms Montgomery agrees that she has never heard the employer
verbally abuse the apprentice. She indicated that
although she had not witnessed
anything directly, the apprentice’s demeanour had changed. She had to prop
him up all the time
as his confidence was at an all-time low.
few days after the termination when the apprentice, her husband and herself
discussed it, they could not believe the role the other
person at the meeting
had played. She said something to the effect he should have been on the
apprentice’s side. The apprentice
was upset and did not believe he would
become a baker as the employer would never give him a good reference. His
termination was
totally unexpected as there had been no forewarning the employer
was going down this direction. She thought the meeting would be
apprentice not giving the employer enough notice for his holidays as that is
what he complained to her about on the phone.
had previously told the apprentice not to sign anything and his father had
texted him that morning advising him not to sign anything.
Ms Montgomery
stated that it was always something we said to him as the employer was always
threatening him. That is a reason why
she did not go in, if she had known that
it was an important meeting she definitely would have been there and would have
forms and sought legal advice.
the employer swearing at the apprentice, they had a discussion most nights. The
apprentice indicated that Mr Ryan was yelling
at him, swearing at him and
calling him names. It seemed to be a constant thing. He used terms such as
“minda” “dumb”
and “stupid” but as she does
not like swearing the apprentice did not use the worse terms and she only found
the depth of the actual swearing.
Montgomery’s evidence was that the apprentice was very upset about how the
termination happened. They called the training
organisation asking who was at
the meeting. Everyone they rang said that they had not sent anyone to the
meeting. They called about
five organisations to find out who the other person
was. They finally became suspicious and presumed Mr Ryan had taken somebody with
him to intimidate the apprentice into signing. Eventually they were put in touch
with the Office of the Training Advocate who have
been assisting
The employer’s evidence
The evidence of Ben Ryan
Ryan indicated he had called the meeting with the apprentice on
28 July 2015
in the food court adjacent to the bakery. When the apprentice arrived at 10.55am
he told him to wait in the food court
until he finished production. At 11.00am
he joined the apprentice who was by himself. At no point during the meeting did
anyone else
the meeting they discussed how things were not going well in the bakery and how
the apprentice is underperforming and constantly
deceiving him and the other
staff. He raised the apprentice’s unwillingness to listen and follow
directions and not giving
him notice when taking leave. Mr Ryan stated that he
thought it was in both of our interest to sign a mutual agreement to terminate
his contract.
no point during the meeting was the apprentice intimidated, threatened, or put
under duress to terminate his contract. The form
states in bold letters if he
felt that way not to sign it. After the meeting finished the apprentice followed
Mr Ryan back inside
the bakery where he spoke to other staff members before
saying goodbye.
two weeks later the apprentice showed up at the bakery and asked to speak to
him. He told him he had applied for a job at the
Alberton Football Club as a
groundskeeper which started later in the year and in the meantime he would have
a break. The apprentice
asked if he had lodged the mutual termination form as he
was trying to receive Centrelink payments. During the week from 24 to the
August 2015 the apprentice rang the shop every day asking if the mutual
termination form had been posted. He was advised that
this had been done a few
weeks before. Mr Ryan states that it got to the point where it was becoming
the apprentice’s employment at Bakers Delight North Adelaide he states
that he has never abused, yelled at, belittled,
bullied, threatened, or made the
apprentice do anything against his free will. Mr Ryan said that the apprentice
was not forced to
sign the mutual agreement form and there was no third party at
the meeting. He states that the apprentice’s allegations are
Ryan indicated he has only ever spoken to Ms Montgomery three times on the
phone; twice when the apprentice was sick and the third
time was when the
apprentice left to go on holidays. Other than that
Ms Montgomery has had no
involvement with the business. He states that he never called the apprentice any
names and Ms Montgomery’s
claims are untrue. The apprentice always had
breaks at around 8.00am.
relation to the text message the apprentice received from his phone during jury
duty he took responsibility at the time as the
text came from his phone number.
He had no way of proving otherwise but he did not send the text message or phone
call as his phone
was off and left it in the office where other staff had access
to it. He took the matter seriously and spoke to the other staff that
that day. He has since taken precautions so that it can never happen again.
cross-examination Mr Ryan indicated that Mr Pope, the previous franchisee,
replaced a qualified Baker with an apprentice as the
wages were cheaper. He
accepted that the apprentice mostly turned up to work on time but there were a
few days he was late. He agreed
that he was a good apprentice most of the time.
The employer indicated he had not been involved in the apprentice’s
plan as it had been set up and supervised by the previous employer.
Ryan did not agree that he left an apprentice alone working on the oven but did
accept he may have been in the office doing paperwork
on some of the days. He
denied ever leaving the store between 2.00am and 3.00am leaving the apprentice
alone on the oven. He accepted
his wife supervised him on some occasions when he
was a second or third year apprentice as the level of supervision required can
Ryan did not believe the apprentice was up to standard, he thought he was a
little slow on learning generally due to not listening
to the processes
involved. Sometimes he thought that the apprentice didn't want to learn or just
got bored. Mr Ryan believed the
training he provided was quite good, the new
apprentice Mr O’Connor is doing quite fine with the same training the
Ryan accepts he did not give the apprentice any written warnings but did give
him verbal warnings. After giving the apprentice
verbal warnings his performance
improved for a time so he did not think a written warning was required.
Ryan did not believe there were large gaps in the apprentice’s training.
He learnt to do twists and pinouts before he went
on to the ovens in 2015.
Ryan states that he contacted the apprentice about the meeting after waking up
that night. He goes to bed at 6.00pm and did not
receive the apprentice’s
message stating he was back until he awoke. Mr Ryan indicated that he thought
long and hard about
whether to terminate the apprenticeship and came to that
view on the Monday afternoon. He agrees he did not advise the apprentice
decision to terminate him but asked him to come in at 11.00am to have a chat. He
indicated that he could not be sure whether
telling the apprentice prior to the
meeting would have changed the outcome. He did not give him earlier notice about
the meeting
because he was not contactable. He did not think it was fair to text
message him about the termination as it is something that you
would verbally
want to say to a person.
Ryan’s reasons for seeking to terminate the contract was that the
apprentice was underperforming, constantly deceiving himself
and other staff
that work there, unwilling to listen and follow direction and not giving
appropriate notice to take leave when he
took leave in late July, the apprentice
only told him that he was taking leave the day before it was due. He did not
give the apprentice
any written warnings because he had numerous verbal ones and
besides, the apprentice agreed to the mutual termination, he stated
that it was
mutually decided to end the contract. He said he did not fire the apprentice
which would have been a different story.
Ryan states that the apprentice could have had somebody with him at the meeting
or he could have taken the agreement home with
him but he decided to sign the
document there and then. Mr Ryan found the termination papers online but had no
idea whether the apprentice
would or would not agree to sign them. He was hoping
they could reach agreement mutually which he thought had occurred at the time.
He agrees he could have contacted the apprenticeship board to have a meeting
to look at removing him
that way. Mr Ryan agreed that he was looking at terminating the apprentice no
matter what.
Ryan stated that he took responsibility for the call to the apprentice when he
was on jury duty at the time because the apprentice
put him on the spot when he
rang him. He indicated to him that if a phone call was from his number it must
have come from his phone
so it had to be him that made the call. He had no proof
that someone else had made a call from his phone. He said he spoke to the
staff the next day to find out who did it but he could not recall who he spoke
to about it. Later one of the employees, Mr
Hillier who had since ceased his
employment at the bakery admitted to making the call. Mr Ryan could not remember
who was on the
shift that day without looking at the roster. He indicated he had
left the premises without his phone on the day the call was made.
Mr Ryan’s evidence was generally credible I formed the view that some of
his evidence was not. The first issue related
to the call to the apprentice when
he was on jury duty. Mr Ryan admitted telling the apprentice at the time that he
made the call
and did not indicate that it may have been someone else who made
the call. He stated that he talked to the staff on duty at the time
but he could
not recall who was on duty that day without looking at the roster. Given Mr Ryan
acknowledged that he understood the
seriousness of the matter it is not credible
that he could not remember who he spoke to as part of the investigation the day
the call was made.
second matter relates to when he knew the apprentice was going on leave to
Melbourne. His evidence was that he only knew the day
prior to the apprentice
leaving. This evidence was contradicted by the evidence of Mr O’Connor
whose version of events were
The evidence of Samuel Reading
Redding gave evidence that he was a friend of Mr Ryan’s for about ten
years. During the last four years he has worked at
Bakers Delight North Adelaide
on call, filling in whenever someone takes a day off. He indicated that during
this period he spent
one year in America. He generally worked the same hours as
Mr Ryan as he lived with him and it was convenient. He stated that he
much bakery work. He indicated that after a few days of training he could
perform some of the duties such as icing. He
worked with the apprentice on a few
re-examination he indicated that he did not see Mr Ryan bully or swear at
anyone. He indicated that he had probably only seen the
apprentice about two
times. The evidence of Mr Redding was limited because of this
The evidence of Ms Anne Martin
Martin is the partner of Mr Ryan both in business and personally. Her evidence
was that she saw Mr Ryan and the apprentice having
a meeting on the day in
question and they were by themselves. She felt harassed when the apprentice rang
her every day from 24 to
28 August 2015.
cross-examination Ms Martin gave evidence she took her daughter to the toilet
for a nappy change at about 11:30am on the day of
the meeting. She looked over
and saw the apprentice and Mr Ryan in the food court by themselves. She could
not remember what direction
either of them was facing. She did not know Mr Ryan
was going to terminate the apprentice prior to the meeting. She knew he was
as the apprentice went to Melbourne and had not let Mr Ryan know he was
going until just before he went. She thought the apprentice’s
generally okay but he was quite slow on some things.
re-examination she was certain that the apprentice and Mr Ryan were sitting in
the food court and not the café as she would
not have been able to see
them if they were inside the café. Her evidence was that she was heavily
involved in the bakery
and she has not heard of Mr Ryan bullying or belittling
the apprentice. To the best of her knowledge she did not think the apprentice
was left alone in the bakery. She felt sufficiently skilled to supervise him in
the bakery.
The evidence of Kyle O’Connor
O’Connor is 16 years old at the time of giving his evidence I am satisfied
that he understood the difference between telling
the truth and lying. I am of
the view that Mr O’Connor gave his evidence in a credible way. His
evidence was that he commenced
as an apprentice baker at Bakers Delight North
Adelaide on 26 April 2015. He has not witnessed Mr Ryan yelling or abusing any
the staff and Mr Ryan has been very patient with his training.
after 11.00am on 28 July 2015 Mr O’Connor went to the toilet. On the way
he saw the apprentice and Mr Ryan having a meeting
in the food court. They were
sitting alone. A little while later the apprentice returned to the bakery with
Mr Ryan and he seemed
okay, he was smiling. He collected his things and said
goodbye to him. A few weeks later he came back to the bakery and he talked
Ryan about football and that he had applied for a job as a groundskeeper. He
said he would not hear back about the job until
later. He said he was just
taking a break until then and looking at going on to Centrelink. Mr
O’Connor indicated that he had
not been pressured by Mr Ryan in what to
cross-examination Mr O’Connor indicated that Ms Martin supervises him for
three hours a day without the employer. He does
not remember any incident where
the employer bullied the apprentice or himself. On the day of the meeting he
remembered going to
the toilet at about
11.00am and seeing Mr Ryan and the
apprentice in the food court. He remembered what direction they were facing but
could not remember
what the apprentice was wearing. He remembered it because he
knew it was an important meeting. He knew the apprentice could possibly
terminated from about the Thursday before as that was when he told them he had
another baker that could work while he was away
on leave. When the other baker
did not turn up, he knew the apprentice could possibly be terminated.
remembered that the apprentice had told him and the employer earlier in the week
that he was going to Melbourne the next week and
that another baker would cover
for him. Mr Ryan said to him “if you’re lying, I’m going to
have to talk to you
in a nice manner to him. This evidence contradicted the evidence of Mr
stated that he only knew the apprentice was taking leave the day before he took
leave. I prefer Mr O’Connor’s
evidence over Mr Ryan’s in
regard to this matter.
The evidence of Miranda Hyde
Miranda Hyde is the Bakers Delight area manager. She gave evidence that there
have not been any complaints regarding inappropriate
behaviour or language from
Mr Ryan towards his staff. In cross-examination she felt in some circumstances
Ms Martin would be able
to supervise apprentices. She was not aware that
apprentices needed to be supervised for the whole of their shift or all of their
re-examination she indicated that she lives close to the shop and often drops
into the bakery unannounced. She has never heard
the employer yelling at his
staff or customers.
The employer’s closing submissions
employer provided a short closing submission. He stated there were several
witnesses who said there was not a third party at the
meeting with the
apprentice. Except for the apprentice’s evidence no one else provided
evidence that there was anyone else
at the meeting.
Ryan submitted that if any penalties were applied it would leave his business
unviable. It would bankrupt the business and Mr O’Connor
would lose his
job. He believes that contrary to the apprentice’s evidence, the
apprentices are supervised to an appropriate
level. He is of the view that the
apprentice contradicted his evidence when he first said he was sitting in the
food court at the
meeting and then later on changed his evidence that he was
sitting in the café. He could not understand if the apprentice
working at Bakers Delight North Adelaide was so bad why would he be seeking
reinstatement?
The apprentice’s closing submissions
apprentice is seeking reinstatement as he wants to finish his apprenticeship. He
submitted it is clear from the evidence including
Mr Ryan’s that he
was not supervised correctly.
apprentice is seeking payment from the time of his termination until the hearing
and is seeking payment in recognition of the
significant amount of stress,
duress and intimidation he has been placed under. When he was told to attend the
meeting he was not
given prior warning about what could happen and as a result
he did not bring a support person. The employer’s evidence was
contradictory, at first he indicated he could not contact him in regard to the
meeting but then he could.
was a third person at the meeting which was held in the café and not in
the food court. Only Mr O’Connor could
remember where he apparently sat
and in what direction he was sitting. This was surprising and convenient given
that Mr O’Connor
knew exactly what time he went to the toilet but he could
not remember the day, date or what the apprentice was wearing.
a result of his lack of supervision, bullying, intimidation and duress he
received at the hands of the employer he is seeking that
he no longer is able to
train apprentices. The apprentice alleges the employer stated he only used
apprentices because they were
cheaper. If the Commission does not order
reinstatement he is seeking compensation as the employer terminated his
apprenticeship
unlawfully and he placed him under duress in order to make him
agree to the termination. Without this duress he would not have signed
termination papers. He submits that if he was happy to sign the papers then
would he go through this stressful process in order
to get my job back?
Considerations and findings
applicant has raised a number of issues needing consideration and I intend to
deal with them separately.
Bullying and harassment
apprentice alleges that in the latter part of his apprenticeship he was
subjected to ongoing bullying and harassment by Mr Ryan.
The only first-hand
evidence that supported this was the oral evidence provided by the apprentice.
Although the apprentices mother,
Ms Montgomery provided evidence that her
son’s personality had changed for the worse she acknowledged that she had
never heard
Mr Ryan actually bully or harass her son directly.
five witnesses for the employer including the other apprentice
O’Connor stated that they had never witnessed the employer yelling or
abusing any staff including the apprentice. Mr O’Connor’s
in relation to the last incident regarding the apprentice allegedly not giving
enough notice before taking leave was that
he was firm towards him but spoke to
him nicely.
any corroborating evidence I am not able to find that the apprentice was
Supervision of the apprentice
apprentice’s evidence was that when he attended for work on some early
shifts he would arrive and the employer would immediately
commence to leave the
bakery by either going to the office or home to sleep. This was denied by the
employer who indicated that he
did not leave the apprentice unsupervised but
acknowledged that on some occasions he did attend the office to conduct
employer indicated that as well as himself he also employed another Baker, Mr
Hellier who was employed full-time throughout 2014
until February 2015 when he
began working on weekends only. Mr Ryan was not the only qualified Baker
employed during the apprentice’s
time at Bakers Delight North Adelaide.
This evidence was not disputed by the apprentice.
O‘Connell provided evidence that on some days he was left for three hours
at the end of his shift with Ms Martin who is not
a qualified Baker. Mr
O’Connor is a first year apprentice and stated that during the period when
he was supervised by Ms Martin
his duties were to clean up the bakery and
prepare food for the following day. He did not use machinery during this period.
The employer
gave evidence that he understood a second and third year apprentice
could receive less supervision.
Guidelines for Persons Who Supervise Apprentices or Trainees
is a publication approved by the then Training and Skills Commission now
known as Regulation and Contract Management. The guidelines
state that first and
second year apprentices must be under direct supervision with a supervision
ratio of one supervisor to one apprentice.
A supervisor is defined as a person
who is either qualified in the trade or declared vocation, or has an appropriate
level of industry
experience relevant to the apprenticeship or traineeship.
is an appropriate level of industry experience relevant to the apprenticeship or
traineeship is, is not identified and as such
I am not able to find whether Ms
Martin would be considered as having an appropriate level of industry experience
to regularly supervise
first year apprentices for up to three hours at a time.
Mr O’Connell gave evidence that during this period when he is being
supervised by Ms Martin he was either cleaning the kitchen or preparing food for
the next day. He was not using any machinery. The
corollary of this is if this
is occurring on a regular basis where the apprentice is performing basic duties
for three hour periods
at a time it would be highly unlikely that the employer
would be able to fulfil their agreed Training Contract Obligations in relation
to providing the apprentice appropriate training.
parties when agreeing to enter into a Contract of Training agree to abide by the
written training contract obligations. Part of
the obligations agreed to by the
employer is to:
“a) Employ and train the apprentice/trainee
as agreed in our Training Plan and ensure the apprentice/Trainee understands the
choices he/ she has regarding the training
sure the apprentice/trainee receives on-the-job training and assessment in
accordance with our Training Plan...”
the evidence before me I am not inclined to make findings that the supervision
is inadequate, however, I am of the view that the
employer should initiate
discussions with the regulator to ensure that an appropriate level of
supervision for apprentices is being
provided. The discussions should including
the ongoing suitability of Ms Martin in relation to the supervision of first and
year apprentices and whether the employer is meeting their training
obligations in accordance with the training plan of their current
apprentice.
Was the termination mutually agreed?
apprentice’s evidence was that when he received a text message to attend
the meeting at 11.00am on Tuesday 28 July 2015
he was unaware the employer
wanted to terminate him. His evidence was that he attended the bakery at about
10:55am and was told to
wait for Mr Ryan in the café. When Mr Ryan
entered the café at 11.00am he sat down at another table where another
was already sitting. This person was unknown to the apprentice. Mr Ryan
then invited the apprentice to the table and did not introduce
the other person
to him. He proceeded to tell him that he had cost the bakery $10,000 in lost
stock, how bad he was at everything
and how he lied about taking his holidays.
The employer then produced the termination documents and asked him to sign them.
the apprentice asked to take them home he was told by the third person it
was in his interest to sign them. He was told that if he
did not sign the papers
he would not get his holiday pay. The apprentice felt intimidated and signed the
termination form.
apprentice provided evidence of a screenshot of a text message from his mobile
phone from his father on the morning of the meeting
9:47am. The message
said “don’t sign anything or agree to anything”, the
apprentice replied “I won’t”.
to entering the meeting the apprentice had no intention of signing or agreeing
to anything. He had no reason to have serious
misgivings about the meeting as he
had never received a formal warning whilst working for his employer nor was
there any advanced
warning that his employer wanted to terminate him.
employer's evidence is that there was no third person at the meeting and the
meeting happened in the food court area not in the
café next to the
bakery. His evidence was the apprentice willingly signed the mutual termination
form and did not ask to take
the form home. While the evidence of Ms Martin and
Mr O’Connor supported the employer’s evidence that there was no
person present their evidence was weakened by Ms Martin not being able to
remember which way either the employer or apprentice were
sitting at the meeting
and by Mr O’Connor’s evidence that he could not remember what
the apprentice was wearing.
a number of witnesses for the employer provided evidence that a third person was
not present at the meeting given that they
could not recollect simple matters in
relation to this event I am not able to form a view whether a third person
attended the meeting
is agreed is that the employer had made up his mind to terminate the apprentice
on the night before the meeting. His own evidence
was that if the apprentice did
not agree to the mutual termination form he would seek to have a meeting with
the regulator to terminate
him. This was corroborated by Mr
O’Connor’s evidence that he knew the apprentice would be terminated
the week before
when the replacement Baker that the apprentice had supposedly
organised to fill in did not materialise.
the employer contacted the apprentice to attend the meeting at 11.00am that day
he had an obligation to advise the apprentice
the serious nature of the meeting.
His evidence was that telling him he was going to be terminated was something
that should not
be put into a text message. He did not need to tell the
apprentice he was going to be terminated. He only had to advise him that
termination was a possibility or to tell him the meeting was serious and to
consider bringing a support person with him. This would
have given the
apprentice an opportunity to have a support person attend or to get some advice.
providing the apprentice prior warning of his intention to terminate him, he was
denied procedural fairness. The apprentice
was unaware he was walking into a
meeting where the employer had already determined to terminate him.
have considered that the employer is a small business employer without a lot of
industrial relations knowledge but this cannot excuse
the employer’s
actions in this instance. Even the most basic concept of industrial fairness
would be to advise the apprentice
of their intentions so as to allow the
apprentice an opportunity to have a support person attend with them and to allow
opportunity to defend themselves against any allegations.
the evidence provided I have formed the view that the apprentice did not
willingly sign the mutual termination form and as a result
the termination of
the training contract was unlawful.
Training Contract obligations agreed to by the original parties state that the
parties will try to resolve any dispute they have
between them and if they
cannot, they will contact the state or territory training authorities to request
assistance or to access
the appropriate dispute resolution process.
transferring a Training Contact to a new employer s 52 of the TSD Act
52—Transfer
of training contract to new employer
(1) A change in the
ownership of a business (or part of a business) does not result in the
termination of a training contract entered
into by the former owner but, where a
change in ownership occurs, the rights, obligations and liabilities of the
former owner under
the contract are transferred to the new owner.
(2) If a training contract is transferred or assigned from 1 employer
former employer
) to another (the
new employer
(whether by subsection (1) or otherwise), both the former employer and the
new employer must, within 21 days of the transfer or
assignment, notify the
Commission in writing of the transfer or assignment.
Maximum penalty: $5 000.
Expiation fee: $315.”
a transfer of employment occurs, the training contract rights, obligations and
liabilities of the former owner under the contract
transfer to the new owner. In
this case they were transferred to Ryan’s Family Bakehouse Pty Ltd.
not attempting to resolve the issues between them or to bring the State Training
Authority in to resolve this matter the employer
erred by meeting with the
applicant in an attempt to get him to agree to terminate the training contact
when he had already determined
to terminate the apprentice. By doing this the
employer breached the training contract obligations.
the history between the parties and the applicant's view that he has been
bullied and harassed by the employer. I am of the
view that reinstatement would
not be inappropriate. I am of the view that compensation for the apprentice not
being able to complete
his apprenticeship with Ryan family Bakehouse Pty Ltd is
the appropriate remedy.
considered the remedy, it is appropriate that the employer pay to the apprentice
the sum of $9,776.00 minus the appropriate
tax. This being the equivalent of 16
weeks wages based on the ordinary weekly rate of pay for a third year apprentice
General Retail Industry Award 2010
at the time of the
apprentice’s termination.
The Industrial Relations Commission of South Australia orders that:
to s 65(2)(h) of the
Training and Skills Development Act 2008
Ryan’s Family Bakehouse Pty Ltd is to pay the apprentice an amount of nine
thousand seven hundred and seventy six dollars
($9,776.00) less any amount
required to be deducted by way of taxation pursuant to Australian taxation
amount in 1. above is to be paid to the applicant within 28 days of the date of
this order.
Family Bakehouse Pty Ltd will provide written evidence to the applicant of any
amount deducted by way of taxation.
is further ordered that the Training Contract number 581394/1 be terminated as
of 28 July 2015.
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
It is the practice of this Commission to publish its reasons for decision in
full on the Internet. If any party or person contends
that these reasons for
decision should not be published in full the party or person must make an
application within seven days of
the delivery of these reasons. The application
shall be by an Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should
addressed to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within
the time specified these reasons will be published
in accordance with the
Commission’s usual practice.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (371 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter