URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACAT/2025/68.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:53:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BAK & Anor v Chief Executive, Department for Child Protection & Ors [2025] SACAT 68 (5 August 2025)
RESPONDENTS
Executive, Department for Child Protection
NEUTRAL CITATION
BAK & Anor v Chief Executive, Department for Child Protection &
[2025] SACAT 68
Senior Member J Rugless
Member R Croser
Member B Caldeira
5 August 2025
HEARING DATES
24, 26, 27, 28, 31 March 2025; 1, 2, 16 April 2025
SACAT FILE NO.
2024/SA002173
ON REVIEW FROM
Chief Executive, Department for Child Protection
The applicants (the child’s paternal grandparents) sought review of a
placement decision of the Department for Child Protection
(the Department) under
Children and Young People (Safety) Act 2017
(CYPS Act). The
Department initially decided to place the child with the applicants, but the
Department’s decision was reversed
on internal review and the decision was
made that she should remain with her foster parents.
The applicant paternal grandparents submit that the decision to place the
child with them is the correct decision and should be substituted
on review. The
applicants’ case is that the long-term psychological benefits of placing
the child with them, as her paternal
biological family, outweigh any risk of
harm to the child arising from the disruption of her attachment to her foster
parents. The
applicants also argue that the child, who is Aboriginal, will have
a greater opportunity to develop a closer connection with her
biological family and her Aboriginal cultural identity if placed with them. This
view was supported by the Department’s
Principal Aboriginal Consultant who
gave evidence at the request of the Tribunal.
The applicants provided expert evidence from a psychologist which supported
their argument and indicated that any psychological harm
to the child could be
mitigated by an appropriate transition plan.
The Department submitted that the child should remain in her placement with
the second and third respondents, and that the original
decision to place the
child with the applicants was not correct. The Department submitted that the
original decision did not place
sufficient weight on the child’s
attachment to her foster parents and siblings, that disruption to that
attachment would cause
significant psychological harm and this could not be
mitigated by a careful transition process. The Department also relied on expert
evidence from two psychologists.
The respondent foster parents agree with the decision as reversed on
internal review and were seeking an order that the child remain
in her placement
with them. The child’s foster mother provided evidence to the Tribunal
her observations of the child’s
behaviour in the context of increased visits and access with the
applicants.
There was a preliminary issue about the identification of the decision and
of the decision-maker and whether that person held the
appropriate
delegation.
Held, setting aside and substituting the decision under review:
The Tribunal is
satisfied that the placement decision was made in consultation with the
Departmental officers who were present at
the meeting on 15 January 2024, and
was approved and ratified by the Department Supervisor, Mr Thelning, who held a
delegation from
the Chief Executive to make decisions about the placement of the
The applicants
and the second and third respondents are safe and appropriate caregivers for the
The Tribunal
finds that there is a high risk of psychological harm to the child arising from
a disruption of her attachment relationship
with her foster parents should she
be removed from residing with them (and with her foster siblings);
The Tribunal
finds that there is a risk of psychological harm to the child arising from
issues related to the impact on her identity
formation (including her identity
as an Aboriginal child) and the development of her self-worth by not being
brought up in her biological
family and by remaining as a ‘foster
child’ (in non-kinship care);
The Tribunal
finds the risk of significant harm from attachment disruption can be mitigated
by a successful transition process, but
is not satisfied that a successful
transition can be achieved for the child in this case;
The Tribunal
finds the risk of future harm from issues arising from her identity formation
can be mitigated by continued contact with
her biological family members;
The Tribunal
finds that the risk of harm for the child due to attachment disruption in this
case far outweighs the risk of harm for
her of not being placed with her
biological family and of not being connected to her culture;
The child should
not be moved to a placement with the applicants and should remain in her current
placement with the second and third
respondents.
Administrative Review –
Children and Young People (Safety) Act
– Children and young people in Chief Executive’s custody or
guardianship – Review of a decision of the Chief Executive
or Delegate
– Removal from placement – Aboriginal and Torres Straits Islander
Child Placement Principle – weighing
up competing risks of harm
Administrative Review –
Children and Young People (Safety) Act
– Children and young people in Chief Executive’s custody or
guardianship – Review of a decision of the Chief Executive
or Delegate
– Preliminary applications – Validity of decision under review
– Delegation - Power to review invalid
decisions on a merit review –
Requirement to produce written reasons
LEGISLATION CONSIDERED
Children and Young People (Safety) Act 2017
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Children and Young People (Safety) Regulations 2017
CASES CONSIDERED
Brian Lawler Automotive Pty Ltd v The Collector of Customs, New South
[1978] AATA 49
Carrascalao v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
DLT v Chief Executive of the Department for Child Protection
EG v Chief Executive of the Department for Child Protection
GKZ v Department for Child Protection & Anor (No 2)
[2022] SACAT
Hospital Benefit Fund of Western Australia Inc v Minister for Health,
Housing and Community Services
[1992] FCA 599
(1992) 39 FCR 225
Khan v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1987] FCA 457
KJS v Chief Executive of the Department for Child Protection &
[2023] SACAT 51
OXF & Anor v
Department for Child Protection & Ors
[2022] SACAT 85
Newton and Secretary, Department of Family and Community Services
[2000] AATA 349
Secker and Secretary, Department of Family and Community Services
[2000] AATA 290
Robusto Investments Pty Ltd v Essential Services Commission of South
[2023] SACAT 2
Secretary, Department of Social Security v Alvaro
[1994] FCA 1124
(1994) 50 FCR 213
Seventh Mingcourt Pty Ltd v Minister for Human Services and Health
[1996] FCA 1283
(1996) 64 FCR 367
WWZ & Anor v The Department for Child Protection
[2020] SACAT
Chief Executive of the Department for Child Protection
[2023] SACAT 113
REPRESENTATION
Mr B McCloud instructed by Mr D Starke of Starke Lawyers for the applicants
Ms E Denbigh instructed by Ms I Nikoloudakis, Crown Solicitor’s
Office, for the First Respondent
Mr N Gabriel instructed by Ms J Caracoussis of Knox & Associates for
the Second and Third Respondents
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s decision pursuant to
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
. The parties and participants in the proceedings have been
de-identified in accordance with the Tribunal’s anonymisation policy.
Other facts and details that are sensitive, or may lead to the identification of
any person, have also been anonymised or omitted.
Parts of the decision have
been redacted to comply with
Children and Young People (Safety)
These changes do not affect the Tribunal’s decision or its
reasons for decision.
REASONS FOR DECISION
The application for review
is an application to review a decision made by a delegate of the Chief Executive
of the Department for Child Protection (CE of
DCP) under s 84(1)(a) of the
Children and Young People (Safety) Act 2017
(the CYPS Act).
to the nature of the hearing, the review hearing was heard in private, and
various non-publication and non-disclosure orders were
made under s 60 of the
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Act). Any published version of this decision will be appropriately redacted and
anonymised.
is a merit review of a decision made by the Chief Executive of the Department
for Child Protection under s 34 of the SACAT Act.
The reviewable decision
reviewable decision
‘placement decision’ concerning an Aboriginal child under the
guardianship of the CE of DCP. This is a decision
reside whilst under guardianship. The respondent makes such decisions regularly
regarding children placed
under her guardianship by the Youth Court.
relevant placement options for the Chief Executive are to place children with
approved carers,
who are either
related to the child (this is known colloquially as a ‘kinship
placement’), or who are unrelated to the
child (‘a non-kinship
placement’), or to place them in a residential care placement with
approved carers providing care
on a rotational basis (‘a residential care
placement’). For Aboriginal children, the Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Child Placement Principle (ATSIC Placement
is relevant to that
decision-making.
this case, an initial decision was apparently made by a delegate of the Chief
Executive in early 2024 to change the child’s
place of residence from a
long-term non-kinship placement with the foster carers (the second and third
respondents) to a kinship
placement with the child’s paternal grandparents
(the applicants). That decision was then reversed by a delegate of the Chief
Executive on internal review. The original decision as reversed is the decision
under review.
decision relates to a little girl, currently 5½ years of age, who is under
the guardianship of the CE of DCP until she reaches
the age of 18. The child was
initially placed under a short-term guardianship order by the Youth Court. A
long-term guardianship
order was made when the child was about eight months old.
child has her biological father’s surname and a beautiful first name.
child’s first name was given to her, at birth, by her mother. Sadly, that
is essentially the extent of the biological mother’s
involvement in the
child’s life, as the child was removed from her mother’s care in the
hospital, by officers of the
Department, shortly after her birth (under s 41 of
the CYPS Act). The birth mother has had virtually no contact with her daughter
since that time, despite some efforts by the Department to attempt to arrange
child is described by her current foster mother (DTY) as a loving, outgoing and
active child, who enjoys playing outside on play
equipment and trampolines,
drawing and reading books. The evidence reveals that the child enjoys playing
imaginative games, dancing
with her three young foster siblings at her foster
carers’ house, and that she loves helping to look after her youngest
sister. She enjoys attending church with her foster family every Sunday.
She goes to a local primary school, which her older foster
brother also
evidence shows that the child has been having contact visits with her paternal
grandparents (and her father) since the child’s
paternity was established.
Recently the access visits with the paternal grandparents have increased in
frequency and duration (extending
to overnight visits).
evidence shows that the child enjoys interacting with her father and her
paternal grandparents at the grandparents’ house.
When she goes to her
grandparents’ house she enjoys playing in the garden, going to swimming
lessons and baking cakes, and
she sometimes plays dress-ups with her biological
dad, XZG. She also enjoys playing with her maternal cousins, when contact is
with them by ‘BAK’ (paternal grandmother) and with the
maternal grandmother (QBO).
the child is emotionally heightened or anxious. she spins around in circles and
engages in other repetitive
behaviours.
Sometimes these
behaviours are exhibited when the child returns from access visits with her
paternal grandparents. The child told
her case worker that she spins because it
makes her feel safe.
child’s foster mother reports that the child shows sensory sensitivities
and that she can struggle with social interactions,
particularly with new people
or environments. The child struggled with starting school and has recently
exhibited some difficulties
when parting from her foster mother and entering the
classroom in the morning (the school has developed some strategies to assist
child with that transition). There is a suggestion that she may have autism
spectrum disorder (ASD) or attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD). She
has recently been referred for an assessment about these issues.
Summary of the early placement decisions
following facts are not in dispute. The s 41 removal decision was made because
......................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
child has been in two separate foster placements since her removal from her
birth mother.
child’s paternity was unclear at the time that she was removed from her
mother, so this meant that departmental ‘scoping’
for paternal
family members suitable as kinship carers could not occur. We accept that there
was no suitable maternal family member
who could provide care at that
so the child was initially
placed in a short-term placement with an approved (non-kinship) foster
first approved foster carer could not continue to provide care after about three
weeks, so the child was then placed with approved
carers, the second and third
respondents.
child’s birth mother is Aboriginal,
..........................................................
child’s biological father and the applicant paternal grandparents identify
as Caucasian.
foster parents are not related to the child and are not Aboriginal. The current
placement is therefore a ‘non-kinship/non-Aboriginal
placement’. The
placement with the foster parents was initially described in DCP documentation
as a ‘short-term placement’,
but it has become a ‘long-term
placement’ over time.
child has been residing with her foster family continuously since she was two
and a half weeks old (18 days of age); she has continued
to reside with them
whilst the recent placement decision has been under review in the Tribunal. This
means that the child has now
been in the placement with her foster parents for
nearly 5½ years.
child now has three foster siblings aged 7, 4 and 2 (the foster parents’
biological children); the youngest two foster siblings
were born after the child
was placed with the family.
What do the parties seek?
BAK and IVU are the paternal grandparents of the child; their son, XZG, is the
biological father of the child. They are represented
in these proceedings by Mr
B McCloud of counsel.
paternal grandparents have been seeking to have the child placed with them by
the Department since the child’s paternity
was confirmed, when she was
their application to
be approved as kinship carers, in January
but they are now approved as
respite and long-term (specific child only) carers for the child, and there is
no suggestion that there
are any concerns by any party about their ability to
care for the child.
early 2024, after they were successfully approved as carers (following the carer
reassessment), a senior officer of the Department
decided, under delegation, to
move the child from her previous placement, and to place her in a new placement
with the paternal
grandparents.
foster carers were aggrieved about, and sought an internal review of, the
initial placement decision. On internal review, the
placement decision was
subsequently reversed by an Acting Executive Director of the
(acting as a delegate
of the Chief Executive). That decision was based on an assessment and review
report prepared by Ms Claire
paternal grandparents now seek a review, in the Tribunal, of the decision as
reversed; they say that the initial decision prior
to internal review is the
correct decision and are asking the Tribunal to decide that their granddaughter
should reside with them
whilst she remains under the Guardianship Order.
foster parents have been joined as respondents in these proceedings; they want
the child to remain in the placement with them,
i.e., they agree with the
reversed decision, which they say is the correct or preferable decision. The
foster parents are represented
in these proceedings by Mr N Gabriel of
first respondent, the CE of DCP (represented by Ms E Denbigh of counsel), now
supports the ongoing placement of the child with
the foster parents, even though
the first respondent made an initial decision (via her delegated officers, in
early 2024) that the
child should be moved from that placement to live with the
applicant grandparents.
CE of DCP now argues that the child should remain in the non-kinship placement
with the foster parents. The first respondent says
that the initial decision was
not correct, and that the delegated decision-maker failed to consider and weigh
up all the relevant
considerations under the CYPS Act.
should be clear from that background, and what became more apparent on the
review, is that various senior officers of the Department
held, and continue to
hold, different opinions about what the correct or preferable decision should be
in this matter.
is not a reflection on the professionalism of those officers. It is merely a
reflection on the fact that the relevant issues
in this matter are finely
balanced, particularly since the competing care options for the child are
excellent and given that the
child has a demonstrated a secure attachment to
both her foster mother and, to a lesser and/or developing sense, to her paternal
grandmother.
Understandably,
the respondents and the child’s grandparents are very emotional about the
potential outcome of this review.
decision has been very difficult for the Tribunal, as it is not alleged that
either the foster parents or the paternal grandparents
would be inappropriate
carers for the child. There are no allegations or concerns that either of the
potential carer families would
provide anything other than optimal care for the
child in a safe and loving environment. We are tasked with determining the
The issues to be resolved on review
question for the Tribunal on review is – what the correct and preferable
placement decision is, i.e., where should the child
reside long-term whilst
under the guardianship of the Chief Executive.
Considering
that the paramount consideration under the CYPS Act is to protect the child from
the issues to be resolved
in answering this question are:
whether there is
a risk of psychological harm to the child if she is not now placed in a
family-based placement with her paternal
grandparents (i.e., the risk of
psychological harm arising from issues related to the impact on the
child’s identity formation
and the development of her self-worth by not
being brought up in her biological family, or closely connected to her
whether there is
a risk of psychological harm to the child if she is removed from the placement
with her foster parents (arising from
a disruption of her attachment
relationship with her foster parents and the concomitant removal from residing
in her current home
with her foster siblings)
whether either
of those potential risks can be mitigated and, if so, how
circumstances, whether either of those potential risks (taking into account the
mitigating factors) outweigh the other
and, accordingly,
what is the
correct or preferable placement decision.
A summary of our decision on review
have taken evidence from many lay witnesses, several departmental officers and
three psychologists, over eight days of hearing.
Two of the psychologists, and
some of the departmental officers, hold different opinions about the best
placement decision for the
child, reflecting the difficulty of the decision.
paramount consideration under the CYPS Act is to ensure that children are
protected from harm. Harm is defined in s 17 of the
CYPS Act as
“physical harm or psychological harm” not including “emotional
reactions such as distress, grief, fear
or anger that are a response to the
ordinary vicissitudes of life”.
balance, we consider the current risk of significant psychological harm to the
child if she is moved away from a placement with
her long-term foster carers far
outweighs the potential future risk of psychological harm to the child if she is
not placed with
her biological grandparents.
is, we have decided that the future psychological
that the child may suffer
from not being moved to reside in a kinship placement does not outweigh the risk
of psychological harm
if her attachment to her foster parents is now disrupted
(with an associated separation from her foster brother and sisters). We
that the future risks of harm can be mitigated by the child having ongoing
maternal relatives.
we have concluded that the preferable decision is to substitute a decision under
s 37 of the SACAT Act that the child should
not be moved to a placement with her
paternal grandparents but should remain in the current placement with her foster
parents (effectively
this affirms the initial decision as reversed on internal
review). We accept that this is a discretionary decision; either decision
be legally ‘correct’.
have substituted a decision on review because there were some obvious process
errors in the initial decision-making by the Department,
and because the
evidence before us now is much greater than that which was before the initial
decision-makers.
are the reasons for our decision.
The relevant legal provisions – the review process
158 of the CYPS Act states that the Tribunal has the power to review certain
decisions under the CYPS Act including a decision
made under s 84(1)(a) of the
before the Tribunal can consider a decision on review, s 157 of the CYPS Act
requires that there be an internal review of
the decision conducted by a
delegate of the CE. Once the matter has been considered on internal review it
becomes a “reviewable
decision” for the purpose of the SACAT
application for review to the Tribunal is made under s 34 of the SACAT Act,
which states that the Tribunal will conduct the review
by way of rehearing and
must reach the correct or preferable decision, giving appropriate weight to the
original decision.
conducting a review under s 34, the Tribunal must consider the evidence or
material before the original decision-maker, and any
further evidence or
material the Tribunal considers is relevant and appropriate to consider in the
course of the review process.
(a) Initial placement decision as reversed
this case the Tribunal was reviewing a
(purported)
placement decision
as reversed on internal review under s 157 of the CYPS Act. It is accepted by
the parties, and we agree, that
the Tribunal has jurisdiction to review a
reversed decision in such circumstances and that the applicants have standing to
review, as they are aggrieved by the initial decision as
discussed by Hughes J in
KJS v Chief Executive of the Department for Child
Protection & Anor
of the CYPS Act is expressed in such a way that indicates that the reviewable
decision is ‘the decision’, following
the process of internal
review, and not the decision on internal review. The internal review is not
described as a ‘decision’
in s 157 of the CYPS Act and the
outcome of the internal review is not a separate decision. This means there is
only one substantive
decision, which is the decision as to whether to place the
child in a particular placement.
a review under s 34 of the SACAT Act the Tribunal is to give appropriate weight
to the decision of the initial
decision-maker.
It is therefore
necessary, as the first step, for the Tribunal to identify the placement
decision (as originally made and after internal
review), to understand the
reasons for the initial decision at both stages of the process, and to identify
who made it and when.
This is necessary so that we can understand the reasoning
of the initial decision-maker(s) to determine whether it was legally correct,
and whether we should place any weight on the initial decision on review.
that the decision as originally made is the initial step in the decision-making
process, we do not agree with the submission
made early in the case, by the
Department, that the reasons for the original placement decision are of limited
relevance (because
they submitted, the decision was clear on the case notes and
was eventually reversed on internal
Neither do we agree
that determining the identity of the decision-maker, the date of, or the reasons
for the initial placement decision
is peripheral to the Tribunal’s
do not agree that the reasons for the initial decision are clear on the case
notes. In fact, we do not consider that the case notes
clearly set out when the
initial decision was made or by whom. Further, we note that in the Index to the
Book of Documents (DCP1)
the Department identified the internal review reasons
as the statement of reasons for ‘the decision’. We do not agree
that contention for the reasons set out above.
McCloud, counsel for the applicants, contended at the outset of the review that
the original placement decision (prior to internal
review) was the correct
decision. For that reason, he submitted that it would be relevant and of
assistance to the Tribunal to hear
from the original decision-maker on the
accept that the initial decision and the reasons for that decision are of
significant relevance to the applicants’ case.
Accordingly, we requested
that the person who
to be the original decision-maker (Mr
Thelning) be made available to give evidence to the Tribunal on the review. We
also requested
that the Department make the Principal Aboriginal Consultant (Ms
Yazarae Greenwood) available to give evidence, as she was present
at the meeting
where the relevant factors about placement were discussed. Ms Greenwood’s
evidence is particularly relevant
to the ATSIC Placement Principle in s 12 of
the CYPS Act.
(b) Delegated authority of the decision-maker – validity
of decision
we must at least consider both stages of the decision-making process, it is also
necessary to consider whether the initial
decision-maker had the relevant
delegated authority to make the decision. If the decision-maker did not have the
lawful authority
to make the decision, that may be a good basis for the Tribunal
to find that the decision was not ‘correct’ and ought
confirmed on review.
issue of the validity of child placement decisions made by persons purporting to
exercise delegated authority under s 84 of the
CYPS Act has been considered by
the Tribunal in two recent matters.
the matter of
Department for Child Protection &
President Hughes J
found that the decision purported to have been made under s 84 of the CYPS Act
(a placement decision and a concomitant
placement termination decision) had been
made by a person who was not authorised by delegation to make that
President Hughes went
on to determine that, as the decision was made in the exercise of power beyond
the decision-maker’s authority,
it must be set aside, having concluded
that the defect could not be cured under s 83 of the SACAT
and neither could the
presumption of regularity be invoked.
Tribunal found, in that matter, that there was no valid decision left to review,
and the purported decision was subsequently set
aside, bringing the SACAT
proceedings to an end.
KJS v Department for Child
the Tribunal
again considered the question of whether the decision-maker had the delegated
authority to act under s 84 of the CYPS
Act. The Tribunal accepted that the
decision-maker needed to have the delegated authority to place a child (and
concomitantly to
terminate the previous
placement).
In that matter, the
decision-maker was found to have acted within the authority of the delegation.
The decision, being a valid decision,
proceeded to a full merit review in SACAT.
the current matter, the respondent was requested by the Tribunal on day one of
the proceedings
to identify the
initial decision-maker and to satisfy the Tribunal as to that person’s
authority to make the placement decision.
This is because these issues were not
immediately apparent from the documents filed by the Department in its Books of
for the Department tendered an instrument of delegation at the request of the
We are satisfied that
persons holding the position of ‘Supervisor, Child Protection
Office’ and ‘Manager, Child
Protection Office’, in addition to
various Executive Directors, Directors, Lead Practitioners, Managers and
Practice Leads
(but not every person holding that role description) had the
delegated authority to make a placement decision under s 84(1)(a) of
Act at the time of the decision. The Deputy Chief Executive also holds this
delegated authority, and the Chief Executive
is, of course, the repository of
(c) Was there an initial placement decision or was there
merely a direction? If there was a decision, who made the initial placement
decision and when? Did that person hold the appropriate delegation? What are the
reasons for the initial decision?
was some confusion on the evidence adduced at the hearing as to whether a
departmental officer attached to the Noarlunga Office
made the initial placement
decision, or whether someone in the Executive of the Department simply directed
the Manager or Supervisor
of the Office managing the case to make the decision
(regardless of any relevant considerations).
Unfortunately,
the Department did not identify this issue at the commencement of proceedings on
day one of the hearing, nor in its
opening on day four. This only became
apparent to the Tribunal panel as the hearing progressed.
we find the latter factual premise to be correct, it could be argued that
neither the individual in the Department’s Executive,
nor any subordinate
case officer who acted on the direction of his/her superior to give effect to
that direction, in fact made ‘a
decision’. This is because a
‘decision’ at law requires a thought process, that is, a
“proper, genuine and
realistic consideration” or an “active
intellectual process” undertaken by the decision-maker by weighing up
statutory and factual considerations to achieve a considered,
unfettered outcome in furtherance of his or her statutory
process of ‘making a decision’ requires the decision-maker to fully
engage with the task.
we find that a decision had in fact been made by someone from the Executive of
the Department (and then simply relayed to a case
officer with a direction to
act on it), the Tribunal will need to be satisfied of that person’s
identity, his or her specific
authority to make the decision and, if possible,
to understand the reasons for that decision.
Alternatively,
if we find that the decision (i.e. an active engagement with the decision-making
process), was in fact made by an officer
from the Noarlunga office, either with
or without an appropriate delegation, on the mistaken understanding that a
direction had been
given to make it, then we might find that this was the
placement decision, but that issues of validity and confusion in the mind
decision-maker should reduce the weight that we should attach to the original
The evidence on this issue
documentary evidence placed before us by the Department about when the initial
placement decision was made, and by whom, is scant
and contradictory. There is
no clearly documented decision-making process for the placement decision and no
detailed written reasons
for the original placement decision.
day one of the proceedings Ms Denbigh, counsel for the Department, submitted
that the decision was made “in consultation
with quite a number of
people” and that the reasons for decision were “reflected in the
case notes around that time,
particularly the case note on 15 December
2024” (p 152 BoD).
submission was made even though the relevant case note does not refer to a
decision being made on that
Ms Denbigh confirmed that
the case note was ‘approved’ by Supervisor Stuart Thelning, for the
purpose of C3MS.
However, there
is no notation to indicate that this approval signified that Mr Thelning was
also approving a placement decision for
the child on that date. Further, it was
not suggested to us, by counsel for the Department, on day one of the
proceedings, that Mr
Thelning was the actual
decision-maker.
Nor was there
any mention, at the commencement of proceedings, that the decision was
understood by some departmental officers as
having been made “under
direction” from an executive officer of the Department.
in the Crown Solicitor’s additional written submission (provided after the
close of evidence and oral
submissions),
it is stated that
the Department’s position has “always been” that the decision
(to place the child with the paternal
grandparents) was made in consultation
with a number of experts in the Department and that Mr Thelning was the person
who held the
delegation and gave effect to the
The respondent says
the evidence for the decision is in a record of a meeting held on 15 January
2024 (when the case direction changed),
in subsequent meetings on 17 and 19
January 2024 (when the decision was communicated orally to the parties), and in
the final letter
sent to the foster parents on 19 February 2024. It is submitted
that that position is consistent with the evidence before the Tribunal
reasonably arguable.
Members of the Tribunal take the view that it would have been preferable for the
confused decision-making process, the possibility
of an Executive direction, and
the subjective understanding of Mr Thelning, to have been clearly identified by
the Department at
the outset of the
proceedings.
of the confusion as to the identity of the decision-maker, and as to what the
initial reasons were, the Tribunal required
the Department to make DCP
Supervisor, Mr Stuart Thelning, available as a
evidence, Mr Thelning stated that he did not make the ultimate placement
decision at the meeting on 15 January 2024.
stated that the decision to change the child’s placement was an Executive
direction given through his manager (Ms Perks),
approximately a month after the
carer assessment had been
He stated that he
was aware that the paternal grandmother had met with the Chief Executive and the
Deputy Chief Executive in 2023
and he thought it “must have been one of
those two people” who had given the direction about placement. We find
Mr Thelning did not speak directly to the CE or the Deputy CE to verify his
understanding about the alleged direction.
assertion about the decision having been made because of an Executive direction
is also contained in the departmental case notes
at page 193 of the BoD (record
of a meeting chaired by Stuart Thelning, dated 15 March 2024) and at page 44 of
the Supplementary
BoD (email from Nick Ratsch to the DCP Briefing Unit dated 4
April 2024 – referencing the case
also note that, in the letter written by Mr Thelning (in his capacity as Acting
Manager, Noarlunga Office) to KNH and DTY on 19
February 2024 to confirm the new
placement decision, Mr Thelning stated “Chief Executive Jackie Bray is
aware and supportive
of this decision”. We observe that the statement in
that letter that the Chief Executive ‘supported the decision’
evidence that the Chief Executive in fact directed that the decision be made.
to the confusion about the identity of the decision-maker, the Department
tendered an affidavit, at our request, containing some
additional evidence about
the identity of the initial decision-maker. The
submitted by the
Department on 16 April 2025 reveals that extensive searches were conducted to
attempt to find any documentary support
for the asserted direction, and to
identify whether any member of the DCP Executive made the initial placement
decision. We accept
that no direct evidence could be located about this topic.
that affidavit, the recollections of Mr Thelning’s Manager at the
Noarlunga Office, Ms Rebecca Perks, are set out. Ms Perks
“considered it was Mr Reilly who had made the decision”, but she
concedes that she never spoke to Mr Reilly
directly about this, in order to
confirm that the direction had come from him. She ‘
believed that [the
paternal grandmother] had shown Mr Thelning an email from Mr Reilly to [the
paternal grandmother]’
to support this, but the paternal grandmother
(through her counsel) said she did not receive an email from the Deputy Chief
seeing such an email.)
Perks confirmed that she attempted to speak to Mr Reilly to confirm this, but
she was not successful in so doing. Ms Perks concluded
by stating that
“the Noarlunga Office still implemented ordinary practice, including their
own assessment at a social worker
We assume that Ms
Perks means that the appropriate officers in the Noarlunga Office conducted
their own assessment about the appropriate
placement decision.
Perks’ manager, Mr Akash Segal, and the Chief Executive, Ms Jackie Bray,
are quoted in the affidavit as stating that they
did not make or give any
directions about a placement decision for the child. Mr Rohan Davison-Bennett,
Acting Executive Director
of Child and Young Persons Services at DCP deposed in
the affidavit that he did not give the direction.
Deputy Chief Executive at the time, Mr Adam Reilly, has left the Department and
was not interviewed about this topic. We did not
require him to be called as a
witness on this collateral issue. Extensive searches of Mr Reilly’s email
communications failed
to reveal any directions or any emails to BAK stating that
the child was to be placed with the paternal grandparents.
on the evidence before the Tribunal, no-one employed within the Department takes
ownership for making the decision.
Department concedes that the identity of the decision-maker is not clearly
recorded, nor identified in any document, and that
there is no individual who
subjectively accepts that they made the original placement
Department also concedes that, in the absence of any additional evidence, there
is an available inference, based on the affidavit
of Rohan Davison-Bennett, that
the former Deputy Chief Executive directed that the original decision was to be
the Department does not contend for that inference to be drawn.
Department contends for a finding that Mr Stuart Thelning made the initial
decision, even though he did not agree with that proposition
in his sworn
evidence at the hearing.
further submissions were proffered by the applicants’ counsel or the
foster parents’ counsel on this
We observe that counsel
for the other parties have conducted their cases on the understanding that a
valid initial placement decision
had been made by an officer or officers of the
Noarlunga Office.
Findings as to identity of the initial decision-maker and when
the decision was made
are satisfied that there is no documentary or other direct evidence from any
witness to demonstrate that the former Deputy Chief
Executive, Mr Adam Reilly,
gave a direction to the case management team at the Noarlunga Office to make the
initial placement decision
for the child (i.e., to change her place of residence
to live with her paternal grandparents).
we accept that both Ms Perks and Mr Thelning thought that this was the case, we
are unable to find that there was such a direction
from the DCP Executive. We
note that neither of those individuals spoke directly to Mr Reilly to confirm
their understanding about
a direction. We consider that it is conceivable that
they formed this belief, because they were aware that the paternal grandmother
had met with the DCP Executive in 2023, and that she had Executive support for a
new carer assessment to
Irrespective
of what they thought had occurred, Ms Perks said that the Noarlunga Office
implemented ordinary practice, including their
own assessment about the
appropriate placement decision. Mr Thelning also gave evidence that, if he did
not agree with the decision,
he would have said
accept the Crown Solicitor’s submission that Mr Thelning would have
objected to such a decision, if he had an issue with
it. We also accept that a
decision can be made by an administrative decision-maker, even though he or she
is subjectively unaware
that he/she is making it.
to reach the conclusion that a decision was made by Mr Thelning, we need to be
satisfied that the purported decision-maker
gave proper, genuine and realistic
consideration to the relevant statutory and factual considerations, and that the
decision was
unfettered.
considered the relevant case notes and the evidence of Mr Thelning about what
was discussed at various meetings, we conclude
A new placement
decision was contemplated by relevant officers in the Noarlunga Office at a
meeting on 21 December 2023 (where there
was a discussion about a
‘potential decision’ and an action plan was agreed for
consultations).
A trial period
of three months to increase contact arrangements was agreed. Another action
proposed was that “
further assessments [would be] made in consultation
with PAC, Practice Lead and Psychologist.
Despite the
abovementioned proposed actions, a new placement decision was made following
consultation with some of the relevant officers
at the meeting at the Noarlunga
Office on 15 January 2024.
meeting was attended by (some of the) relevant senior departmental
including the Principal
Aboriginal Consultant, the Practice Lead, the Case Supervisor and the Manager of
the Office. However, contrary
to the Department’s accepted practice about
complex placement decisions, no-one from DCP Psychological Services had been
or was in attendance.
The purpose of
the meeting on 15 January 2024 was stated to be for “a placement
discussion” about the child. The discussion
at the meeting was directed
towards the pros and cons of a placement move for the child, increasing access
for the grandparents and
supporting the current carers through a placement
transition.
Some relevant
(but not all) statutory considerations were discussed at the meeting, including
the principles of intervention, timely
decision-making and a discussion about
culture. The case note indicates that the placement principles under the
legislation were
discussed including that
both carers are
good, kin offers the biological connection on both sides to support kin and
There was a discussion about:
“factoring [in] the
current carers to continue to have an ongoing relationship with [the child] into
the transition and future
planning. This will help mitigate trauma for [the
‘Actions’ outlined in the meeting notes indicate that the decision
to move the child to live with the foster parents
had been made and was now to
be actioned.
minute dated 4 April 2024 to the DCP Briefing Unit (written by Practice Lead
Nick Ratsch) refers to the consult records
for ‘the decision’ (which
we understand to be the 15 January 2024 meeting minutes) and states
DCP has undertaken kinship carer assessment of [the paternal
grandmother], and as soon as [the paternal grandmother] was approved
as a carer,
the decision to transfer [the child] to [the paternal grandmother] was
accept the Crown Solicitor’s submission that the outcome of the meeting on
15 January 2024 resulted in a change in case direction,
to give effect to a new
placement for the child by planning for her transition to live with her paternal
grandparents. Shortly thereafter,
meetings were held with the paternal
grandparents (on 17 January 2024) and the foster parents (on 19 January 2024),
where the decision
to change the child’s placement from one with the
foster parents to one with the paternal grandparents was conveyed to all
by Mr Thelning.
the absence of any other evidence, we are satisfied that the placement decision
was made in consultation with the departmental
officers who were present at the
meeting on 15 January 2024, and was approved and ratified by DCP Supervisor, Mr
Thelning. Mr Thelning
held a delegation from the Chief Executive to make
decisions about the placement of the child and later took all of the necessary
steps to implement the decision, including communicating it to the parties and
planning for her transition.
find that the decision was made by DCP Supervisor Mr Stuart Thelning, with the
appropriate delegated authority. We are not satisfied
that the decision was made
by anyone in the Executive of the Department, or under an Executive
Some further comments on this topic – jurisdiction of
Tribunal on a merit review
completeness on this topic, had we found that someone in the
made the placement
decision we would have found that such a person held the appropriate delegation
to so act (being a person more
superior to the Supervisor and Manager of the
Noarlunga DCP office and whose role is mentioned in the instrument of
delegation).
there been any remaining question about whether a valid decision had been made
we accept that, whilst the Tribunal is obliged
to determine whether the decision
is the correct or preferable decision, it is not obliged, on a merit review, to
determine whether
the original decision was legally valid (i.e., in this case -
whether the decision-maker held an appropriate delegation). Despite
challenge having been taken in previous DCP merit reviews in SACAT (and
entertained), we agree with the Crown Solicitor’s
submission about this
proposition as a matter of law.
accept that the Tribunal has the power to review invalid decisions on a merit
review and that this is not a barrier to the Tribunal’s
As discussed by
the President of the Tribunal, Hughes J in
Robusto Investments Pty Ltd v
Essential Services Commission of South
a finding of
invalidity in this respect would only go to the question of the weight the
Tribunal should attach to that decision.
Importantly,
there is a line of Federal Court authority in support of the proposition that,
if there is a purported decision in exercise
of power conferred by a relevant
Act affecting the interests of the person seeking the review, there is
conferred with the power to review administrative
decisions to undertake the review; it matters not whether the decision is made
by someone without lawful
This is because the
purpose of a merit review is to allow the Tribunal to correct error and
substitute a new decision where error
note that this approach promotes the objects of the SACAT Act in s 8 and
the flexible approach to the conduct of Tribunal hearings
set out in s 39 of the
SACAT Act. We also observe that a generous attitude should be taken to what is a
purported reviewable decision
under the CYPS Act (given the subject matter of
the statute and the human rights affected), and that we should not become bogged
down in technical legal arguments but should exercise our review power where
there is a worthwhile controversy to be
adjudicated.
is the same practical approach that the Administrative Appeals Tribunal adopted
in two matters where the purported decision-maker
was the Commonwealth
Department of Family and Community Services. The AAT concluded that it should
assume that a decision had been
made by the Department of Family and Community
Services in those matters, even though no formal record of the decisions could
No written reasons – what are the reasons for the
we do not disagree with the submission of the Crown Solicitor that strictly, as
a matter of law, there is no requirement to
reduce the initial placement
decision to writing, we observe that this is a departure from well recognised
and best practice administrative
law processes and is a significant departure
from the Department’s own ‘Decision-Making Practice Paper’ and
‘Consult or Decision Record Procedure’ in C3MS.
value of written reasons for important administrative decisions provides a
safeguard for sound government administration by ensuring
a high standard of
decision-making and consistency of decisions, that administrators discharge
their statutory functions and that
their decisions are justifiable. It also
provides a benefit to the parties and facilitates a review bodies’
our view, for important DCP decisions regarding placement decisions for children
in care, short written reasons should be made
as a matter of course. Brief dot
points jotted down at a case meeting to record a discussion do not achieve the
same purpose. Neither
should it be left to the Tribunal to have to seek a
statement of reasons
event for those few matters that go on review to SACAT.
absence of a statement of reasons, or any clear decision-making record for the
initial placement decision, has made our task very
difficult on review in this
matter. The reviewer on internal review had the same difficulty, noting that she
was unable to identify
when the decision to move the child was made, or
a result of the paucity of reasons for the original decision we required Mr
Thelning and Principal Aboriginal consultant, Ms Yazarae
Greenwood, to be called
as witnesses so that we could understand the Department’s reasoning for
the original decision.
Procedure on review - additional evidence and witnesses
The Child’s voice
159(1) of the CYPS Act states that in any proceedings under that part of the
Act, the Tribunal must give a child or young
person to whom proceedings relate,
a reasonable opportunity to personally present their views related to their
ongoing care and protection.
s 159(2) of the CYPS Act states that sub-section (1) will not apply if the
child or young person is not able to do so, or
it would not be in their best
the child’s young age, we considered that she would have difficulties
presenting her views to us about this very difficult
decision and, further, that
it would not be in her interests for us to speak with or meet with her. We also
considered that we had
a clear idea of her voice from the information which has
been provided to the Tribunal. We determined not to meet with the child
did not consider it was in her best interests to do so.
child’s direct views are set out at pp 46 – 57 BoD and in attachment
her grandparents. It is apparent from the documents that she loves her
grandparents and enjoys spending
time with them but that she perceives her
foster family as her family and their house as her home. At a home visit on 3
2025, she completed the “My voice Survey” with Ms Petrucci
and indicated that she felt safe and cared for with her foster
family, gets
along with them and is connected to them and that she felt good about herself
inside and out.
also rely on the interview with the child, and observations conducted by
psychologist Ms J Webster in her attachment assessment,
where the child’s
views are clearly expressed.
Documents and witnesses
response to their obligations as the decision-maker under s 35 of the SACAT Act,
the Department has provided to the Tribunal a
folder of documents (the Book of
Documents - BoD).
1 of the BoD contains confidential material that was not disclosed to the
parties, and which is subject to a non-disclosure
A redacted version of
that information has been provided to the applicants and the second and third
respondents in Volume 2 of the
BoD (open/redacted books of
documents).
Most of the
documents in the respective books of documents are case notes and other records
from the Department’s case files
regarding the child.
the course of the review, the Tribunal has been provided with the following
further documentary evidence (marked A1 – A9)
tendered by the
applicants:
Affidavit of the
paternal grandmother, BAK, dated 11 September 2023;
Letter from
Anglicare Community Services date 10 April 1997
Facebook message
from the father’s twin brother to his mother, the paternal grandmother,
dated 02 September 2016
– the child with paternal and maternal families
Affidavit of the
paternal grandfather, IVU, dated 11 September 2024;
Affidavit of the
maternal grandmother, QBO dated 11 September 2024
Affidavit of the
child’s father, XZG, dated 11 September 2024
Psychological
report of Fiona Fallo dated 24 February 2025;
Attachment goes to court: child protection and custody
co-authored by 70 experts in the field (referred to as the
Forslund et al
paternal grandparents gave evidence at the review hearing and called the
following witnesses to give evidence: the child’s
father, the maternal
grandmother and psychologist Ms Fiona Fallo.
addition to Volumes 1 and 2 of the Books of Documents (DCP1 and DCP1A), the
first respondent (CE of DCP) tendered the following
documents (marked DCP2
A Supplementary
Book of Documents
Affidavit of Ms
Chelsea Petrucci, case worker, dated 17 March 2025
Foundational
Theories and Knowledge Attachment, DCP Practice Paper
ATSIC Placement
Principle, DCP Practice Paper
Instrument of
Delegation under CYPS Act
Psychological
Report of Ms Claire Simmons dated 20 March 2025
CV of Ms Claire
psychologist Ms Jessica Webster
articles provided by Claire Simmons (Bundle of 4)
Family Support Services (AFSS) Recognised Organisation Consultation (ROC)
response 28 November 2019 (Emergency placement)
cultural response 4 December 2019 (Short term placement)
Email chain
dated 16 March 2023 associated with a ROC
Referral to AFSS
ROC (Long term placement) 16 March 2023
practice place a child or young person in care chapter (pp 42-45)
Principle: A Guide to Support Implementation (SNAICC)
Role description
of Principal Aboriginal Consultant (PAC)
Department also called Ms Chelsea Petrucci, case worker, to give evidence at the
review hearing.
second and third respondents tendered the following documents (marked R 1-4):
Affidavit of the
foster mother
Kindergarten
report page 3
Photo booklet,
the child with her foster family and others
Christopher Lyndon, DCP case worker, 24 January 2024 (two pages)
foster mother also gave evidence at the review hearing.
Additional evidence sought by the Tribunal under s 35 of the
the conclusion of the evidence, the Tribunal indicated that it required more
information about the Departmental reasoning process
in support of the original
placement decision. We required the decision-maker to make the following
witnesses available to give evidence
pursuant to s 35(4) of the SACAT Act: Mr
Stuart Thelning, Supervisor, DCP and Ms Yazarae Greenwood, Principal Aboriginal
(PAC), DCP.
Mr Thelning and Ms Greenwood subsequently gave evidence at the Tribunal
the conclusion of the hearing (and prior to closing submissions) the first
respondent was also requested to file an affidavit from
an appropriate officer
of the respondent Department setting out the date when the original placement
decision was made in this matter
and the identity and position title of the
original decision-maker.
closing submissions, the CE of DCP also filed a brief written submission about
its model litigant obligations, which also
addressed the topic of identifying
the facts regarding when the original decision was filed and by whom. The other
parties were invited
to file additional responding submissions, but no other
party elected to file any further submissions.
Our findings - a summary of the principal facts since
(a) The paternal grandparents’ first carer
2021 carer assessment (conducted when the child was only one year of age) found
that the paternal grandparents were unsuitable to
be approved as long-term
kinship carers for the
2021, the assessor identified concerns about aspects of the paternal
grandparents’ parenting of the paternal grandmother’s
twin boys, who
were conceived during her earlier brief relationship with their biological
father and who were born when she was aged
16. The child’s father was one
of the twins. The other twin was sadly murdered in 2016.
paternal grandmother commenced a relationship with her husband at the age of 18,
when the boys were two years old, and she gave
birth to a third son, EKS, when
the twins were four years old.
paternal grandparents gave evidence in the Tribunal about the care concerns
noted when they were raising the twin boys and their
explanation for those
paternal grandmother says the twins exhibited very difficult behavioural
problems at a young age and she had significant difficulties
managing their
behaviours (when she was aged in her late teens and early twenties). The
twins’ behavioural and learning difficulties
continued when they were at
school, and they were both eventually diagnosed with ADHD.
2021 assessor noted that there was a period when the twin boys were placed in
respite foster care in 1993. We accept the paternal
grandmother’s evidence
CAFHS), .....
..................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
also accept that the paternal grandmother’s first de facto relationship
was marked by significant domestic violence, which
the twin boys witnessed.
There were other concerns raised by professionals about the paternal
grandparents’ parenting of the
twins in 1996 and 2001
....................................................................................
............................
The twin boys subsequently lived elsewhere during
their teens, as the paternal grandparents were not prepared to have them living
in their home. ................................................................
find that there are not, and never have been, any concerns raised, or
difficulties with, the care provided by the paternal grandparents
youngest child, EKS. He has not exhibited the behavioural issues exhibited by
issues of concern for the 2021 assessor were that the paternal grandmother had
some significant health concerns in 2019 and
2020 (being hospitalised and
subsequently receiving outpatient treatment for 18 months), and that the
paternal grandfather was assessed
as not being fully supportive of the
application at the time (citing health concerns for his wife, and financial
issues). The assessor
noted that “[the child] requires a home with
emotionally available and nurturing carers, which is not viable without
from both partners within the relationship.”
the paternal grandmother’s son (the twin brother of the child’s
father) ............ ....................... Understandably,
significant detrimental effect on the family, particularly on the paternal
grandmother, who has been receiving ongoing
support from her GP and a
counsellor. The paternal grandmother has been heavily involved in the
.....................................,
but we accept that she will be winding
down that involvement now, to focus on caring for her granddaughter.
accept the evidence of the paternal grandparents and the child’s father
1987 – late 1990s and
find that there are various explanations which mitigate any concerns. We take
into account the twins’
ADHD diagnoses, the young age of the paternal
grandmother when she conceived the boys, the lack of any support provided to her
the boys were very young, and the emotional and psychological impact on the
boys (resulting in behavioural problems),
...............................................................
are satisfied that we have heard much more detailed evidence about these issues
on review and find that the 2021 assessor (and
Ms Claire Simmons during the
internal review) reached an incorrect perception about, and/or placed too much
weight on, the historical
care concerns regarding the paternal
grandparents’ parenting of their twin boys.
original assessor recommended that the paternal grandparents not be approved as
kinship carers “at this time”. The
assessor stated: “
relationship with , [the paternal grandparents] and [the child] progresses over
time it may then be reassessed in the future
in terms of the caring role [the
paternal grandparents] were able to provide ... Whilst the assessment does not
support authorisation,
it is the assessor’s opinion ... that the
development of a relationship between [the paternal grandparents] and [EKS]
provide [the child] with the family connection and sense of belonging that
is important to a child who has been separated from her
parents and is essential
in developing a secure sense of self. It is recommended that the relationship
between [the child] and her
grandparents be supported in order for a natural
grandparent- grandchild relationship to develop. Over time ... allowing for
unsupervised
short-term care options on a more informal basis.”
paternal grandparents disputed the outcome of the first assessment and sought an
internal review but were apparently told by DCP
that, as no final decision had
been made on their kinship care application, they had no right of review.
Significant delays ensued,
with a follow-up reassessment
paternal grandmother was unhappy with the delays and relentlessly petitioned DCP
for a formal carer reassessment between 2021
(b) Meeting with the DCP Executive
paternal grandmother eventually attended a meeting with the Chief Executive and
the Deputy Chief Executive in August
where it was agreed that
the paternal grandparents would be reassessed as carers, this time via the
Winangay Aboriginal Kinship Carer Assessment
are satisfied that, although Executive Officers of the Department were
supportive of a decision to commence a carer reassessment
process for the
paternal grandparents, this was not a decision of the Executive to support or
direct that the child should, or would,
be placed with them.
carer approval process, and any subsequent carer approval decision, are separate
decisions from a child placement decision.
is apparent that the paternal grandmother (for one) was confused and perhaps
remains confused about this. In her affidavit, she
states that: “On 18
December 2023 the Winangay Aboriginal Kinship Care assessment recommendation
approved [paternal grandfather]
and I as kinship carers for [the child], with
[the child] to be transitioned into our
observe that this is not what the second Kinship Care Assessment Recommendation
stated. In fact, the Winangay assessor was very
clear to emphasise that a carer
approval is not the same as a placement decision. At page 5 of the report, the
assessor states:
[The paternal grandparents] have been made aware
that the carer approval recommendation and the decision to place a child are
decisions, and that case management intend to engage in consultation
regarding long-term placement for [the child], with a decision
to be made based
on what is deemed to be in [the child]’s best interests
(c) Winangay Aboriginal Carer Assessment
second carer assessment report, dated 4 December 2023, concluded that the
paternal grandparents should be approved as long-term
and respite carers for the
find the Winangay assessment report to be a very detailed and thorough document.
The process adopted by the assessor appears to
be a professional and thorough
carer approval assessment.
note that the child was not interviewed or assessed as part of that process, and
neither were the foster parents, as this was simply
a carer approval process for
the paternal grandparents; it was not an attachment assessment, nor did it form
part of a child placement
Winangay assessment included an action plan which included that (should a
decision about a change of placement be made) transition
planning be
A summary of the paternal grandparents’ case on
paternal grandparents do not argue that there is any inadequacy in the care
provided to the child by the foster parents. To the
contrary, they concede that
the foster parents (in particular, the foster mother) have provided a high level
of care for the child
in a loving environment. They are grateful for that care
and want the foster parents to continue to be included in the child’s
life, should it be decided that the child reside with the paternal
grandparents.
paternal grandparents’ case is that the long-term psychological benefits
of placing the child with them, as her paternal
grandparents, outweigh any risk
of harm to the child arising from disrupting her attachment to the foster
applicants rely on the expert evidence of Ms Fiona Fallo, Clinical Psychologist,
to the effect that any risk of harm to the child
by changing her placement, is
outweighed by the benefit that she will realise by residing with her biological
family, and also that
any psychological harm caused by moving her from the
carers (who they accept the child recognises as her psychological parents) can
be mitigated by a carefully planned and executed transition plan.
The paternal grandparents’ evidence
evidence was provided orally and by way of affidavit from the applicants. It is
unnecessary to set it all out in detail
in our statement of reasons, but we have
taken it all into account. We were very impressed by the evidence of the
applicants, who
we assessed as honest and reliable witnesses. It is apparent
that they love their granddaughter very much and are both passionate
wanting her to be placed in their fulltime care.
note that the paternal grandmother has undertaken various parenting courses,
plus courses to further her understanding of Aboriginal
culture and history. She
has proactively developed a strong, trusting relationship with the child’s
maternal grandmother and
has taken steps to ensure that the child has contact
with her maternal grandmother and other appropriate members of her extended
maternal family.
The paternal
grandparents recognise the importance of the child’s Aboriginal culture,
and we accept that they will take appropriate
steps to further the child’s
connection to her Aboriginal culture.
child calls the applicants ‘Nan [ ]’ and ‘Pop’. She has
her own bedroom at their home, which is a good-sized
house, well-maintained, and
with a large backyard. It is apparent that the applicants take pride in their
produced to the Tribunal, showing the proposed living
arrangements for the child should she be placed with the applicants and
her engaging in various activities with the paternal grandparents and
their extended family (and with the child’s maternal
arrangements between the paternal grandparents and the child were initially
limited and supervised, but this has increased
over time to regular unsupervised
access, including some instances of overnight access (which commenced in August
2024). We note
that the contact arrangements are frequently changed to
accommodate the needs of the child (for example contact with the paternal
grandparents was reduced after the child commenced school, in order to assist
with that transition process).
great deal of information was presented to the Tribunal about the access visits
with the paternal grandparents, and how those visits
impact on the child. We are
satisfied that the child enjoys her time with grandparents, but she sometimes
gets tired and fractious
after a busy weekend of activities. We accept that
recently the child’s behaviour has been more elevated at access handovers
and following access
heard evidence about the quality of the relationship between the paternal
grandmother and the child, which we find to be very good.
Apart from providing
for all the child’s personal care needs when she stays with them, the
paternal grandmother appears to
dote on her granddaughter and enjoys doing
activities with her, such as craft, cooking and exploring in their garden. The
many toys, clothes and possessions at their home, including a bike,
and there is a trampoline and a set of monkey bars in the backyard.
The paternal
grandparents take the child to regular swimming lessons, which she obviously
accept that the quality of the relationship between the paternal grandmother and
the child is trusting, loving, strong and very
positive. This is supported by
the attachment assessment conducted in May 2024 by psychologist Ms Jessica
We find that the child
views her paternal grandmother as a ‘safe haven’; i.e., a person
whom she trusts and would seek
out in a situation where she is feeling scared,
anxious or wary.
quality of the relationship between the child and her paternal grandfather is
also very good, but not as close as that which exists
between the child and her
grandmother. We note that the paternal grandfather sees himself as being
‘more in the background’,
leaving the hands-on caregiving role to
the paternal grandmother. Nevertheless, we find that the quality of their
relationship is
also loving and comfortable.
positive, secure relationship between the child and her Pop was noted by
psychologist Ms Jessica Webster (the child volunteering
that she loved her
paternal grandfather and likes to sit on his
find that the child views the paternal grandparents as her loving grandparents
and that she enjoys spending time with them.
The child’s father’s evidence
child’s biological father gave evidence in the Tribunal. Some of his
evidence was taken in private, as it related to his
personal experience
........... when he was placed in respite care as a
We recognise that he had
a distressing and traumatic experience as a child, when placed in respite care.
We also accept that this
may negatively affect his views of the foster care
system in SA.
it is unnecessary to set out all of his evidence in detail in our statement of
reasons, but we have taken it into account.
We find the child’s father to
be an honest witness, and we accept his evidence.
a long period where he had very limited access to his
he has recently
started to have some regular contact with the child, supervised by his parents
at their home. There have been occasions
where he has been unable to attend
those visits, for illness or other reasons, and a period where he missed contact
because he was,
.......................................................................
child’s father supports the child being placed with his parents so that
she can be brought up in a family-based kinship
placement. He does not want her
to be brought up in non-kinship foster care. He recognises that he is personally
unable to care for
his daughter, but he firmly believes that she is better off
living with her extended paternal family, where she will have the ability
form deep connections with his parents, his brother and with himself, together
with her maternal family.
accept that the child’s father has a positive and loving relationship with
her and that she has a secure and positive attachment
to him. They enjoy playing
games together, riding bikes, going out on activities and playing in the
backyard. Our assessment of the
evidence is that their relationship is good, but
is more akin to a sibling relationship, probably due to their limited contact
opportunities.
Ms Jessica Webster observed that the child volunteered one
positive feeling towards her father during the Family Relations
accept that any placement decision should not exclude the child’s
father’s ongoing contact with his daughter.
The maternal grandmother’s evidence
applicants called the maternal grandmother as a witness in support of their
appreciated hearing from her during the Tribunal hearing, as we considered it
important for us to hear the views on the placement
decision from a member of
her maternal family.
with the other witnesses, it is unnecessary to detail all of the maternal
grandmother’s evidence, but we summarise it here,
having taken it all into
maternal grandmother is a member of the ........... cultural group, which is an
Aboriginal cultural group in central NSW. She
told us that she also has European
heritage. She says she was initially told that she was not Aboriginal because
she was “so
The maternal grandmother said that, because of her light complexion, she has a
good understanding of the nuanced difficulties that
are experienced by
“light-skinned” Aboriginal people in Australia, particularly in
terms of identity, racism (from both
Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal
and where exactly they
fitted into society and culture. She said that, as the child is also “so
white”, it is important
that she have ongoing contact with her as she
matures, so that the maternal grandmother can provide some ‘lived
experience’
guidance to her granddaughter about these
maternal grandmother said that, after a time, her birth mother moved to SA,
where the maternal grandmother was born. She was placed
in foster care at a
young age and was then adopted by her foster parents. She said that her adoptive
parents adopted her as a “present”
for her 6-year-old brother. She
had an unhappy childhood and said that her adoptive mother mistreated her, and
that she also experienced
abuse by a health professional.
maternal grandmother told us about the identity issues which she experienced as
a young woman, because of not being brought up
in her biological family. She
said she had no understanding for some time of her cultural background, or of
who she was, or how she
fitted into “the general population”. She
did not gain that understanding until she met some Aboriginal people, and
that she fitted in, or “gelled”, with
maternal grandmother is concerned that the same confused identity issues will
happen to the child, if she remains in non-kinship
care with non-Aboriginal
maternal grandmother met and married her
a member of the
............ ................... cultural groups from SA. Whilst they had a
somewhat troubled relationship, they
had six children together, including the
child’s mother.
Tribunal Members were very moved to hear of the maternal grandmother’s
traumatic childhood and her many difficult life experiences.
maternal grandmother said that she and her daughter have had a difficult
relationship over the years, and rarely see or speak
to each other now.
...................
....................................................................................................................
.............
maternal grandmother is an approved foster carer, and has the full-time care of
another grandchild, (the son of one of her other
daughters).
.................................
.............................................................. Due to her age
other caring duties, she is not able to offer to be a carer for the
child. The maternal grandmother would like to have a rest from
caring duties and
do some travelling now. She told us she just wants to be a loving grandmother to
maternal grandmother gave evidence in support of the child being placed with the
paternal grandparents and not remaining in the
“foster care system”.
maternal grandmother is strongly supportive of the paternal grandparents as
‘good people’, ‘loving grandparents
to [the child]’ and
good role models. She spoke positively of their significant efforts to engage
with her and other members
of the maternal family, and with the child’s
Aboriginal culture and heritage.
maternal grandmother said that there are problems with foster care, and that
they are well known. She also stated in her affidavit
Our family is
going through generational trauma. I am part of the stolen generation, along
with my mother and my grandmother and now
[the child] is a victim of the stolen
generation. I hope for this to stop by placing [the child] into the care of her
recognise that the maternal grandmother has had a difficult life, and that
relating her past life experiences to the Tribunal was
likely to have been an
emotional and challenging experience for her. Whilst we do not doubt the
accuracy of her evidence on those
issues, we observe that much of her evidence,
by her own early experience in the foster care system (and as an
adopted child), and by her understanding of the significant difficulties
traumas faced by her own mother and grandmother in the past.
recognise that historical experiences of racism (together with the State’s
removal of Aboriginal children from their parents),
has resulted in significant
trauma and loss for many Aboriginal people. We also realise that the concept of
“the Welfare”
as the adversary of Aboriginal people still pervades
the thinking of some Aboriginal people in
The maternal
grandmother continues to hold those views, which we consider affects how she
interacts with the Department and its employees
on some occasions. As a result,
she apparently finds it difficult to engage with several social workers employed
by the Department
(including the child’s current case
heard evidence about an angry interaction directed towards the foster mother by
the maternal grandmother at a kindy event when
the child was present. We accept
the evidence provided by the foster mother and paternal grandmother about what
transpired at that
event. While we acknowledge the depth of the maternal
grandmother’s anger, loss and trauma, resulting in her views about the
‘foster system’ and the Department, we also suggest that it is not
in the child’s interests to be exposed to indiscriminate
displays of
unrestrained emotional outbursts and hostility, directed either towards the
current foster carer or to the DCP social
workers managing [the child]’s
case. In our view, due to her uncontrolled emotions, the maternal grandmother
exhibited uncalled-for
anger and incivility in her interaction with the foster
mother at the kindy event, and with Ms Petrucci in a phone call voice message
left after the event.
recognising the significance of what is described by the maternal grandmother as
“generational trauma”, concerning
the historical experiences of
herself and her relatives, the Tribunal is careful to consider the placement
decision for the child
within her own context.
find that the evidence clearly demonstrates that the child is in care because
she was exposed to the risk of suffering serious
harm, due to the evidence-based
care concerns
....................................................................................................................
............ These are the issues that required the intervention of the State
under the CYPS Act. The child has not been “stolen”;
she has been
protected from harm. We also accept that the child was not placed at an early
stage, or at all, with a member of her
maternal Aboriginal family because the
Department was unable to identify anyone suitable or available when its relevant
undertook ‘scoping’ for placement
accept that the maternal grandmother’s continued supervised contact with
the child is in the child’s best interests
and will promote the principles
set out in ss 11 and 12 of the CYPS Act. We agree that the maternal
grandmother’s continued
involvement in the child’s life is
important, as she will provide an important connection to the child’s rich
culture and heritage and enhance her sense of identity.
Ms Fiona Fallo’s evidence
applicants also relied on the expert evidence of Ms Fallo (which will be
discussed later in this decision).
A summary of the foster parents’ case on review
foster father elected not to give evidence; however, he attended each day of the
hearing. We understand that he works full-time
...................., and is very
involved in the local ......... church, which the whole family regularly
attends. We accept that
the foster father is strongly in support of the decision
to leave the child in his and his wife’s care.
heard at length from the foster mother, who also spoke to her affidavit. It is
unnecessary to set out her evidence in detail, but
we have taken it all into
found the foster mother to be an impressive, intelligent and honest witness. Due
to her university studies in social work, she
has a good understanding of the
issues involved in this decision.
foster mother spoke of her deep love for the child and told us that she views
her as her daughter, noting that she has been in
the foster parents’
full-time care since just 18 days of age (i.e., for nearly 5 ½ years). The
foster mother says that
the child is “embedded” in their family and
considers their home as her
However, the foster
parents have explained to the child that she has two families, namely a
“birth family” and a “foster
child refers to her foster mother as “mum” and to her foster father
as “dad”. She refers to her foster
siblings as her ‘brothers
and sisters’.
having children, the foster mother studied social work and worked as a pastoral
care worker at various primary schools. She
undertook a six-month placement at
DCP (Families SA) during her studies, and she then held a job briefly as a
rostered care worker
in a residential care home. This experience inspired her to
suggest to her husband that they put themselves forward to DCP to be
approved as
foster carers, as her observation of the experience for children in residential
care was not positive. The foster mother
left her employment to be a “full
time stay-at-home mother” dedicating her time to raising the child and her
three biological
child was placed with her foster family the day after they were approved as
carers and is the only child to have been placed in
their care. They are
supported by workers from Lutheran Care foster care support.
the child was placed with them, the foster parents already had a son who was
then nearly two years of age. The foster mother
told us that she and her husband
had decided not to continue with expanding their own family after being approved
as carers –
intentionally ‘making room’ for a foster child in
their family, so that any foster child would feel like part of the
not feel like ‘an afterthought’. Right from the outset, the foster
mother said she wanted any foster child
to grow up with siblings and
to be embedded in that family culture and to be part of
the child was placed with them, the foster parents went on to have two more
daughters (born approximately two years and four
years respectively after the
child was placed with their family). The children in their household are now
aged 7½, 5½ (the
child), 4 years and 4 months, and 2 years and 2
months. The child is particularly close to the youngest child (this is borne
by the Bene Family Relations Test conducted by psychologist Jessica Webster
– the youngest child in the foster family given
the second highest number
of positive affirmations by the child, after the foster
heard a lot of evidence about their family life and how closely attached the
foster mother considered that the child was to each
member of her family,
including the extended family on both sides. A photo book was tendered, which
visually demonstrated some of
the child’s experiences in her foster
understand that the foster mother is also a regular attendee at the local
......... church and that the family attends church together
each Sunday; we
infer that this is an outing that the child enjoys and would not want to miss
lot of the content of the foster mother’s affidavit and her oral evidence
was focussed on the child’s behaviours on
her return from access visits
with the paternal grandparents. The foster mother directed some negative
comments towards the paternal
grandmother about how she does not share
information with her about what the child does on access visits. We find this
to be unfounded. The paternal grandmother reports about access visits
in detail to the Case Worker, Ms Petrucci, after each access
our view, this overly close focus by the foster mother on the child’s
responses to access visits likely reflects her anxiety
the child may be removed from their care. In our view, some of the child’s
reported reluctance to leave
for access visits with her paternal grandparents
(and conversely by her paternal grandmother) may be influenced by the
subconscious
anxiety exhibited by her foster mother about those visits. We note
that both the paternal grandparents and the foster parents will
be anxious about
the outcome of these proceedings, and that this will no doubt impact on their
interactions regarding contact. We
find that the contact visits with the
paternal grandparents have been an overwhelmingly positive experience for the
child. However,
there is no doubt that, given her age, she will be tired if
those visits are too frequent, long, or ‘jam packed’ with
activities. Those are issues we leave for consideration by the child’s
case workers and the Contact Access Review Panel.
accept that the child has recently exhibited some dysregulated and unusual
behaviours prior to and after access visits. We find
that this this is likely to
be indicative of the continued stress of the proceedings on the foster parents
and the paternal grandparents,
and the fact that the child is detecting that
child has recently started school, which is the same school as her older foster
brother attends. The foster mother said this is
a school with a higher
population of Aboriginal children than other schools, which was an important
consideration for them. We accept
that the child has settled well into school,
after an initial period where she was somewhat reluctant to part from her foster
The foster mother said that the child is looking forward to her younger
foster sisters starting at the same school.
to school the child attended a kindergarten which apparently has an
“Aboriginal focus”. The foster parents chose
that kindy deliberately
because of that focus on First Nations people, and they also chose to send their
other children to the same
kindy, so that the child would not feel ‘any
different’ from her foster siblings.
foster mother said that it is important to them that the whole family
understands and engages with ‘Aboriginal culture’.
They attend
culturally positive events, including reconciliation and NAIDOC
”, plus cultural events at the library, where they have made
a “connection with senior indigenous women and we buy [the child]
culturally appropriate
foster mother said that she and her husband are strongly committed to promoting
the child’s understanding of her culture,
and they understand that this is
important to her self-identity. They feel that they provide at least the same
level of cultural
support as the paternal grandparents (who are also not
Aboriginal).
find that the foster parents (as with the paternal grandparents) are taking
active and positive steps to ensure (as much as is
possible, given that none of
them identify as Aboriginal) that the child understands and engages with her
Aboriginal cultural heritage
and identifies as Aboriginal.
accept that the child has a very deep connection with, and a healthy, secure
attachment to the members of her foster family, and
that she views her foster
parents as her psychological parents and their children as her siblings.
accept that the quality of the relationship between the foster mother and the
child is secure, trusting, loving, strong and very
positive. This is supported
by the attachment assessment conducted in May 2024 by psychologist Ms Jessica
We find that the child
views her foster mother as her psychological mother and her primary ‘safe
haven’; i.e., a person
who she trusts and would seek out in a situation
where she was feeling scared, anxious or
find that the relationship with the foster father is also loving, positive and
accept that the child loves her siblings deeply, having grown up with them as
part of her psychological family in the foster home
for over five years. The
child clearly has a very strong bond with her foster brother and sisters. She is
particularly attached to
her youngest foster sister. We refer to the attachment
assessment report provided by Ms Jessica Webster, and to various interviews
conducted with the
have no doubt that the child would be significantly distressed (at the very
least) if she was removed from the foster parents’
long-time care. We find
that she would also be significantly emotionally affected if she were now
removed from her school (which
we consider would be likely to occur should she
be transitioned to the paternal grandparents’ household).
A summary of the Department’s case
Denbigh, from the Crown Solicitor’s Office, relied on the documentary
evidence provided to the Tribunal, contained in the
three Books of Documents and
the documents annexed to DCP case worker, Ms Chelsea Petrucci’s affidavit.
The Crown also called
Ms Petrucci to give evidence, mainly to detail how the
child had been coping with recent increased and overnight access arrangements
with the paternal grandparents. The Department also called Ms Claire Simmons to
give evidence to the Tribunal.
Department’s current position is essentially that as stated in the
Internal Review decision (although noting that a vast
amount of additional
evidence has been adduced on review).
reviewer (Mr R Davison-Bennett relying on the report of Ms Simmons) found that,
in making the decision to place the child in the
paternal grandparents’
care, rather than that of the foster parents, the Department placed insufficient
weight on the psychological
risks of moving the child from her current placement
with the foster parents, given the strength of her attachment to them.
Department’s position may be summarised as follows:
initial decision to place the child with the paternal grandparents did not place
sufficient weight on the fact that the child’s
placement with the foster
parents is in a safe, nurturing, stable and secure environment (as required by s
11 of the CYPS Act).
initial decision to place the child with the paternal grandparents, failed to
place sufficient weight on the fact that the foster
parents have become the
child’s psychological parents, and their children, her psychological
siblings. The initial decision
failed to give sufficient weight to the
child’s love of and attachment to her foster mother in particular, as
required by s
8(1)(b) of the CYPS Act, the Foundational Theories and
Knowledge Attachment Practice
and the Permanency
Planning Practice Paper.
the initial decision was made an attachment assessment was conducted by Ms J
Webster. This demonstrated that the child has
a very strong primary attachment
to her foster mother. Due to the strength of that attachment, removing her and
placing her with
her paternal grandparents will disrupt that relationship and is
likely to cause the child significant psychological harm. Accordingly,
initial decision is inconsistent with the principle stated in s 7 of the
psychological harm to the child caused by a move in placement cannot be
sufficiently mitigated by a careful transition process;
this is unlikely to be
achieved given the length of time the child has resided with the foster
internal reviewer, and the Department on review, acknowledge that there were a
number of deficiencies in the Department’s
initial decision-making
process, for example: in the initial decision, the Department failed to consider
the issue of a young person’s
attachment needs (as set out in the
Attachment Practice Paper), or to recognise the positive impact of permanency
and stability for
children as required by s 10(1)(a) CYPS Act. The reviewer
found that there was an unreasonable delay in the eventual approval of
paternal grandparents as kinship carers, however, a change in placement for the
child now is not consistent with the principles
of timely decision making and
intervention.
Ms C Simmons’ evidence
Department relied on the expert evidence of Ms Simmons (which will be discussed
later in this decision).
Ms Chelsea Petrucci
Department called Ms Chelsea Petrucci, the child’s case worker. It is
unnecessary to set out that evidence in any detail.
We accept Ms
Petrucci’s evidence, and we have taken it into account, together with the
contents of her affidavit and the various
of the annexures set out email communications from the paternal grandmother and
from the foster mother about access visits and
handovers. It is apparent from
those communications that the foster mother has been anxious about those visits,
particularly the
overnight access visits. Both the paternal grandmother and the
foster mother describe instances where the child has been reluctant
to leave for
access and/or to return from access. Nevertheless, we are satisfied that the
child’s contact with her paternal
grandparents, her father and her
extended maternal family (at supervised visits) has been overwhelmingly positive
for the child.
recent times, there has been elevated stress for the parties, and emotional
dysregulation for the child. Hopefully this will decrease
after these
proceedings have been finalised.
consider it would be helpful for the child if the visits are spoken about
positively, and are supported by all parties. The frequency
of contact visits is
a matter for the Contact Access Review Panel and the relevant case
Our analysis
The legal framework under the CYPS Act.
placement decision is made under s 84 of the CYPS Act, which relevantly
states as follows:
“(1) ...the Chief Executive may, in relation to a child or young person
who is in the ...guardianship of the Chief Executive
from time to time...
(a) place the child or young person, ...in the care of a member of their family;
(b) place the child or young person in the care of any other
suitable person...”
84(3) of the CYPS Act states that in exercising powers under that section, the
Chief Executive:
“(a) must have regard to the principles of intervention, the placement
principles...; and...should exercise the power in a
manner that is consistent
with this Act and any relevant policy published under section 19.”
have set out the principles of intervention and the placement principles in full
in Annexure A.
7 of the CYPS Act and s 8 of the CYPS Act set out important objectives for the
S 7 The paramount consideration in the administration, operation and enforcement
of this Act must always be to ensure that children
and young people are
protected from harm.
S 8(1) In addition to the paramount consideration set out in section 7, and
without derogating from that section, the following needs
of children and young
people are also to be considered in the administration, operation and
enforcement of this Act:
need to be heard and have their views considered;
need for love and attachment;
need for self-esteem;
need to achieve their full potential.
(3) Without derogating from any other provision of this Act, it is desirable
that the connection of children and young people with
their biological family be
maintained.
is defined in s 17 of the CYPS Act as follows:
(1) For the purposes of this Act, a reference to harm will be taken to be a
reference to physical harm or psychological harm (whether
caused by an act or
omission) and, without limiting the generality of this section, includes such
harm caused by sexual, physical,
mental or emotional abuse or neglect.
(2) In this section –
Psychological harm does not include emotional reactions such as distress, grief,
fear or anger that are a response to the ordinary
vicissitudes of life.
the child is an Aboriginal child, the Tribunal must consider the ATSIC Placement
Principle, which highlights that, when making
a placement decision for the
child, specific considerations about the child’s connection to Aboriginal
family and culture is
central to considering what is in her best
the matter of
WWZ & Anor v The Department for Child
involved a placement decision for an Aboriginal child), the Tribunal referred to
the phrase “cultural harm” and
noted that that phrase is not used in
the CYPS Act but that a reasonable meaning explanation for it is -
“a form of psychological harm caused by a deprivation from the opportunity
to live within a culture that one’s biological
family members practise and
may manifest in (amongst other things) confusion, depression, loss of identify
and loss of self-esteem.”
this case, we heard from DCP Principal Aboriginal Consultant, Ms Greenwood, who
referred to that term when discussing the placement
decision for the child. Her
evidence is discussed below.
have also considered the Department’s relevant policies published under s
19 of the CYPS Act as follows: the Attachment Practice
Paper, the Permanency
Planning Practice Paper and the ATSIC Placement Principle Practice Paper
together with the ATSIC Placement
Principle: a guide to Support and
Implementation a paper published by
SNAICC is a national
ATSIC peak body advising on government strategies and actions for Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander children.
Our analysis and conclusions about the relevant issues on
are tasked on review under s 34 of the SACAT Act with determining the correct or
preferable decision.
doing so we address the following issues:
(a) What weight should be given to the decision under
we would place significant weight on the decision of the original decision-maker
in a review of a placement decision under
the CYPS Act, due to the considerable
expertise of departmental officers in child protection and their knowledge of
the relevant
case, however, we have considered a vast amount of additional material on
review, so, effectively, we are considering the
matter afresh.
are also satisfied that aspects of the initial decision-making process
miscarried.
from the fact that there is no considered statement of reasons for the original
decision (and that the delegated decision-maker
thought he was acting under a
direction), we are satisfied that the original placement decision, made on 15
January 2024, was based
on an inadequate consideration of the relevant factors
under the CYPS Act.
concern, we note that there was no input by psychological services at the
meeting on 15 January 2024 and, accordingly, no proper
consideration of
attachment issues and the potential psychological harm that the child might
suffer from a placement move.
the length of time that the child had been in the placement with the foster
parents, we find that the initial decision-making
process miscarried, because
there had been no attachment assessment conducted prior to the decision being
made (this did not occur
until 19 May 2024 by Ms Webster – at the request
of senior departmental
psychologists).
the Department’s officers failed to consult with the approved carers or
the potential carers before making the decision,
as required by the CYPS Act (s
11(c)). The meetings that were held with the paternal grandparents and the
foster parents on 17 and
19 January were not arranged to consult with them about
a potential decision, but to advise them that a decision had been made.
find that there was a failure by departmental officers at the meeting on 15
January 2024 to properly consider or engage with the
principles set out in s 7,
s 8(1) and s 11 of the CYPS Act.
Department concedes on review that the original placement decision was wrong, as
the decision-maker failed to reflect on all of
the relevant considerations under
the CYPS Act. Further, the paternal grandparents’ counsel, Mr McCloud,
agrees that these
omissions occurred.
also find that there were some errors in the factual findings made and, in the
conclusions, reached by the internal reviewer, Ms
Simmons, particularly around
the suitability of the paternal grandparents to be approved as carers. We
consider that the reviewer
placed a disproportionate reliance on the outcome of
the paternal grandparents’ initial carer assessment report conducted in
2021. We also consider there was an inadequate discussion or consideration of
the ATSIC Placement Principle by Ms Simmons during
the internal
Accordingly,
while we have taken them into account, we have placed little weight on the
reasons for the initial placement decision,
or on the decision as reversed on
the internal review.
(b) What are the issues which should be taken into account in
making the decision about the placement of the child, and what weight
given to those factors?
i. Was there a proper basis to consider a placement
foster parents did not really argue this point; there was an acceptance by all
parties that once the paternal grandparents were
approved as carers they should
have been considered as a placement option. We note that any decision under s 84
of the CYPS Act may
be about the initial or subsequent placement of a child and
that the CYPS Act does not propose circumstances in which it is appropriate
the Department to consider making a subsequent placement decision.
our view, the CYPS Act allows the CE to choose to reconsider a placement
decision even if a child is in a secure and successful
long-term foster
placement, if the CE decides that it is appropriate to do so, having regard to
the principles of intervention, the
placement principles under the CYPS Act and
all of the circumstances of the case.
this case there was a second carer assessment for the paternal grandparents in
late 2023. This meant that members of the child’s
biological family were
approved as respite, short and long-term carers for the child. Given the
placement principle in s 8(3), the
placement hierarchy suggested in s 8(1) and
the ATSIC Placement Principle hierarchy in s 12(3) of the CYPS Act, it was
entirely appropriate
for the Department to consider whether there should be a
placement change for the child.
situation is discussed in the Department’s Attachment
“If relatives or kin have expressed an interest to care for the child or
young person who has been in a long-term placement
with carers with whom they
have formed healthy attachment relationships, practitioners need to give careful
consideration to the
impact that separation from attachment figures will have on
the child or young person. Practitioners must also consider whether or
benefits that might be offered in the relative or kinship placement outweigh the
risks posed to the child or young person’s
psychological wellbeing and
development by removing them from an attachment figure with whom they have a
healthy attachment.”
ATSIC Placement Principle set out in s 12(3) of the CYPS Act is discussed
in the ATSIC Placement Principle Practice
“...as a priority, wherever possible, the infant child or young person
must be placed with the child’s Aboriginal or
Torres Strait Islander
extended family or relatives. If after all reasonable efforts, this is not
possible, the child may be placed
extended family or relatives
” (namely, with non-Aboriginal family
ii. The relevant issues and weighing up the risks of harm
involved in the decision
broad terms, the relevant issues are:
Is there a risk
of harm to the child if she is removed from the foster parents’ care and
Is there a risk
of harm to the child if she is not now placed with her extended biological
we accept there are risks in both placement options for the child, we must also
whether either
of those potential risks can be mitigated and, if so, how,
whether either
of those potential risks (taking into account the mitigating factors) outweigh
the other and, accordingly
what is the
correct or preferable placement decision.
issues should be considered in the context of ss 7, 10, 11 and 12 of the CYPS
parties accept that, essentially, this case is about the competing risks of
psychological harm to the child due to a disruption
of her attachment to the
foster family if her placement is changed, as opposed to the long-term
psychological harm she may suffer
if she is not placed with her biological
quote from Mr McCloud’s final address:
“Neither of those risks is certain, and we don't have a crystal ball. This
is a weighing up exercise and clearly, a very, very
difficult one. We have a
divergence of psychological opinion on this topic, with experienced
psychologists who now, no doubt, all
have [the child]'s interests in mind, but
where the central question is in dispute.
To be clear, all three psychologists agree that the [paternal grandparents] and
the [foster parents] can provide safe care, and each
family would do their best
to love and care for [the child] were she to be placed with them. All three
psychologists understood attachment
theory and general application to the
present case, although we saw some divergence in the specifics of its
application and the interpretation
of empirical research to the findings to the
present case.”
Our findings about the relevant factors
Q A: Are the foster parents and the paternal grandparents safe
and appropriate caregivers?
The paternal grandparents are safe and appropriate caregivers for the
a result of the above evidence, and our assessment of the applicants when giving
evidence, we have no basis to question the current
ability of the paternal
grandparents to provide safe and consistent care for the
note that neither the Department, nor the foster parents, question the ability
of the paternal grandparents to provide safe care
for the child. We accept that
in 2019 and 2020 the paternal grandmother experienced some serious health
issues, which have now resolved.
A medical report submitted to the Winangay
assessor indicates that the paternal grandmother’s heath issues will not
on the care provided to the child and that she is now physically able to
care for the chid.
also find that the paternal grandfather is now fully committed to having the
child placed in their
Finding: The foster parents are
safe and appropriate caregivers for the child
a result of all the evidence, and our assessment of the foster mother when
giving evidence, we have no basis to question the current
ability of the foster
parents to continue to provide safe and consistent care for the child. This is
not in dispute.
Q B: Is there a risk of psychological harm to the child if she
is removed from a placement with the foster parents?
We find there is a high risk of psychological harm to the child arising from a
disruption of her attachment relationship
with her foster parents should she be
removed from residing with them (and with her foster siblings).
Department and the foster parents rely upon the evidence of psychologists Ms C
Simmons and Ms J Webster in support of this contention.
The paternal
grandparents called psychologist Ms Fiona Fallo, whose opinion is that moving
the child to live with her paternal grandparents
would result in a low risk of
harm to the child.
Evidence of clinical psychologist, Ms J Webster
Department called Ms Jessica Webster, psychologist, who had been requested to
conduct an independent ‘attachment assessment’
for the child and
then answer specific questions about attachment. We note that Ms Webster was not
requested to provide an opinion
attachment assessment occurred in April and May 2024 (just over one year ago).
Webster is an experienced clinical psychologist in private practice (gaining her
Bachelor degree in 2001 and her Masters degree
in 2008.) Relevantly, from 2006
she worked for four years in Families SA as a clinical psychologist (two years
as a senior clinical
psychologist) and since 2010 has been a private provider of
assessment and therapy services to DCP, in addition to her other work
range of clients.
were impressed with Ms Webster’s evidence, which was careful, objective
and pertinent. Importantly, Ms Webster was not called
by DCP to advocate for a
decision to be made either way. In fact, the request for an attachment
assessment was made after the decision
had already been made, by DCP, to change
the placement and to transition the child to the care of the paternal
grandparents.
Webster’s report and her evidence touched on the assessment, a description
of the concept of ‘attachment’, the
risks of harm to the child
involved in both placement scenarios, and the steps that ought to be taken
during a transition process
to minimise any harm or distress for the child, if a
transition was proposed.
Webster is the only psychological expert in this matter who interviewed the
parties and the child, and who observed the parties
and the child’s
interactions at their respective homes. She interviewed and formally assessed
the child at her kindergarten
on 1 May 2024.
What is ‘Attachment’?
Webster stated in her report that attachment is the psychological bond that
forms initially between an infant and a primary caregiver.
This bond develops
with the infant’s experience of the caregiver.
theory focuses on the relationship forged between an infant and a primary
caregiver. An attachment relationship is not
“transferred” from one
attachment figure to another. However, it is accepted that children can form
multiple attachment
relationships, such as with extended family members or key
people involved in the care of the child.
‘secure’ attachment relationship is developed when a caregiver is
consistently available to meet the infant’s
care needs, responding to the
care needs sensitively and effectively. If a caregiver does not provide this
their attachment relationship is described as being
‘insecure’.
the optimal exchange between an infant and their caregiver, the infant comes to
develop an internal working model of who they
are, their relationship with
others, and knowledge that they are safe and that they are able to explore and
learn. These internal
working models are critical for a child’s
development across most domains, including social, emotional, behavioural and
are different stages through which attachment is considered to develop over a
child’s first four years: the ‘pre-attachment
phase’ being
when a child is in the first three months of age; between three and eight
months, where the child is thought to
move into a phase of “recognition
and discrimination” i.e., where they are able to differentiate between the
caregiver and others; from eight months through to three years where the
infant begins to demonstrate a clear preference for the
primary caregiver in the
“active attachment” phase; and the final stage,
“partnership”, where a child solidifies
their attachment
relationship, and they can communicate their needs verbally to a caregiver.
her age, the child is in the final stage of attachment with her primary
caregiver(s).
Simmons and Ms Fallo did not disagree with these views about attachment theory,
although Ms Fallo described this concept slightly
differently in her report and
evidence. We will canvass this below.
The nature of the child’s attachment relationship with
the foster parents and the paternal grandparents
a result of her assessment, Ms Webster’s evidence was that the child had
formed a secure attachment relationship with her
foster parents and that she
seemed to have a warm and positive relationship with her siblings in that
view was that the child has her primary source of care and positive affection
from her foster family, but that she has experienced
consistent contact and a
warm interaction with her paternal grandmother, and, through this contact, she
has been able to develop
connections with other members of her biological
family, including her father.
opined that as the child has had regular contact with her paternal grandmother
since she was a baby she has developed a good relationship
with her paternal
grandmother and seeks her out for comfort, suggesting that she has a capacity to
form a secure attachment relationship
with her. It may be that the beginnings of
such a relationship are already in place between the two. The nature of this
relationship
could be built as an attachment relationship, with increased care
responsibility and time spent together (noting that this assessment
conducted in April 2024 and that access has increased, we accept that the
relationship between the two of them is now much stronger).
also found that the child seemed to be very comfortable in both homes.
Webster concluded that the child is a psychologically healthy child, who has
developed a secure attachment to her foster mother
and is developing a secure
attachment relationship with her paternal grandmother. Ms Webster stated that
the child has her strongest
relationship with her foster mother (her primary
caregiver or primary ‘safe
The child has
formed a secure attachment relationship with her foster parents, and views them
as her psychological parents.
accept Ms Webster’s opinion on these matters, which accord with our
observations of the witnesses and our reading of the
documents. Ms Simmons and
Ms Fallo relied upon this attachment assessment when giving their evidence.
Will a disruption of a child’s attachment relationship
with a primary caregiver have an impact on the child’s wellbeing
future relationships?
this issue, Ms Webster said that this would be influenced by several factors,
this disruption occurs before the child enters the ‘active
attachment’ phase, the impact will be much less than one
where the child
is secure in their attachment with a primary caregiver;
the disruption occur after this age, it will be necessary to consider the
quality or security of the attachment relationship
that is being disrupted and
what relationship with a primary caregiver is offered in its place (noting that
a child who has successfully
formed a secure attachment is able to go on to form
age of the child will impact on their understanding of, and response to, the
relationship disruption; and
secure attachment relationship is critical for children’s psychological
wellbeing and relationships about the internal working
models that are
developed. It is not simply the disruption to an attachment relationship which
can have traumatic results for children,
but rather their ability to go on to
form these positive internal working models through the development of a
subsequent attachment
relationship.
Webster was unwavering in her opinion that a decision to move the child from the
care of the foster parents to the care of the
paternal grandparents would be
likely to cause psychological harm to the child. In her report she stated as
Moving [the child] from the care of her psychological parents [foster parents]
to place her with her biological family is likely
to cause a level of
psychological harm to [the child]. The extent of that harm would be dependent on
how the child understood this
change, how she would make sense of a decision to
shift out of her family home and whether she might question whether it was
her own fault that she was being moved.
Webster suggested that given the child’s age currently, her biological
connection may not be as important to her as her attachment
preferences.
Webster also reflected on the fact that a change in the child’s care would
not only separate her from her familiar home environment
and her psychological
parents, but also from her psychological siblings, the foster parents’
extended family and their network
of friends. She agreed that it may also mean
that she would need to move away from her school and school friends.
Webster said the multitude of changes for the child may result in psychological
harm exhibited by distress, anxiety and grief,
in addition to behavioural
problems. She opined that it is possible that being separated from her
psychological parents could cause
her to protest the change, fall into despair
and then become psychologically detached.
her evidence in response to a direct question from the Presiding Member about
whether disrupted attachment would cause psychological
harm she stated:
“I’m not sure how it isn’t psychological
Webster said the negative behaviours displayed by the child could include:
... tantrum-ing, non-compliant behaviour ... It could be difficulties with
regulation, her sleeping, incontinence difficulties, poor
social interactions
... tantrums and withdrawal ... a depressed
Webster also agreed during evidence that, should the child be diagnosed with
ADHD and/or autism in the near
there might be
additional risks for her, particularly during any transition in care, because of
likely complications around her executive
functioning, which will affect her
ability to cope with a transition (“...
having to add the transition
between two households on top of...that...should be quite tricky for [the
Evidence of clinical psychologist, Ms Claire
Department also relied upon the evidence of Ms Claire Simmons, clinical
psychologist.
accept that Ms Simmons is an extremely experienced psychologist having worked in
the child protection system for over 27 years.
She was first registered as a
psychologist in 1987 and obtained her Master of Clinical Psychology in
1995-1996. Ms Simmons is currently
employed as the Director of Student Support
Services with the Department for Education but was previously the Lead
Practitioner,
Quality and Practice, DCP from March 2018 to June 2024. That role
included working in partnership with the Director of Quality and
Practice and
the Director of Aboriginal Practice to establish and maintain continuous
improvement processes about DCP’s practice
and providing high level
clinical and strategic advice to DCP’s senior executive group regarding
complex cases and issues.
Ms Simmons had been involved in preparing many of the
Department’s practice and policy papers.
accept that Ms Simmons is a highly experienced DCP clinical psychologist with
relevant practical experience providing clinical
psychology services to children
and young children, their families and carers. Ms Simmons has worked with and
assessed children at
all stages of their experience in the foster care system,
including prior to, during and after transitions into care and within care
placements. We accept that Ms Simmons’ experience is particularly
pertinent to the practical impact on children under the guardianship
of DCP regarding placement changes or transitions when in foster care.
also note that Ms Simmons provides training in attachment, developmental trauma,
managing complex behaviours and various other
topics, for both staff and carers.
We accept that the longevity of her work in child protection means that she has
been able to observe
the short and long-term impact, on children and young
people in care, of decisions about placement changes and associated transitions.
She has had the opportunity to apply available research and to continue to
refine her practice as new research becomes available.
Simmons’ opinion is that removing a child from a safe, loving and
nurturing home causes both short and long-term negative
psychological impacts.
Ms Simmons (like Ms Webster) disagrees with Ms Fallo’s opinion that, while
short-term impacts can be
reasonably predicted for the child, she will not
suffer any ongoing impacts or psychological harm.
report and evidence on this topic can be summarised as follows:
disruptions have both short and long-term psychological impacts on children.
These are reflected as emotional regulation
and long-term relational and social
functioning impairments. It is unlikely that, in the child’s case, such
emotional impacts
will only be short-term. Even if the child is placed with
capable new carers, the child is likely to sustain long-term emotional
social difficulties and may struggle to form trusting relationships given her
experience of a cessation of her primary attachment
relationships (with her
long-term foster carers).
Some children
never recover from a disruption to primary attachment figure and are diagnosed
with attachment-based difficulties. In
her report, Ms Simmons relies on a
chapter on attachment disruptions in a publication ‘
Handbook of
Attachment’
(Kobak, Zajac and Madsen, 2016) where the authors state:
attachment disruptions represent a severe threat to the attachment
bond and constitute a significant risk for the development and
maintenance of
psychopathology
She also relies
on an article by Dr Sara
where she states:
Holding the belief of attachment as a relationship skill that, once
mastered, is ‘transferable” and can be applied to
relationships does not appear related to any theoretical ideas from the
attachment literature. However
, its implications for the child could be a
minimising of the child’s need for enduring attachment bonds and a denial
potentially devastating impact of placement breakdowns and placement
drift on the child
”. (McLean, Riggs, Kettler and Delfabbro, 2013)
(Our emphasis)
relationship, with each of their attachment figures, is unique. Attachment
relationships (or skills) are not easily
or readily ‘transferable’,
even in cases where children have formed organised and secure attachment
relationships with
their current carers. This is because the ending of a primary
caregiving relationship impacts on a child’s template for attachment
relationships and therefore impacts all future relationships.
Children can of
course form multiple attachments (which they organise into a hierarchy), but it
cannot be argued that the child’s
current attachment relationships with
her lifelong psychological parents are equivalent to, or interchangeable with,
her relationships
with her grandparents, despite their long-term contact with
relationships that result from ‘spending time’ with a child, even
frequently (such as with a grandparent), are not
comparable to the attachment
bonds that are formed between the child and its psychological parents, based on
their ongoing provision
of nurturing, sensitive and predictable caregiving on a
day-to-day basis.
Ms Simmons was
somewhat critical of Ms Fallo’s over reliance on aspects of the
Forslund et al
and she expressed
caution about the Tribunal drawing incomplete, or mistaken, conclusions from
that article (as summarised by Ms
Fallo), i.e., (to paraphrase) that significant
harm will not be caused from disrupting the child’s primary attachment
relationship(s).
In particular, Ms Simmons referenced the following excerpts
from the article which she opined support her opinion about serious harm
caused from disrupted attachment when moving a child from a long term, stable
foster placement:
We are also in full agreement that losses of, and permanent
separations from, attachment figures are in themselves risk factors that
be prevented wherever possible in child development
’ (p13). (Our
‘Expectations about safe haven availability stem from particular
relationships and are not simply transferable.
Extreme caution should
therefore be exercised in disrupting children’s attachment relationships
Thus, even if another caregiving environment may be better than the
child’s current one on some dimension, decision-making should
considerable weight to the value of continuity of ‘good enough
. The result is a paradox: holding families to the standard of a
best interests can risk harm to his/her
best interests, unless those interests are taken to include the
value of continuity of care” (p 26) (Our emphasis)
‘Indeed, children with multiple placement changes have been found to be at
particularly high risk for adverse developmental
effects, including markedly
higher rates of externalising and internalising problems and poor executive
functioning...
Birth parents’ right to their biological children should
not automatically trump children’s right to continuous good-enough
especially not when children have spent considerable time in stable and
well-functioning foster care since a young age
.’ (p 27) (Our emphasis)
her report Ms Simmons cautions the reliance or over-reliance, on empirical data
and theory and states;
“It is important to understand that research cannot directly examine all
situations commonly experienced in child protection
practice and that one must
apply theoretical understandings, relevant related research and clinical
experience to guide decision-making.”
Simmons relies upon her own clinical experience when forming the view that
disrupted attachment to the child, in the circumstances
of this case, would
potentially result in a significantly negative psychological outcome for
Simmons said that the Tribunal should focus on permanency and stability for this
child. In her report she concluded: “there
are significant risks
associated from moving a child from their safe, loving and nurturing home with
their psychological parents”
and that the benefits that the child may
achieve from being placed with her biological family do not outweigh those
Evidence of clinical psychologist Ms Fallo
Fallo is a registered clinical psychologist in Australia and has been in private
clinical practice since 2002. She has a First-Class
Honours degree in Bachelor
of Psychology (Flinders University) (1999) and a Master’s Degree in
Clinical Psychology (University
of Adelaide) (2001). Ms Fallo has received
academic awards for outstanding achievements and her Master’s thesis was
Impacts of Maternal Trauma on Attachment”
(2000). Her
area of expertise is in the translation of empirical findings to clinical
practice and in the assessment and treatment
of mental illness. Further details
of her qualifications and expertise are included in her report.
note that Ms Fallo has not worked in a child protection setting, counselling
children in care. Nor has she had extensive experience
with managing placement
transitions for children in foster care. Although, we do recognise that Ms Fallo
has some experience in transitions
in care, particularly involving Aboriginal
families. Her main area of practice is in counselling adults who have had a past
experience from being raised in the care system as children.
Fallo acknowledged that she had not made a clinical assessment of the child, the
foster parents or the paternal grandparents. In
this regard, she relied on the
clinical assessment contained in Ms Webster’s report and the material
provided to her in the
referral by Mr McCloud. She has subsequently read Ms
Simmons’ report.
Fallo said there is a low risk of harm for the child in the short or long-term
if she were to transition to the care of the paternal
grandparents. Ms Fallo
it is reasonable to predict that the child will most likely
experience grief sadness and longing, the desire to be with her foster
and in addition, the behavioural expressions of anger and/or withdrawal in the
short term. These emotional experiences would
be most unlikely to be harmful or
cause long-term damage because the child’s attachment needs would be met
by the [paternal
grandparents] and supported by information sharing between the
[foster parents] and [the paternal grandparents] which would enable
the child to
manage the separation adaptively.
Fallo acknowledged that the child has a strong attachment to the foster parents.
However, she said that children can maintain secure
attachments with multiple
carers if they have enough time together, and that the development of a new
attachment is not necessarily
detrimental to an existing attachment. Ms Fallo
said that, while attachment is important, it is not the only factor to take into
account, in a matter such as this. She said that the quality of care being
received by the child is more important than the level
of attachment, and that
the ability of a (new or proposed) carer to provide a ‘safe haven’
for the child is also a significant
Fallo said that, due to the mitigating factors which arise in this particular
case, in her opinion, the risk of harm to the child
in placing her with the
paternal grandparents is low. She said the impact on the child would only be
short-term and would be most
unlikely to be harmful or cause long-term damage,
because her attachment needs would be met by the paternal grandmother and
by information sharing between the foster mother and the paternal
grandmother.
Fallo placed significant emphasis on the following factors as mitigating any
risk of long-term harm to the child as a result of
transitioning her to a
placement with the paternal grandparents:
The child is
reaching the normal developmental milestones, she is physically healthy and she
is psychologically healthy.
developed a healthy attachment to the foster parents and a healthy attachment
commenced developing a healthy attachment to the paternal grandparents,
particularly the paternal grandmother, and the they
are approved as suitable
carers for the child (any health concerns no longer existing and other
historical parenting concerns having
been addressed).
paternal grandmother is capable of providing the child with a safe haven, and
there are no other concerns about their care. It
is highly likely the child will
develop a secure attachment to the paternal grandmother (if she not already done
Appropriate and
sensitive transition arrangements will minimise any risk of harm to the child,
who already has a significant level
of familiarity with the paternal
grandparents. The paternal grandparents have indicated a willingness to adopt
similar routines and
activities for the child, including by keeping her in her
current school.
There is an
absence of conflict between the paternal grandparents and the foster parents
– they both want what is in the best
interests of the child. Although, she
acknowledges a transition process will not be easy for them, and they may need
short-term therapy.
The paternal
grandparents and the foster parents are willing to cooperate and so there can be
an “overlap of caregiving”,
during which the paternal grandparents
can seek guidance from the foster parents about issues as they arise. If there
is an overlap
of caregiving between the foster carers and the grandparents
during the transition, and then some contact with the foster carers
maintained afterwards, the risk of harm to the child will be appropriately
mitigated. Ms Fallo emphasised that “the overlap
important”.
paternal grandparents and the foster parents are well placed to manage
themselves and their lives to continue to prioritise
The transition
would occur pursuant to a proper plan, and over a period of time, so that the
child can be monitored, and any regression
can be addressed.
Any transition
should include therapy for the child, the paternal grandparents and the foster
Fallo said that the low risk of harm (from disrupted attachment with the foster
parents) does not warrant a decision to not place
the child in kinship care,
because of the benefits of placing her with her biological family. Ms Fallo said
that kinship care will
provide the child with long-term benefits, which outweigh
any risk of harm arising from the disruption of her attachment to the foster
Fallo disagreed with Ms Simmons’ reasoning in relying on certain research
in support of her conclusions (that the child is
likely to suffer serious harm
if she is placed with the paternal grandparents). Ms Fallo said that the
circumstances in some of the
research quoted were not analogous to the
circumstances in this matter. In particular, Ms Fallo noted that the alternative
involved situations where children lost their access to a caregiver
through bereavement, deprivation or trauma, or in unplanned,
circumstances and where the loss resulted in children’s emotional needs
not being met.
Fallo referred to the
Forslund et al
article, where the authors suggest
that courts can place too much emphasis on attachment theory when making
decisions about custody
and care of children. They make the following
observations, which we have considered:
a) There are three attachment principles:
The child’s need for familiar, non-abusive caregivers;
The value of continuity of good enough care; and
The benefits of networks of attachment relationships.
b) Attachment is not the same thing as attachment quality. Attachment refers to
an affectional bond in which a child is motivated
to seek and maintain proximity
to, and comfort from, particular familiar persons. Children are born with a
predisposition to develop
this motivation in relation to significant others who
have been sufficiently present and responsive, and this is usually their
The motivation is governed by an attachment behavioural
system – when the attachment system is activated (e.g., by fear) then
child will seek out an attachment figure. Secure attachment relationships are
indicated by behaviour that suggests that a child
expects the attachment figure
will be there in times of need.
c) Attachment relationships are built over time, through recurrent interactions
with caregivers, and depend on the opportunity to
develop expectations regarding
the attachment figure’s accessibility and responsiveness.
d) Human children are vulnerable and depend on their caregiver’s support
for a long time, and the capacity to develop attachment
relationships appears to
be universal in humans.
e) Children can develop and maintain secure attachment relationships with
multiple caregivers simultaneously, if they have sufficient
time together and
the caregivers respond in ways that provide a safe haven for the child in times
f) Attachment researchers generally hold the view that humans evolved with the
expectation of a (limited) number of attachment relationships
with particular,
familiar people who can be turned to in times of need. Multiple caregivers and a
network of attachment relationships
have been found to constitute a protective
factor in child development. Each attachment relationship is important, with
gaining benefits from having more than one safe haven.
g) Children’s attachment relationships with all their regular caregivers
are important. It is unclear whether more time should
be allocated to a
particular caregiver early in life to assist with cognitive development. The
authors urge practitioners to consider
pertinent contextual circumstances in
settling arrangements for children and to strive for continuous contact with
both caregivers
(e.g., both parents in a custody dispute) wherever possible. It
is also important for a child to transition gradually to spending
more time with
a caregiver who may previously have had little contact with a child.
h) While there has been significant research undertaken about attachment and,
while that research is useful generally, it has limited
sensitivity and
specificity for predicting individual children’s development or predicting
individual children’s caregiving.
However, secure attachment is generally
a protective factor in human development. But attachment quality always
interacts with other
factors conveying risk and protection.
a child from a caregiving arrangement which is secure, stable and settled should
be done cautiously.
j) There is disagreement between researchers as to the value of attempts to
measure the quality of an attachment, but it is agreed
that assessments of the
caregiver’s ability to provide a safe haven should be given greater
priority than assessments of child
attachment. Attachment measurement
instruments tend to be unhelpful when applied to individual cases.
Fallo concluded that, when it comes to assessing risk (and making decisions
of future and previous
caregiver behaviour and caregiver circumstances should be prioritised and that
the quality of care (e.g.,
the likelihood that the child’s attachment
needs will continue to be met by the paternal grandmother) is central to the
adaptation or a maladaptation during and following a disruption in
an attachment relationship.
Our conclusion on this issue
are satisfied that the child’s primary attachment figures are her
psychological parents (foster parents) and that she is
psychologically embedded
with them in the foster family with her three young siblings.
prefer the opinion of Ms Simmons and Ms Webster on this issue in the context of
all the evidence before us.
are not persuaded by Ms Fallo’s opinion that the risk of harm to the
child, by removing her from the care of the foster parents,
is low, given that
the paternal grandmother is capable of providing the child with a ‘safe
haven’ and that there are
no other concerns about the future proposed
care. We appreciate that her opinion regarding the risk of harm being low was
also provided
in the context of a successful transition being achievable (which
we address below). In our view, the quality of the proposed caregiving
relationship that the paternal grandmother (and the paternal grandfather) will
likely provide, is just one factor in this assessment,
but that there are other
more persuasive reasons not to move the child.
assessment is that the risk of harm to the child, through the disruption of her
attachment relationship with her primary caregiver(s)
(and the consequent
significant losses she will be required to endure from losing her siblings, her
is much higher than that
suggested by Ms Fallo, for the reasons expressed by Ms Simmons.
also take into account (although as a much lesser consideration, as this is not
yet confirmed), the likely additional risks for
the child in any attempted
move/transition due to her particularly vulnerable coping abilities, given that
an autism/ADHD diagnosis
has been mooted and is currently being explored.
We rely on the combined clinical experience of Ms Simmons and Ms Webster, who
both have extensive experience working with children
in the care system.
are well satisfied that there is a high risk of significant psychological harm
to the child by moving her out of her long-term
foster care placement now.
Q C: Is there a risk of psychological harm to the child if she
is not now placed in a family-based placement with her paternal
grandparents?
Finding: We find
that there is a risk of psychological harm to the child in this scenario,
arising from issues related to the impact
on her identity formation (including
her identity as an Aboriginal child) and the development of her feelings of
self-worth, by not
being brought up in her biological family and by remaining as
a “foster child” (in non-kinship care).
here discuss the evidence of Ms Fiona Fallo, Ms J Webster, Ms Yaz Greenwood and
Mr Stuart Thelning.
importance of placing children under the guardianship of the CE of DCP with
members of their biological family is a well-recognised
principle set out in the
and the various
policies and practice papers published by the Department. The CYPS Act
recognises it as a particularly important
consideration for Aboriginal
applicants called Ms Fiona Fallo as a witness and relied upon her detailed
report in arguing that this is the primary factor weighing
in favour of the
child’s placement with the paternal grandparents.
Evidence of psychologist, Ms Fiona Fallo
Fallo’s opinion is that she would have concerns about long-term
psychological harm for the child, if she is not placed with
the paternal
grandparents. She said that the long-term benefits of placing the child with her
biological family will address any
loss of sense of identity (which can become
problematic for adolescents) and will be an opportunity for the child to have a
which is secure, cohesive, stable and intimate within the
child’s own biological family. Ms Fallo opined that these benefits
not be achieved if the child remains in the care of the foster parents, even if
the foster parents do their best to facilitate
a connection for the child with
her biological family.
Fallo relies heavily on an academic article: “Attachment and Human
Development” co-authored by 70 experts in the field
(referred to as the
Forslund article – A9). We will discuss this below.
Fallo summarised the risks for the child of not being placed with her biological
grandparents as follows:
a) Family members are committed to caring for biological children in the long
term and there are risks with placement breakdowns
in foster care. However, she
conceded that the quality of care provided by the foster parents and their
commitment to the child,
together with the quality of the attachment
relationship means that it is unlikely that this foster placement will break
b) The main risk for the child will be difficulties with identity formation. She
Identity is central to psychological well-being across the
lifespan and one’s biological relatives feature in the formation
identity. The child’s ability to form realistic and balanced internal
representations of their biological family members
is critical for healthy
identity formation. The intimate experience of being raised with biological
family supports the development
of balanced internal representations of
biological relatives, as noted by Ms Webster, who states that a child raised
with biological
family gains more information about their family, which can
“offset the child’s imagined understanding of their
c) Lack of an adequately integrated self-perception complicates emotional
regulation and relationships in adulthood. Ms Fallo states:
identity disturbances mean that children raised outside the biological family
unit are more likely to develop unrealistic expectations
of others in adulthood,
more likely to experience mistrust, dissatisfaction and emotional disturbances
and, as noted by Ms Webster
are more likely to have “increased feelings of
loss, disappointment, rejection, self-blame, or abandonment”. This is
irrespective of any healthy attachments experienced with foster
d) Ms Fallo did not consider that simply having access or contact with her
biological grandparents would be sufficient to ameliorate
any identity related
issues, as contact opportunities with her family can only be superficial at
e) For the child, there was also the loss of an assumed right for her to be
raised within her biological family. She said that, in
the long-term, the loss
of such an opportunity may be experienced by the child as an injustice, with
corresponding thoughts and feelings
of grief (including anger and
victimisation).
f) As the sense of injustice develops, the psychological consequences can be
difficult to manage and may not be sufficiently mitigated
by the positive
experiences of being placed in non-kinship care. This may manifest in the future
as mental health issues for the
child. For the child, there is the possibility
in the future of a ‘perceived injustice’ if she is not transferred
her grandparents’ care. Ms Fallo said this was particularly more so in
this case, given that there was evidence on the file,
and in the material
provided to her, that the registered organisation, AFSS, held concerns that the
Department was not properly pursuing
or scoping for a family-based placement. Ms
Fallo was of the view that, if issues of injustice do arise for the child, they
be in addition to the unmitigated complications regarding identity
formation. In Ms Fallo’s opinion, the degree of risk of
psychological harm arising from this child being placed outside of her
biological family unit is significant.
g) Her conclusion is that, whenever possible, placement within the extended
biological family should be promoted and prioritised,
as this leads to the
lowest risk of long-term psychological harm.
h) Ms Fallo said this was particularly important for the child, given that she
was an Aboriginal child. She said the internal review
report and Ms
Simmons’ subsequent report did not focus enough on this issue. Ms Fallo
referred to the ATSIC Placement Principle
and the hierarchy of preferred
placements recognised in that principle to maintain cultural connections. She
said it was well accepted
that the hierarchy prefers placement of an Aboriginal
child with biological family over non-familial foster care. She said that moving
the child to live with her non-Aboriginal grandmother better meets her cultural
Fallo indicated that the information before her suggested that placement with
the paternal grandparents would facilitate the child’s
access to cultural
connections with her maternal family and would reduce obstacles to those
connections, more so than if she were
to remain in the foster family. She said
that it was well recognised that, because of past societal injustices,
Aboriginal parents
and caregivers have difficulty engaging with the Department
and other support services. Ms Fallo suggested that this was borne out
evidence in this case regarding the maternal grandmother and her difficulties
interacting with the Department. Ms Fallo suggested
that it is more likely that,
in the future, the child’s birth mother would be better able to interact
with the paternal grandparents
than with the foster parents.
j) While acknowledging the importance of permanence in care, she said that this
should not take precedence when there is a viable
family placement
alternative.
k) In this case, for the child, Ms Fallo said that a placement transition should
be undertaken, particularly if a placement transition
can be achieved and can be
made safely.
Evidence of Mr Stuart Thelning
the review hearing, Mr Thelning, DCP senior social worker, gave evidence at the
request of the Tribunal.
Thelning is not a psychologist, but he is a trained social worker with many
years of experience as a supervisor, and a substantial
body of social work
experience to draw from, particularly in relation to Aboriginal families. Mr
Thelning’s evidence is that,
at the meeting in January 2024, he had
supported, and he continues to support, a placement decision to move the child
to reside with
her paternal grandparents.
Mr Thelning considers that the child should be placed with her biological family
because, in his experience, a child who is placed
in kinship care is likely to
have fewer mental health issues when the child is older, because they are less
likely to have issues
also said that the care provided in a child’s biological family is likely
to be more stable, particularly in difficult times
such as during adolescence.
Mr Thelning is also of the view that the placement with the paternal
grandparents will enable the more
regular and relaxed contact for the child with
her maternal family, which will enhance the child’s connection with her
culture and heritage.
said that the sense of belonging and identity from a placement in kinship care,
cannot be overestimated, and is reflected in the
CYPS Act and the ATSIC
Placement Principle. He supported the views that the Principal Aboriginal
Consultant, Ms Greenwood had put
forward at the meeting on 15 January 2024. He
was aware of the recent decision of the Tribunal relating to a similar scenario,
the Tribunal concluded that the child would be less psychologically harmed
if she were moved to reside with a member of her biological
He agreed that he
had referred to the case when he wrote to the foster parents in February 2024,
confirming the new placement decision
for the child, but he said that the SACAT
case was not the overriding factor in the decision to move the child. Mr
Thelning agreed
with the proposition that each case needed to be determined on
its own facts and circumstances.
Thelning said that he considers the risk of harm to the child (if she is placed
with the paternal grandparents) is low, due to
the mitigating factors in this
case. He said that the child had a good relationship with, and the beginnings of
a secure attachment
to, her paternal grandparents.
was more optimistic than Ms Simmons that a well-planned transition with the
involvement of the foster parents and the paternal
grandparents could occur. He
said he had been involved in successful transitions within the care system. He
acknowledged that there
would be issues for the child, because of the rupture of
her attachment with her foster mother in particular, but he said that disrupted
attachment issues were only one part of the picture. He said it was relevant to
consider the future issues for the child when she
becomes an adult, when she
becomes a mother and a partner and when questions arise, such as the importance
of family and culture.
Mr Thelning said that attachment issues are a very strong
part of these considerations, but it is just one part of a holistic situation
for the child. He said the issues about her identity formation and connection to
kin were a particularly important consideration,
given that the child is an
Aboriginal child.
Thelning conceded that he did not really know the child or the parties, when he
attended the meeting in January 2024, as the case
had recently been transferred
from the St Mary’s office to the Noarlunga
He was therefore
applying general social work principles, and his training and experience in a
child protection framework, when concluding
that a placement move was the
correct decision in the child’s case. He conceded that there was no
psychologist present at the
January 2024 meeting, and that there had not been an
attachment assessment at that time. However, Mr Thelning still maintains that
the child should be moved to live with the paternal grandparents. But he agreed
that he had not had the benefit of hearing the extent
of the evidence presented
to the Tribunal.
Thelning acknowledged that a decision such as this is a difficult decision,
which involves a balancing exercise, regarding the
magnitude of each risk. He
also acknowledged that there are different views held within the Department as
to the extent of each risk,
and whether they can be mitigated, but, in this
matter, he considers that the benefits to the child of moving her to live with
biological family outweighs the benefits of maintaining her placement in the
foster placement. He considers that any risks of harm
to the child, as a result
of disrupting her attachment to the members of her foster family, can be
Evidence of the Principal Aboriginal Consultant
the review hearing, Ms Yazarae Greenwood, Principal Aboriginal Consultant (PAC),
gave evidence, at the request of the Tribunal.
We considered it important for us
to hear from the PAC in this matter, given that we need to make a decision about
the weight to
be placed on the ATSIC Placement Principle, and the important
considerations contained in s 12 of the CYPS Act.
Greenwood is a trained social worker and has been practising for six years,
including in her role as a senior social worker and
supervisor. Her role as the
PAC includes implementing the ATSIC Placement Principle within DCP. Ms Greenwood
gave evidence with little
notice, and by telephone, given that she was currently
on leave from the Department. Only the Tribunal members and counsel were
We were grateful to Ms Greenwood for making herself available at short
Greenwood was at the meeting on 15 January 2024 when consultation took place
necessary for Ms Greenwood to
be at the relevant meeting, because the Department’s Practice
of the ATSIC Placement Principle makes it clear that decisions about the
placement of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander children should include
meaningful consultation by DCP with PACs. Section 84(3)(a) of the CYPS Act
requires the Chief
Executive to have regard to the ATSIC Placement Principle, if
the decision involves an Aboriginal child such as this child.
Greenwood gave articulate, powerful and moving evidence in support of her
opinion that the child should be transitioned to the
care of her biological
family, where she can have meaningful contact with members of her maternal
Aboriginal family, and not remain
just as a ‘foster kid’ in
non-kinship care.
Greenwood said that Aboriginal children under guardianship orders are meant to
be supported to maintain or re-establish connection
with their birth family,
particularly their Aboriginal families, so that they can be raised within
culture, learn language, develop
their understanding around their family tree
and their kinship connections. She said this is important, so that, later in
can know how to return to their Aboriginal nation group and their
local community, and have connections established and be welcomed
back. It also
supports, she said, “our young people to have safe and healthy
relationships later, because they understand who
they are related to in the
community”.
that the maternal grandmother is not able to care for the child, she said she is
in support of the placement of the child
with her paternal grandparents, because
they are her biological family. Ms Greenwood has been instrumental in supporting
the maternal
grandmother and the maternal family to have contact with the child,
by working with the paternal grandmother. She said: “
this makes me feel
very proud. It's a significant experience, a milestone if you will, for [the
child]. She's having contact with
[the maternal grandmother] as well as her
maternal auntie, [the maternal grandmother’s] youngest and one of her
youngest children.
And she's also having contact with her maternal cousins and
they're learning ............ language as a family. [The paternal grandmother],
[the maternal grandmother], [the child] as a family unit. They're learning
............ language, which is [the child's] Aboriginal
nation group. It's
beautiful for [the
Greenwood continued her evidence by stating: “
It's not solely the
placement principles and the legislation. It's a lot broader than that. It's
more layered and sacred for Aboriginal
kids to be raised with
Greenwood is supportive of the fact that the Department has been successful in
maintaining contact for the child with her paternal
family, but she observed
that this has not been as positive or successful with the maternal family (her
Aboriginal kin). She spoke
positively of the fact that the paternal grandmother
has been able to build a relationship with the maternal grandmother and is able
to engage in a therapeutic conversation, whereby they can reflect on their
difficult circumstances but show up in an emotionally
attuned way for the child.
consider it necessary to set out some of Ms Greenwood’s evidence in full
of being brought up with kin.
“It's also the way that Aboriginal people who could form connections with
those families and contact becomes a natural thing
where it's no longer family
child] is now reportedly
delighting in that relationship that she has with both
of her grandmothers. It's natural. It's also the way that Aboriginal people
could form connections with those families and contact becomes a natural thing
where it's no longer family contact as determined
by the Department, but it's
just family time. They can go to the swimming pool, they can go to the park,
they can have a family dinner.
It's a very natural mindset and it leads [the
child] away from being institutionalised as a guardianship child. It's now a
matter, and I wholeheartedly believe [the child] deserves that.
She deserves a natural family arrangement where cultural identity doesn't have
to be an add-on. It is intertwined into her daily
life, with two grandmothers
who communicate openly, who negotiate and return to country, who learn language
together and who guide
[the child]. It's also deeper. It is around [the child]
seeing herself in the people who are raising her. Small things like [the
realising that she looks like her maternal cousins, something that she's never
had before. It's a beautiful moment with grandparents
and aunties and cousins
and [the child] moving away from a foster care system and moving away from being
a DCP guardianship kid.
Now, she's just a granddaughter.
Being raised within kin is nuanced. It is mannerisms and likes and learning
lingo which could be considered Aboriginal language.
It's a lot more intricate
and special for our kids to grow up in, and not every Aboriginal kid has that
opportunity, but on this
occasion, [the child] does. It's all too often that our
kids end up in non-Aboriginal foster care placement. Culture is an add-on,
it's outsourced to a carer support group rather than an internal resource within
a family unit. [The child] has that.
[The paternal grandmother] has consistently shown up for [the child], and the
minute we say, look hey she's got maternal family,
she's an Aboriginal kid, you
know, what can we do to support [the child] in that space, then the grandmothers
are communicating.
They're arranging family time, they're learning language.
There's a big commitment there. Not every family member or foster carer
that off their own back. It's recognised as important. [The child's] no longer
[the child], a kid in foster care placement.
She's a ..........
....................... She's not just Aboriginal. She comes from a nation
group. She's got strong matriarchal
lines and that's being recognised and that's
what's articulated. It's therapeutic for [the child] to be raised in that
Greenwood was critical of the well-meaning steps taken by the foster family to
attempt to support the child to understand her Aboriginal
culture and heritage.
While expressing her criticism respectfully, she described those steps as
‘tokenistic’ and unable
to replicate the immersion in culture,
stories and connections permitted by placement with her biological family.
reject the assertion that the steps taken in this respect by the foster parents
“tokenism”.
find that the paternal grandparents are taking similar steps to the foster
parents to engage with the child’s Aboriginal
culture and heritage, and we
note that Ms Greenwood has not criticised their attempts to so engage.
Nevertheless,
we also recognise that attending regular community events to engage with
“Aboriginal culture” cannot replicate
the experience for the child
of being brought up with her Aboriginal kin, growing up with and knowing her
‘mob’, and/or
being immersed in ............................
language, culture and dreaming
To quote from the
ATSIC Placement Principle Practice Paper:
“An Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander infant, child or young
person’s cultural identity is made up of their Nations,
family stories,
language, traditions and relationships, and Aboriginal ways, beliefs and values.
Missed opportunities to identify
can have long lasting detrimental
this matter does not involve a comparison between a non-Aboriginal and an
Aboriginal placement.
The Tribunal panel found Ms Greenwood’s evidence to be extremely
compelling and thought-provoking. The sincerity and depth
of feeling conveyed by
Ms Greenwood about the importance of the placement of the child with her
biological family was plain. The
PAC provided an important cultural perspective
we considered Ms Greenwood’s opinion to be overly optimistic regarding the
joint-grandparent caregiving relationship
for the child and/or the mentoring
role that might be established between the paternal grandmother and the maternal
grandmother in
the future.
Tribunal has had the benefit of considering all of the evidence, including
detailed psychological evidence, when making this decision.
The placement
decision is not one-dimensional; we are tasked with weighing up the competing
risks of harm to the child.
Evidence of Ms Webster and Ms Simmons
her report Ms Webster stated that it is widely accepted that it is only when
children cannot be safely looked after by their own
biological family that they
should be cared for by others. She stated:
A child who is still to be raised within their biological family ... [after
removal from their parents] ... is likely to best maintain
their connection with
their family, which is the best source of information regarding the
child’s identity. Being raised within
the family can support a
child’s self-esteem by reducing feelings of loss, rejection, self-blame or
abandonment when the child
discovers or comprehends that they were removed from
their parents’ care. When a child is raised within their family, they
likely to have more information about their family which can offset the
child’s imagined understanding of their parents,
such as worrying about
them or having an idealised view of them. It is important to nurture a
child’s connection with their
biological family to enable successful
integration of familial belonging into their identity formation, which will
support positive
development of self-concept (who am I?) and self-esteem (how do
I feel about myself?).
Webster agreed that there was potential harm around identity formation, and that
these issues would become a bigger deal for the
child as she enters adolescence.
stated that the child knows that she is a foster child. When she interviewed her
the child told her that she did not grow in her
foster mother’s tummy, and
that she had another father and grandparents that she visited. The child stated
that she did not
like that she had a different surname to her foster family, but
otherwise she did not seem to be distressed by being the only non-biological
child in the home.
Webster said that her assessment of the child is that, while she has the
knowledge that she is a ‘foster child’ and
that this makes her
different from the other children in the foster family’s household, it is
unknown what the level of this
comprehension is at this early age. She
postulated that it is possible that, as the child ages, she might develop a
better understanding,
have more questions and be less accepting of this
difference. Ms Webster also agreed that, as an Aboriginal or Torres Strait
child, if she was not having contact with her maternal family that
would also have the potential to cause harm for her in terms of
her identity
Simmons did not disagree with the contention that loss of connection to a
person’s biological family can lead to psychological
harm, due to poor
self-esteem issues and identity formation, causing feelings of loss, rejection,
self-blame or abandonment.
Our conclusion on this issue
have concluded that there is a potential risk of psychological harm to the child
by not placing her with her biological family
members. However, we note that
there is a lack of empirical research in this area as to the likely extent of
that harm, compared
to the harm associated with rupturing an attachment
relationship with long-term foster carers and returning that child to live with
her birth parents or biological
Nevertheless,
we accept that, when the child is older and starts to question her identity
(such as in adolescence), she may become
confused, and she may suffer feelings
of rejection at not being placed with her biological family. She may also feel
angry that such
a placement did not occur when her biological family had first
approached DCP about her being placed with them at a very early age.
agree that a placement within the biological family would provide the child with
knowledge of paternal and maternal family traditions
and conventions, family
history, values, attitudes and ideas. It would enable her to have a more honest
and realistic understanding
of her biological mother and father and the issues
that they had faced leading her to being removed from their care. We accept that
a placement which is not with a biological family member (without regular
access) may well manifest in some problems for the child
later in life, such as
confusion, depression, loss of identity and loss of self-esteem.
also accept that, for the child, this is likely to be compounded if she has less
a consequent deprivation of
the opportunity to understand her rich Aboriginal culture, language and
Q D: Can either of those potential risks be mitigated and, if
We find the risk of significant harm from attachment disruption can be mitigated
by a successful transition process, but
we are not satisfied that a successful
transition can be achieved for the child in this case.
detailed above, Ms Fallo opined that a successful transition process was readily
achievable in this case. She considers that appropriate
and sensitive transition
arrangements will minimise any risk of harm for the child, and she is optimistic
of the likely success of
a transition in this case.
Webster said that a clear transition plan could mitigate the potential for
severe psychological harm. She postulated that a clear
transition plan would
have to be formulated in consultation with all involved parties. It would be
necessary for everybody to embark
upon the process positively, and both the
foster parents and the paternal grandparents had apparently expressed their
desire to ensure
that the child does not experience undue distress, and that
they are all committed to working together as a family group to support
paternal grandparents had spoken of wanting to maintain the child’s
Webster said that, at all times, it is imperative for the child to be provided
with a safe, predictable care environment, and that
the paternal grandmother may
benefit from psychological therapy to support her with the care of the child,
with gradual involvement
of the child in therapy as well.
her evidence, Ms Webster agreed that the reports about the child’s recent
elevated behaviours prior to, and after, access
could be due to the child
detecting the foster parents’ understandable anxiety around the
proceedings/access, and that this
could explain the child’s behaviours.
Whilst these behaviours were clinically significant, she surmised that they did
not constitute
a diagnostic condition, and that they could be transient.
Webster did not consider that there were ‘alarm bells’ ringing about
any potential significant harm arising from a
transition, or that it would be
‘too dangerous’ to embark upon. Whilst Ms Webster was of the view
that there was a risk
of harm arising from a transition, she was also of the
view that, theoretically, the risk could be mitigated. She agreed that the
enjoyed a safe and loving relationship with the paternal grandparents, which
could be built upon.
Ms Webster conceded that she has not had any practical experience in transition
planning or transition teams within the Department.
She conceded that her
opinion about a successful transition being achieved was entirely theoretical.
Simmons’ view is that there is a real likelihood that a transition will
not be successful in this case.
Simmons is critical of the suggestion that a safe, gradual, organised transition
will be possible for the child. She says this
is not consistent with her
extensive experience attempting to achieve therapeutic transitions in matters
where children have needed
to change care placements. Even in circumstances
where a child is healthy, and both current and future carers voice their
and co-operation, she said transitions often result in negative, if
not devastating, consequences for the children (and often for
both the former
and the new carers).
Simmons’ view is that children often become increasingly distressed as
they begin to understand the consequences of decisions
made about changing their
care arrangements. In her experience, this distress is often minimised, or
ignored, by the future carers
to whom the child is moving (and often by DCP, if
they are committed to that process). She said this is not intended as a
of future carers, but an observation that adults often have difficulty
accepting that their own wants and needs are inconsistent
with a child’s.
Occasionally, very attuned and selfless carers are able to acknowledge the
child’s distress, and choose
to cease the transition plan. However, it is
common for transition processes to continue, despite a child’s distress.
Additionally,
Ms Simmons opined that being involved in a transition process is highly
distressing for both the former and the new
carers and requires a very
significant emotional and logistical commitment that, over time, may begin to
impact other children, adult
relationships and tasks of daily living. She said
that given these difficulties, commitments to facilitating and supporting
child’s distress (without the ability to protect them from
it) leads to
transitions being accelerated, essentially to meet adults’ needs. In
addition, conflict often arises between the
current and new carers, and plans
are adjusted in a manner that is very rarely consistent with the child’s
Simmons’ main concerns are:
Children moved
to new placements may experience a further placement breakdown, in some
circumstances when their new carers realise
that they are unable to meet the
child’s needs (if they were not fully apparent at the time decisions were
made about placement
course of her lengthy experience in DCP, in an ‘uncomfortable number of
cases’, and despite high quality and
sometimes multiple assessments, she
has observed new carers who are unable to meet a child’s needs or are
unable to provide
There is no
guarantee that the paternal grandparents will be able to meet the child’s
needs in the short or long-term. In contrast
there is considerable evidence that
the foster parents are able to provide high quality caregiving and that they are
highly committed
to the child.
It is a rare
occurrence for a child to be removed from their safe, loving and nurturing home
in a planned manner. Such decisions would
be rarely made for a child, unless
there was a real need to interfere with that safe placement; there is no need to
do so now for
this child, given the length of time she has spent in her current
There is a lot
of evidence that the child is struggling already with the access transitions.
She has exhibited some behavioural issues
before and after access with her
grandparents, which may be indicative of her stress and anxiety.
Our conclusion on this issue
accept the evidence of Ms Simmons on this issue, in preference to the other
professional witnesses in this case. We rely on Ms
Simmons’ vast
experience in overseeing transitions in care and monitoring the psychological
impact, or fallout, for children
when transitions from one care placement to
another are not successful. We also rely on our own conclusions from hearing
evidence over many days from the various parties and closely examining
the material before us.
her qualifications and experience, we also prefer Ms Simmons’ evidence in
this area regarding the risk of psychological
harm to the child, to that of DCP
social worker, Mr Thelning.
find that a safe care transition for the child is unlikely to be achieved,
without her experiencing significant stress and trauma,
and that it should not
be attempted.
we accept Ms Webster’s and Ms Fallo’s views that, in theory, the
extent of harm to the child could be mitigated
by a transition plan that is
‘properly and carefully considered and put into execution’, we find
that the practical realities
of successfully carrying out that transition plan
in this case, with minimal distress to the child, are low.
review of the case notes and the evidence before us, relating to the
child’s distress (on occasion) both before and after
access visits,
indicates that the current contact arrangements are causing real challenges for
the child and her current carers.
There are also impacts being experienced by
the child’s foster siblings.
foster mother gave some very poignant evidence about the difficulties she
predicts will occur during the proposed transition plan,
and the requirement for
her to juggle the individual emotional needs of all four children in her
household, together with her own
and her husband’s needs.
accept that this would be a highly complex scenario for the foster parents to
navigate, given that they also need to be alert to
the emotional and
psychological needs of their three biological children (who are likely to
experience their own feelings of loss,
confusion and grief during any transition
plan). There is a real chance that the foster parents will disengage from a
slow, careful
transition process to protect the emotional and psychological
welfare of their own children and of themselves.
note that the recent contact regime for the child with her paternal
grandparents, her father and her maternal family is higher
than generally occurs
for children in long-term high-quality foster care. The evidence before us
indicates that, in recent months,
the child’s behaviour has been impacted
by the frequency and extent of the visits, particularly by overnight visits. We
the foster mother’s reports that the child has experienced
significant and uncharacteristic emotional dysregulation, separation
anxiety and
some toileting issues on return from some visits. The evidence also suggests
that the child is demonstrating self-regulating
behaviours after access, such as
spinning in a circle.
evidence provided by the foster mother, in cross examination, about what
occurred at the most recent contact visit prior to the
hearing is of concern.
The foster mother described the genuine distress that the child, the paternal
grandmother and the foster mother
all experienced when the child refused to
leave with the paternal grandmother for a planned contact visit. The fact that
managed to carefully resolve that (after some time) for the
child’s benefit, does not detract from the fact that it occurred,
it negatively impacted the child.
evidence also suggests that the current carers are experiencing difficulties
coping with the situation, and that the paternal
grandparents are starting to
raise concerns about the impact of their behaviours on the child. We accept that
this is a pattern of
behaviour by carers that may demonstrate the emergence of
complex dynamics, which Ms Simmons opines is very common in situations
consider that the transition will be particularly challenging for the child,
given her emotional and cognitive vulnerabilities.
conclusion, we are not satisfied that a safe, gradual, organised transition will
be possible for the child, given the complex dynamics
in this case. The child is
embedded in the life of the foster family; this case is not just about removing
a child from one foster
mother or two foster parents. This is also about
removing the child from a home with her psychological siblings and likely also
removing her from her school and her school
Accordingly,
we do not find that the serious risks of harm, caused by disrupted attachment
for the child, can be mitigated by a carefully
planned, gradual transition
Finding: We find that the risks associated by not being
placed with her biological paternal family can be mitigated by continued regular
Finding: We find the risks of ‘cultural
harm’ can be mitigated by continued regular contact visits with her
biological family and support being provided to both the foster parents
and the paternal grandparents about ensuring the child’s
connection to her
Aboriginal culture.
we accept that there is also a long-term risk of potential psychological harm in
not placing the child with her biological
family, in our view this risk can be
mitigated by continued, regular contact visits for the child with her
grandparents and her maternal
family. We also consider that the risks of
‘cultural harm’ can be mitigated for the same reasons.
with the maternal grandmother’s traumatic experience (in the welfare
system and then as an adopted child) of a complete
disconnect with her family of
origin and with her Aboriginal culture and heritage, we are satisfied that the
child has a good understanding
of who she is, who her biological family are and
where she fits into this complex family paradigm. The child knows she is a
child, but she knows very well who her dad is, who her paternal uncle is
and who her paternal grandparents are. She knows that she
is Aboriginal, and she
knows that she has an Aboriginal grandmother and many Aboriginal cousins. She
knows that she has at least
one biological brother, who she has met. She is
learning, and will continue to learn, from her maternal grandmother at contact
community and about her maternal family’s stories.
consider that the child would benefit by maintaining the status quo in her
current placement and with contact visits as determined
we were considering a placement transition for a much younger child moving from
a short-term foster placement to the care of her
kin, our view is that such a
child would likely be more psychologically secure in the long-term by being
placed with her biological
this matter, we rely on all the evidence before us in concluding that continued
placement in non-kinship foster care will be unlikely
to manifest in the
postulated problems for the child later in life such as confusion, depression,
loss of identity and loss of self-esteem.
We consider that those risks are, and
will continue to be, mitigated by frequent contact visits with members of her
paternal and
maternal family.
Q E: Do either of those potential risks (taking into account
the mitigating factors) outweigh the other?
Finding: We find the
risk of harm for the child due to attachment disruption in this case far
outweighs the risk of harm for her of
not being placed with her biological
must determine this issue by considering the relevant considerations in the CYPS
Act and the Department’s relevant policies
and applying them to the
circumstances for the child.
have considered the overriding consideration in s 7 of the CYPS Act, which is to
ensure that children and young people are protected
summary, based on the paramount consideration of ensuring the child is protected
from harm, our view is that there is a significant
risk of long-term
psychological harm for the child by removing her now from her current placement
with the foster parents.
do not consider that a carefully planned/gradual transition process in this case
will successfully mitigate those risks. We are
not optimistic that the
significant harm to the child of disrupting her current placement can be
successfully mitigated by a careful
transition process, even if the child is
able to find a ‘safe haven’ with the paternal grandmother. We find
risk that the transition process will fail in this case is real and
appreciable, and that this will detrimentally impact on the child’s
psychological health.
also consider that there is a possibility that the child is at risk of forming
an attachment disorder if there is any major transition
in her care; this is
particularly so, given her tentative diagnosis of autism and/or ADHD, which (if
diagnosed) will make her much
more vulnerable and reactive to
Conversely,
whilst we accept that there is also a long-term risk of potential psychological
harm in not placing the child with her
biological family, in our view this risk
is low and can be mitigated by continued contact visits with her family. We
consider that
the risks of ‘cultural harm’ can be mitigated for the
same reasons.
Q F: Is our decision consistent with the relevant principles in
the CYPS Act.
Finding: We are
satisfied that the decision accords with the relevant principles in the CYPS
have considered the priorities in the operation of the CYPS Act in s 7, 8 and
have considered the principles of intervention in s 10 and the placement
principles in s 11 and s 12 of the CYPS Act. We have also
reflected on
the relevant DCP policies and practice papers.
summary, we consider that our decision accords with those relevant provisions of
the CYPS Act and the Department’s polices.
8 - we have considered the child’s views as detailed above (principally in
Ms Webster’s assessment), her need
for love and attachment, her need for
self-esteem and her need to achieve her full potential.
11 - our decision is that the child should remain in the current placement,
being an environment which is safe, nurturing,
stable and secure; and with a
person or persons with whom she has an existing relationship.
10(1)(c) and s 12 - we have considered the child’s rich Aboriginal culture
and the opportunity for her to have continuing
Aboriginal family, community and culture, together with her biological
non-Aboriginal family.
decision reflects the placement principles of permanency and stability in
12(3)(c) - we have also considered the contents of the many papers and
recommendations prepared by the AFSS (the Recognised
Organisation for
Consultation (ROC) regarding the placement of Aboriginal children in care).
observe that the AFSS does not support the child’s placement in
non-kinship care. However, the overriding or paramount consideration
CYPS Act is to protect the child from harm and we
consider on balance that
our decision meets that paramount objective.
What is the correct or preferable placement decision?
is no question that this has been a difficult decision for the Tribunal. Mr
McCloud in his closing submission described it as
“a heartbreaking
decision either way”. We agree with that observation. We accept that the
applicants and the maternal
relatives will no doubt grieve as a result of this
decision and the Tribunal is hopeful that the Department will assist them, so
that they may continue to be important figures in the child’s life.
our focus must be on the interests of the child.
all the circumstances, we consider, on balance, that the risk of harm for the
child if she is removed from her current placement
far outweigh the risk of harm
for the child if she is not placed with her biological family.
the reasons discussed above, reflecting on the errors in the decision-making
process and the fact that the Tribunal has had the
benefit of a vast amount of
additional material (including three detailed psychological opinions), we have
determined that we should
set aside the decision under review and substitute our
own decision.
Order of the Tribunal
to s 37(1)(c)(i) of the SACAT Act the correct and preferable decision is to set
aside the placement decision under review
and substitute it with the following
child should not be moved to a placement with her paternal grandparents. The
child should remain in the current placement with
her foster parents.
Or purported decision; see
discussion under the heading “What is the decision to be
There is a ‘carer
approval’ process under the CYPS Act. We use the terms ‘foster
carer’, ‘foster mother’,
‘foster placement’ etc.
interchangeably with ‘approved carer’, ‘care placement’
in these reasons
for convenience.
Section 12 of the CYPS
This is supervised contact
agreed to by the Department.
Affidavit of the foster mother
My voice survey Supplementary
Revealed in numerous case
notes and in communications with the Aboriginal Family Support Service (AFSS)
during Recognised Organisation
Consultations (ROC).
Assessments Australia:
Authorised Relative and Kinship Carer Assessment DCP1 BoD pp 19 – 49.
Winangay Assessment completed
4 December 2023 DCP1 BoD pp 97 – 140.
See discussion about
‘the decision’.
Davison-Bennett.
DCP1 BoD pp 9-18.
See discussion about
attachment assessment.
Section 7 and s 17 of the
Referred to by Ms Fallo and
the Principal Aboriginal Consultant as cultural or identity harm.
Section 34(4) of the SACAT
Act and s 158 of the CYPS Act.
See discussion below about
when the decision was made and by whom.
Regulation 40A(c)
Children and Young People (Safety) Regulations 2017
Chief Executive of the Department for Child Protection & Anor
OXF & Anor v
Department for Child Protection
[2022] SACAT 85.
KJS v Chief Executive of
the Department for Child Protection & Anor
[2023] SACAT 51
Section 34(4) of the SACAT
T Day 1 p 3.
Crown Solicitor’s
written submission dated 12 May 2025.
T Day 1 p 2.
As occurred in
Department for Child Protection & Anor (No 2)
[2022] SACAT 75
v Chief Executive of the Department for Child Protection & Anor
The instrument of
delegation at that time (dated 16 June 2022) limited ‘termination
decisions’ to a certain classification
of persons; it has since been
replaced by a subsequent delegation.
A provision of the SACAT
Act which permits the Tribunal to cure irregularities affecting proceedings
“or any matter to which
the proceedings relate”.
But the previous instrument
of delegation which restricted the power to “terminate” a placement
to certain persons was
no longer a limitation of the June 2022 instrument of
delegation.
And in an earlier
directions hearing.
DCP6 dated 27 September
Khan v Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1987] FCA 457
Carrascalao v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] FCAFC
107 (Griffiths
, White and Bromwich JJ) at [46].
Robusto Investments Pty
Ltd v Essential Services Commission of South Australia
[2023] SACAT 2
P and Bean M) at [51] – [54].
T Day 1 p 3.
The relevant case note
refers to ‘Actions’ but does not record a placement decision.
The Department’s case
management system – referred to at T Day 1 p 4.
T Day 1 pp 3 and 4.
Written submission dated 12
Written submission dated
12 May 2025 at [2.4].
We are not directly
critical of counsel from the Crown Solicitor’s Office for this omission;
we make allowance for the fact
that the Department’s counsel was relying
on instructions. We also accept that Mr Thelning was called by the Tribunal and
not have been proofed or, alternatively, that he ‘went off
Section 35(4) of the SACAT
Act sets out the decision maker’s responsibilities on review. The first
respondent did not call
this witness. Counsel for the first respondent indicated
that two witnesses would be made available when requested by the
T Day 7 pp 73, 82.
We accept that those
references were contained in the Books of Documents filed with the Tribunal, but
we note that this was not
brought to the Tribunal’s attention during the
exchange with the Department’s Counsel about the identity of the
decision-maker
on day 1 of the hearing (T Day 1 pp 3-5).
Affidavit of Rohan
Davison-Bennett filed after close of evidence, sworn on 16 April 2025.
Affidavit filed on 16 April
2025 paragraph 12.
The Crown Solicitor’s
written submissions filed on 12 May 2025.
Additional time was allowed
for the other parties to address us on this topic.
Discussed below.
T Day 7, pp 74-75.
BoD pp 52 and 153.
But no psychologist was
This minute also refers to
a direction from the Chief Executive.
That is, the Deputy Chief
Brian Lawler Automotive
Pty Ltd v Collector of Customs, New South Wales
[1978] AATA
Robusto Investments Pty Ltd v Essential
Services Commission of South Australia
[2023] SACAT 2
Ibid at [99].
Hospital Benefit Fund of
Western Australia Inc v Minister for Health, Housing and Community Services
[1992] FCA 599
(1992) 39 FCR 225
Secretary, Department of Social Security v Alvaro
[1994] FCA 1124
(1994) 50 FCR 213
Seventh Mingcourt Pty Ltd v Minister for Human
Services and Health
[1996] FCA 1283
(1996) 64 FCR 367.
Secretary, Department of
Social Security v Alvaro
(1994) 50 FCR 225
per von Doussa J at 219-20.
We recognise that this is a
different approach than that which was taken by President Hughes J in
Department for Child Protection & Anor
supra (and recently in
[2025] SACAT 45
however, we note that in those cases the challenge to
the validity of the decision was made at the commencement of the proceedings
not at the conclusion of Tribunal proceedings, where there was a clear lack of
lawful authority.
Secker and Secretary,
Department of Family and Community Services
[2000] AATA 290
Secretary, Department of Family and Community Services
[2000] AATA 349.
Under s 35(2) of the SACAT
DCP1 BoD p 11.
Affidavit of Chelsea
Affidavit of Mr Rohan
Davison-Bennett, Acting Executive Director of Child and Young Person Services at
DCP1 BoD pp 19- 31.
The child’s father
gave evidence in private, and in the absence of the other parties, about what
The reasons for the delay
are unclear.
Referred to in an email
from the paternal grandmother to Adam Reilly at DCP1 BoD p 210.
This assessment tool is a
relevant tool given that the child is an Aboriginal child.
Affidavit of BAK 11
September 2024 at [34].
DCP1 BoD pp 97- 140.
In consultation with
Also discussed in the
Winangay assessment at DCP1 BoD pp 119 and 120.
We refer to the evidence of
DTY in this respect.
DCP1 BoD p 223.
Evidence of Fiona Fallo and
Jessica Webster.
DCP1 BoD p 223.
The Tribunal made a closed
hearing order and certain confidentiality orders over those parts of XZG’s
evidence which related
to his past experience ...........
For some of this time the
witness .......................................................
DCP1 BoD p 225.
T Day 2 p 73.
T Day 2 p 73.
T Day 2 p 74.
T Day 2 p 73.
Who is now deceased.
A6, Affidavit of the
maternal grandmother sworn on 11 September 2024.
This is referred to in AFSS
ROC reports.
T Day 7 evidence of Stuart
Thelning p 87, Day 5 evidence of Chelsea Petrucci.
We refer to the evidence of
the foster mother and Chelsea Petrucci about this incident and its sequelae,
which we prefer.
Referred to in the various
AFSS ROC documents.
Affidavit of the foster
mother [27].
Evidence of the foster
mother T Day 6, 1 April 2025 p 13.
The foster mother conceded
that she was unaware that the paternal grandmother was reporting in detail about
access to Ms Petrucci
until the hearing.
Affidavit of the foster
mother [34].
DCP1 BoD p 223.
Referred to in evidence
by Fiona Fallo.
We rely on Jessica
Webster’s report, the evidence of Chelsea Petrucci and the foster
DCP1 BoD p 225.
DCP5 ATSIC Placement
Principle Practice Paper p 11.
[2020] SACAT 111.
Supra at [106].
Section 34 (4) of the
At the meeting on 15
March 2024.
There is a fleeting
reference to the principle at p 7 of the report (DCP1 BoD p 15), but it is not
listed as a relevant DCP policy
considered in the internal review process at p 5
of her report (DCP1 BoD p 13).
Although, Ms Fiona Fallo
did not recognise the disruption of the child’s current placement would
necessarily lead to long-term
psychological harm.
We specifically rely
upon the Winangay carer assessment outcome.
Although, Ms Fallo
observed that this was dependent on the transition being well managed.
Terminology used by Ms
Fallo and mentioned in the
Forslund et al
T Day 5 p 36.
T Day 5 pp 36 –
Noting that this has been
suggested and that she is shortly to be assessed for these conditions.
T Day 5 p 46.
An expert cited by Ms
Fallo in her report.
Exhibit A9.
We observe that a focus
of the article was the appropriate considerations that a court should reflect on
in decision making about
whether to return a child from long term stable foster
care to their birth parents, once the birth parents’ ability to provide
care is judged to have been improved.
Section 12.
Report of Fiona Fallo A
KJS v Chief Executive of
the Department for Child Protection & Anor (No 2)
[2023] SACAT 113
was upheld on appeal to the Supreme Court in
EG v Chief Executive of the
Department for Child Protection & Anor
[2025] SASCA 6.
A large number of cases
had been transferred from St Mary’s to Noarlunga around that time and the
social workers at Noarlunga
had a heavy workload regarding new cases.
T Day 7 p 142.
T Day 7 p 143.
T Day 7 p 144.
Evidence of Principal
Aboriginal Consultant, Ms Greenwood.
Evidence of Principal
Aboriginal Consultant, Ms Greenwood, T Day 7 pp 144 - 149.
This is acknowledged in
the Forslund article at para 6.1.
Various witnesses
acknowledged that this may be one consequence of the placement move.
This is a much less
important consideration; there is no evidence that the child has been diagnosed
with these conditions.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.93 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter