URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASC/2025/175.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:05:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS (SA) v HJB & ORS [2025] SASC 175 (21 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Civil: Application)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS (SA) v HJB &
[2025] SASC 175
Decision of the Honourable
Justice Stein
21 October 2025
CRIMINAL LAW - PROCEDURE - CONFISCATION OF PROCEEDS OF CRIME AND RELATED
MATTERS - RESTRAINING OR FREEZING ORDER - VARIATION GENERALLY
Real property in Magill (“property”) in the eastern suburbs of
Adelaide was restrained by order of this Court under the
Criminal Assets
Confiscation Act 2005
(SA). The registered proprietor is a corporation, the
second respondent. The sole director of the second respondent, the first
respondent,
has been charged with drug trafficking offences under
Controlled Substances Act 1984
(SA), which are the charges enabling the
restraining orders over the property.
The first respondent on behalf of the second respondent, filed an
interlocutory application seeking the payment of mortgage loan repayments,
other expenses relating to the property, out of cash sums seized by police and
made the subject of restraining orders. The second
respondent also seeks payment
of ongoing expenses in relation to the property by the Director of Public
Prosecutions and the reimbursement
of expenditure incurred by others to cover
the same kinds of expenses for the time that the property has been
restrained.
Held (dismissing the interlocutory application):
Criminal Assets Confiscation Act 2005
(SA) cannot be
used as sources of power to make an order to which
is directed;
evidence adduced by the first respondent is insufficient to satisfy the Court
that the conditions required to make an order under
have been met.
Controlled Substances Act 1984
Assets Confiscation Act 2005
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
referred to.
Anthony Hordern & Sons Ltd v Amalgamated Clothing and Allied Trades
Union of Australia
[1932] HCA 9
(1932) 47 CLR 1
Hollington v F Hewthorn & Co
[1943] KB 587
Leon Fink Holdings Ltd v Australian Film
(1979) 141 CLR 672
Mansfield v Director of Public
Prosecutions (WA)
[2006] HCA 38
(2006) 226 CLR 486
Commissioner of the Australian
Federal Police v Hart
[2018] HCA 1
(2018) 262 CLR 76
Lordianto v Commissioner of the
Australian Federal Police
[2019] HCA 39
(2019) 266 CLR 273
Commissioner of the
Australian Federal Police v Kanjo
[2019] QCA 143
(2019) 1 QR 568
Australian Securities
and Investments Commission v Macks (No 2)
(2019) 133 SASR 25
considered.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS (SA) v HJB &
[2025] SASC 175
Civil: Application
In June 2021, restraining orders were made pursuant to the provisions of
Criminal Assets Confiscation Act 2005
in relation to a property located in Magill (“
”) in the name of Company 1, the second respondent to the
action. A loan made by Beyond Bank Australia Ltd
”) is secured by registered mortgage over the
Magill property and guaranteed by Mr B, the first respondent. In 2023,
restraining
orders were made over three sums of cash being $10,715, $40,000 and
$450 respectively (“
”) found at the Magill property
and seized by South Australia Police (“
”) on the basis
the cash was under the effective control of Mr B. The Bank served on Company 1
and Mr B a notice of default
which prompted Company 1 to apply to this Court for
orders pursuant to
of the Act for “an amendment
to” the restraining orders. Company 1 seeks amendment to the restraining
orders to enable
it to meet the arrears and continuing obligations to the Bank
from property the subject of the order comprising the cash sums. Company
also seeks an order that all ongoing costs, including mortgage payments,
interest, fees, rates, insurance and other outgoings be
paid by the Director of
Public Prosecutions (“
”) pursuant to
of the Act.
Company 1 also seeks an order pursuant to
of the Act that all previous
and ongoing costs paid for by others, including but not limited to mortgage
payments, interest, maintenance,
statutory rates and fees, insurance and other
outgoings in relation to the Magill property be protected and recouped from the
property if any order for forfeiture is made by the Court.
the reasons that follow I have determined to refuse the application.
June 2021, an originating application for restraining orders pursuant to
of the Act was filed by the DPP, supported by an affidavit of
Detective Brevet Sergeant Wilson. At that time, Mr B had been arrested
was proposed he would be charged with trafficking in a large commercial quantity
of a controlled drug. The originating application
noted the DPP’s
undertaking pursuant to
of the Act to abide by any order the Court may make
as to payment of damages or costs, or both, for the making and operation of the
restraining orders. The affidavit in support, among other matters, asserted that
the Magill property was “tainted property”
owned by or subject to
the effective control of Mr B who if, convicted of the offence, would become a
prescribed drug offender.
Mr B is the sole director, shareholder and secretary
of Company 1. Company 1 is the sole registered proprietor of the Magill
June 2021, a Judge of this Court made a restraining order in respect of the
Magill property. The order was made upon the DPP’s
undertaking in the
terms contained in the originating application and was made subject to the
rights of the Bank pursuant to the
registered mortgage over the Magill property.
B was thereafter charged with multiple counts of drug trafficking in a large
commercial quantity of a controlled drug and other
The investigating officer deposed to suspecting Mr B being responsible for
tracking and recording incoming bulk quantities
of methamphetamine, recording
distributions to sub-dealers and tracking, recording and collecting cash
payments and making payments
to syndicate suppliers.
Mr B was arrested on 7 June 2021, three bundles of cash comprising the cash sums
were found in locations at the Magill property,
his home address, and seized.
The investigating officer deposed to suspecting the cash seized was money
received from the sale of
methamphetamine. One specific bundle of cash seized
from Mr B’s home address corresponded with a specific record on Mr
communication device. The investigating officer deposed to suspecting
the seized cash was tainted, being the direct or indirect
proceeds of the sale
of illicit drugs.
third amended originating application was filed in 2023 which sought a
restraining order over the cash sums which were described
as “seized and
banked by” police with reference to specific Police Property Management
”) numbers. The affidavit in support of the
third amended originating application described the cash sums, including the
where each bundle was found at the Magill property.
27 October 2023 restraining orders were made in relation to the cash sums. The
orders refer to sums “seized and banked”
by police, mirroring the
terms of the amended originating application. However, the
reasons delivered that day referred to the cash being recorded in the PPMS and
an exhibits log and being stored in police exhibit
October 2024, the solicitors for the Bank wrote to Company 1 and Mr B to serve a
default notice on the basis Company 1 was in
default under a credit contract for
a loan. The default notice was addressed to Company 1 and to Mr B. It stated
that there was
default under the credit contract and the mortgage securing the
obligations under the credit contract through the failure to make
which were due, totalling approximately $25,000. The default notice stated that
Company 1 was also in default by the
fact it had been de-registered. The
default notice required repayment of the outstanding amount, failing which the
notice of default
stated that the whole amount required to pay out the contract
would become immediately due and payable, enforcement proceedings may
commenced and the Bank may take possession of, and sell, the mortgaged property.
The whole amount required to pay out the credit
contract was, at that date,
approximately $436,000.
letter dated 13 November 2024 from the Bank’s solicitors to Company 1,
care of Mr B, the Bank confirmed agreement to postponing
any further enforcement
action until a specified date on a number of conditions, including the making of
an application to the Court
seeking a variation of the restraining order to
allow for payment of arrears and ongoing repayments to maintain the loan
an application for reinstatement of the deregistered borrower company,
Company 1, and the reinstatement of the registration of Company
Australian Securities and Investments Commission (“
B and Company 1 are unrepresented. Mr B made submissions on behalf of Company
1. Mr B indicated that the application was made
pursuant to
ss 40(1)(d)
of the Act, but in the event that was unsuccessful, Company 1 relied on
the Act. I set out the details of the submissions made on behalf of Company 1
DPP opposed the application. In essence, the DPP contended that Mr B is the
owner, or has effective control, of Company 1 and
thus the Magill property and
the cash sums. The DPP submitted that to allow the application for expenses to
be paid from the cash
sums would be contrary to the Act’s objectives
because the cash sums are suspected to be proceeds of crime from the sale of
illicit drugs, are retained as exhibits for the ongoing criminal proceedings and
meet the definition of “tainted property”
because Mr B is facing
charges of which, if convicted, he would be a prescribed drug offender.
Purpose and scheme of the Act
long title to the Act states that it is an Act to provide for the confiscation
of proceeds and instruments of crime; to provide
for the confiscation of
property of certain drug offenders as an additional punishment for their
offending and for other purposes.
Court must make restraining orders if satisfied of the matters set out in
of the Act. The Act allows expenses to be paid out of restrained
property on satisfaction of specific matters set in s 27 of the
Act and contains
express powers to allow property to be excluded from restraining orders or for
such orders to be revoked in certain
Those powers are subject to
specific limitations and conditions.
Act constitutes a statutory scheme with significant impact upon personal and
property rights.
The purpose of
the Act is to deprive certain persons, including those convicted of drug crimes,
from profiting from their crimes.
However, it contains limited and
circumscribed measures to protect individual rights associated with the
ownership of property.
objective of a freezing order, and similarly a restraining order, is to secure
the prospective liability of the defendant to
pay the State and accordingly the
DPP is characterised as a contingent
DPP enjoys immunity in the performance of his
drug offender
is charged with offences against
Substances Act 1984
(SA), that is, trafficking in a large commercial
quantity of a controlled drug, which falls within
, div 2 of the
Controlled Substances Act 1984
(SA). The charged offence thus falls
within the definitions of “serious drug
“commercial drug
in s 6A of the Act,
which sets out the circumstances in which a person will be a prescribed drug
offender for the purposes of the
Act. It follows that if he is convicted, Mr B
will be a prescribed drug offender pursuant to s 6A of the Act.
B submitted that in circumstances in which the originating application for
restraining orders was made under
, consideration could not be given
to s 6A of the Act. Further, he contended the DPP could not rely on affidavits
filed after the
restraining orders in relation to the cash sums were made and
affidavits which did not relate to Company 1 could not be considered,
alternatively, little weight should be placed on them.
do not accept Mr B’s submission that s 6A does not apply to him because
the application for the restraining order relied
of the Act.
addresses the circumstances in which a court must make a restraining
order on application by the DPP. The definitions in s 6A depend
on the nature
of the offences with which a defendant is charged, and subsequently convicted or
acquitted, and bear no relationship
with the manner in which an application for
a restraining order may be framed.
also reject Mr B’s submission that the DPP could not rely on any affidavit
filed after the restraining order was made. The
DPP is entitled to file
affidavit evidence in opposition to the application made by Company 1 for orders
of the nature sought in
the application. The DPP is not restricted to reliance
on affidavits relating only to Company 1 because the restraining orders against
Company 1 were made on the basis of the charges laid against Mr B and the fact
that the Magill property, while in the name of Company
1, was subject to the
effective control of Mr B as sole director, shareholder and secretary of Company
1 and the cash sums were in
his effective control.
220 of the Act provides that the applicant in any proceedings under the Act
bears the onus of proving the matters necessary
to establish the grounds for
making the order for which the applicant applied. The standard of proof is on
the balance of probabilities.
B’s position was that s 220 has the effect that the DPP bears the onus of
proof in relation to any application including
one brought by a party other than
the DPP. I do not accept that submission. The words of s 220 do not support
it. The reference
to “any proceedings under this Act” properly
read does not qualify “the applicant” as the DPP irrespective
identity of the applicant on a specific application. A reference to “the
applicant” in s 220 is properly understood
to be a reference to the
applicant seeking the orders for which the application is brought. In
Lordianto v Commissioner of the Australian Federal
the High Court
considered an application for exclusion from restrained property. The onus of
proof provision contained in the legislation
under consideration was identical
to s 220 of the Act. The High Court stated that an applicant for exclusion
bears the onus of proving
the matters necessary to establish the grounds for the
exclusion order.
reasoning applies to an application under either
of the Act.
is entitled “Ancillary orders”. It provides that a court that
made a restraining order may make any ancillary orders
the court considers
appropriate including, without limiting the generality of the subsection, orders
including an order varying the
property covered by the restraining order and an
order varying a condition to which the restraining order is subject.
B contended that
, which enables the Court to make an order varying a
condition to which a restraining order is subject, allows the Court to make an
for the payment
of the arrears of the mortgage from the cash sums;
for the payment
by the DPP of all ongoing costs including, but not limited to, the mortgage
repayments and all other outgoings associated
with the Magill property; and
previous and ongoing costs paid for by others be recouped from the Magill
property in the event any order for forfeiture
is made by the
B submitted that the orders sought under
are orders relating to an
undertaking with respect to the payment of damages or costs pursuant to
the Act. Mr B contended that there is an obligation on the DPP to fund payments
associated with the Magill property on the basis
that the intention of the Act
is not only to protect the State’s interests in property which may be
later deemed forfeitable
but also to protect the rights of the person whose
property is restrained. He submitted that it would be contrary to
to only be utilised at the end of the proceedings.
DPP submitted that the general power in
cannot be used to circumvent a
specific power, otherwise
would have no role to play.
Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police v Kanjo
Philippides JA (with whom Gotterson JA agreed) referred to the restraint of
property under Queensland legislation (containing provisions
similar to the Act)
as being a critical part of the scheme to ensure property that may be the
subject of future forfeiture is not
dissipated before it can be
confiscated.
The circumstances
in which property will be excluded are limited and the conditions
referred to the principle of statutory construction to the effect that where
legislation contains a specific power which
prescribes the mode of exercise of
the power and the conditions and restrictions on it, it excludes the operation
of general expressions
in the same legislation which may otherwise have been
relied on for the power.
ancillary power relied on in
could not be used to circumvent the
specific and limited avenues for exclusion of property from a restraining order
contained in
legislation.
McMurdo (with whom Gotterson JA also agreed) also relied on
Anthony Hordern
& Sons Ltd v Amalgamated Clothing and Allied Trades Union of
Leon Fink Holdings Ltd v Australian Film
to conclude that
the power to vary a restraining order (conferred by a provision equivalent to
was not exercisable when the court was being asked to exclude a specified
interest in property from a restraining order. That power
could only be
exercisable under the statutory provision equivalent to
same reasoning applies to Company 1’s attempt to utilise the ancillary
orders power in
Company 1 seeks the payment of expenses comprising
arrears of mortgage payments from the seized cash sums. Any application for
order to allow expenses to be paid out of restrained property is properly to be
made pursuant to
which sets out the Court’s powers and contains the
conditions and limitations upon the making of such an order.
were further obstacles which Company 1 could not overcome regarding
example, Mr B did not identify what “condition to which the restraining
order [wa]s subject” should be varied by
the proposed ancillary order.
were other difficulties with Company 1’s position. The
“other” persons who may have made any payments in
relation to the
Magill property were not identified. Company 1 did not set out any foundation
upon which the Court could make an
order in favour of such unknown persons or in
advance of any application for forfeiture.
difficulty was Company 1’s inability to attach the asserted obligation
upon the DPP to pay expenses associated with
the Magill property to any
obligation or power within the Act. Mr B’s resort to
did not assist
him for reasons to which I now turn.
B relied on
in support of his contention that the DPP was obliged to pay
expenses associated with restrained property. He submitted that payments
required by the contractual obligations of a loan subject to a registered
mortgage over property included in a restraining order
have a direct effect of
reducing the value of a person’s interest in the property should repayment
not be met resulting in
accrual of interest or default leading to repossession
of the property. He made the same point in relation to ongoing maintenance,
rates, fees and other outgoings which he contended would be said to have the
effect of reducing the value of a person’s interest
in the property
because, if not paid, they would result in devaluation of the property or
repossession of the property.
provides that a court may refuse to make a restraining order if the Crown
refuses or fails to give the Court an appropriate undertaking
with respect to
the payment of damages or costs, or both, for the making and operation of the
undertaking referred to within
“evokes by analogy the practice of
courts of equity when granting interlocutory remedies such as those by way of
injunction”.
undertaking reflects the potential that a court order of such a nature may
result in material damage to the party impacted by
the order. It thus has a
protective purpose. The power to impose a condition upon the party at whose
instance the court proposes
to act arises from the court’s discretion to
grant the injunction which is
enables the Court addressing an application for a restraining order to
exercise a discretion to refuse such an application absent
provision of an
undertaking in situations where
requires the Court to make a restraining
order when satisfied of the matters set out within that section.
undertaking proffered by the DPP to obtain a restraining order constitutes the
DPP’s undertaking to the Court to abide
by any order the Court may make in
the future as to payment of damages, or costs, or both, for the making of the
restraining order.
The undertaking given in accordance with
, and noted on
the restraining order, will require the Crown to pay amounts on account of
damages or costs if at a future time a court
makes an order for payment of
damages or costs, or both, associated with the making of the restraining order
or its operation. The
section does not envisage nor require the payment of any
amounts in the interim including amounts in the nature of the expenses,
subject of this application.
1 alternatively sought orders pursuant to
to meet the arrears and
ongoing obligations in relation to the debt to the Bank from the cash sums.
B submitted that
does not exclude an order for expenses to be met from
tainted property as it only refers to property or a specified part of property
covered by a restraining order. Mr B pointed out that the restraining order in
relation to the sums of cash referred to the cash
as “banked” and
therefore it could not offer any sort of evidence other than comprising police
allegations as to where
and when the cash sums were located.
DPP’s position was that the affidavit evidence was not sufficient to show
that the amounts sought to be paid constituted
reasonable living or business
expenses of Company 1 because there was no evidence the Magill property was
required for any ongoing
business or trade by Company 1, it was not Company
1’s place of business nor its registered business address, it was not Mr
B’s residential property address and there was no evidence about how Mr B
acquired the Magill property or why that property
needed to be maintained. The
DPP also submitted that there was no evidence the debt, the subject of the loan
from the Bank, was
incurred in good faith and that must be viewed in light of
the transfer of the Magill property to Company 1 in December 2020 and
it fell within the definition of “tainted property” in the Act.
was no evidence about when, or the circumstances in which, Company 1 was
de-registered or whether and when it was re-registered.
The DPP contended that
there was no evidence an application for reinstatement of Company 1 had been
lodged or that Company 1 had
been reinstated. Mr B submitted that Company 1 had
been re-registered following receipt of the letter from the Bank. Mr B invited
the DPP or the Court to conduct an ASIC search to verify the assertion.
No evidence establishing this fact was filed and there was
accordingly no
evidence before me to establish re-registration.
provides that a court that has made a restraining order may order that one or
more of the following be met out of property, or a
specified part of property,
restrained by the order:
the reasonable
living expenses of the person whose property is restrained;
the reasonable
business expenses of the person whose property is restrained;
a specified debt
incurred in good faith by that person.
provides that the Court may only make an order if satisfied of certain
matters. Those matters include that:
the person whose
property is restrained is applying for the order;
notified, in writing, of the application and the grounds for it;
the person has
disclosed all of his or her or its interests in property and liabilities in a
statement on oath in the proceedings
and the court is satisfied that the person
cannot meet the expenses out of property which is not restrained.
DPP accepted that in
Mansfield v Director of Public Prosecutions
the Court held
it is open to a court to regard mortgage repayments required to be made as
reasonable living expenses but contended
that the Court did not define what
comprises reasonable business expenses, nor a specified debt incurred in good
B, on behalf of Company 1, swore an affidavit in which he deposed to Company
1’s “interests in property” including
the Magill property
insofar as it held it as trustee for the Company 1 Investments Trust and that
liabilities “known at this
time” are the “mortgage over”
the Magill property with the Bank as mortgagee, as well as “all other
obligations
and disbursements as set out in the trust deed”. The
affidavit was thus not definitive and the trust deed was not tendered.
envisages an order to enable a person’s qualifying expenses to be met
out of their restrained property.
Section 27(1)(a)
specifies the reasonable
living expenses “of the person whose property is restrained” and
subparagraphs (b) – (d)
refer to the expenses or debt of “that
person”. It follows that for the Court to order payment of the arrears of
loan in Company 1’s name from the cash sums, it would be necessary to
prove that the cash sums were owned or possessed by Company
1. There was no
evidence to support such a position. The restraining orders over the cash sums
were made on the basis they were
in the effective control of Mr B, who was able
to deal with the cash sums as he wished. At the time the cash was seized, Mr B
at the Magill property.
was also no evidence to support the position that the arrears on the debt owed
to the Bank constituted reasonable business
expenses of Company 1 or a debt
incurred in good faith by Company 1, in circumstances in which
Company 1’s last available registered
business address and office was
a location in Seaton and there was no evidence about the nature of Company
1’s business, nor
the purpose and circumstances in which the debt was
entered into by Company 1. The fact that Company 1 was deregistered suggests
such expenses were and are not reasonable business expenses. It follows that
Company 1 has failed to establish that the arrears
constitute reasonable
business expenses of Company 1, or a specified debt incurred by Company 1 in
good faith.
DPP also submitted that the Court may only make an order upon the respondents
satisfying the Court of the matters set out in
ss 27(2)(a)
-(e) and the
respondents had failed to properly disclose all interests in property and
liabilities in a filed statement on oath.
The DPP submitted those requirements
could not be met without Mr B filing a statement on oath given he is the sole
director, shareholder
and secretary of Company 1, has effective control of
Company 1 or is the owner of it and that the Magill property is tainted
On the DPP’s position, the statement on oath from Mr B was also
required because the Court must be satisfied that neither
the first, nor second,
respondents can meet the expenses before exercising the discretion under
B contended that he personally had no involvement in this application, which was
brought only by Company 1 and, accordingly, any
submission made by the DPP in
relation to his personal position had no relevance to the application.
In those circumstances Mr B
contended it was not necessary for him, as
first respondent, to swear an affidavit to satisfy the requirements of
of the Act.
refers to “the person” whose property is restrained applying for
an order and “the person” having disclosed
all of his or her
interests and liabilities in a filed statement on oath. The section thus
connects applications for expenses to
be met from restrained property with
ownership of that property. It does not touch upon effective control of
property. The affidavit
sworn by Mr B was sworn in his capacity as director of
Company 1 and he maintained the application was brought only by Company 1.
follows that Company 1 could only seek payment of expenses from Company 1
assets. It also follows that the affidavit required
was in respect of
Company 1’s assets and liabilities.
DPP opposed the application on the basis that the cash sums were held as
exhibits for the criminal proceedings against Mr B.
It would adversely impact
the criminal proceedings and contradict the purposes of the Act for an exhibit
in the form of cash to
be utilised pursuant to
In this case, the DPP
relied on a statement in my
ruling to evidence the fact the
cash sums were held as evidence for use in the criminal proceedings. However,
the statement in the
ruling does not evidence those
The foundation for the
statement in the ruling was contained in affidavits sworn by police officers
which evidenced the seizure
of the cash sums pursuant to a general search
warrant and the subsequent holding of the cash sums pursuant to the criminal
investigation.
Those affidavits were not filed in this action, nor tendered for
the purpose of opposing this application. However, the issue does
not require
further consideration given my conclusions above. For the same reason, it is
not necessary to address the submissions
concerning tainted property. I observe
that the reference in the order to the cash sums as “banked” appears
been erroneous.
Regardless,
Company 1 has not met the evidentiary threshold for me to be satisfied that an
order for payments under
ought to be made.
Conclusion and
on my reasons above I conclude:
cannot be used as sources of power to make an order to which
is directed; and
evidence adduced by Mr B is insufficient to satisfy me that the conditions
required to make an order under
have been met.
therefore dismiss the application.
Criminal Assets
Confiscation Act 2005
Mansfield v DPP (WA)
[2006] HCA 38
(2006) 226 CLR 486
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Kirby, Hayne and
Crennan JJ).
Mansfield v DPP (WA)
[2006] HCA 38
(2006) 226 CLR 486
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Kirby, Hayne and
Crennan JJ).
Criminal Assets
Confiscation Act 2005
A serious drug offence is an
offence against
, div 2 or 3 of the
Controlled Substances Act 1984
(SA) that is an indictable offence. An indictable offence is one that is not a
summary offence, see
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
A commercial drug offence is
defined to include an offence against
Controlled Substances
Criminal Assets Confiscation Act 2005
[2019] HCA 39
(2019) 266 CLR 273.
Lordianto v Commissioner of
the Australian Federal Police
[2019] HCA 39
(2019) 266 CLR 273
(Kiefel CJ, Bell,
Keane and Gordon JJ); [124] (Edelman J).
[2019] QCA 143
(2019) 1 QR 568.
Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police v
[2019] QCA 143
(2019) 1 QR 568
(Philippides JA) citing
Commissioner of the
Australian Federal Police v
[2018] HCA 1
(2018) 262 CLR 76
with Kiefel CJ, Bell, Gageler and Edelman JJ agreeing)
[2019] QCA 143
(2019) 1 QR 568
(Philippides JA with Gotterson JA agreeing) quoting
Commissioner of the
Australian Federal Police v
[2018] HCA 1
(2018) 262 CLR 76
with Kiefel CJ, Bell, Gageler and Edelman JJ agreeing)
Anthony Hordern &
Sons Ltd v Amalgamated Clothing and Allied Trades Union of Australia
[1932] HCA 9
at 7 (Gavan Duffy CJ and Dixon J).
Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police v
[2019] QCA 143
(2019) 1 QR 568
(Philippides JA)
[1932] HCA 9
(1932) 47 CLR 1.
(1979) 141 CLR 672.
Commissioner of the
Australian Federal Police v Kanjo
[2019] QCA 143
(2019) 1 QR 568
(McMurdo JA
with Gotterson JA agreeing)
Mansfield v DPP (WA)
[2006] HCA 38
(2006) 226 CLR 486
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Kirby, Hayne and
Crennan JJ).
Mansfield v DPP (WA)
[2006] HCA 38
(2006) 226 CLR 486
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Kirby, Hayne and
Crennan JJ) quoting
Russell v Farley
[1881] USSC 166
(1881) 105 US 433
[2007] WASCA 39
(2007) 33 WAR 227.
Hollington v F Hewthorn
[1943] KB 587
; This rule continues to operate in South
Australia to a limited extent, see
Australian Securities and Investments
Commission v Macks (No 2)
[2019] SASC 17
(2019) 133 SASR 251
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (373 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter