URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRComm/2016/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Fortunaso v Department for Correctional Services [2016] SAIRComm 5 (4 July 2016)
Fortunaso v Department for Correctional Services
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION (SA)
FORTUNASO, Mark
DEPARTMENT FOR CORRECTIONAL SERVICES
s 62 Review - Public Sector Act 2009
8065 of 2015
HEARING DATE:
18 January 2016
JUDGMENT OF:
Commissioner PJ McMahon
DELIVERED ON:
4 July 2016
CATCHWORDS:
External review of employment decision - Correctional Officer - Alleged
misconduct - Whether the applicant misled initial investigation
reprimand issued - Whether applicant was sanctioned twice for same incident -
Held: Two sanctions were separate - Reprimand
affirmed -Regulation 26 of the
Public Sector Regulations 2010 - Ss 9, 47, 49, 55, 62 and 65 of the Public
Sector Act 2009
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: In Person
Respondent: Mr P
Solicitors:
Applicant: N/A
Respondent: N/A
Introduction
Mark Fortunaso (“the applicant”) is a Corrections Officer with
approximately ten years’ service with the Department
of Correctional
Services (“DCS”). He is seeking an external review of an employment
decision in accordance with s 62
the Public Sector Act 2009
Act”) initially made against him by the Chief Executive of DCS on
21 July 2014 but revised on 13 August 2015.
26 March 2012 an incident occurred at the Adelaide Remand Centre when a prisoner
was injured. The prisoner alleged that he was
assaulted by a Corrections Officer
(“CO”), not the applicant.
31 May 2013 the applicant was advised that he had been found to have engaged in
misconduct where he may have breached Local Operating
(“LOC”) 10, which states “Prisoners on separation will be
supervised by two (2) officers at all
he may not have provided the appropriate documentation relating to the matter.
The Deputy Chief Executive Chief Executive
Statewide Operations, Mr Weir,
found the applicant guilty of contravening the professional conduct standards in
the Code of Ethics
for the South Australian Public Sector. The applicant was
issued with an intention to implement disciplinary sanctions of a formal
reprimand and a reduction in salary of one pay point for a period of twelve
1 August 2013 the applicant made an application for an internal review of the
decision. The internal review was conducted by
Mr Graeme Payne, DCS
Industrial Relations Consultant. In the course of the internal review Mr Payne
interviewed the applicant, the
proceedings of which were not transcribed. During
the interview it is alleged that the applicant indicated that he saw the
“being assaulted” or “being belted” by a CO
during the 26 March 2012 incident.
statement conflicts with the applicant’s earlier interview with
Mr Bill Kelsey
the DCS Investigations Manager, which was conducted and transcribed on
16 April 2012. In that interview the applicant indicated
that he saw
the CO involved restraining the prisoner against the wall but he could not
recall seeing the prisoner being thrown off
the bed and out the door of Cell 2.
28 October 2013, Mr Payne issued his report relating to the internal review. He
formed the view that the employment decision relating
to the applicant was
reasonably open to the decision maker. In relation to the applicant providing
conflicting statements, the reviewer
proposed that the issue will become the
subject of further consideration.
13 April 2014, DCS Chief Executive, Mr David Brown wrote to the
applicant was advised that he suspected on reasonable grounds that the applicant
had committed misconduct and was thereby liable
for disciplinary action. The
allegations related to the discrepancies between the statements provided to Mr
Kelsey during the initial
investigation and those provided to Mr Payne during
the internal review.
applicant was provided with an opportunity to respond to the allegations and he
provided in a written response on 24 April
. In the response
the applicant indicated that it was possibly true that his statements were
conflicting but that was as a result
of the prolonged delay in dealing with the
matter, not for any dishonest or intentional purpose.
Chief Executive was not persuaded by the written response and advised the
applicant by way of letter dated 21 July
that he had been
found guilty of misconduct and that he intended to provide further sanctions of
a reprimand pursuant to s 65 of
the PS Act and a reduction in remuneration
equivalent of one incremental level for a period of six months. The delegate
advised the
applicant that in conjunction with the disciplinary action he
intended to take, he would also give consideration to assigning the
applicant to
another position pursuant to s 9 and 47 of the PS Act. Section 9 deals with
flexible arrangements for transfer within
the Public Sector and s 47 deals with
the assignment of duties.
30 July 2014 the applicant submitted an application for internal review in
relation to the 21 July 2015 decision of intended sanctions
proposed by
internal review was allocated to Mr Chris Sexton, the then Director of Business
and Information. Mr Sexton interviewed the applicant
18 September 2014.
Prior to the completion of the internal review DCS determined that in accordance
with Regulation 26(7) of the
Public Sector Regulations 2010
error had occurred in allocating the Internal Review to Mr Sexton. Regulation
26(7) states:
“If the employment decision subject to internal
review was made personally by the public sector agency, the review must be
by a person who is not an employee of the
way of letter dated 24 March
the applicant
was advised that although the internal review of the employment decision was to
be conducted by Mr Sexton, as the original
employment decision was made by the
Chief Executive of DCS the internal review must be conducted by a person who is
not an employee
of the agency in accordance with the Public Sector Regulations
2010. Accordingly Mr Mark Stokes, the Sheriff of South Australia,
Administration Authority (“CAA”), was engaged to conduct the
internal review.
17 April 2015, the applicant agreed to meet with Mr Stokes on 27 April 2015
to discuss the internal review. Later that day the
applicant advised Mr Stokes
that he wished to postpone his meeting until mid-May as he was going overseas on
holidays. When the applicant
returned from holidays he again sought a further
delay as he had taken the matter to the then Minister for Corrections, Minister
15 July 2015, having discussed the matter with the Minister, the applicant
advised DCS that he requested the application for internal
re-commenced.
16 July 2015,
wrote to the applicant advising that Mr Stokes was no longer available but
Mr Darrell Treasure, an independent consultant, was
available and had been
engaged to undertake the internal review. The applicant met with Mr Treasure on
27 July 2015, the interview
was transcribed.
7 August 2015 Mr Treasure provided a copy of the Summary and the Recommendations
/Decision to the
After careful consideration of all the relevant information, it is my view that
the employment decision made by Mr David Brown, Chief
Executive, Department for
Correctional Services was reasonably open to him.
However, the decision to impose a sanction of a reprimand and a reduction in
salary for six (6) months could be regarded as excessive
given the lengthy delay
from the initial incident in March 2012, subsequent internal review interview of
October 2013 and the findings
of misconduct and intended sanctions made in July
The delays occurred as a result of both departmental errors and as a result of
Mr Fortunaso deferring the process.
I believe that an external review body would find that procedural fairness was
afforded to Mr Mark Fortunaso. However, I believe
an external review body could
determine the level of sanction imposed as excessive.
It should be noted that throughout the course of events from March 2012 Mr
Fortunaso has remained at the Adelaide Remand Centre fulfilling
his duties as a
Correctional Services Officer. He has served the initial sanctions of reprimand
and loss of remuneration by one (1)
level for twelve (12) months. It is on this
basis that I consider that these later sanctions could be perceived as being
by a relevant review body.
RECOMMENDATIONS/DECISION
It is my recommendation that the decision by Mr David Brown to reprimand and
provide a six (6) month reduction in salary, although
open to the decision
maker, may appear excessive to a relevant review body
However, it is likely that a relevant review body would find that the processes
relating to the decision were conducted appropriately
and allowed procedural
fairness to Mr Mark
Fortunaso”.
way of letter dated 13 August
Executive advised the applicant that he had maintained the view that he had
committed misconduct by providing conflicting
versions of events to Mr Kelsey
and Mr Payne. The Chief Executive acknowledged there had been a lengthy delay
between the date the
applicant requested an internal review and the date the
report was received. Having considered the protracted internal review process
the Chief Executive reviewed his decision and decided to impose a reprimand
pursuant to s 55 of the PS Act.
potential disciplinary sanction of assigning the applicant to another position
and the reduction in remuneration by the equivalent
of one incremental level for
a period of six months would not be implemented.
18 August 2015, the applicant requested an internal review of the employment
decision to issue the applicant a reprimand pursuant
to s 55 of the PS Act.
Alan Martin, from Alan Martin and Associates, an independent consultant engaged
by DCS interviewed the applicant on
1 September 2015 and on 14 September
2015 provided his recommendations to DCS and the applicant. Under the heading
Recommendations/
Decision Mr Martin stated:
“It is my recommendation that the decision dated 13 August 2015 by the
Chief Executive, Mr David Brown, to maintain a finding
of misconduct against Mr
Fortunaso and to impose a disciplinary sanction of a reprimand was reasonably
open to him.
In my view it is likely that a relevant review body would find that the process
was conducted appropriately and the decision to impose
a disciplinary sanction
of a reprimand is not harsh, unjust or
unreasonable.”
applicant filed an application for an external review of the decision with the
South Australian Industrial Relations Commission
(“the Commission”)
on 25 September 2015.
employment decision under review is the employment decision of the Chief
Executive, Mr David Brown, dated 13 August 2015 which
found the applicant had
committed misconduct by providing conflicting visions of events to Mr Kelsey and
Mr Payne regarding the incidents
at the Adelaide Remand Centre on 26 March 2012.
The disciplinary sanction imposed on the applicant is a reprimand pursuant to s
of the PS Act.
The jurisdiction
62 of the PS Act
“62—External
(1) An employee aggrieved by an employment decision of a public sector agency
directly affecting the employee may apply to the
appropriate review body for a
review of the decision.
(2) Subject to the regulations, an
employee may not apply to the appropriate review body for a review of a decision
(a) the employee has applied for an internal review of the decision by the
agency; and
(b) the internal review has been completed, or has not commenced, as
required by the regulations.
(3) The appropriate review body may decline to review a decision—
(a) if the application for review is frivolous or vexatious; or
(b) if the applicant for review has made a complaint under the
Opportunity Act 1984
in respect of the decision; or
(c) in circumstances prescribed by the regulations.
(4) On a review, the
appropriate review body—
(a) must examine the decision on the evidence or material before the
agency, but may, as it thinks fit, allow further evidence or
material to be
presented to it; and
(b) must determine whether, on the balance of probabilities, the decision
is harsh, unjust or unreasonable; and
(i) affirm the decision;
(ii) in the case of a prescribed decision—rescind the decision and
substitute the decision with a decision that the body considers
appropriate
(including a decision restoring any entitlements lost up to the time of the
(iii) remit matters to the agency for consideration or further consideration
in accordance with any directions or recommendations
of the body.
(5) The parties to a review are not to be legally represented unless the
appropriate review body considers that either party would
be at a significant
disadvantage in the absence of legal representation.
(6) The regulations may make provision relating to—
(a) applications for reviews under this section; and
(b) the conduct of reviews under this section.
(7) This section does not apply in circumstances prescribed by the
regulations.
(8) In this section—
appropriate review body means—
(a) in the case of a prescribed decision—the Industrial Relations
Commission; or
(b) in any other case—the Public Sector Grievance Review
Commission;
prescribed decision means—
(a) a decision to take disciplinary action; or
(b) any decision to reduce an employee's remuneration level; or
(c) a decision to transfer an employee, or to assign an employee to
different duties or a different place, made in conjunction with
a decision to
take disciplinary action or reduce an employee's remuneration level; or
(d) a decision to transfer an employee, or to assign an employee to a
different place, that reasonably requires the employee to
change his or her
place of residence.”
the employment decision sought to be reviewed externally was a prescribed
decision (a decision to take disciplinary action) the
Commission is the
appropriate review body.
The hearing
matter was heard on Monday 18 January 2016. Mr Fortunaso was self-represented
and Mr Phil Taylor appeared on behalf of with Ms
The applicant’s evidence and submissions.
applicant provided evidence that the interview with Mr Payne was not recorded
and DCS are relying on hand written notes. This
was one of many interviews the
applicant had made himself available for. The applicant has spoken to four or
five different staff
at various times regarding the incident that occurred on 26
March 2012. At the interview with Mr Payne he took his union representative,
Gully, with him who supported his version of events.
applicant is of the view that DCS breached the PS Act when they allowed Mr
Sexton to conduct an internal review into the employment
decision when the
internal review should have been conducted by someone outside of the DCS. This
issue delayed the matter for about
six months.
the decision was reviewed internally, the applicant stated that the reviewer was
scathing in his comments in regard to the length
of time taken. The internal
reviewer, Mr Treasure, concluded in the review that the original intended
sanction of a reprimand, a
reduction in remuneration of one level for six months
and a possible transfer out of the area, may be viewed as excessive by an
review body and it was only as a result of the findings that the Chief
Executive changed his decision to that of a reprimand only.
applicant indicated that it had to be considered in light of the fact that he
had already been penalised for the original incident.
He had already been issued
with a reprimand and a reduction in pay of one level for twelve months. He
states that he is effectively
being punished twice for the same incident.
the interview with Mr Payne, the applicant said that he does not know how Mr
Payne could have mistaken what he had said.
He believes that he is only here
today due to a face-saving exercise by the DCS. He wanted the interview to be
recorded and took
his union delegate to the meeting. He does not understand why
DCS did not record the interview as all other interviews have been
recorded. The
applicant has been fully cooperative in all stages of the investigation and is
seeking closure.
applicant indicated his union delegate did not attend this hearing because he
did not want to get involved in a protracted saga.
The applicant indicated that
Mr Gully had provided an email to the DCS and that should be enough.
cross-examination the applicant agreed that he may have presumed the interview
with Mr Payne would be recorded because all other
interviews had been. The
applicant was not aware that previous internal reviews were not recorded such as
those conducted by the
Ethics Intelligence Investigation Unit which were
relation to saying to Mr Payne during the interview that he saw a prisoner
“being bash” or “being belt”
by another CO, he could
not recall saying that but remembered that he did not mention anything along
those lines. The applicant
did not believe that anything arising from the
interview with Mr Payne warranted any form of
The respondent’s evidence and submissions
respondent submitted that the version of events provided by the applicant to Mr
Payne implicated the other CO in a criminal assault
and this was a serious
matter. The information provided to Mr Payne during the conduct of the internal
review conflicted with the
version of events the applicant provided to Mr Kelsey
in the initial interview. As a result of this, the delegate had reasonable
grounds to suspect that the applicant had misled the initial investigation. The
delegate found that the applicant had committed misconduct
and was initially
provided a reprimand, a reduction in remuneration level of the equivalent of one
incremental level for a period
of six months. In conjunction with this, the
delegate advised the applicant that he would also give consideration to
assigning him
duties in another position pursuant to s 9 and s 47 of the PS
acknowledged that the initial internal review to deal with the conflicting
evidence was allocated to Mr Sexton but prior to the
completion of the review,
DCS identified that an error had occurred in allocating the internal review to
him. DCS acknowledged the
review should have been conducted by a reviewer
external to DCS in accordance with Regulation 26(7) of the Public Sector
Regulations
2010. While this was unfortunate, it was not a breach of the PS Act
as claimed by the applicant. The internal review was not complete
applicant was not advised of the outcome by Mr Sexton. The information collected
from this internal review was not communicated
with or disclosed to the
subsequent reviewer.
the internal review error was discovered, DCS sought that the internal review be
conducted by Mr Treasure. Mr Treasure found
that the employment decision was
reasonably open to the delegate. However, in his conclusion he indicated that an
external review
body might find that the decision to impose both the sanction of
a reprimand and a reduction in salary for six months could be regarded
excessive give the lengthy delays.
provided the Commission with an email From Mr Treasure dated
email Mr Treasure sought to clarify his intentions in his statement issued in
the internal review document. He confirmed
his view that a reprimand and a
reduction in wages might be considered excessive by an external reviewer. At no
time did he believe
the applicant's actions in the October 2013 interview did
not warrant some form of sanction.
submitted that while it agreed the process was protracted, it must be remembered
that the issuing of a reprimand is the lowest
level of disciplinary action. The
delegate indicated to the applicant that all other matters he had initially been
considering were
indicated that although the process had a number of delays, not all were caused
by them. Some of delays were caused by the applicant.
submitted that when considering the employment decision under review, the
Commission should be mindful that a reprimand is the
lowest form of sanction
Considerations
employment decision of 13 August 2015 made by the delegate to make a finding of
misconduct and issue the applicant with a reprimand
arising from the discrepancy
in the interview with Mr Payne is the employment decision to be reviewed.
applicant argues that DCS breached the PS Act when it engaged
Mr Sexton to
conduct the internal review as the review should have been conducted by someone
external to DCS. The applicant argues
that when the DCS breached the PS Act
there were no consequences but when the applicant is accused of doing the same,
he is penalised.
it is correct to say DCS commenced the internal review with Mr Sexton but once
they realised the mistake, they sought to
correct it at the earliest
convenience. DCS ensured that the whole of the internal review conducted by Mr
Sexton was disregarded.
The internal reviewer who was engaged after the mistake
commenced the review from the beginning.
DCS recommenced the process, it did so in accordance with the
Regulations. Having discovered that the initial internal review was inconsistent
with the PS Act and Regulations DCS rectified
it when they arranged for the
matter to be conducted by a reviewer external from DCS. While the circumstances
were unfortunate, DCS
rectified the matter and as a result of this DCS did not
breach the PS Act or the accompanying Regulations.
DCS acknowledge that the mistake caused delays in having the matter finalised,
they were not the only party responsible for
delays in having the matter
determined. The applicant also caused delays in the process that included a
period of leave when he was
overseas and an extended period when the
investigation be suspended while he sought the intervention of the then Minister
for Correctional
applicant argues that the additional sanction of a reprimand is unjust given
that he has already received a finding of misconduct
and a reduction in pay of
one level for twelve months. The applicant argues that the second reprimand
arises from the same matter
and as a result the applicant should not be
penalised twice.
is not disputed by the parties that the second employment decision did arise
from the applicant's interview conducted by Mr Payne
during the internal
submitted that the applicant had initially been found guilty of misconduct for
the substantive matter arising from the incident
that occurred on 26 March 2012
for misconduct for breaching the LOC in not ensuring two CO’s were
supervising prisoners on
separation at all times.
submitted that this matter is different to the original issue as it relates to
providing misleading versions of events. What was
allegedly stated to Mr Payne
by the applicant was a serious matter that may have resulted in criminal
proceedings against the CO
involved in the initial incident. The conflicting
version of events provided by the applicant to
Mr Payne was serious and if
proven, constituted misconduct which warrants further discipline.
this matter I am of the view that the second matter is separate and distinct
from the first. If the applicant did make the statement
Mr Payne as
described by him, then this is substantially different to the applicant’s
first statement. If the second version
of events was provided by the applicant
at the first interview, DCS would have been dealing with a case of assault
against the other
CO. Providing two distinctly different versions of events, if
found, would justify separate sanctions from the first incident that
not following procedures in relation to the movement of prisoners.
DCS could not find a logical reason why Mr Payne would state that the applicant
made these comments if he had not done so. The delegate
had found the applicant
was guilty of misconduct and the initial intention was to provide the applicant
with a reprimand and reduction
of pay up to one level for six months,
consideration was made whether the applicant should be transferred from his
current workplace.
the delegate considered the following comments made by
Mr Treasure in the
internal review that although the reviewer formed the view that the decision by
the delegate was reasonably open
to him, he made the following
observation:
“... the decision to impose a sanction of a
reprimand and a reduction in salary for six (6) months could be regarded as
given the lengthy delay from the initial incident in March 2012,
subsequent internal review interview of October 2013 and the findings
misconduct and intended sanctions made in July
effect, the delegate considered the internal reviewer’s observations and
reduced the intended sanctions to a reprimand only.
In the circumstances DCS
argues that this sanction is the lowest form of sanction available to them and
must be considered in this
applicant’s position is that he does not understand how Mr Payne came to
the view that the applicant stated that he saw
the prisoner “being
assaulted” or “being belted” by the other CO. The applicant
denies he said words to this
effect and argued that his union delegate provided
an email supporting his position. The email from Mr Gully indicated that he did
not recall the applicant using terms such as seeing the prisoner “being
belted” or “being assaulted”.
the interview between Mr Payne and the applicant, Mr Payne sought confirmation
from the applicant that he agreed with his version
of notes taken from the
interview. On Tuesday 22 October 2013 at 5:11pm the applicant provided the
following email to Mr Payne:
There are two points which I wish to change the emphasis on.
Point 1 ‘where my partner removed the prisoner from cell 1 to cell
2’. I wish to add I was by my partner’s side
when he removed the
Point 2 ‘On his return he observed the prisoner being assaulted or
being belted and that he did not interfere as he himself
could be accused of
participating in the abuse of the prisoner.’ I wish to say that what I
stated was incorrect. The prisoner
was restrained using reasonable force and was
under control which is why I didn’t want to make the situation worse or
the prisoner which was unnecessary. I believe the stress that has been
inflicted upon me by the department has caused me to have
some issues with my
memory in regard to the incident. I would like to state that the incident was a
long time ago and recalling every
exact detail is hard. I would also like to add
that the department has offered me no extra training and these charges are
punitive. The psychologist who I saw with the EPA Employee Assistant
Program said that the department’s actions seem to have
caused my stress
levels to rise and affected my physical and mental wellbeing.
point 2 of the above email, in relation to the prisoner “being
assaulted” or “being belted” the
“I wish to say that what I stated was
incorrect”.
have concluded from this statement the applicant agrees that he made the
comments. The applicant does not indicate that the reviewer
misunderstood what
he said or that the reviewer has added comments that the applicant did not make.
The email sent to Mr Payne was
eight days after his interview. It was
contemporaneous and made a very short time after the interview. The email
clarifies that the
applicant is seeking to change what he said at the interview,
not to correct a mistake made by the reviewer at the interview. It
is clear from
the email that the applicant did in fact make the statements in relation to the
prisoner “being belted”
or “being assaulted” I have
concluded that the email indicates clarifies that the applicant is seeking to
withdraw what
he actually said.
considered all of the evidence and documents available to me I have found on the
balance of probabilities that the applicant
did provide a different version of
events to Mr Payne from his original account and having done so, committed
misconduct. Having
found that the applicant committed misconduct, I have
considered the penalty of a reprimand being the lowest form of sanction
I am of the view that the sanction is appropriate in the
circumstances.
accordance with s 62(4) of the PS Act I have determined that the decision made
by the delegate to find that the applicant was guilty
of misconduct and that the
applicant receive a reprimand is appropriate and accordingly, the decision by
the delegate is affirmed.
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
It is the practice of this Commission to publish its reasons for decision in
full on the Internet. If any party or person contends
that these reasons for
decision should not be published in full the party or person must make an
application within seven days of
the delivery of these reasons. The application
shall be by an Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should
addressed to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within
the time specified these reasons will be published
in accordance with the
Commission’s usual practice.
Respondent’s Book of Documents
Respondent’s Book of Documents
Respondent’s Book of Documents
Respondent’s Book of Documents
Respondent’s Book of Documents
Respondent’s Outline of Argument
Respondent’s Book of Documents
Respondent’s Book of Documents
Respondent’s Book of Documents
Respondent’s Book of Documents
Respondent’s Book of Documents
Respondent’s Book of Documents
Tab 2.11 of
the respondent’s outline of argument
respondent’s book of documents
respondent’s book of documents
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (191 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter