URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWLRP/2010/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
[2010] SAWLRP 5
WORKCOVER LEVY REVIEW PANEL
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
(Employer No. E03644502 -- File Reference 2009-0004000)
(Applicant)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION
OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
Member P.G. Eblen
Deputy Member
T.M. Minett
Deputy Member C.B. Davidson
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED 7
Application for review -- impact on employer’s claims history of
claim of particular worker -- claims history taken into account
in calculating
levy -- whether claim should be treated as secondary disability and thus
disregarded from claims history -- application
out of time in relation to first
year’s levy assessment but not in relation to second -- reasonable to
assume application intends
to refer to both -- principles for extending time --
merits of application -- examination of evidence -- nurse experiencing pain
shoulder culminating seven months later in incapacitating symptoms --
consideration of concept of disabilities that develop gradually
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Cases referred to:
Adventure Tours v. WorkCover
[2007] SAWLRP 2
UnitingCare Wesley Port Adelaide v. WorkCover
Camms Group v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2008] SAWLRP 4
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v. Taylor
[1996] HCA 25
(1996) 186 CLR 541
70 ALJR 866
Ulowski v. Miller
[1968] SASR 277
Santos v. WorkCover
[1998] SASC 6839
(1998) 199 LSJS
Hunter Valley Developments v. Cohen
[1984] FCA 176
Kulja v. WorkCover
[2005] SAWCT 94
Gallo v. Dawson
[1990] HCA 30
(1990) 64 ALJR 458
WorkCover Corporation v. Harley
[1998] SASC 6622
Tickled Pink v. WorkCover
[2009] SAWLRP 5
Quality Staff v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP 3
Arnott’s Snack Products v. Yacob
[1985] HCA 2
(1985) 155 CLR 171
Dibbins v. Dibbins
(1978) 80 LSJS 165
Ivkovic v. Rinaldi and Ivkovic
(1980) 25 SASR 516
GMH v. Barkway
(1975) 11 SASR 381
(1975) 66 LSJS
Arrowcrest v. Markowski
(1991) 55 SASR 557
[1991] SASC
Coates v. Commissioner for Railways
(1963) 81 WN (NSW)
Appearances:
Mr C.A. Sargent of counsel for the applicant employer.
J.K. O’Loughlin of counsel for the respondent WorkCover.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
This is the
determination of an application, dated 12 May 2009, seeking a review pursuant to
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
") of a levy decision made by the WorkCover Corporation of South Australia
("WorkCover") dated 23 May 2008. The assessment was partly
based on the
employer’s recorded claims history, which is subject to dispute in
relation to the claim of one worker.
, at the relevant time, provided as follows:
Review of levy,
penalty interest or fine
(1) Where an employer considers that a decision of the
Corporation as to--
the fixing or assessment of a levy;
the imposition of penalty interest or a fine;
the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead
to the imposition of a supplementary levy,
is unreasonable, the Board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a levy,
penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined
by the Board, by the Board itself, or by a committee or
person to whom the Board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the Board has an
absolute discretion as to whether
it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the Board may--
alter a levy or an assessment;
quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
quash or vary a condition imposed by the Corporation.
(5) An application under this section for review of a decision of the
Corporation--
must, if the decision relates to a class of employer, be made
within four months after notice of the decision was given;
must, if the decision relates to an individual employer, be made
within two months after the employer was given notice of the decision,
unless the Board (or its delegate) allows an extension of time for making the
application.
immediately apparent from
section 72(5)
that the application was lodged out of
time. Time to lodge an application to review a decision dated 23 May 2008,
taking into account
the posting rule embodied in
section 117
have expired in the last week of July 2008. WorkCover opposed the necessary
extension of time.
This Panel is the
Board’s delegate under the section: see the
WorkCover Levy Review
Determination 2002
, as amended (for the version current at the relevant
South Australian Government Gazette
, 3 July 2008,
, under which
the dispute has arisen, at the relevant time provided (so far as is
Adjustment of levy in relation to individual
(1) The Corporation may, in relation to a particular employer,
having regard to all or any of the following matters--
the adequacy or inadequacy of measures taken by the employer to
reduce the incidence of work related traumas;
the incidence or costs of claims in respect of compensable
disabilities suffered by the employer’s workers (disregarding claims
class excluded from the ambit of this paragraph by regulation);
the rehabilitation facilities or services for disabled workers
provided by the employer, or the absence or inadequacy of such facilities
services provided by the employer;
the employer’s practices as to the retention, employment or
re-employment of disabled workers (and in particular, any failure
employer’s part to provide, in accordance with this
, employment to a
worker who has suffered a compensable disability in the employer’s
employment);
such other matters (whether similar or dissimilar to those
referred to above) as the Corporation considers relevant,
grant to the
employer a remission of the levy that would be otherwise payable or impose on
the employer a supplementary levy (as the
case may require). ...
It is under paragraph
subsection (1) that an employer’s claims history may be taken into account
in assessing the employer’s levy, by the
granting of a remission or the
imposition of a supplement. The application for review refers to the claim of a
particular worker.
The Board of WorkCover
has set out parameters for the exercise of discretions under
officers. The version that was current at the time of the subject reviewable
decision was the Board determination set out
South Australian
Government Gazette
on 26 July 2007, at p.3191 ("LAS07"). Element 1 of LAS07
is relevant to the decision in this matter; however, the dispute before
not turn on the wording of LAS07.
common reason for the exclusion of a claim from calculations is that it is a
secondary or unrepresentative disability (to
which the words in parentheses in
section 67(1)
refer). The employer contends that this claim was
The term "secondary disability"
is defined by
section 3(1)
means a disability that is, or results from, the aggravation,
acceleration, exacerbation, deterioration or recurrence of a prior
disability;
considers that the contentious claim was a single one that developed gradually,
in the way envisaged by
section 113
. It will be convenient to set out
a portion of
Disabilities that
develop gradually
. (1) A disability (not being noise induced hearing loss) that
develops gradually or is a disease shall be deemed to have occurred
worker first becomes totally or a partially incapacitated for work by the
disability.
(2) Subject to this section, where a claim is made under this
in respect of noise induced hearing loss by a worker (not being a person who
has retired from employment on account of age or ill-health),
the whole of the
loss shall be deemed to have occurred immediately before notice of the
disability was given and, subject to any
proof to the contrary, to have arisen
out of employment in which the worker was last exposed to noise capable of
causing noise induced
hearing loss. ...
We will return to discuss the subject of
the parties’ contentions. Firstly, it is appropriate to consider the
implications of
the application being out of
Extension of time
As mentioned
in paragraph [
], the application for
review was out of time by approximately ten months. From the dates, it appears
reasonable to us to infer that
the lodging of the application was prompted by
receipt of the corresponding decision embodied in the following year’s
notice, at which time the contentious claim would again have been taken
into consideration in the decision on the employer’s
levy. In relation to
the second year, the application is in time, and although no copy of the
2009-2010 decision is before us, it
seems reasonable to take the application for
review to refer to both years.
permits an extension of time to be granted in relation to the first
year’s levy assessment. The Panel has discussed the principles
to such extensions in such cases as
Adventure Tours v. WorkCover
[2007] SAWLRP 2
UnitingCare Wesley Port Adelaide v. WorkCover
[2007] SAWLRP 5
Camms Group v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2008] SAWLRP
The paramount principle is that the purpose of an extension of time provision
is to enable justice to be done between parties:
Brisbane South Regional
Health Authority v. Taylor
[1996] HCA 25
(1996) 186 CLR 541
Many cases have attempted to enumerate factors that will be
relevant in the decision as to what the interests of justice require
particular circumstances: see, for example,
Ulowski v. Miller
[1968] SASR 277
Santos v. WorkCover
[1998] SASC 6839
(1998) 199 LSJS 83
Hunter Valley Developments v. Cohen
(1984) 3 FCR
Gallo v. Dawson
[1990] HCA 30
(1990) 64 ALJR 458
McHugh J, who was also one of the judges in
, wrote the
"The discretion to extend time is given for the sole
purpose of enabling the Court or Justice to do justice between the parties: see
Hughes v. National Trustees Executors and Agency Co. of Australasia
[1978] VicRp 27
[1978] VR 257
, at p 262. This means that the discretion can only be
exercised in favour of an applicant upon proof that strict compliance with
rules will work an injustice upon the applicant. In order to determine whether
the rules will work an injustice, it is necessary
to have regard to the history
of the proceedings, the conduct of the parties, the nature of the litigation,
and the consequences
for the parties of the grant or refusal of the application
for extension of time: see
Avery v. No.2 Public Service Appeal
[1973] 2 NZLR 86
Jess v. Scott
, at pp 194-195. When the application is for an extension of time in
which to file an appeal, it is always necessary to consider the
prospects of the
applicant succeeding in the appeal: see
Burns v. Grigg
[1967] VicRp 113
, at p 872;
, at pp 263-264;
Mitchelson v.
(1979) 24 ALR 522
, at p 524."
His Honour in that passage has carefully
emphasised that it is "always necessary" to consider the prospects of the
applicant succeeding
only in the case of an application for time to appeal. We
acknowledge that these proceedings are not to be characterised as an appeal,
reasons analogous to those set out by Hannon DP in
[2005] SAWCT 94
). Nevertheless, we think that in the
circumstances of this case the prospects of the applicant employer succeeding in
the application
are a relevant, in fact decisive, factor, and given the way the
case was argued before us, we turn to consider the merits of the
application.
The worker’s disability
The worker was born in 1970 and employed
by the employer in 1995 as a registered nurse in the employer’s aged care
at North Adelaide. The worker’s claim dated 6 June 2007 (p.1 of
the book of documents before us) referred to an injury to the
left shoulder in
October 2006 in the nature of "subacromial bursal thickening" and was supported
by a prescribed medical certificate
of Dr A. Tan dated 6 June 2007
certificate gave the diagnosis as "L shoulder injury, including bursal
thickening and adhesions", attributed to "lifting heavy
patients, and making
beds" with a reported date of injury of 28 May 2007. The certificate also
"L shoulder initial injury Oct 2006, aggravation on 28
The certificate indicated that the
worker was fit for modified duties for the following week, subject to
restrictions described as
"with L arm, lifting limit 3 kg, no abduction more
than 45 degrees". A further certificate dated 13 June 2007 (p.18) extended the
restrictions with slight variation:
"with L arm, lifting limit 3
kg, no excesive [sic] abduction, no dressings."
The worker’s claim was accepted by
notice of the claims agent dated 15 June 2007 (p.59), for a closed period to 13
reflecting the initial prescribed medical certificate. A further
notice of the claims agent dated 2 July 2007 (p.64) extended this
to acceptance
for ongoing income maintenance payments in respect of partial incapacity for
The next certificate, dated 22 June
2007 (p.19), certified the worker unfit for work on 21 and 22 June, but fit for
modified duties
from 23 June to 7 July 2007, with similar restrictions to those
mentioned before. The period 21-22 June 2007 seems to be the only
total incapacity for work attributable to this claim in the documents before
There seems to be a gap in the
certificates before us. The next one is dated 22 August 2007 (p.20), and
certifies the worker fit for
modified duties from that day to 14 September 2007
subject to the slightly less severe restrictions:
"with L arm,
lifting limit 3 kg, no excessive
abduction movements
medication round and
wound dressings only attempt once a week on Thursdays."
Certificates of partial incapacity
appear to have continued for a considerable time, with the gradual easing of
restrictions. It is
not necessary to detail all of these certificates, but it is
worth recording that the latest one before us was dated 2 September
covered the period 2 September to 5 December 2008, listing the following
restrictions:
"with L arm,
lifting limit 5 kg, no excessive
abduction movements,
medication round and
wound dressings to attempt 6x a fortnight, but not on consecutive
To have an attached care worker to
This certificate indicated a further
review would take place on 5 December 2008, so no doubt there is at least one
further certificate.
Indeed, at the time of our hearing, it did appear that
permanent restrictions would be in
The claims agent sought a report
from the certifying doctor, Dr Tan. His report dated 4 July 2007 (p.32)
indicated little by way of
history but stated:
"Her duties
include repetitively:
Lifting patients, some of considerable
body weight.
Crushing tablets for residents
to swallow.
Sometimes adjusting the weights
of beds by winding up a mechanical lifter.
"These duties have
caused pains in her left shoulder, since about October, 2006.
"This injury was further aggravated by work duties on 28/5/2007.
"It is noted that [the worker] is a Chinese lady of small stature and slim
"In summary, [the worker] complained of left shoulder pains, caused by
work related duties since October 2006. It was further aggravated
28/5/2007."
Dr Tan had also referred the worker for
an ultrasound investigation, which took place on 5 June 2007, and the report
(p.31) contained
the following:
"The patient has had pain for 8
months having had an injury lifting a patient at work.
"The ultrasound showed
prominent subacromial bursal thickening and marked reduction in global movement.
The pattern is consistent
with ‘adhesive capsulopathy’."
Dr Tan’s report indicated, in
response to a question whether there were factors other than "the work-related
incident" contributing
to the worker’s disabilities:
that I know of."
report by Dr Tan, dated 14 February 2008 (p.37), stated:
already been established, [the worker], a Registered Nurse, suffered a work
related left shoulder injury.
"The injury included:
thickening.
"These resulted from [the worker] using her left
shoulder constantly and repetitively at work, undertaking various nursing
"[She] still complains of pains in the left shoulder, especially after her
work sessions undertaking nursing duties.
"Clinically, the range of movements of her left shoulder have appreciably
improved. ...
"In the short term, I do not expect her to regain fitness for unrestricted
pre-injury normal duties.
"It is quite possible that she could suffer
permanent residual disability of her left shoulder."
An additional report dated 20 May 2008
(p.40) stated:
"Clinically, she has improved but the left
shoulder still shows definite restrictions on movement.
"Of late, she has been on light modified duties and she is able to
"However, she still experiences pains in the left shoulder."
agent also referred the worker to Mr D.J. Jones, consultant orthopædic
surgeon, whose report dated 19 August 2008
(p.42) included the
"She reported that [the workplace] was an aged care
facility with dependent patients. It was heavy physical work although they have
lifters and occupational health and safety recommendations as to the way in
which they work. She told me however that there were
often staff shortages which
created some difficulties at times undertaking normal work duties. ...
"[The worker] noted that during the course of her employment in October 2006
and onwards that she was experiencing intermittent discomfort
in her left
shoulder particularly with some of the more demanding physical activities at
"It was not however until 28 May 2007 that she developed significant pain in
her left shoulder which became continuous and which was
associated with a
reduction in movement in the left shoulder that she sought medical
assistance.
"[She] attended Dr Arnold Tan of the Tranmere Medical Centre and he arranged
an ultrasound scan of her left shoulder on 5 June 2007
which showed evidence of
a thickened subacromial bursa. [She] underwent an ultrasound guided injection of
steroid on 21 June 2007
and 9 August 2007 but with only partial relief of
symptoms. She was certified fit for modified work duties from 6 June 2007 and
on modified duties for a period of one year.
"Throughout this time although she was prescribed initially Mobic, a
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory, she has preferred to seek treatment
acupuncture. The pain in her shoulder has progressively eased and she has been
aware of a gradual turn of movement in her left
"She confirmed that she remains on normal work hours but modified duties and
continues to attend acupuncture once every three or once
every five weeks as
necessary. The need for treatment appears to be reducing. ...
SUMMARY AND ASSESSMENT:
"[The worker] is a 38 year old registered nurse who developed a subacromial
bursitis in her left shoulder in approximately October
2006 which progressively
became increasingly painful with associated restriction of should movement on or
"Her symptoms and clinical findings would suggest that she may have developed
a secondary adhesive capsulitis or frozen shoulder.
However following two
subacromial steroid injections her clinical condition slowly improved which is
the natural history of an adhesive
capsulitis and her shoulder movements still
demonstrate mild restriction of the extremes of rotation today. ...
"I have documented her current symptoms and complaints and confirmed that the
pattern has been one of gradual recovery over time.
"It is my opinion that the worker’s current symptoms and complaints
result from the left shoulder injury including bursal thickening
and adhesions
which developed on or about 28 May 2007. There do not appear to be any other
factors other than the work related activities
contributing to her current
disability. ...
"[The worker’s] pain has eased. Her movement has
recovered. The prognosis therefore is one for continued improvement although
persistence of the thickened subacromial bursa would indicate that she will be
left with a small residual impairment in her shoulder."
The worker gave a written statement
dated 9 June 2009 (p.73), which she affirmed when she gave evidence before us at
the hearing.
"1 I am ... employed by Helping Hand Aged
Care as a Registered Nurse.
On or about October 2006 I began to
experience pain in my left shoulder. I consulted my chiropractor at the time, Dr
Rose on Prospect
Road. I did not see any medical practitioner during this
I only saw Dr Rose on the one
occasion as the pain was intermittent. When I had severe pain I would take
I never took any time off work for
the shoulder and was able to undertake my normal afternoon staff duties that
included dispensing
of medication to patients, attending incontinent patients,
adjusting patient’s positions in
On 28 May 2007 I was undertaking
my normal duties but began to experience more extreme pain at about 9 pm during
the shift. I had
just moved and lifted some patients during the evening but at 9
pm I remember changing an incontinent patient. After that time I
noticed that
the range of movement of my shoulder was extremely
The day of 28th of May was a weekend
day. I filled out an incident report on 1 June about my shoulder. On the Monday
I contacted my
usual doctor, Dr Koh of Fullarton Road for an appointment. I saw
him and he indicated that I should see a specialist shoulder doctor
referred me to Dr Tan.
I saw Dr Tan on or
that I had a frozen shoulder before
this date as I had previously had some
movement in the shoulder. From 28 May I was totally incapacitated for my duties
as a registered
I had two cortisone
injections into the shoulder, being on 21 June 2007 and 9 August 2008. I did not
have any cortisone injections
before 2007."
The worker’s helpfulness in
agreeing to the employer’s request to give evidence before us was
appreciated, but in the
end she was able to add little to the statement. She
confirmed that she had begun to experience pain in her shoulder about October
2006, but it came and went until 28 May 2007, after which it became constant.
There was no particular occasion when she first noticed
it. She said she had in
fact been twice (in the October 2006-May 2007 period) to receive chiropractic
treatment from Dr Rose, who
we were informed is a medical practitioner in
addition to being a chiropractor, but she had paid for this treatment through
her private
health insurance, and consequently has no records of those long-ago
transactions (we think we may be allowed to know that private
health funds
usually retain the original accounts when a claim is made).
The parties’ contentions
Mr Sargent’s argument was that the
worker had suffered a primary disability in the nature of bursitis in October
2006, which
had not caused her to lose any time from work. In his analysis, she
then suffered a secondary disability in the nature of adhesive
capsulitis in May
2007, which had brought about incapacity for
He particularly pointed to the report
of Dr Jones (p.45, quoted above at
]), who he said distinguished the two
conditions and referred to one as being "secondary" to the other. There was no
evidence of a
frozen shoulder before May
Because there were two independent
conditions,
section 113
was inapplicable, Mr Sargent contended. In any event, he
section 113
was a technical provision for the identification of the date
of incapacity, rather than a substantive provision limiting the operation
other provisions of the
WorkCover Corporation v.
[1998] SASC 6622
as authority for the proposition, or, perhaps
more correctly, as an illustration of the proposition, that establishing the
between a prior disability and the secondary disability is often
Mr O’Loughlin argued that
the worker had suffered a classic over-use injury, developing gradually through
repetitive duties.
When the first symptoms were noticed, they seem to have been
intermittent, causing her no time loss, and prompting her to seek chiropractic
assistance only twice. She continued with her normal work, not light duties.
Where Mr Sargent had highlighted the use of language
used in the medical reports
consistent with the definition of "secondary disability", Mr O’Loughlin
understandably highlighted
language in the same reports and in rehabilitation
and other paramedical reports that was consistent with a gradually developing
over-use injury. He pointed out that the claim had been accepted on its own
terms as a disability that had begun to appear in October
2006 but caused
incapacity only at the end of May 2007. There was no identifiable incident on 28
May 2007. Mr O’Loughlin invited
us to adopt the approach the Panel took in
relation to the second worker in
Tickled Pink v. WorkCover
, at [38]-[47].
Mr Sargent replied
that if the worker had claimed for Dr Rose’s accounts in October 2006, the
claim would have been accepted,
at least for
purposes. This is an
assertion that cannot be tested. Mr Sargent also referred to the Panel’s
recent discussion in
Quality Staff v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP 3
and particularly to
Arnott’s Snack Products v. Yacob
(1985) 155 CLR 171
, referred to in both that case and in
, in relation to the notion of incapacity for
Discussion and conclusions
The initial certificate issued by Dr Tan
said "initial injury Oct 2006, aggravation on 28 May 2007" (paragraph
] above). His later reports seem to
regard the worker’s condition as a single injury (paragraph
]). Dr Jones refers to a subacromial
bursitis developing in October 2006 and becoming "progressively" more painful,
which "may" have
involved "a secondary adhesive capsulitis" in May 2007, but
states that his opinion is that her "current symptoms and complaints
result from
the left shoulder injury including bursal thickening and adhesions which
developed on or about 28 May 2007" (paragraph
In our respectful view, this case does not
turn on any complex points of law. It is to be resolved by a commonsense view of
the overall
state of the evidence, not by seizing on particular words out of
context appearing in the reports before us. The cases are replete
with reminders
of the primacy of the role of the fact-finder in making factual findings,
important as the medical evidence may be
(see, for example,
(1978) 80 LSJS 165
Ivkovic v. Rinaldi and Ivkovic
(1980) 25 SASR 516).
This is particularly so, in our opinion, where medical
reporters may use language evocative of terms used in the
necessarily being fully cognisant of their legal
significance.
In our opinion, the evidence
fairly viewed and considered as a whole leads to the conclusion that the
worker’s condition was
caused by "exposure to countless traumata over a
period of time", that is to say, her heavy and repetitive work activities,
symptoms first noticed by her in October 2006, and continuing to develop
through an unabated continuation of the same work duties
until 28 May 2007, when
both parties are agreed that incapacity for work first arose. It may fairly be
said that "whilst it may be
progressive and contributed to over a long period of
time by countless traumata, [it] is nonetheless a single, entire and indivisible
condition." It seems to us to be "quite artificial and unreal to view it
otherwise." Further, "it can properly be said that an injury
occurs when and not
until there has been a significant and measurable diminution of [function] ...
An injury may result from many
small causes, but it is not until these have had
an appreciable effect that it can be said that an injury has
The words in quotes in the
previous paragraph are the words of Bray CJ in
GMH v. Barkway
(1975) 11 SASR 381
(1975) 66 LSJS 170
, Olsson J (as he then was) in
Arrowcrest v. Markowski
(1991) 55 SASR 557
[1991] SASC 2874
Coates v. Commissioner for Railways
(1963) 81 WN (NSW)
). Although these quotes refer to cases of
noise-induced hearing loss, we think they are apposite in the present
It cannot be a coincidence or an
accident that
section 113
is structured as it is. The heading to the
section, which we have set out at paragraph
] of these reasons, is "Disabilities
that develop gradually". Sub-section (1) deals with "a disability (not being
noise induced hearing
loss) that develops gradually or is a disease" and
sub-section (2) deals with noise induced hearing loss. But both come under the
general heading of
disabilities that develop gradually
. It is probably
accurate, as Mr Sargent contends, that the section can be characterised as a
technical section serving principally
to fix a date of disability in cases that
would otherwise present some difficulty, but it also serves to establish that
"disabilities
that develop gradually" comprise a species of disabilities
recognised by Parliament. Hearing loss is one example, which causes particular
difficulties, but is part of the category of disabilities that develop
We would think most disabilities
of the repetitive-strain type, although certainly not all disabilities that
develop gradually, have
in common with hearing loss disabilities that they may
appropriately be described as being caused by "exposure to countless traumata
over a period of time", leading to "a single, entire and indivisible condition."
We acknowledge that the analogy is not exact, but
we do think, with respect,
that the present worker’s condition is more apt to be described in this
way, than by attempting
artificially to dissect the progression and the
individual effects of unidentifiable individual traumata occurring in large
over an extended period of
We do not consider, with respect,
that the case of
WorkCover Corporation v. Harley
[1998] SASC 6622
is of assistance in the present context. In that case, an underlying berry
aneurysm was aggravated by work pressures and suddenly
ruptured. Prior J
(Debelle and Nyland JJ agreeing) considered the aneurysm to be a disease within
the meaning of
and the subarachnoid hæmorrhage to be
a secondary disability.
Section 113
was not considered, nor would any such
consideration seem to have been warranted. We cannot see any relevant analogy
between the
circumstances of that case and the circumstances before
It follows from all that we have said
that we are of the opinion that the worker’s disability is a single
disability of the
repetitive-strain type that has developed gradually as
contemplated by
section 113
and has culminated in incapacity on 28 May 2007,
rather than a secondary disability occurring on that date, secondary to a
disability occurring in October 2006. The worker first noticed symptoms
around October 2006, but in our opinion that was merely a
stage in the gradual
development of the condition that eventually caused incapacity on 28 May 2007.
We merely add that the worker appeared to
us as an honest witness doing her best to assist us, and we are prepared to
accept her revised
evidence as to the number of times she attended her private
chiropractor between October 2006 and May 2007. We are somewhat surprised
no report had been sought by either party from Dr Rose, but we do not think, in
the end, that anything turns on whether she
saw him once or twice. Whether he
would have been able to say anything about the development of her symptoms over
the period she
was seeing him must remain a matter of
speculation.
The employer’s
application for review must therefore fail on the merits and in those
circumstances there seems no useful purpose
to be served by granting an
extension of time within which to lodge the application for review in relation
to the levy notice dated
23 May 2008. We do not consider it necessary to
consider other criteria for granting an extension of time (paragraphs
above). The interests of justice do not require it because it is clear that if
we did grant an extension of time, we would in any
event dismiss the application
for review for the reasons we have
In relation to the 2009-2010
levy assessment, no extension of time is necessary. Insofar as the application
relates to the decision
on that assessment, we simply dismiss
Determination
For these reasons, we refuse an
extension of the time within which to lodge the application insofar as it
relates to the review of
WorkCover’s decision of 23 May 2008. In relation
to WorkCover’s decision on the following year’s assessment, we
dismiss the application for
Trudy Minett
Deputy Member
Claire Davidson
Deputy Member
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (190 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter