URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWC/2009/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:08:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
THE DIRECTOR OF MINES V GRAEME VAN DER WOLFF [2009] SAWC 2 (19 November 2008)
WARDENS COURT OF SOUTH
(District Court Administrative and
Disciplinary Division)
to comply with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting
publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person
using material in the judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed
to the Registry of the Court in which it was generated.
DIRECTOR OF MINES v GRAHAM VAN DER WOLFF
[2009] SAWC
Reasons of Warden
19 November
PRESCIOUS STONES CLAIM
Breach of labour conditions
DIRECTOR OF MINES v GRAHAM VAN DER
[2009] SAWC 2
I intend to give some ex
tempore reasons for my orders. I have before me a Plaint where the Director of
Mines seeks the forfeiture
of Precious Stones Claim, 75211 situated at Emu
Diggings Coober Pedy. This claim is inside the major working area. The
regulations
require the claim holder to personally mine this claim for not less
than 20 hours per week.
This Plaint
originally came on for hearing on 15th July 2008 when Warden Fahey heard
evidence from Compliance Officer Lane, who inspected
the claim on 1st April 08
and again 18th April 08. Compliance Officer Lane formed a view that the claim
was not being worked in
accordance with the regulations. Warden Fahey conducted
a view of the claim and I read into these reasons the reasons of Warden
which are contained in the file. I do not intend to repeat them. There was
clearly some doubt in Warden Fahey's mind as to
whether the claim holder was as
he claimed working the claim in accordance with the regulations and his
obligations thereunder.
Warden Fahey said 'In the circumstances I propose to
give Mr Van Der Wolff an opportunity to demonstrate beyond doubt that he is
working the claim and I adjourn the forfeiture application to Tuesday 18th
November at 11.30 am.' I interpret those words liberally
because the burden of
proof does not lie at the feet of Mr Van Der Wolff, rather at the feet of
the Department and on the balance
of probabilities rather than beyond reasonable
On the 18th November I heard further
evidence from Compliance Officer Lane who since the last hearing attended the
claim he said on
4 further occasions. On the first occasion he set what he
described as a bench mark upon which he could judge any work on the claim.
the 4th August he again attended and he took a series of photographs. Those
photographs and others taken later have been the
subject of some discussion and
extensive submissions by Mr Van Der Wolff this morning. Those original
photographs in my view show
that there had been some movements of machinery on
the claim, especially as regards a small dozer and a bucket elevator. The
that I subsequently heard was that the claim holder was positioning the
bucket elevator over a shaft with the intention of pushing
material into that
shaft so it could be brought up by the elevator to the
On the 11th September Officer Lane
re-attended and again took photographs. They show further movement of the
bucket elevator, one
set of wheels of which were in the shaft, the evidence
explained the miner had inadvertently backed that wheel into the shaft. Other
photographs show the cut on the claim alongside that bucket elevator.
14th November he re-attended and noted the
bucket elevator was set up over the shaft, but it was in his view, not then
operational.
Mr Van Der Wolff then gave
further evidence and explained to the court that a pillar on the side of the cut
had collapsed and he used
a small bulldozer to push that material out of the
cut. He said that had taken considerable time. He also informed me as he had
told Warden Fahey that he continued to access his claim via a shaft on an
adjoining claim and was mining underground.
I digress now to mention the other matter
before me which is an application for suspension of working conditions issued by
holder for relief from 1st October 08 and 1st January 09 based on
medical grounds. I indicated during the hearing that because the
holiday took effect from 15th December, I would only consider suspension of
working conditions between 1st October and
that date, 15th December, as
thereafter the statutory holiday does not require a miner to mine until 14th
March of the following
year. The claim holder suffers from a condition he
describes as obstructive sleep apnoea, which I understand to be a serious
condition and he most recently underwent surgery at the Royal Adelaide
Hospital on 8th August 08.
He produced during
the hearing, various certificates covering the period August to December yet he
told me he was back in Coober Pedy
within 2 days of that operation. Today he
has produced a further certificate. It concerns an examination by a medical
practitioner
of him yesterday and it is the doctor's opinion that Mr Van
Der Wolff would be unfit to perform his normal work from 18th November
18th December 08. Unfortunately what really is just a simple certificate, gives
me no assistance whatsoever as to why Mr Van
Der Wolff has been so certified. I
take it to be the condition that he describes as his obstructive sleep apneoa.
I accept that
his condition is genuine and that advisors recommended to him to
effectively take it easy, he said for about three months. On his
however it seems he has more or less ignored that advice as while seeking
suspension, he tells me that he has not only been
working in the cut but also
accessing his claim by the shaft that I previously mentioned. It is with
interest that although he could
have applied for suspension at about the time of
his operation in August, he didn't apply until 13 October 08. This is
surprising,
because he pegged his claim from 23rd December 03 and on a number of
other occasions he has been granted a suspension of working
conditions. His
explanation was interesting as he said he was spending a lot of time in Adelaide
sorting out his health issues and
I can well understand that and that is why he
didn't apply until he got back to Coober Pedy. That seems to me an admission he
been here working his claim as required by the regulations. While I
accept the genuineness of his condition and I have considerable
sympathy for
anyone in his circumstances, I take the view on the balance of probabilities the
application for suspension was more
of an after thought, to thwart the
application for forfeiture.
evidence he was questioned as to why all his mining mail was sent to his Aldgate
address in Adelaide and not his Coober
Pedy post office box. Again his answer
to those questions suggested to me he may have been spending more time in
Adelaide rather
than Coober Pedy.
to the application for forfeiture. In all, Officer Lane attended the claim on 6
documented occasions. Significantly the
claim holder was not present on any of
those occasions. Officer Lane is an experienced Compliance Officer. He has
been giving
evidence of his observations for many years and from those
observations, evidence in opinion form, as to whether the claims were
not been worked within the regulations.
Today in his lengthy final submissions,
Mr Van Der Wolff has been very critical not only of Compliance Officer Lane
but also apparently
of any number of other officers including Officer Lane's
direct superior and indeed of Warden Fahey with respect to some comments
made presumably in the course of the last hearing or the view.
Claim holder Van Der Wolff is obviously an
intelligent and articulate man, who forcefully and very capably opposed the
of his claim. Not only with respect to the evidence that he gave but
also with respect to his final submissions today.
I decided it appropriate to conduct a
further view of the claim and I did so on the afternoon of 17th November. I
made observations
of a litany of machinery, including the previously mentioned
bucket elevator and bulldozer. I also saw another elevator set up over
access shaft to his claim. On site was a generator that Mr Van Der Wolff
started to demonstrate that it was serviceable. Mr
Van Der Wolff described the
presence of a bobcat which was underground on his claim, but which was not
presently in service. There
was also nearby a large generator to power it. He
has told me today that he is capable of repairing any machinery and that all of
his machinery, either works or if it doesn't presently work he is capable
personally of repairing it on site. He told me that he
was pushing a tunnel
towards the shaft, towards the bucket elevator, using a jack and other like
tools. He told me he had about
20 metres to go.
I also made observations of the cut that
has been the subject of considerable comment this morning by Mr Van Der Wolff in
his closing
submissions. I particularly noted that side of the cut from which
the pillar collapsed. There was further material at the bottom
of the cut which
was obviously from a more recent collapse. This is a small cut and the pillar
size while not insubstantial would
in my view have taken only a few hours to
clear, even with a small bulldozer. As I said the regulations require not less
hours work per week by the claim holder personally, not by others on his
behalf. I say that because of his evidence as he mentioned
others had helped
him mine his claim. As far as the underground work is concerned I saw very
little signs on the surface that would
confirm substantial and sustained,
sub-surface activity in the nature required by the regulations.
Like Warden Fahey I have my doubts, whilst
the claim holder sought to convince me he was genuinely mining his claim, not
time to time, but for the required number of hours per week, I am
afraid at the end of the day and on the balance of probabilities,
believe him.
I accept the evidence of
Compliance Officer Lane in that regard and make the following orders: -
1) I refuse the application for suspension;.
2) I find the breach of the regulations as regards the working conditions, of
sufficient gravity to order forfeiture. I make an order
of forfeiture of this
claim. However I indicate to Mr Van Der Wolff he is entitled to appeal my
decision and he has one month to
do so and you can lodge the appeal to
Environment and Resource Development Court. You have to remove your
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (88.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter