URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SARTTRP/2008/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:04:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sleaford Holiday Park v Brewer [2008] SARTTRP 12 (28 September 2008)
Sleaford Holiday Park v Brewer
28 September 2008 (RP08/0037)
Park manager serves a notice under Section 95 excluding the resident.
Manager applies to the Tribunal under Section 97 to terminate
the agreement.
The resident also applies under Section 97(3) on the grounds the notice is
invalid and seeking to resume occupation.
Tribunal finds there has been no serious act of violence and no-one’s
safety has been endangered.
Tribunal dismisses park manager’s application and allows the resident
to resume occupation. Tribunal finds resident is not liable
for rent for the
days he was excluded.
REASONS FOR ORDER OF THE TRIBUNAL MADE ON
Hearing 19 September 2008 at Port Lincoln
SLEAFORD HOLIDAY PARK v BREWER (RP08/0037)
These are the reasons for the decision of the Tribunal made on 19 September
2008 in respect of the following applications:
An application lodged with the Tribunal on 16 September 2008 by the operator of
Sleaford Holiday Park seeking an order pursuant
Section 97(3)(a)
Residential Parks Act 2007
") terminating a Residential Park Agreement
with a resident, Shane Brewer, and that possession of the rented property be
the Park Owner.
application lodged with the Tribunal on 17 September 2008 by Shane Brewer as a
resident of Sleaford Holiday Park seeking an order
pursuant to
Section 97(3)(c)
that a Notice of Exclusion served on him pursuant to
is invalid and that he be allowed to resume occupation of the rented
RESIDENTIAL PARK TENANCY AGREEMENT DETAILS
Rented property: Cabin 21, Sleaford Holiday Park
Sleaford Bay Port Lincoln SA 5606
Park Owner: Deceased Estate of Adam Nestor
Resident: Shane Brewer
Agreement commenced: March 2006
Period of agreement: Periodic
Rent: $80.00 per week, payable fortnightly
Security Bond: $150.00 was paid by the resident.
I am satisfied there is a Residential Park Tenancy Agreement on the
abovementioned terms which is subject to the
At the hearing of this matter the Park Managers, Marcus Schumann and Kym
Fullerton, gave sworn evidence as did the resident Shane
On 16 September 2008 the Park Managers served a notice on Mr Brewer, pursuant
, excluding him from the park as he had allegedly
committed a serious act of violence in the park and had put the safety of
or other persons in the park in danger.
95-Park owner may give person notice to leave for serious act of
(1) A park owner may give a resident a notice to leave the residential
park immediately if the park owner has reasonable grounds to
(a) a serious act of violence by the resident has occurred in the park; or
(b) the safety of any person in the park is in danger from the
(2) A park owner may give a person permitted on rented property with the
consent of the resident (a resident's visitor
a notice to leave the
residential park immediately if the park owner has reasonable grounds to believe
(a) a serious act of violence by the resident's visitor has occurred in
the park; or
(b) the safety of any person in the park is in danger from the resident's
(3) A notice to leave under this section must be in the form approved by
the Commissioner.
(4) A notice to leave under this section must be given as soon as it is
possible for the park owner to safely do so after the serious
act of violence
has occurred or the safety of a person in the park has been endangered.
(5) A park owner must not give a notice under this section, or a document
that purports to be a notice to leave under this section,
unless the park owner
has reasonable grounds to believe that
(a) a serious act of violence by a resident or resident's visitor has
occurred in the residential park; or
(b) the safety of any person in the residential park is in danger from a
resident or a resident's visitor.
Maximum penalty: $1250.
(6) A person who has been given a notice to leave a residential park
under this section must not remain in the park after receiving
Maximum penalty: $1250.
Ms Fullerton gave evidence that one morning "a couple of months ago" she
became aware that Mr Brewer was searching for his missing
dog. She stated that
Mr Brewer lives three cabins from where she resides and Mr Brewer was walking up
and down outside the cabins
in what appeared to her to be a rage as he was
swearing and accusing people of untying his dog. Ms Fullerton spoke to Mr
however he was abusive and continued to swear whereupon Ms Fullerton
returned to her cabin. She stated she was concerned that her
six year old
daughter who was asleep in her cabin would hear the language and the anger being
expressed by Mr Brewer. She conceded
that the following morning Mr Brewer sought
her out and apologised for his behaviour the previous day.
Ms Fullerton also gave evidence that "a couple of weeks ago" she became aware
of a disturbance at the park and on investigating found
that Mr Brewer had tried
to negotiate past a car parked in a driveway and in the process had hit a rock.
She stated that Mr Brewer
was yelling obscenities and appeared to be very angry
and aggressive.
Early one morning "a few days ago" Ms Fullerton became aware that Mr Brewer
was angry with her dog and when she enquired as to the
problem Mr Brewer threw a
bicycle which he had been riding on the ground and accused her of failing to
keep her dog under control.
Ms Fullerton stated that she was apprehensive about
Mr Brewer's outburst and temper and two days later called the police with a view
to having them talk to Mr Brewer. The police attended, however Mr Brewer was not
at the park and the police left a card on the door
of his cabin. When he
returned to his cabin Mr Brewer contacted the police as requested. The police
again attended the next day when
Mr Brewer was served with a notice pursuant to
and told by the police that he had "a couple of hours" to
gather up his possessions and leave the park. Ms Fullerton said that she
this step as she was concerned about Mr Brewer's temper and "did not want to
wait until a punch up took place."
Mr Brewer gave evidence that, in relation to the first incident described by
Ms Fullerton, he was concerned about his dog which he
stated was tied up
securely and could not have escaped unless he was untied. As the dog was a puppy
he was worried it could enter
a nearby national park where he was aware that
poison baits had been laid for foxes. He stated that one of the park residents
lost a dog when it took one of these baits. He also conceded that he was
angry when he had damaged his car when he was trying to
drive around another car
parked in the driveway. He stated that when Ms Fullerton approached him to ask
him what was wrong he was
angry and concerned about the damage to his car and
was not addressing Ms Fullerton directly. He gave evidence that the third
referred to by Ms Fullerton occurred when he was cycling to the park
toilet which is approximately 100 metres from his cabin. One
of Ms Fullerton's
dogs ran up to his bicycle which caused him inconvenience as the dog was prone
to run in front of his bicycle.
He conceded that he was angry and requested that
Ms Fullerton keep her dog tied up.
97-Park owner may make urgent application to
(1) If a resident is given a notice to leave under this Part, the park
owner may apply to the Tribunal for an order that the residential
park agreement
be terminated.
(2) An application under subsection (1) must be made within the exclusion
3) On hearing an application under this section, the Tribunal may
(a) make an order terminating the residential park agreement as at the
date of the order and make an order for possession of the rented
(b) make an order vesting the residential park agreement in a person who
resides or resided on the rented property with the resident;
(c) order that the resident be allowed to resume occupation of the rented
property under the residential park agreement.
(4) The Tribunal may make any ancillary or incidental orders that the
Tribunal considers appropriate.
(5) If the Tribunal orders that the resident be allowed to resume
occupation of the rented property under the residential park agreement
satisfied that there was no reasonable basis for the giving of the notice under
this Part, the Tribunal may make 1 or more
of the following orders:
(a) an order excusing the resident from paying rent in respect of the
exclusion period;
(b) an order for compensation to be paid to the resident by the park owner
for rent paid in respect of the exclusion period;
(c) an order for compensation to be paid to the resident by the park owner
for reasonable expenses incurred by the resident relating
to the exclusion
I am satisfied that, on at least the three occasions described by Ms
Fullerton, Mr Brewer had lost his temper and was prone to use
bad language. Ms
Fullerton conceded that she did not think Mr Brewer would hit her although he
was very abusive. Mr Brewer gave evidence
that he was aware of the consequences
should he attempt to assault anyone, especially as he is due for an access visit
from his daughter
who is travelling from Queensland.
After reviewing the evidence, I am not satisfied the park owner has
established that Mr Brewer had committed a serious act of violence
in the park
or that the safety of any person in the park was in danger. I accept that Mr
Brewer became angry and used colourful language
at times to express that anger,
however before he can be excluded from the park, in accordance with
, he has to have committed a serious act of violence. The Collins
English Dictionary defines "violence" as "assault or outrage; unlawful
of physical force; injury". There is no evidence before the Tribunal to support
a finding that Mr Brewer has assaulted anyone,
used physical force against
anyone in the park or caused injury. Ms Fullerton seems to have served the
Notice of Exclusion because
she was apprehensive of what Mr Brewer might do
rather than what he had actually done. I find that there was no reasonable
for serving a Notice of Exclusion on Mr Brewer. I will accordingly dismiss
the application by Mr Schumann and Ms Fullerton that the
agreement terminate and
that the park owner have vacant possession of the rented property. There will be
an order pursuant to
Section 97(3)(c)
that Mr Brewer be allowed to
forthwith resume occupation of the rented property.
Pursuant to
, if there is an order that the resident is
allowed to resume occupation of the rented property and if the Tribunal is
satisfied that
there was no reasonable basis for giving a notice under the
the Tribunal may make orders for compensation. Mr Brewer stated that he did not
seek an order for compensation and preferred to
discuss the matter with the new
park owner. Mr Brewer also stated that he had not paid rent for the period he
was excluded from the
park and I find he is liable to resume paying rent as from
today (19 September 2008).
application by the park operators is dismissed.
Section 97(3)(c)
I order that the resident, Shane Brewer, be
forthwith allowed to resume occupation of the rented property under the
Residential Park
Tenancy Agreement.
Tribunal Member
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (73.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter