URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACorC/2025/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:54:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SALTER, Kathleen Ethel ([2025] SACC 18) [2025] SACorC 18 (12 June 2025)
CORONERS COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
KATHLEEN ETHEL
[2025] SACC 18
Inquest Findings of her Honour Deputy State Coroner
12 June 2025
CORONIAL INQUEST
Examination of the cause and circumstances of the death of a 76-year-old
woman who died following elective surgery at the Clare Hospital.
The Inquest
explored the events leading up to and during the surgery, including the
circumstances that led to the surgeon becoming
misoriented and dividing
incorrect physiological structures and injuring a major blood vessel, as well as
how those injuries were
Ethel Salter, aged 76 years of Clare, died at Royal Adelaide Hospital on 4 June
2020 as a result of multi-organ failure and
sepsis due to complications of
cholecystectomy.
Circumstances
of death as set out in these findings.
Recommendations made.
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
KATHLEEN ETHEL SALTER
[2025] SACC 18
Introduction
Kathleen Ethel Salter was 76 years old when she died at the Royal Adelaide
Hospital (RAH) on 4 June 2020. She had been retrieved
from the Clare Hospital
on 20 May 2020, following surgery to remove her gallbladder.
Mrs Salter’s
past medical history was atrial fibrillation for which she was prescribed
apixaban and atenolol. She also suffered
from sleep apnoea and used a
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) machine.
the time of her death, Mrs Salter lived in Clare with her (now late)
husband. She had three children, six grandchildren and five
grandchildren. Mrs Salter was a much-loved member of her family.
was a regular patient of the Clare Medical Centre and saw different general
practitioners (GPs) at different times. On
20 February 2020, Mrs Salter
saw Dr Tod Owen, a GP who had trained in laparoscopic
On that day,
Mrs Salter complained of right upper quadrant abdominal pain that radiated
around her abdomen to her back. She reported
that she had suffered gallstones
in the past and wondered if the pain was reflective of a recurrence of that
condition. Dr Owen’s
assessment was ‘
mild Cholecystitis until
proven otherwise
’. He prescribed Mrs Salter antibiotics and
referred her to have bloods and an abdominal ultrasound. Dr Owen asked
to return to see him in 10-14 days, or to present to hospital if
she was not able to manage the pain or it became worse.
days later, on a Saturday, Mrs Salter presented to the Clare Hospital
Outpatients Department and was seen by Dr Prashan Kuruppu,
a GP with a
specialist qualification in anaesthetics. On this occasion Mrs Salter
presented with a continuation of her pain and
a low-grade fever.
Dr Kuruppu reviewed the blood and imagery reports. While the blood results
were unremarkable, the ultrasound
identified ‘
a thickening of the
gallbladder wall and an impacted gallstone ... within the gallbladder
discussed the possibility of a
laparoscopic
cholecystectomy
in the near future
and suggested that she complete the course of antibiotics as prescribed by
28 February 2020, Mrs Salter returned to the Clare Medical Centre and saw
Dr Owen again. After review of the ultrasound, Dr Owen
Mrs Salter with chronic cholecystitis and referred her to Dr Darren Lituri,
a general surgeon, for a laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
He noted that she was
probably a good
procedure to take place at Clare Hospital.
saw Dr Lituri on 25 March 2020, who agreed with both Dr Kuruppu and
Dr Owen’s assessment. Dr Lituri booked Mrs Salter
elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy at Clare Hospital on 18 June 2020. On 15
May 2020 this procedure was brought forward
at short notice and Mrs Salter
was re-booked to undergo surgery on 20 May 2020. The events surrounding
the rescheduling of Mrs Salter’s
surgery were the subject of some
evidence and will be canvased later in the Finding.
underwent a pre-anaesthetic consultation with Dr Kuruppu on 19 May 2020.
Some concerns were identified in relation to
Mrs Salter’s upcoming
anaesthetic, and so a second GP anaesthetist was arranged to be present at the
surgery. With these additional
arrangements in place, Mrs Salter’s
surgery remained on the list at Clare Hospital.
20 May 2020, Mrs Salter was second on Dr Lituri’s surgical list.
The first procedure (also a laparoscopic cholecystectomy)
uneventfully. Following this, Mrs Salter’s procedure commenced.
There were two attempts to intubate Mrs Salter,
with the third being
successful and the procedure commencing at 11:10am. Dr Lituri found the
gallbladder to be inflamed and embedded
into the liver. He also encountered
difficulties with dissection and an intraoperative venous bleed. Upon the
removal of the gallbladder,
a significant bleed was discovered which saw
Mrs Salter very quickly become haemodynamically unstable. Dr Lituri
converted the laparoscopic
procedure to a
and sutured a bleeding
vessel in the gallbladder bed. Mrs Salter was stabilised with two units of
O negative blood and provided
with vasopressor support. These blood products
were past their use by date. Her abdomen was packed with gauze and closed at
approximately
MedSTAR retrieval team had been contacted at approximately
and arrived at Clare Hospital
at approximately 4pm. Upon her retrieval and arrival at the RAH at 7:30pm,
Mrs Salter was taken immediately
to theatre for an emergency laparotomy.
It was at that time that the surgeon, Dr Chuan Tan, discovered the common bile
been transected and the right portal vein and right hepatic artery were
both divided. Mrs Salter’s liver was found to be partly
To address these findings, a
hemi-hepatectomy
hepato-jejunostomy
were performed.
Upon the surgery concluding, Mrs Salter remained intubated and was admitted
to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) of
the course of the next four days, Mrs Salter’s haemodynamic status
was stable, but her hepatic function declined with increasing
encephalopathy
thought to be as a result of both hepatic and renal failure. She was commenced
on dialysis with positive effect.
On 29 May 2020, Mrs Salter became
febrile and hypotensive with an increase in her inflammatory markers with a
possible collection
and small bowel pathology on CT scan. Mrs Salter
underwent a further laparotomy with a peritoneal
being performed.
Mrs Salter’s
condition improved with a decrease in her inflammatory markers until 3 June
2020 when she developed septic shock,
with a CT scan suggesting bowel ischaemia.
Another laparotomy was performed which did not reveal ischaemia. However, due
Salter’s ongoing deterioration and poor prognosis a decision
was made, in consultation with her family, to withdraw active
Surrounded by her family, Mrs Salter died at 4:12
on 4 June 2020.
Cause of death
pathology review was conducted by Dr Jane Alderman of Forensic Science SA
(FSSA). Dr Alderman’s findings were discussed with
forensic pathologists,
Dr Cheryl Charlwood and Dr Karen Heath of FSSA. As Mrs Salter had
been an inpatient in a hospital for a number
of days, with her clinical
treatment and surgeries extensively documented, an autopsy was not considered
necessary. The pathology
review was completed on 10 June
with the cause of death
suggested as ‘
multi-organ failure and sepsis due to complications of
cholecystectomy
’. I so find.
Definitions
Cholecystectomy
way of explanation, a cholecystectomy is the surgical removal of a gallbladder.
The gallbladder is a small organ located under
the liver that stores bile which
is used by the body for the digestion of fat. The procedure is commonly
performed to treat inflammation
of the gallbladder. This medical condition is
called cholecystitis and is often caused by the presence of gallstones. A
cholecystectomy
is commonly performed by way of a laparoscopic procedure; making
small incisions in the abdomen and using a camera and specialised
instruments to
remove the gallbladder. This is a less invasive procedure. In more complex
procedures, a laparotomy is performed
which is a larger incision in the abdomen
and provides direct access to remove the gallbladder, often referred to as an
open procedure
Critical view of
order to safely remove the gallbladder by way of laparoscopic procedure,
prevailing medical training suggests that the ‘
critical view of
’ should be achieved. The critical view of safety is unique to
gallbladder surgery. It involves identifying the cystic duct
and the cystic
artery as the only two structures entering or passing into the gallbladder, with
the gallbladder clearly dissected
away from the liver for a reasonable distance,
before the gallbladder is removed. If this is not achieved, or it is believed
be achieved in error, injury can be sustained during the removal of the
gallbladder by interfering with the incorrect structures,
notably those which
supply blood to the liver. The critical view of safety is important as there
are anatomical variations in the
structure of vessels from patient to patient
which can be easily misidentified. As will be detailed later in the Finding, in
Salter’s case, her gallbladder was positioned intrahepatically,
which increased the difficulty of identifying the critical
view of safety.
CT cholangiogram
intraoperative cholangiogram (IOC) assists with the critical view of safety.
The mechanics of this procedure involve a catheter
being inserted through one of
the small abdominal incisions and then through an incision in the cystic duct,
typically near the gallbladder
neck, then advanced into the cystic duct.
Special radiographic contrast dye is then injected allowing the common bile duct
clearly visualised on live x-ray imaging. This imagery has the benefit of
identifying potential anatomical variations in the biliary
tree before the
irreversible severing of the vessels and the removal of the gallbladder. This
is undertaken to prevent injury to
the common bile duct and hepatic artery. It
is also used to look for filling defects within the bile duct, to ensure a
smooth tapering
of the bile duct and flow into the duodenum.
above three terms will be referred to frequently throughout the Finding.
Reason for Inquest
Mrs Salter’s
death was reported to the South Australian Coroners Office on 4 June 2020 by an
ICU registrar by way of medical
deposition. The reason for reporting was that
her death was considered to have met the criteria for a reportable death under
Coroners Act 2003
(the Act) namely, that death was
or as a result
, or within 24 hours of a surgical
procedure, or invasive medical or diagnostic procedure, or anaesthetic
procedure’.
Mrs Salter had undergone three surgical procedures following the
cholecystectomy (at the RAH), it was evident from the reporting
documentation
that it was the
cholecystectomy performed at Clare Hospital that gave rise to the reason for the
report. There was also reference
in the deposition to this surgery being
additionally complicated by a difficult intubation and airway, a difficult
dissection and
bleeding requiring a transfusion of two units of blood and four
gauze swabs to be packed in the abdomen before Mrs Salter was retrieved
the RAH. Of most concern, however, was reference to a transected common bile
duct, a divided right portal vein and a divided
right hepatic artery from the
surgery at Clare Hospital. These injuries required a
hemi-hepatectomy
hepato-jejunostomy
at the RAH,
upon Mrs Salter’s retrieval. Put simply, the deposition properly
gave rise to the concern that Mrs Salter’s
death was ‘
of the surgery at Clare Hospital.
the investigation process an independent expert clinical review was obtained
from Professor Robert Padbury, a general surgeon
with a special interest in bile
duct injuries and liver and pancreatic surgery. Professor Padbury identified
significant discrepancy
’ between the operation record and
what must have happened during the surgery based on the findings at the rescue
once Mrs Salter was at the RAH, namely the unrecognised injuries
to the bile duct, the portal vein and hepatic artery. Professor
described this in his report as ‘
the very upper end of the spectrum of
injury that one could ever see secondary to undertaking a
cholecystectomy
was therefore considered necessary to conduct an Inquest into the cause and
circumstances of Mrs Salter’s death. It is
important to note that
just prior to the Inquest commencing, a histological report (from testing
undertaken on the removed gallbladder)
came to the attention of the Coroners
Court. Professor Padbury was provided with this report which revealed the
microscopic findings
denuded mucosa, fibrotic thickened gallbladder
wall and florid chronic inflammation with
multinucleated foreign body giant
Professor Padbury identified the finding of multinucleated foreign body giant
cells as significant as it placed the cholecystitis
from which Mrs Salter
was suffering, into a more serious category which had implications for
This was not a variant
that could have been identified with imaging, only with histopathology. I will
later in the Finding.
were other ancillary issues identified and explored at Inquest. They included
Mrs Salter’s surgical procedure on 20 May
2020 being undertaken
during the height of the COVID-19 pandemic and taking place in a regional area;
the Clare Hospital. During
the Inquest, evidence was heard in relation to what,
if any, impacts these factors may have had on Mrs Salter’s death.
Ultimately,
it was submitted that while the usual smooth running of the surgical
lists was affected by COVID-19, creating anxiety amongst staff
and resulting in
the lack of surgical resources (including qualified surgical staff) in the
regional area, neither impacted directly
or indirectly on
Mrs Salter’s death. I agree with this submission. There was also
the issue of the expired blood products
required when Mrs Salter’s
portal vein was damaged. It is certainly an undesirable state of affairs to
conduct a surgical
procedure without ensuring the blood stores were in date.
However, when it was realised that the blood was a few hours out of date,
consideration was given to the risk versus benefit of transfusing such blood
with expert guidance provided over the phone. It was
determined that the
benefit far outweighed the risk in the circumstances. This ultimately prevented
Mrs Salter from suffering fatal
hypovolaemia in the Clare Hospital
operating theatre. Furthermore, a process was put into place after
Mrs Salter’s surgery
to ensure that this would not occur in the
In the circumstances, I
am satisfied that with their brief mention in their chronological place, these
issues do not require further
exploration.
only other issue relating to the procedure being conducted in Clare was that the
Clare Hospital did not then, and does not now,
have a cholangiogram CT machine.
Evidence was heard during the Inquest that this imaging tool is important to
assist with determining
the anatomy before the gallbladder is removed. As will
be detailed below, it is probable that Dr Lituri would have utilised this
tool in Mrs Salter’s case had it been available. Furthermore, had he
utilised it, the expert evidence supported a conclusion
that this would have
illuminated the anatomical confusion that Dr Lituri subsequently operated
under. Given the difficulties that
Dr Lituri encountered in the
laparoscopic procedure, it naturally followed that had a cholangiogram CT
machine been available, Mrs
Salter’s death could have been prevented.
I consider this to be an important issue and one that requires urgent attention.
I will detail this later in the Finding by way of a recommendation.
Evidence at Inquest
documentary evidence at Inquest comprised 34 exhibits.
addition to the documentary evidence, oral evidence was heard from:
Dr Chuan Tan,
medical practitioner, Royal Adelaide Hospital
Lituri, general surgeon, formerly of Clare Hospital
Kurrupu, assistant surgeon, Clare Hospital
Professor Robert
Padbury (expert witness), Clinical Director Surgery and Perioperative Medicine,
Flinders Medical Centre
Hindsight bias
warn myself concerning a vital consideration in the assessment of the evidence
and any potential criticisms of witnesses in this
Inquest, namely hindsight
description of ‘hindsight bias’ is given in the Australasian
Coroners Manual, namely:
'The tendency after the event to assume
that events are more predictable or foreseeable than they really were.
What is clear in hindsight
is rarely as clear before the fact. If it were,
there would be far fewer mistakes made. It is an obvious point, but one
that nonetheless
bears repeating, particularly when Coroners are considering
assigning blame or making adverse comments that might damage a person’s
reputation...
Hindsight, of course, is a very useful tool for learning lessons from an
unfortunate event. It is not useful for understanding how
the involved
people comprehended the situation as it developed. The distinction needs
to be understood and rigorously applied.'
stated, I am very mindful of this warning when considering the evidence in this
writing this Finding, I do not purport to summarise all of the evidence tendered
or heard at the Inquest, but refer to it only
in such detail as appears
warranted by its forensic significance. It should not be inferred from the
absence of reference to any
aspect of the evidence that it has not been
considered.
Circumstances leading up to death
Mrs Salter is diagnosed with cholecystitis
is no controversy in the events leading up to and including
Mrs Salter’s first appointment with Dr Lituri on 25 February
2020. While I have touched briefly on these facts at the beginning of the
Finding, it is important to note that this aspect of the
clinical care leading
up to the surgery was all timely and appropriate. This included:
On 20 February
2020, Mrs Salter had experienced right upper quadrant pain, radiating
around to her abdomen and then to her back and
consulted with her regular GP, Dr
consultation, Dr Owen agreed with Mrs Salter’s suspicion (based on
her medical history) that a gallbladder condition
was likely and referred her
for bloods and an abdominal ultrasound and prescribed antibiotics. He advised
Mrs Salter to present
to hospital if the pain worsened, otherwise he would
see her in a fortnight.
Mrs Salter’s
pain did worsen, and she presented to the Clare Hospital two days later and was
seen by local GP anaesthetist Dr
viewed the results from the recent investigations and noted that the ultrasound
identified ‘
a thickening of the gallbladder wall and an impacted
gallstone ... within the gallbladder
Dr Kuruppu suggested that she complete the course of antibiotics as
prescribed by Dr Owen and raised the possibility of requiring
cholecystectomy.
On 28 February
2020, Mrs Salter returned to the Clare Medical Centre and saw Dr Owen
again. This was the planned consultation to
review the results of the bloods
and ultrasound. Although not specifically addressed in his note, it is likely
that Dr Owen had
access to and reviewed Dr Kuruppu’s entry from
22 February 2020 at the Clare Hospital as the electronic records of the
Hospital and the Clare Medical Centre were linked
electronically.
After review of
the ultrasound, Dr Owen diagnosed Mrs Salter with chronic cholecystitis and
referred her to Dr Darren Lituri, a
general surgeon, for a laparoscopic
cholecystectomy. A letter of referral was written by Dr Owen to Dr Lituri
dated 28 February
2020 and attached the ultrasound findings and blood
On 25 March
2020, Dr Lituri saw Mrs Salter at the Clare Medical Centre and booked
her surgery to take place at the Clare Hospital
on 18 June 2020. He wrote to Dr
Owen to advise him of the planned surgery and to ensure that Mrs Salter
stopped her anticoagulant
medication (apixaban) two days prior to the
Darren Lituri, general surgeon
Darren Lituri obtained a Bachelor of Science from the University of Central
Queensland in 1986 and then a Bachelor of Applied Science
with an Honours Degree
in Science at Flinders University in 1995 and 1996. He was then conferred with
a Bachelor of Medicine and
Surgery at Flinders University in 2000.
Dr Lituri was accepted in the surgical trainee program and obtained a
Fellowship with the
Royal Australian College of Surgeons in General Surgery in
December 2013. He commenced working in private practice as a consultant
in February 2014. Prior to that, Dr Lituri had been working as a registrar
at major tertiary hospitals in Adelaide. During
this period of his training,
Dr Lituri was frequently on call for emergencies which often consisted of
trauma related matters. When
working as a senior fellow at the Lyell McEwin
Hospital, his primary work was in the acute surgical unit. Dr Lituri
explained that
experience as a trauma surgeon involved the stabilisation of
patients as well as surgical repair. He explained that this experience
in his ability to remain calm and provide careful and clear orders to theatre
staff while attempting to stabilise a patient
in an often high pressure
environment.
reaching consultant level, Dr Lituri worked as a visiting specialist at a
number of private hospitals including the Calvary Wakefield,
Calvary Central
Districts Hospital and Northeast Community Hospital as well as public hospitals
such as Gawler Health Service, Lyell
McEwin Hospital and Modbury Hospital. For
a period of 13 months between April 2019 and June 2020, Dr Lituri was a fee
for service
staff specialist at Clare Hospital. This was where
Mrs Salter’s surgery was performed. Dr Lituri indicated in his
that laparoscopic cholecystectomy was a routine part of his practice
in May 2020 and he estimated that he had performed hundreds
of these procedures
as the primary operator by that time. However, Clare Hospital was the only
hospital at which he operated that
did not have facilities for
cholangiography.
explained how he came to provide surgical services at Clare Hospital. He was
approached to take over the practice of retiring
surgeon, Dr Andrew Lord.
Initially Dr Lituri’s practice only required him to consult once a
month, but as his practice became
busier, the consulting and operating became a
fortnightly arrangement. When operating at Clare Hospital, Dr Lituri
relied on the
GP anaesthetists and GP surgical
assistants.
This is commonplace
in regional areas.
gave oral evidence at the Inquest. He also provided a
Dr Lituri was
working at an interstate hospital at the date of his summons and could have
elected to give his evidence remotely
via Webex. It was conveyed by
Dr Lituri’s solicitor, prior to the Inquest commencing, that he
wished to give evidence in person.
Dr Lituri expressed in his oral
evidence that he felt it was important to appear
personally.
For reasons
detailed below, I was impressed with Dr Lituri as a witness. It was
evident that the events of 20 May 2020 deeply affected
him, to the point that he
self-elected to cease performing cholecystectomy surgery for a period of time
and sought further training
by observing colleagues perform the surgery. This
allowed him a period of professional reflection and an opportunity to observe
whether the technique he had previously employed was in any way deficient. I
observed a willingness on the part of Dr Lituri, particularly
cross-examination, to accept the error he made during the surgery. I agree with
the submission of Mr Darren Evans of counsel
Dr Lituri did in this Court would have been difficult. He came along and
owned his mistake and the consequences of it.
Your Honour will have heard
evidence from...surgeons who are less forthcoming than Dr Lituri, who
appeared to be, in my respectful
submission, doing his best to give an account
of what happened.’
Surgery date is brought forward
to the narrative, Mrs Salter’s surgery at Clare Hospital was
initially scheduled for 18 June 2020. On 15 May 2020,
Mrs Salter was added
to a surgical list for 20 May 2020. Her surgery was brought forward by one
month. During the course of the
oral evidence there were a number of reasons
postulated as to why Mrs Salter’s surgery had been brought forward.
was heard that patients added to surgical lists at short notice was not
No definitive reason
why this occurred was established, however the only matter of importance that
arose from the surgery being
brought forward was the rushed nature of the
pre-anaesthetic consult process and the availability of blood products.
Dr Kuruppu,
as the GP anaesthetist, gave detailed evidence on the topic of
the pre-anaesthetic consult. He explained that upon learning of
Salter’s surgery being scheduled for 20 May 2020, he undertook
the pre-anaesthetic consultation on 19 May 2020.
touched on briefly above, Dr Kuruppu is a rural generalist at the Clare
Medical Centre. He has been in this role since December
2016. Dr Kuruppu
provided an affidavit to the Court and gave oral evidence at the
Dr Kuruppu’s affidavit outlined his medical training, including that
he was conferred with his basic medical degree in India
in 2006 and relocated to
Australia in December 2007 where he continued with his medical career. At the
time of Mrs Salter’s
surgery in May 2020, Dr Kuruppu was a
registrar trainee in the Australian College of Rural and Remote Medicine (ACRRM)
training program.
Between 2010 and 2016, he was a trainee in the Australian and
New Zealand College of Anaesthetists training program, but changed
programs in
In his affidavit,
Dr Kuruppu outlined that he had been in the anaesthetics training program
for six years and was confident as the
primary anaesthetist for cholecystectomy
procedures (laparoscopic or open). He considered himself less experienced in
the role of
assistant surgeon as his main focus in theatre had been
anaesthetics. When approached to be Dr Lituri’s assistant surgeon
for Mrs Salter’s expedited procedure, Dr Kuruppu explained that
he felt somewhat hesitant. He stated in his oral evidence
that the surgical
list on 20 May 2020 was the first time he had scrubbed into surgery in an
assistant surgical role in 10
However, he agreed to
assist as he understood there was a shortage of staff due to the COVID-19
to Dr Kuruppu’s affidavit was an email dated 15 May 2020 from Katie
Martin, the Clare Medical Centre’s executive
assistant, to the Clare
Medical Centre’s roster manager, Ms Kylie Sabeeney.
Katie Martin
Sent: Friday, 15 May 2020 3:34 PM
To: Kylie Sabeeney
Cc: Julie Lewcock
Subject: Changes to Theatre
Lituri has added a list very last minute. I didn
bother you with this on your day off. So I think I have it covered, fingers
Wednesday 20th May - Lituri
day off anyway - have confirmed with him)
Assist: PSK
confirmed with him - doesn
t like assist - but has agreed to
I have moved nursing home visits from PSK Thurs am to DC on Monday 18th
(as she opened up a session there).
I have let Dyne know she has nursing home Monday and have called Carinya
and Kara house to let them know.
Hopefully this is all ok.
Kind regards,
Katie Martin
Executive Assistant
though Dr James McLennan was listed as the anaesthetist for the surgery, the
pre-anaesthetic consult was booked in with Dr Kuruppu.
This appeared to be
due to the lack of availability of Dr McLennan at short notice as the surgery
had been brought forward:
'From: Katie Martin
Sent: Monday, 18 May 2020 7:56 AM
To: Melissa Lynch
Subject: Fwd: Final list for Wednesday
Attachments: Clare Hospital Theatre List 20 May 2020.docx
Hey Mel, would you be able to call Kathleen and get her booked in for PAC
tomorrow afternoon, their (sic) should be one left with
Thank you, then this list should be done.
I can email it out tomorrow.
pre-anaesthetic consult (PAC) occurred on 19 May 2020 and was conducted at the
Clare Medical Centre.
Dr Kuruppu identified several risks relevant to Mrs Salter’s
anaesthetic profile, namely medically treated atrial fibrillation,
sleep apnoea,
a high BMI and a history of post-operative nausea and vomiting. Perhaps most
relevantly for the consultation, it was
noted that Mrs Salter had a
morphologically small mouth and receding jaw. Dr Kuruppu identified this
as creating potential difficulties
with intubation. He assessed her overall
physiological status as ASA3. Dr Kuruppu explained that this put
Mrs Salter at a moderate
risk in terms of
anaesthesia.
told the Court that if there had been more time between his pre-anaesthetic
consult and the surgery, he would have discussed
Mrs Salter’s risk
with Dr Lituri. However, he did discuss the matter with Dr McLennan and a
plan was formed for Dr Kuruppu
to undertake a dual role of support for both
anaesthetist and then the surgeon. Dr Kuruppu gave oral evidence that he
also discussed
the plan with either the nurse manager or the anaesthetic nurse,
and it was agreed that the surgery could proceed as planned. Three
and C were devised for intubation, and Dr Kuruppu described this in his
Ultimately, plan B
and C were not required, and Mrs Salter was intubated successfully on the
third attempt of plan A. This was
recorded in Mrs Salter’s clinical
notes at 11:30am on 20 May 2020, by
Dr Kuruppu.
The expedition
of the surgical list therefore played no adverse role in the anaesthetic care or
intubation of Mrs Salter. This was
well-managed by Dr Kuruppu and
appropriate clinical care was provided.
The surgery
intubating Mrs Salter, Dr Kuruppu, who was already scrubbed in,
changed roles to assist Dr Lituri. Dr Lituri was the primary
conducting the procedure. Dr Lituri gave detailed evidence on this topic
and was extensively cross-examined. He explained
that after placing the ports
into the abdominal incisions and gaining laparoscopic access to
Mrs Salter’s abdomen, he commenced
by firstly removing adhesions,
where he divided some tissue and pushed away other tissue, such as the stomach
or colon, to a safe
distance. This allowed Dr Lituri to see what he was
doing, as well as not to inadvertently damage adjacent tissues and
Once he was able to
clear the adhesions, he found that the gallbladder was intrahepatic, or stuck
within the bottom part of the
liver, and was inflamed. While Dr Lituri
recalled exclaiming ‘
oh that gallbladder doesn
’ out loud in the operating theatre, he explained that he did not
consider the inflammation sufficient reason to discontinue
the procedure at that
point. He had seen worse gallbladders in previous operations and thought it
necessary to continue dissecting
to decide if performing the cholecystectomy
proceeded to expose the gallbladder by using a grasper to hold the fundus and
lift the liver up to expose the gallbladder
and structures beneath. Another
instrument was then passed in to grasp Hartmann’s pouch and retract it
laterally to achieve
an angle that provided the best view. Dr Lituri
recalled that he then turned his mind to obtaining the critical view of safety,
which as touched on above is the view to identify only two structures connecting
to the gallbladder, being the cystic duct and cystic
artery. He admitted it was
difficult to release the gallbladder from the liver in Mrs Salter’s
case as her gallbladder was
contracted and swollen.
released what he estimated to be less than one third of the gallbladder from the
liver, Dr Lituri considered he had obtained
the critical view of safety and
had ensured there was a space behind the second structure to indicate he was
clear of the liver.
He was unable to recall whether he had, at the time, asked
Dr Kuruppu to double-check whether the correct structures had been
identified.
Dr Kuruppu was not able to remember whether he was asked
Dr Lituri placed a
clip on the structure he believed to be the cystic duct close to the
gallbladder, and two clips lower down. He
repeated the same process for the
structure he believed to be the cystic artery. Dr Lituri gave the
following evidence:
‘So they - those structures to me appeared
to be coming from or to the gallbladder and so then I identified what I thought
the cystic duct and placed a clip close to the gallbladder itself and then
two clips lower down, and the same with what I thought
was the cystic artery, a
clip close to the gallbladder, two further down on the side that would stay with
the patient. Then I divided
between those two with laparoscopic sharp
his evidence, Dr Lituri acknowledged that the two structures were, in fact,
likely the common bile duct and the right hepatic artery
and that he had become
misoriented
’ in his identification of the critical view of
I will return to this
topic when dealing with the expert evidence of Professor Padbury.
next step of the procedure involved the separation of the gallbladder from the
liver. Dr Lituri explained this process was difficult
and time-consuming
due to the intrahepatic nature of the gallbladder. As was commonplace, there
were minor spots of bleeding along
the way which were addressed with
At a point during
this process Dr Lituri noticed a site of active bleeding adjacent to the
area where he was undertaking diathermy.
He explained that he must have caused
an injury at some stage while pulling on tissue to dissect the gallbladder from
Diathermy was not
effective with this site of bleeding, so Dr Lituri initially attempted to
address the bleeding by pressing the
gallbladder against the area, but this was
unsuccessful. He then passed a swab through one of the laparoscopic ports to
put pressure
on it, which seemed to control the bleeding. The anaesthetic
record corroborated this evidence and reflected a drop in
Mrs Salter’s
blood pressure from 110 systolic to 70 at approximately
12:30pm with a steady increase until approximately
With the bleeding
seemingly controlled by the swab, Dr Lituri continued the operation. He
was able to eventually release the gallbladder
from the liver, after which the
gallbladder was placed into a plastic bag called an Endo
and removed from the
abdomen. It was then placed in formalin and taken for examination by SA
Pathology. The SA Pathology form recorded
a time of 1:15pm for when the
gallbladder was
meaning the time it was removed from Mrs Salter’s abdomen and
submitted for histological analysis.
explained that even accepting (as he did in evidence) that he had likely clipped
the wrong structures to remove the gallbladder,
being the common bile duct and
the right hepatic artery, he was still able to remove the gallbladder as the
cystic duct is the most
proximal or closest to the gallbladder, and it comes
from the common bile duct. Therefore, in having divided the common bile duct,
he had divided the cystic duct at the same time. The diagram
illustrates that the
cystic duct is an extension (so to speak) of the common bile
the gallbladder was removed from Mrs Salter’s abdomen, Dr Lituri
turned his attention to checking whether haemostasis was
achieved and whether
there was any bile leaking that required washing. Looking through the camera,
Dr Lituri described growing concern
when he noticed the swab he had placed
earlier was now liquid, soaked with blood, and underneath was continuing to
actively bleed.
Upon removing
the swab, an alarming amount of blood flowed. Dr Lituri immediately took
more swabs from the scrub nurse to put pressure
on the area to control the
bleeding. This allowed him time to consider what vessel or vessels were
bleeding. Dr Lituri was unable
to identify what structure was bleeding,
only the area where the blood was pooling. The blood was also impeding
Dr Lituri’s
ability to visualise with the laparoscopic camera.
was at this point that Dr Lituri recalled the anaesthetic and theatre staff
informing him Mrs Salter had lost a considerable volume
of blood. While he
could visualise an active bleed, the notification that Mrs Salter’s
haemodynamic status was beginning to
deteriorate informed him that she had lost
more blood than he realised.
Lituri's evidence relating to the timing of this event was corroborated by Dr
Kuruppu's account, as well as the anaesthetic
McLennan made the decision around this time to contact another GP anaesthetist,
Dr Lisa Beament, requesting her urgent assistance
in surgery. Dr Beament
made a detailed retrospective
in Mrs Salter’s
clinical records and provided an
to the Court. She was
not summonsed to give oral evidence. Dr Beament deposed to receiving the urgent
phone call while consulting
at the Clare Medical Centre and arrived in theatre
shortly before 2pm. She received a quick handover and observed that
Mrs Salter’s
blood pressure was quite low. She was also tachycardic.
In Dr Beament’s retrospective note, she contacted the MedSTAR retrieval
team at approximately 2pm. Dr Beament stated in her affidavit that it was clear
to her upon arrival in theatre that Mrs Salter would
require transfer to
Dr Beament assisted
in administering blood pressure supporting medications and crystalloid fluid to
provide electrolyte and glucose
in an attempt to resuscitate
Mrs Salter.
assisted with the transfusion of blood which is detailed below.
before Dr Beament’s arrival in theatre, Dr Lituri made the decision
to convert to a laparotomy (an open procedure) in
an attempt to have better
access to the bleeding. He estimated there was a time span of 5 to 10 minutes
between having become concerned
procedure. If performed quickly, the laparotomy itself could be done within a
5-to-6-minute
period. Once Mrs Salter’s laparotomy had been
performed, Dr Lituri worked on clearing the blood and clot and directly
pressure on the area. It was around this time, although Dr Lituri
could understandably not be precise, that the anaesthetic staff
informed him
that a transfusion was indicated. Following that conversation, Dr Lituri
was also notified that the blood available
was not within date. A decision was
made to transfuse the blood due to the ‘
critical situation
as noted in the retrospective entry by Registered Nurse Knappstein:
'Retrospective note for 20.5.2020
discussion re need to transfuse blood – 2 units on site; both outdated at
midnight on 19/5/2020. Staff involved in
agreeance that in this critical
situation, this blood could be potentially life-saving. Both units given as
recorded on the Blood Bank Fridge Register, Mrs Salter received two lots of
red cell products at 2:09pm and
The blood was recorded
as having expired at 11:59pm the day before. As touched on above this was a
life-saving measure as, just
prior to the second infusion,
Mrs Salter’s haemoglobin levels were measured at point of care
testing to be 61 grams per Litre
(g/L). This was compared to her haemoglobin
result in a haematology test undertaken on 20 February 2020, which was a normal
apparent from this result that Mrs Salter had lost a critical amount of
blood. Following the second infusion, and around
the time MedSTAR arrived, the
clinical records reflected that Mrs Salter’s haemoglobin level had
risen to a more stable level
A Safety Learning System
(SLS) Report was appropriately lodged in respect of the out-of-date
, raising the issue for the
attention of SA Health management.
explained that identifying the source of the bleed was difficult due to the
amount of blood and clot in the area, and that
it took about 10 to 15 minutes to
identify the source and then secure it with a figure of eight suture. To ensure
he had achieved
haemostasis, he described placing fresh packs against the area,
leaving them for a couple of minutes, then removing them to check
if there was
any blood on the packs or from the site. Once Dr Lituri was satisfied that
he had secured the bleeding, and the anaesthetist
having confirmed
Mrs Salter had stabilised, he closed the layers of Mrs Salter’s
Dr Lituri gave
evidence that while he had identified the source of bleeding in order to suture
it, he was not aware at that time
that he had divided the right hepatic artery
and the common bile duct or damaged the portal vein. Dr Lituri’s
operation record
supported this evidence as it made reference to a non-specific
inadvertent injury to
described feeling ‘
’ while trying to locate and
contain the bleeding. He gave the following
‘Bleeding that is uncontrollable is a very stressful
thing to happen and it's one of those things that you just hope never happens
an operation because it's real time, you have to get control of it there and
then. You can't wait and it's often there is blood
in the field, it's difficult
to see anything. Everything is happening very quickly and it's not something
that you particularly are
expecting in an elective procedure.’
Notwithstanding Dr Lituri’s internal stress, those in the
operating theatre (in particular Dr Kuruppu) were complimentary of
demeanour and ability to navigate and suture the source of bleeding.
Dr Kuruppu agreed that Dr Lituri remained calm and
composed, and it
was evident to him that Dr Lituri’s priority was to maintain control
of the bleeding.
It is likely
that Dr Lituri's experience in trauma surgery assisted him in remaining calm and
the procedure, and once Mrs Salter’s abdomen was closed, a routine
instrument and pack count was conducted by the
scrub nurse and it became
apparent that there were four gauze swabs (Raytec) unaccounted for. An
abdominal x-ray was undertaken
at the Clare Hospital which identified the four
unaccounted gauze in Mrs Salter’s upper
Dr Lituri made
the well-documented decision to leave the packs in situ knowing that
Mrs Salter would undergo further surgery at
the RAH and they could be
retrieved at that time. He also considered Mrs Salter too unstable to
undergo another surgery at Clare
While this did not
impact on Mrs Salter’s condition in anyway, an SLS report was
appropriately filed.
Mrs Salter’s family were also notified. Professor Padbury gave
evidence that it was appropriate for Dr Lituri not to attempt
to retrieve
the Raytec at Clare Hospital.
Dr Lituri’s
operation record was found in Mrs Salter’s clinical notes and was
transcribed for the purposes of the Inquest.
PRE-OPERATIVE DIAGNOSIS: Biliary Colic
OPERATION DATE: 20/5/2020 TIME COMMENCED: 11:10 TIME COMPLETED: 14:45
SURGEON: Lituri ASSISTANT: [Kurrupu] ANAESTHETIST: McLennan
POST-OPERATIVE DIAGNOSIS: Acute cholecystitis •
PROCEDURE PERFORMED: Laparoscopic ➔ Open Cholecystectomy
DETAILS OF OPERATION: TTO ✓ MBS ITEM NO:
Patient entered OT with informed consent Checklist ✓ 30445
Positioned Supine - GA given ➔ IV Cephazolin SCCs
Area prepared with Betadine and draped
Open cutdown using Hassan technique ➔ pneumoperitoneum
Working ports under vision
Acutely inflamed GB [gallbladder] - dense adhesions requiring extensive
adhesiolysis
Dissection at Hartmann's pouch until critical view of safety achieved.
Cystic duct+ artery divided between clips 2:1
Difficult dissection of GB from liver using cautery
Inadvertent injury to vein in GB Fossa
causing bleeding requiring conversion to open incision to oversew with 2.0
➔ 10 Blakes drain
Initial count correct but later 4 swabs missing + located with x-ray in RUQ
[right upper quadrant]
1 prolene mass closure of Kochers incision + umbilical fascia
3.0 monocryl to skin Postop visible
SPECIMEN SENT TO PATHOLOGY: ☑ Yes
POST-OPERATIVE ORDERS:
Transfer intubated and ventilated to RAH ICU
Continue IV ceftriaxone and metronidazole
Drain on suction
Will need 4 gauze swabs removed at a later date
SIGNATURE OF SURGEON: D Lituri'
MedSTAR retrieval observation chart recorded the first set of observations on
arrival at 4pm.
Although there
was a slight delay in the arrival of MedSTAR due to inclement weather,
Mrs Salter was retrieved to the RAH without
incident, by road rather than
helicopter as was originally intended. I do not consider this brief delay to be
material in any way
to Mrs Salter’s death.
Adelaide Hospital
at the RAH, Mrs Salter was briefly assessed in the ICU and then taken to
theatre for a further laparotomy, conducted by surgeon,
Dr Chuan Ping Tan. Dr
Tan provided an affidavit to the Court and gave oral evidence. The
retrospective entry in the RAH electronic
records reflected that
Mrs Salter’s arrival was ‘
expected from Clare with hepatic
vein bleeder during elective cholecystectomy – intubated and HD
operation note completed by Dr Tan at 00:13am on 21 May 2020, stated the
Operation Description
R hemihepatectomy and L hepaticojejunostomy
Summary of injuries:
transected CBD with separation of the R and L hepatic ducts
Divided R portal vein
divided R hepatic artery
Through a roof top incision the abdomen was entered. The R liver looked
ischemic. L liver was normal. There was also bile seen in
the hilum of the
liver. The following injuries were seen and a cholangiogram was performed
through a stump of bile duct that was
ligaclipped and that showed distal CBD
only with no proximal ducts.
Decision was made to explore the hilum and the
L hepatic duct was seen to
be separated from the R hepatic duct
. a the R liver was ischemic decision
was made to perform a R hemihepalectomy. The R liver was mobilised and the short
hepatics were
either tied or liga clipped before it was divided. Once the R
liver had demarcated the liver parenchyma division was performed with
clap technique and the intraparenchymal branches were taken with ligaclips or
The R hepatic vein was then stapled and the R liver was sent off to
A vascularise pedicle of proximal jejunum was prepared and then the distal
end of the jejunum was brought up in an antecolic position
was anastomosed to
the L hepatic duct with 5/0 PDS. The anastomoses were stented. Then an
enteroenterostomy was performed with 3/0
Maxon in a double layer. The biliary
anastomosis was checked and there was no bile leak seen . The cut edge of the
liver was treated
with some Tisseal. One drain was left behind the biliary
anastomosis and the wound was closed in layers.'
was the findings at the operation conducted by Dr Tan, namely the transected
common bile duct with separation of the right and
left hepatic ducts, the
divided right portal vein and divided right hepatic artery, that alarmed
Professor Padbury when he prepared
his expert report. This was for two reasons.
Firstly, these injuries did not appear in the original operation record of
with Professor Padbury describing this as a significant
discrepancy. Secondly, he observed the injuries repaired by Dr Tan as at
upper end of the spectrum of injury one could ever see secondary to undertaking
a cholecystectomy.
touched on above, Dr Lituri was aware that he had caused an injury and that
he had successfully stopped the bleeding. Beyond that
he was not aware of the
specific injuries caused, accepting in his evidence that he had become
misoriented when attempting to identify
the critical view of safety.
Professor Padbury
Padbury was physically present in Court during Dr Lituri’s oral
testimony. He then gave evidence in the Coroners
Court. Two presentations were
provided by Professor Padbury, with slides and two videos. Professor Padbury
described his assessment
of the complexity of Mrs Salter’s surgery as
’ than the two examples of a cholecystectomy shown
in the videos.
That was due to
the condition discovered after Mrs Salter’s gallbladder was sent for
histopathological testing, as described
earlier in the Finding. The microscopic
findings were:
‘The representative sections of the gallbladder
show denuded mucosa, fibrotic thickened gallbladder wall and florid chronic
inflammation with multi-nucleated foreign body giant cells containing numerous
cholesterol clefts in the gallbladder wall. There
is no dysplasia or
malignancy. The included liver parenchyma is
unremarkable’.
Padbury described the significance of the multi-nucleated foreign body giant
cells. It indicated a more severe degree of
chronic inflammation. Instead of
the condition being chronic cholecystitis, it was xanthomatous or
xanthogranulomatous cholecystitis.
The surgical implication of
xanthogranulomatous cholecystitis is that the inflammation also involves
surrounding tissue. He explained
that it is not just the inflammation of the
gallbladder, the surrounding tissues become inflamed, and things get stuck
together which
makes surgery very difficult. This is because it is very
difficult to find tissue planes and very difficult to separate one structure
from another safely.
most relevantly for the surgery undertaken on Mrs Salter, xanthomatous or
xanthogranulomatous cholecystitis is not typically
recognised preoperatively and
the giant cells can only be diagnosed
histopathologically.
sees a high conversion rate to a laparotomy. The imagery undertaken on
Mrs Salter prior to her surgical procedure gave
no indication of this
order to visualise how this condition might impact a surgical procedure,
Professor Padbury explained the following:
gallbladder sits adjacent to the liver and there is some tissue between the
gallbladder and the bile duct. This tissue
needs to be dissected safely to
separate the gallbladder away from those surrounding structures. With this sort
of inflammation
that is a very difficult task.’
Padbury continued:
‘So this is just the summary - which I've
already spoken about - of xanthogranulomatous cholecystitis. I've summarised in
terms the papers and other - the papers that I've submitted and some
other information - but it is relatively rare. Probably .5%
or something like
that of all inflammations, so it is pretty rare, and it's a spectrum from
xanthomatous to xanthogranulomatous.
I suspect this one was somewhere in the
middle, between simple and the most complex. I say that because there were no
findings on
imaging to suggest that the situation was going to be as was found.
So it was entirely unexpected and that is completely reasonable
from the imaging
report. I haven't seen the images myself but from the imaging report. So it's a
gallbladder, I think it was described
as being 5mm. That's not unusual and that
wouldn't necessarily raise your index of suspicion to think that you were going
something terrible. So the giant cell seen on pathology with the florid
chronic inflammatory reaction is the key to understanding
the case. It's a more
severe inflammatory reaction involving the surrounding structures, usually not
recognised preoperatively, and
it is very difficult to dissect and separate
tissue planes. I've mentioned the high conversion rate to open cholecystectomy,
rate of alternative strategies such as partial cholecystectomy and a
recorded significantly higher complication rates of bile duct
Professor Padbury’s evidence, it was clear that the inflammation found in
Mrs Salter’s gallbladder was rare and some
surgeons may never
encounter it in their professional lifetime. Professor Padbury had removed
gallbladders affected by this condition,
recalling a recent surgery that he
initially thought was a high-risk cancer. It was only after resection and
histological sampling
that xanthogranulomatous cholecystitis was revealed.
the course of his evidence, Professor Padbury provided three articles detailing
this condition, to which he referred in the
above passage of evidence. These
articles outlined that it was a particularly rare and destructive variant of
cholecystitis marked
by unique inflammatory changes evident in pathologic
Both articles
concluded that the condition had a non-specific presentation making it difficult
to recognise preoperatively with
it not being detected on ultrasound, CT or MRI
in the subject patients.
Padbury opined that Dr Lituri was misled by the inflammation, believing
that he was dissecting the critical view of safety,
whereas in fact he was on
the left-hand side of the bile duct. The inflammation created a visual
appearance that Dr Lituri was in
the right-hand spot when he was
In cross-examination,
Professor Padbury also agreed another reasonable possibility was that
Dr Lituri could have made a decision
it was not due to the inflammation clouding the ability to clearly identify
Both possibilities really
amounted to the same situation; that Dr Lituri clipped and transected the
wrong structures.
on the evidence of Professor Padbury, the anatomical structures would have been
difficult to distinguish due to the inflammation.
As a result, Dr Lituri
was conducting the procedure in an area of the anatomical structures that he did
not appear to appreciate
at the time. Meaning, that he was dividing the common
bile duct when he intended to divide, and thought he was dividing, the cystic
duct. The cystic duct and common bile duct are areas of the same vessel, the
cystic duct branching away from the common bile duct.
Given the structures that
were divided, I find that there was an error of misorientation due to the florid
inflammation.
the misorientation, Dr Lituri also divided the hepatic artery rather than
the branch of it which provided blood supply to the
gallbladder; the cystic
artery. The consequence of this was to compromise the liver of its primary
source of blood. Professor Padbury
gave evidence that a secondary supply of
blood would have taken over, but would not have been sufficient for the liver to
in the longer term.
consequence was that by the time Mrs Salter was operated on again at the
RAH, a portion of her liver was noticeably ischaemic
and had to be resected.
the process of completing what was clearly a stressful surgery, confounded by
the unexpected level of inflammation which prolonged
the task and increased the
difficulty in identifying structures, Dr Lituri made a second error. This
was to inadvertently open the
portal vein, a large vessel that pumps a large
amount of blood at high pressure. Based on Dr Lituri’s description
of the difficulties
encountered with inflammation and separating the gallbladder
free of the liver, the entries in the anaesthetic record (
) and the drop in
Mrs Salter’s blood pressure at approximately 12:30pm, it is probable
that this injury occurred while he was
attempting to free the gallbladder from
the liver. This was when he noticed a bleed that diathermy could not remedy and
swab on it. Although the portal vein pumps 1.5 litres of blood per
minute, the wound to the portal vein is likely to have received
pressure from
the gallbladder, providing a tamponade effect which prevented blood escaping.
Once the gallbladder was removed, the
damage to the portal vein was no longer
being contained and Mrs Salter suffered an extensive bleed, quickly
becoming haemodynamically
converted to an open procedure, identified the area of the bleed and went about
correcting it. He managed to find the source
and suture it, in tremendously
difficult circumstances. Professor Padbury gave evidence about the extreme
difficulty of the task
of suturing an active bleed on a vessel exerting so much
Padbury opined that if a cholangiogram had been available, performed and
correctly interpreted, it would have provided an
opportunity to stop and
re-orientate before the two sets of injuries occurred. Although a hole would
still have been put in the
common bile duct (as that is how the cholangiogram is
performed) it would not have been completely
Professor Padbury
emphasised the importance of a cholangiogram, stating that he performed one in
100% of these surgeries. He commented
‘I'd perform a
cholangiogram in 100% of cases. Now that's not a universal view by all surgeons
but certainly that is the view
of a significant body of people in Australia.
It's not necessarily international but certainly in Australia it is. I think
are arguments as to whether a cholangiogram needs to be done in every
situation, but I think that we have passed the time where cholecystectomy
be done in an organisation that does not have the capability to do a
cholangiogram, to have a cholangiogram performed.’
Injury during surgery
Padbury was asked how common injuries were in cholecystectomy surgery. He
stated that often mistakes are made, but few
have catastrophic consequences.
Professor Padbury described the most common mistake to be putting a hole in the
gallbladder and spilling
gallstones as not uncommon, but undesirable to say the
At the other end of the
spectrum is damage caused to the common bile duct or common hepatic duct.
Beyond that he described the
next level of transections
be vascular injury and the vasculobiliary injuries as seen in
Mrs Salter’s surgery. This was not common, but he
considered that it
might happen more often than has been reported given it can often be repaired.
The Court heard that the portal
vein is responsible for pumping blood at the
extraordinary rate of a 1 to 1.5 litres a minute. With this understanding it
difficult to see why Mrs Salter became haemodynamically unstable
very quickly following the injury to her portal vein.
Padbury was asked whether an anatomical variation or an inflammatory profile
(such as xanthogranulomatous) may contribute
to an injury to the portal vein in
a cholecystectomy. He explained that it was more likely with the particular
inflammation profile
suffered by Mrs Salter. He did emphasise that it was
still very uncommon and he had only attended on two injuries to a portal vein
his career.
Anecdotally,
Professor Padbury gave evidence about the risk of surgery in rural areas. He
described (in general terms) the advanced
disease profiles of those who live in
the country, as they are typically less likely to see a doctor regularly due to
Furthermore, there is understanding that these patients will put up
with more for longer than their metropolitan counterparts. Those
rural areas have a slightly higher body mass index (BMI) as
This is compounded by the
isolation of a rural surgical setting without immediate help in emergencies.
Professor Padbury stated
that this risk matrix made interoperative
decision-making critical.
red flags for not proceeding with a surgery in a rural area were listed by
Professor Padbury as significantly advanced disease
on imaging, BMI of greater
than 40, a significant medical comorbidity and a previous significant upper
abdominal surgery. Mrs Salter
did not meet any of these
categories.
Her intentions were
also clearly documented in the lead-up to the surgery that she was fearful of
the COVID-19 pandemic and preferred
to have her surgery in
I find that it was not
inappropriate for Mrs Salter to have been booked for surgery at the Clare
issue was not where the surgery should have taken place, but whether or not
Dr Lituri should have stopped the surgery and, if
so, at what point.
Professor Padbury described bail out procedures including partial
cholecystectomy and cholecystostomy. However,
as events transpired, these bail
out options were not considered by Dr Lituri, as the injuries to
Mrs Salter were only appreciated
after the removal of the gallbladder,
which was achieved laparoscopically.
that said, there was another bail out option open to Dr Lituri and that was
to have stopped the laparoscopic procedure and rebooked
the surgery for another
day at a tertiary hospital. The first opportunity to consider this was when
Dr Lituri discovered Mrs Salter’s
gallbladder to be inflamed.
This was when he exclaimed ‘
oh that gallbladder doesn
’. He gave evidence that at the time he made the decision
to continue with the procedure, with a ‘
wait and see
’. The other opportunity was when he found it difficult to
dissect the gallbladder from the liver, as it was intrahepatic.
inflammation causing the intrahepatic gallbladder also led Dr Lituri to
believe he had visualised the critical view of safety,
when in fact he had not.
was asked by his counsel, Mr Andrew Harris KC, whether, upon reflection, he
should have considered stopping the procedure.
Dr Lituri explained that he
should have made the decision to rebook Mrs Salter’s surgery when he
observed an inflamed gallbladder
at the beginning. He
‘On reflection, recognising where I was, in Clare
Hospital, two hours from Adelaide, no other surgeons around, that when the
gallbladder was not as the previous gallbladder had been, very similar to that
video that we saw, quite straightforward, given her
age and comorbidities, it
would have been more appropriate to think: no, I need to abandon this procedure
before I even start, and
then tell Mrs Salter later, “I'm sorry, this
was not a place where I think we should be doing this now, having seen what your
gallbladder was like”, and referred her to the metropolitan area.’
I agree that the finding of an unexpectedly inflamed gallbladder was the
primary opportunity to have abandoned the procedure and rebooked
for another
time and place. The other potential occasion to reconsider proceeding further
was when Dr Lituri encountered difficulties
dissecting the intrahepatic
gallbladder from the liver. While this was not specifically put to
Dr Lituri in cross-examination, it
goes without saying that further
difficulties encountered for the same reason (inflammation) should have brought
Had Dr Lituri stopped at that point, it is
likely the injury to the portal vein would not have been caused, although the
to the common bile duct and right hepatic artery had already been
sustained. These injuries were contributory to Mrs Salter’s
Therefore, I do not consider this to have been a genuine opportunity, in the
circumstances, to prevent Mrs Salter’s
Padbury spoke of the pressure, particularly felt by general surgeons, to
continue with a surgery that may not be what was
expected. He
I think there’s a lot of pressure on people to not
[bail out]. So if I take my own situation as a subspecialist in a very small
area, that it’s a lot easier for me to make the decision to stop and bail
out because its less likely that I’ll be criticised
by others. I think
its difficult for general surgeons because there’s always – and this
is part of the culture within
surgery – there is a risk and they would
feel the pressure that they would be criticised by people that they refer the
to or if they don’t feel that they want to do it themselves in a more
supportive environment. Yeah, I think that’s hard
and difficult to do and
we don’t have a great culture around it.’
Dr Lituri did not give evidence that he felt pressure to continue with
Mrs Salter’s surgery at any time, it is certainly
appreciable that
there is pressure at play when a room full of health professionals are booked to
do a task and there are other patients
waiting on a list. Surgeons are highly
skilled specialist doctors and are expected to perform at a certain level
creating its own
inherent pressure for the smooth running of procedure lists.
Certainly, if Dr Lituri had decided not to proceed with
Mrs Salter’s
surgery when he observed the gallbladder to be
unexpectedly inflamed, the outcome would have been very different.
Dr Lituri candidly
reflected on that missed opportunity, both in his
surgical practice and when giving oral evidence.
Padbury opined that once Mrs Salter’s haemodynamic status began to
decline, the rescue efforts by both the GP anaesthetists
were outstanding,
particularly in light of an estimated blood loss of 2.5 litres. He described it
really magnificent
not in the least bit critical of transfusing the out-of-date blood, stating the
decision to use it was lifesaving. He postulated
what he described as the
extraordinarily interesting
’ alternative scenario to
withhold the out-of-date blood while the patient exsanguinated on the operating
Of course, that did
not happen and the appropriate course of action was taken.
External reviews
is important to acknowledge that three separate reviews were conducted following
Mrs Salter’s death, looking into various
aspects of the anaesthetic
and surgical care Mrs Salter received on 20 May 2020. This was in addition
to the SLS reports lodged.
included a clinical case review by the Yorke and Northern Local Health Network
(YNLHN) on 21 May 2020, relating to the sedation
and anaesthetic capabilities of
Clare Hospital.
recommended a re-evaluation of elective surgery procedures at country sites and
was subsequently endorsed by Dr Viney
Joshi, the Executive Director of
Joshi also commissioned an independent review from Dr Robert Franz (a senior
surgeon from Queensland). Dr Franz recommended consideration
of whether the
adhesions could have been predicted prior to the surgery. The rarity of
Mrs Salter’s condition and the inability
to detect the particular
inflammation prior to surgery was uncovered during the Inquest. I am satisfied
that this issue has been
explored and answered.
independent surgical review was conducted by Associate Professor Ivan
Associate Professor
Rapchuk was critical of the timing of the pre-anaesthetic consult suggesting
that it should have been conducted
earlier to allow for comprehensive
consideration of potential issues arising during surgery. While expediting the
surgery created
anxiety amongst theatre staff and resulted in issues regarding
availability of blood, this did not impact on Mrs Salter’s
have taken into account the opinions expressed in each review as well as the
recommendations.
Preventability
am of the view that Mrs Salter’s death was a preventable one.
were two primary opportunities to have prevented Mrs Salter’s death.
The first opportunity was at the point Dr Lituri
Mrs Salter’s gallbladder to be unexpectedly inflamed. This was the
point at which Dr Lituri should have (and duly
acknowledged) rebooked
Mrs Salter’s surgery at a tertiary hospital. Had he done so, the
injuries to the common bile duct,
the hepatic artery and the portal vein would
not have occurred.
second opportunity related to the unavailability of a CT cholangiogram at Clare
Hospital. I accept Dr Lituri’s evidence
that, had one been
available, he would have used it intraoperatively. I further accept the
evidence of Professor Padbury that this
would have illuminated the anatomical
area in which Dr Lituri was and should not have been, providing him an
opportunity to correct
himself. I also repeat the evidence of Professor Padbury
that he uses a cholangiogram in 100% of cholecystectomies. In the
identification
of the correct structures intraoperatively, it is simply too
important not to have available during a cholecystectomy.
Conclusions
findings I have made are set out in accordance with the issues above. I have
come to these conclusions on the basis that I am
comfortably satisfied each of
them were established on the evidence.
Ethel Salter died on 4 June 2020 at the Royal Adelaide Hospital. She was
76 years old.
cause of Mrs Salter’s death was multi-organ failure and sepsis due to
complications of cholecystectomy.
cholecystectomy was performed on 20 May 2020 by Dr Darren Lituri, general
surgeon, at the Clare Hospital.
surgery was indicated due to symptoms of cholecystitis.
the surgery was brought forward and the pre-anaesthetic consult by
Dr Kuruppu was rushed, being undertaken the day before surgery,
impact on the adverse outcome either on the day of surgery or in relation to
Mrs Salter’s death.
identified certain risk factors in placing Mrs Salter under general
anaesthetic. He appropriately mitigated against those
risks by asking for a
second GP anaesthetist to be present at the procedure.
Notwithstanding
the risk identified by Dr Kuruppu, Mrs Salter’s surgery was
appropriately scheduled at the Clare Hospital on
20 May 2020. The standard
pre-surgical tests and imagery were undertaken and did not (and could not)
identify the inflammatory condition
that Mrs Salter was suffering from.
the day of the procedure, Mrs Salter was the second on
Dr Lituri’s surgical list. The first patient’s cholecystectomy
procedure proceeded uneventfully.
was successfully intubated by Dr Kuruppu at approximately 11:30am.
gaining laparoscopic access to her abdomen, Dr Lituri observed that
Mrs Salter’s gallbladder was unexpectedly inflamed.
It was at this
point Dr Lituri should have abandoned the procedure and rescheduled for
another time and at a metropolitan hospital.
continued the procedure and attempted to identify the critical view of safety.
He thought he had identified the correct
structures being the cystic duct and
the cystic artery and clipped them. He then divided between the two structures
with his laparoscopic
sharp scissors.
to the level of inflammation, Dr Lituri had in fact become misoriented and
clipped the wrong structures, being the common bile
duct and the hepatic artery.
He was not aware of his error at this time.
Dr Lituri had access to a CT cholangiogram, he would have utilised this
tool to assist him to identify the critical view of safety.
he done so, his identification of the correct structures and his realisation
that he had become misorientated would have been
markedly improved.
Hospital did not have a CT cholangiogram.
continued to separate the gallbladder from the liver. Mrs Salter’s
gallbladder was embedded into the liver (intrahepatic)
making this task
difficult and time consuming.
this process and at approximately 12:30pm, Dr Lituri identified a site of
bleeding that could not be addressed with diathermy.
Mrs Salter’s
blood pressure began to drop. Dr Lituri attempted to address the bleed by
pressing the gallbladder against the
area. This was not effective. He then
passed a swab through one of the laparoscopic ports and placed pressure on the
appeared to contain the bleed as Mrs Salter’s blood
pressure rose.
approximately 1:15pm, Dr Lituri released Mrs Salter’s
gallbladder from the liver and sent it off to be pathologically examined.
the removal of the gallbladder, the site where Dr Lituri had placed the
swab was actively bleeding. This saw Mrs Salter become
haemodynamically
unstable. This was due to an injury in the portal vein that had, on balance,
been inflicted during Dr Lituri’s
attempts to separate the
gallbladder from the liver.
approximately 1:30pm, Dr Lituri converted the procedure to a laparotomy in
order to better visualise the area. This was undertaken
quickly and was an
appropriate course of action.
McLennan contacted another GP anaesthetist, Dr Beament, to attend surgery
urgently and assist with Mrs Salter’s deteriorating
condition. This
was appropriate.
Beament arrived in theatre shortly after the laparotomy had been performed and
administered blood pressure supporting medications,
crystalloid fluids,
electrolytes and glucose. This was all appropriate and lifesaving.
Beament contacted MedSTAR at approximately 2pm. This was appropriate.
received two units of O negative blood, at 2:09pm and then at 2:35pm. While the
blood was out of date by several hours,
it was an appropriate and life-saving
sutured the site of the bleeding. He was unaware at that time that the injury
he had repaired was to the portal vein.
remained calm and composed during the emergency, however was not aware that he
had closed Mrs Salter’s abdomen with
Raytec packs inside. Once this
was realised and identified at x-ray, a decision was made not to reopen and
retrieve them due to
the knowledge that Mrs Salter would undergo further
surgery upon retrieval and her unstable condition. This was an appropriate
Mrs Salter’s condition and impending arrival.
at the RAH, Mrs Salter underwent two rescue surgeries but, despite the best
efforts of the teams involved, she died.
condition that was ultimately identified at histopathology,
xanthogranulamatous
cholecystitis
not identified in the routine radiological investigations undertaken in
the lead up to the procedure. The multi-nucleated foreign
body cells could only
have been diagnosed after biopsy and histopathological examination.
Mrs Salter’s
death was preventable.
Recommendations
section 25(2)
Coroners Act 2003
I am empowered to make recommendations
that in the opinion of the Court might prevent, or reduce the likelihood of, a
of an event similar to the event that was the subject of the Inquest.
Laparoscopic
cholecystectomies are considered to be relatively routine procedures. However,
like all surgical procedures, there is
Mrs Salter’s
pre-anaesthetic surgical assessment did reveal a moderate risk and that was
appropriately identified and dealt
with by Drs Kurrupu and McLennan.
Mrs Salter’s routine pre-surgical tests did not however reveal
anything to suggest that
her procedure would be anything other than uneventful.
The surgical risk presented itself when Dr Lituri observed an unexpectedly
inflamed gallbladder. Although xanthogranulamatous cholecystitis is a rare
condition, the difficulty detecting it until the procedure
is underway (at the
earliest), highlights the importance of having tools available such as CT
cholangiogram. The CT cholangiogram
used intraoperatively would have assisted
in re-orientating Dr Lituri, in a floridly inflamed area. Had this tool
been available
to Dr Lituri, Mrs Salter’s death could have been
prevented. Information received just before this Finding was published
that the Clare Hospital still does not have a CT cholangiogram.
, to the Minister for Health and Wellbeing, that
consideration be given to the provision of CT cholangiogram facilities at all
sites in South Australia where elective cholecystectomy is performed.
should not have proceeded when he identified the unexpectedly inflamed
gallbladder. However, he could not have known of
the condition underlying the
inflammation. The importance of contingency plans, ‘
’, were highlighted by Professor Padbury during oral evidence,
as was a culture of continuing with surgeries where unexpected
issues were
encountered.
, to the Royal Australasian College of Surgeons, that
training be provided to trainees of the surgical program on the importance of
minimising harm by not continuing with procedures/surgeries attended to by
unexpected circumstances of high risk.
Acknowledgments
acknowledge the valuable assistance of special counsel, Mr Darren Evans.
would like to convey my sincere condolences to the family and loved ones of
Mrs Salter.
Keywords: Cholecystectomy; Laparoscopic Surgery; Rural Hospital
Exhibit C16, paragraph
Exhibit C5, pages 58, 97-98
(ultrasound report)
Keyhole surgery used to inspect
and operate on organs inside the abdominal and pelvic areas
A laparoscopic procedure to
remove the gallbladder
C5, page 59
A surgical incision
into the abdominal cavity
Exhibit C15, page 5
a portion of the liver
creation of a communication between the hepatic duct and the jejunum
Washing of abdominal cavity
to allow inspection
Mrs Salter was pronounced life extinct at 5:08pm on 4 June
Coroners Act
Section 3(1)
reportable death (d)
Death Report to Coroner
Medical Practitioner’s
Removal of a
portion of the liver
Connection of the bile duct to the jejunum
Exhibit C14, page
Exhibit C6a, emphasis
Transcript, page
Exhibit C8b, Letter to
Dr Joshi dated 14 January 2021 from Ms Wadsworth, Regional Blood Management
Exhibit C5, pages
58, 97-98 (ultrasound
Transcript, page 168
Exhibit C7, page
Exhibit C7, page
Exhibit C11a, paragraph
Exhibit C11a, paragraph
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C16
Dr Kuruppu has since
become a Fellow of the Australian College of Rural and Remote Medicine (FACRRM)
in 2021 and received his Diploma
of Rural General Anaesthetics (RGA) in
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Dr James McLennan
Exhibit C16,
Exhibit C16,
Exhibit C5, pages
61-62, page 99
Transcript,
Transcript, page
Exhibit C6, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page 150
Diathermy is a medical
technique that uses high-frequency electromagnetic currents or ultrasound to
generate localised heat within
tissues, used for various purposes, including
surgical procedures to coagulate
Transcript, page
Exhibit C6, page 50
A single use specimen pouch
used during laparoscopic procedures to remove a specimen from the abdominal
Exhibit C6a, page
Redrawn from Schwartz et
al. Principles of Surgery. 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill,
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page 197;
Exhibit C6, page 50
C6, pages 25-26
Exhibit C15, paragraph
Exhibit C15, paragraphs
Exhibit C6, page
Exhibit C6, pages 15,
Exhibit C5, pages
Exhibit C6, page
Transcript, pages
Transcript, page
Transcript, page 223;
Exhibit C16
Exhibit C6a,
Exhibit C11a, paragraph 46;
Exhibit C6, page 23; Exhibit C8b, Tool Documentation and Discussion Summary,
Transcript, page 283
Exhibit C6, page 56;
Exhibit C11b, transcribed Operation Note dated 20 May 2020, emphasis
Exhibit C4, pages
Exhibit C4, page
Exhibit C4, page
Exhibit C14, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C6a, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, pages
Transcript, pages
A Contemporary analysis of
xanthogranulomatous cholecystitis in a Western cohort, 2021, Azari et al,
Turkish Journal of Surgery;
The management of xanthogranulomatous
cholecycstitis,2024, Simsek et al, Turkish Journal of
Xanthogranulomatous
cholecystitis: experience in 100 cases, 2020, Feng et al, ATM Annals of
Translational Medicine
Transcript, page 270
Transcript, page 297
Transcript, page 275
C6, page 50
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C5a
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C8bi
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.49 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (508 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter