URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SADC/2025/112.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:55:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DI FEDE v BSGM HOSPITALITY SERVICES (SA) PTY LTD & ANOR [2025] SADC 112 (4 September 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Civil: Appeal Against a Master)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
DI FEDE v BSGM HOSPITALITY SERVICES (SA) PTY LTD &
[2025] SADC 112
Judgment of Her Honour Judge
4 September 2025
COURTS AND JUDGES - JUDGES - DISQUALIFICATION FOR INTEREST OR BIAS -
REASONABLE APPREHENSION OF BIAS GENERALLY
Appeal from an Associate Judge’s dismissal of an application to recuse
himself from any further care or conduct of the proceedings
on the grounds of
apprehended or actual bias.
The appellant had brought an application for summary judgment. Prior to
hearing the application the Associate Judge arranged for
an email to be sent to
all parties to notify them that the Associate Judge had taken the view that the
defence filed did not have
the status of sworn evidence, which triggered the
respondents to file three affidavits. At the hearing the Associate Judge
full argument on the application to provide the appellant (applicant)
with time to consider the material filed by the respondents
and to potentially
file a responsive affidavit. At that hearing there were also exchanges between
the Associate Judge and the parties
obtaining summary judgment in the face of factual disputes, and the potential
adverse costs
implications for him if he were unsuccessful. The Associate Judge
also remarked about deficiencies in the defences of the respondents,
respondents have since sought leave to file amended defences.
The Associate Judge listed the argument on summary judgment for a half-day on
27 February 2025. Prior to that argument the appellant
made an application for
the Associate Judge to recuse himself. The hearing of argument on the
application for summary judgment was
vacated and the recusal application was
heard in its place. The appellant’s argument was principally that the
email the Associate
Judge had arranged to be sent, and his remarks favourable to
the respondents at the earlier hearing, demonstrated actual bias by
prejudgment or an apprehension of bias directed to coaching and assisting the
respondents and condemning his application for
summary judgment. The Associate
Judge refused to recuse himself.
On appeal, the appellant seeks orders precluding the Associate Judge from
further care or conduct of the principal proceedings. The
respondents were
excused from attending the appeal hearing. The appellant contends the Associate
Judge erred in refusing to recuse
himself on the grounds of actual or
apprehended bias.
Held: Appeal dismissed. The Associate Judge’s conduct was not such as
to constitute actual bias by way of prejudgment or to
create a reasonable
apprehension of bias in a fair-minded lay observer.
District Court Act 1991
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
District Court Civil Rules 2006
(SA), referred to.
Mallios v Commissioner of Police
[2024] SASC 131
Rana v Hyatt Regency Hotel Ltd
[2007] SASC 7
Mossop Group
Pty Ltd v 1KW Adelaide Pty Ltd
[2018] SASC 186
DT v Chief Executive of
the Department for Child Protection
[2021] SASC 138
Reid v Commercial
Club (Albury) Ltd
[2014] NSWCA 98
R. (De Vesci) v Justices of
Queen’s County
(1908) 2 IR 285
[1994] HCA 30
(1994) 181 CLR 41
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Jia Legeng
205 CLR 507;
Ibrahim Bilgin v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
[1997] FCA 1022
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
Attorney-General v Sillem
[1864] EngR 352
(1864) 10 HLC 704
[1979] HCA 9
(1979) 142 CLR 531
Minister for Immigration and Border
Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
(2018) 264 CLR 541
McDonald v Attorney-General
[2023] SASCA 132
Johnson v Johnson
[2000] HCA 48
(2000) 201 CLR 488
v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
[2006] HCA 2
British American Tobacco Australia Services Ltd v Laurie
[2011] HCA 2
(2011) 242 CLR 283
Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd v
[2011] HCA 48; (2011) 244 CLR 427;
Spencer v Commonwealth of
[2010] HCA 28
(2010) 241 CLR 118
Adelaide Brighton Cement Ltd v Hallett
Concrete Pty Ltd
[2020] SASC 161
(2020) 137 SASR 117
Collins v Djunaedi
Jennings v Police
[2019] SASCFC 93
Cosenza v Roy Morgan
Interviewing Services Pty Ltd
[2020] SASC 65
Illman v Sterrey &
[2023] SASC 50
State of New South Wales v Spearpoint
Stone v Moore
[2015] SASC 46
(2015) 122 SASR 54
, considered.
DI FEDE v BSGM HOSPITALITY SERVICES (SA) PTY LTD &
[2025] SADC 112
Introduction
is an appeal against an Associate Judge’s refusal to recuse himself from
any further care or conduct of the proceedings
on the grounds of apprehended or
actual bias.
The nub of Mr di
Fede’s complaint on appeal is that the Associate Judge had
“coached” and “assisted”
the respondents in relation to
Mr di Fede’s application for summary judgment so as to destroy his
prospects of success on that
application and to improve their prospects in
defending the substantive claims against them.
substantive proceedings relate to a physical scuffle on 20 May 2021, during the
COVID-19 pandemic, at the shop known as ‘Stirling
Cellars and
Patisserie’. Mr di Fede, as the applicant, claims substantial damages for
personal injury and consequential loss
from the first respondent (Stirling
Cellars) and second respondent (Mr Tarca) for their alleged assault, battery and
The substantive
proceedings are still at an early stage and the application for recusal was made
in contemplation of the Associate
Judge hearing argument on
Mr di Fede’s application for summary judgment. That argument on
the application for summary judgment
has not been heard and is pending the
determination of this appeal.
central issue on appeal is whether the Associate Judge was in error in refusing
to recuse himself. For the reasons that follow,
I have determined that he was
not in error. It is therefore not inappropriate for the Associate Judge to
continue with case management
of this matter.
to this appeal is the Associate Judge’s conduct in the management of
procedural aspects of the matter following Mr
di Fede applying for summary
judgment. It is therefore helpful to summarise those aspects of the proceedings.
di Fede’s claim was filed on 9 May 2024. The respondents filed their
defence on 21 June 2024, in which they broadly denied
the allegations against
During September and October
2024 Mr di Fede filed two affidavits and a USB stick with alleged video footage
of the events of 20
material was taken into account by the Associate Judge in case management of the
summary judgment application.
29 October 2024 Mr di Fede filed an application for summary judgment as to
liability against the respondents.
At a directions hearing held on 5 November 2024, before an Auxiliary Associate
Judge, counsel for the respondents indicated that
they did not propose to file
any affidavit material in opposition to the application for summary judgment.
The respondents instead
took the position that the issue was a factual one for
The application for summary
judgment was listed for argument on 13 December 2024.
Associate Judge’s clerk
sent an email to all
parties on 9 December 2024 to notify them, inter alia, that based on current
information the Associate Judge
had taken the view that the defence filed did
not have the status of sworn evidence (9/12/2024
The Associate Judge’s
reasons for sending the email via his clerk are described in his reasons for
decision; he had formed
the view that it was incumbent upon the court to raise
the issue of the absence of evidence and the principles of law governing summary
judgment having regard to the interests of justice and observing
Civil Rules 2020
(SA) (UCR) UCR
UCR 1.5 sets out the object of
Uniform Civil Rules
, being to “facilitate the just, efficient,
timely, cost-effective and proportionate resolution or determination of the
in proceedings”.
the 09/12/2024 Email, the respondents filed three affidavits, two of which were
affidavits that had earlier been filed
in the Magistrates Court in separate
criminal proceedings against Mr di
the hearing on 13 December 2024 the Associate Judge adjourned full argument on
the application to provide Mr di Fede with time
to consider the material filed
by the respondents and to potentially file a responsive affidavit (13/12/2024
At that time there
were also exchanges between the Associate Judge and the parties about the
difficulties for Mr di Fede obtaining
summary judgment in the face of factual
disputes, and the potential adverse costs implications for Mr di Fede if he were
unsuccessful.
Key extracts from the transcript of that hearing are set out at
paragraph 22 below. The Associate Judge then listed the argument
judgment for a half-day on 27 February 2025 and made other timetabling orders,
including for a short directions hearing
on 3 February 2025 to evaluate the
utility of the scheduled argument “at an early time to avoid costs thrown
away, should the
argument not proceed”.
8 January 2025, Mr di Fede filed a further interlocutory application which
relevantly sought orders that the Associate Judge “recuse
himself from any
further care or conduct of or with respect to these
proceedings”.
supporting affidavit filed on the same day, Mr di Fede deposed to the reasons
why he contended the Associate Judge was required
to recuse himself, which were
principally directed to the content of the 9/12/2024 Email and the remarks of
the Associate Judge during
the 13/12/2024
3 February 2025 the Associate Judge set aside the orders he had made at the
13/12/2024 Hearing, relevant to the hearing of the
application for summary
judgment, and listed the recusal application for argument for a half-day on
27 February 2025.
to timetabling orders, during February 2025 the parties filed further affidavits
and their outlines of argument.
Primary decision: refusal to
recusal application was argued on 27 February 2025. The Associate Judge refused
the application, with his written reasons given
on 12 March
The Associate Judge found
that Mr di Fede had failed to establish facts which demonstrated any apprehended
or actual bias.
Associate Judge adopted the standard test for recusal as it had been enunciated
by Justice B Doyle in
Mallios v Commissioner of
; which requires that
the judicial officer consider whether a fair-minded lay observer might
reasonably apprehend that he might not
bring an impartial mind to the resolution
of the question or questions that he will be required to decide. The relevant
for this recusal application was identified as falling within the
‘conduct’ category, where the question is whether conduct,
connection with the management of the proceeding, gives rise to a reasonable
apprehension of prejudice, partiality or prejudgment.
Associate Judge then made some observations about the context of the impugned
conduct, which conduct needed to be considered
in the prism of the hearing as a
whole and having regard to the entire conduct of the Associate Judge. In so
doing, the Associate
Judge rejected the notion that considerations should focus
on “snippets taken from the hearing”, emphasising that extensive
parts of the 13/12/2024 Hearing, during which other comments he made were
di Fede’s supporting affidavit. He also noted that, in any event, Mr di
Fede had “cherry picked” statements
from the hearing that were, on
occasions, “misquoted, inaccurate, or distorted”
ultimately nothing turned on those
discrepancies).
Associate Judge summarised his role as an Associate Judge dedicated to the
management of pre-trial matters, emphasising that
he did not hear trials and had
no jurisdiction to do so. From this I understood the Associate Judge to be
stressing his limited power
to affect the substantive rights of parties that
would ultimately be the domain of the trial judge; being a matter to which an
independent
lay observer may have regard in assessing any perception of bias.
Associate Judge also considered different judicial methods for the management of
proceedings, comparing what has been described
as “the sporting theory of
justice” of judicial officers of the 20
century, with the
modern approach of “proleptic gate keeping”. He noted that the
Uniform Civil Rules that came into force
in 2020 also contain a clear object for
the “just, efficient, cost-effective and proportionate resolution or
determination
of the issues in proceedings
He emphasised that it
is against this background that the court supervises litigation at the pre-trial
stages by dedicated specialist
judicial officers; who, in the District Court,
are the Associate Judges (formerly known as Masters).
Associate Judge addressed the key contentions of Mr di Fede with respect to the
9/12/2024 Email and the 13/12/2024 Hearing, noting
Mr di Fede’s complaint was underpinned by his presumption that,
without the Associate Judge’s intervention to assist
the respondents, his
summary judgment application would have succeeded because the respondents had
failed to file any evidence, and
their defence strategy was minimalist without
expressing any alternative version of the
The difficulty with Mr di
Fede’s prediction of certain success in the proceedings by way of summary
judgment was also addressed
by the Associate
with him debunking the
prospect that it was a foregone conclusion that he would have succeeded prior to
the Associate Judge’s
intervention.
The Associate
Judge also noted that “the application for summary judgment remains alive
and has not been determined”.
pause at this stage to mention two matters related to Mr di Fede’s
application for summary judgment, and the Associate Judge’s
remarks about
significant to the events of the 13/12/2024 Hearing, Mr di Fede contends that
the 9/12/2024 Email had prompted the respondents
to file affidavits in response
to his application for summary judgment, and without the email no affidavits
would have been filed
by the respondents and the application would have
proceeded to argument on 13 December 2024; at which he maintains he would have
been successful. Whilst the Associate Judge states that the 13/12/2024 Email did
not have a “prescriptive quality”, I
do not doubt that it triggered
the filing of the further affidavits by the respondents provoking an adjournment
of the hearing of
the summary judgment application on 13 December
That said, I agree with
the Associate Judge that it is also possible that an adjournment might have been
sought at the hearing to
remedy the “obvious defect” in the
respondents’ position with associated delay and
I accept that the intent
of the Associate Judge’s 13/12/2024 Email was directed to management of
the proceedings in the interests
of justice and the object of UCR 1.5 (mentioned
at paragraph 7 above).
early stage of the proceedings it was appropriate for the Associate Judge to
raise such matters of concern.
the Associate Judge acknowledged that there were authorities to the effect that
pleadings, of themselves, may well be “sufficient
to thwart a summary
judgment application”.
Though the Associate Judge thought those authorities had been misconstrued, he
accepted that there was also an issue of law arising
from UCR 67.3 - which
requires pleadings to be certified by the responsible solicitor as instructed by
their client, including there
being a proper basis for each allegation of fact.
The issue being that the pleadings may of themselves therefore constitute a
for a defence to a summary judgment application, where further evidence
would not be necessary.
view of these matters, the Associate Judge considered that had the argument on
the summary judgment proceeded on 13 December 2024,
based on the pre-9 December
2024 position (with the lack of any affidavit material filed by the
respondents), “it is by no
means certain, after full argument, that [the
respondents] would have failed in light of UCR 67.3 and the three authorities
identified”.
I address the nature of the application for summary judgment in more detail
later in these reasons.
di Fede had alleged that conduct of the Associate Judge at the 13/12/2024
Hearing, together with the earlier email, demonstrated
A critical aspect of that
allegation was the Associate Judge’s remarks in response to the
respondents’ counsel’s
submission that there was a factual dispute
that could only be determined at trial. I consider those remarks to reflect an
element of Mr di Fede’s application, and to also be relevant to
his case on appeal, and therefore repeat them
HIS HONOUR:
All right. Look, he’s unrepresented. Your affidavits have come in this
week. Two points for your reflection: (1)
you cannot - a summary judgment
application, you cannot resist on the pleadings, that’s not the way
summary judgment works.
I think your side has twigged to that fact, so needs
some evidence to make a controversy. You don’t make a controversy just
having a defence of bare denials.
That work that your side has done in the last seven days or even less, five
days, is critical to this application. Furthermore, he’s
adjournment to answer this. The more controversy there is, the less likely there
is to be a judgment on the papers. But
not only that, your pleadings: do purport
to rely on the defence of necessity, or self-defence, or some - your defence
assert any of the defences to an assault, it just says a deny,
like it didn’t happen.
So you don’t want to plead, you know, that you had some supervening
authority because of, you know, a need to – the COVID
regime where your
people had to enforce that?
his reasons, the Associate Judge’s response to this aspect of the
13/12/2024 Hearing was that it amounted to putting a proposition
parties that “was an incontrovertible assessment of the reality as it
stood on that day”.
Associate Judge appears to have accepted that this proposition followed from the
affidavits that had been recently filed by the
respondents.
However, he also
viewed that certain of those facts set out in the affidavits were already known
to Mr di Fede on or before 9 September
2024 - as was evident from his list of
documents filed at that time.
I understood the Associate Judge, he was not persuaded that those facts would
not have been forthcoming at some point, and once
the affidavits were filed by
the respondents he considered his dialogue with the respondents’ counsel
was unremarkable.
relation to the deficiencies in the respondents’ defence, also raised by
the Associate Judge at the 13/12/2024 Hearing,
the Associate Judge appeared to
take the view that those amendments could be foreseen by reference to the CCTV
footage on the USB
stick that had been filed by Mr di Fede – because the
footage revealed “a complex physical interaction in the context
bottle shop during the period of COVID
restrictions”.
Associate Judge also placed emphasis on a letter that the respondents had sent
to Mr di Fede on 30 October 2024 which alluded
to the defences of
“self-defence and defence of property” which did not appear in the
filed defence at that time.
Therefore, the Associate Judge reasoned that the positive defences were extant
well before the 13/12/2024 Hearing, though (for reasons
unknown) had not been
articulated in the pleading of the
Mr di Fede complains
that the respondents only sought leave to amend their defence to plead these
matters because they were raised
by the Associate Judge.
the Associate Judge reasoned that his remarks at the 13/12/2024 Hearing
regarding the potential defences, which Mr di
Fede had construed as favourable
to the respondents, were directed to avoiding delay, costs and wasted resources
ensure that the parties have articulated their cases with
clarity and in a way that facilitates the smooth progress to a trial i.e.
progress that will not be aborted or
This is in contrast to what the Associate Judge described as Mr di
Fede’s technical position (being analogous to “the
sporting theory
of justice”).
mentioned, I accept that an Associate Judge engaging in active case management
will raise matters of concern early in
the proceedings – this is
particularly so where there were already indications before the court that such
matters would eventually
come to light.
Associate Judge also had careful regard to matters that he addressed at the
13/12/2024 Hearing which he said were clearly favourable
to Mr di Fede,
facilitative
remarks he made about the difficulties in obtaining a judgment on the papers,
particularly for an assault
the prospect of
an adverse costs order being made against Mr di Fede if he wished to pursue the
summary judgment
application;
the perversity
of (or lack of utility in) Mr di Fede potentially having to bear the costs
(which could be “thousands of dollars”)
of the summary judgment
application if he were to ultimately win the case at
leaving open the
prospect of Mr di Fede pursuing summary judgment beyond the 13/12/2024
the respondents
not getting costs of the aborted
the preparedness
of Mr di Fede to prosecute his claim, including in relation to what he would
need to establish for proof as to
Associate Judge was also critical of Mr di Fede having failed to adequately
address matters relevant to the quantum of his claim,
including gaps in his
discovery of materials and the likely need for expert medical opinion as to the
loss caused by his alleged
regard to all of these matters, the Associate Judge decided that actual or
apprehended bias had not been established and refused
the application to recuse
right of appeal which is pursued in these proceedings arises pursuant to
District Court Act 1991
43—Right of
(1) A party to an action may, in accordance with the rules of the appellate
court, appeal against any judgment given in the action.
(2) The appeal lies—
in the case of a judgment given by an Associate Judge or the Court
constituted of an Associate Judge —to the Court constituted
(3) The appeal lies as of right, or by permission, according to the rules of
the appellate court but, in the case of an appeal against
a final judgment of
the Court in its Administrative and Disciplinary Division, permission is
required to appeal on a question of
term “judgment” for this purpose is defined in
judgment, order or decision and includes an interlocutory judgment or
exercised by a Judge: UCR 212.7. Leave to appeal
is required in respect of any
appeal to a Judge of the District Court against a judgment, decision or order of
an Associate Judge:
UCR 213.1A. Such an application for leave to appeal may be
made in the first instance to that Associate Judge: UCR 213.3(1). In this
the Associate Judge granted Mr di Fede leave to appeal when making orders
following his refusal of the
application.
notice of appeal must be in the prescribed form and set out the appeal grounds:
UCR 214.2(1). Unless the court otherwise orders,
an appellant may not rely on
grounds that are not stated in the notice of appeal: UCR 214.2(5). However,
pursuant to UCR 217.10(2)
the court may, if it considers that it is in the
interests of justice to do so, determine an appeal on the merits notwithstanding
a failure of a party to raise or state properly a ground of appeal: UCR
Appeal grounds
In his application Mr di Fede relied upon eight grounds of appeal:
[the Associate Judge] erred in fact and in law.
[the Associate Judge] erred in his findings of facts.
[the Associate Judge] erred in his application of erroneous factual findings and
their application to the law or appropriate
legal practice, protocols and
procedures applicable.
[the Associate Judge] misdirected himself as to the appropriate applicable law
and legal principles he was to follow and apply.
[the Associate Judge] applied legal practice, protocols and procedures that were
not applicable.
[the Associate Judge] failed to apply the correct legal practice, protocols and
procedures that are applicable.
[the Associate Judge] failed to apply the correct case law of legal principles
that apply to the type and nature of the interlocutory
application he
determined.
[the Associate Judge’s] care and conduct of the matter before him has
prejudiced the appellant’s case – and
allowed the respondents to
still be able to continue with the substantive matter, despite the egregious and
ingenious behaviour of
the Associate Judge.
first seven grounds of appeal are in general terms and overlapping; grounds 1,
2, and 3 allege errors in the factual findings,
without specifying those factual
findings; and grounds 1, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 allege legal errors of different
kinds, without identifying
those errors by reference to any parts of the reasons
for decision. Ground 8 is more helpfully directed to Mr di Fede’s
though the description still lacks particularity.
any event I am not required to take a technical approach to confining
Mr di Fede to these grounds, noting that they are broad
also have regard to Mr di Fede being unrepresented.
Fede’s submissions
his oral submissions, it became clear that Mr di Fede had two principal grounds
for challenging the decision of the Associate
Judge not to recuse
Actual bias
Mr di Fede contended that the Associate Judge erred in not finding that he was
biased in the sense of coming to the matter
with a “predisposed state of
mind” that caused him to “depart from
impartiality”.
said that the Associate Judge had “strong views and opinions” that
influenced his conduct as a judicial officer
in the sense of being wedded to not
allowing the matter to proceed to judgment on the papers (which I understood to
mean summary
he alleged that, also directed to this purpose, the Associate Judge
“coached, directed and educated the counsel for
respondents”.
the hearing of this appeal, I expressed some difficulty with this first
contention as to “actual bias” being available
to Mr di Fede on the
facts before me. I am reminded of the high bar for Mr di Fede to overcome for me
to reach a finding of “actual
such a finding is a
grave matter.
Such an allegation
must be distinctly made and clearly proved, and cogent evidence is
I am also cognisant
that, given the broad and general application of the reasonable apprehension
test, it may be unnecessary and
inappropriate for me (in the role of the
appellate court – see
R. (De Vesci) v Justices of Queen’s
to determine such a
serious allegation at an interlocutory
In any event, I informed
Mr di Fede during the hearing that I would give further consideration to his
claim of actual bias, and it
is therefore appropriate for me to say something
more on that topic.
Associate Judge did not find any facts to support a finding of actual
At the appeal hearing Mr
di Fede did not point to any other facts that would potentially show actual
bias. When I questioned Mr di
Fede during the hearing about this, he contended
that his essential point was that the Associate Judge was fixed in his views
the matter having to proceed to trial – and not being open to having
the matter concluded on the
This appears to be the
same foundation for actual bias that had been considered (and dismissed) by the
Associate Judge.
the issue is actual bias in the form of prejudgment, the appellant must
establish that the primary judge was “so committed
to a conclusion already
formed as to be incapable of alteration, whatever evidence or arguments may be
The question is not
whether a decision-maker’s mind is blank; it is whether it is open to
persuasion.
I accept that actual
bias need not be confined to an intentional state of mind; it may be
subconscious, provided it is
Ultimately, not only must
it be established that the decision-maker held an opinion on a relevant aspect
of the matter in issue,
and that he will apply that opinion to the matter in
issue – but it will also be necessary that the decision-maker will do
without giving the matter fresh consideration in light of whatever may be the
facts and arguments relevant to the particular
Ultimately,
I am not satisfied that Mr di Fede has established that the Associate
Judge had a fixed mindset or opinion about the
summary judgment application
sufficient to constitute actual bias; importantly, Mr di Fede did not allege
that mindset other than
by reference to the conduct of the Associate Judge. The
key facts alleged by Mr di Fede as to the Associate Judge’s conduct
09/12/2024 Email and the 13/12/2024 Hearing are not sufficient to enable me to
draw any inference that he had a fixed mindset
or opinion, or that he would do
other than determine the summary judgment application on its merits. As such, Mr
di Fede has been
unable to satisfy me, based upon the conduct of the Associate
Judge, that he is so fixated on an opinion about the summary judgment
application that he would be prepared to disregard whatever submissions and
evidence are made at a hearing of the application. In
these circumstances, it is
appropriate for me to determine this matter by consideration of whether the
Associate Judge’s conduct
was sufficient to amount to apprehended bias
– being Mr di Fede’s second
contention.
Apprehended bias
di Fede contended before me that the Associate Judge ought to have found that
his conduct of the matter in “coaching”
the respondents’
counsel and “giving them ideas of what to put on the defence” was
sufficient to create an apprehension
Mr di Fede said that
“magically, these ideas are reflected in each of the 21 points of the new
defence” and “they
didn’t have this
Further, he
alleged that the respondents had “maintained their position until they
were told what to do or what to write”,
and “that is apprehension of
bias as a minimum because that changed the course of the whole
proceedings”.
on, Mr di Fede also said that the Associate Judge’s conduct looked like he
was “trying to keep the case alive here
by going to the rescue of one of
the parties”.
note that similar matters were raised before the Associate Judge.
He considered those kinds of contentions were not an accurate
reflection of
the 13/12/2024 Hearing and failed to take into account what the fair-minded lay
observer would make of the “entire
and viewing of
the 9/12/2024 Email.
the Associate Judge acknowledged he held views about Mr di Fede’s
application for summary judgment but these were
not “personal
opinion” and represented “a view about the law within recognised
principles of civil
procedure”.
sought on appeal
consequent orders sought by Mr di Fede upon the appeal being allowed
[2] that [Associate Judge Blumberg] be removed from any case
management or care and conduct of the matter, and
[3] that the determination of [Associate Judge Blumberg on 12 March 2025] be
had earlier directed that it was inappropriate and premature for the appeal
hearing to deal with the further proposed orders sought
by Mr di Fede at
paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 of the Appeal Grounds (FDN 1), which dealt with matters
relevant to the substantive proceedings
and were beyond the scope of the
As mentioned above, the
proposed order at paragraph 1 would also be unnecessary because it concerned
leave to appeal which had already
been granted by the orders already made on 12
appeal is conducted by way of rehearing: UCR 217.10(a). This is a provision
under which the appellate court is required to “give
the judgment which in
its opinion ought to have been given in the first
procedure for the correction of error. It is necessary to identify the existence
of an error, whether of fact or
The court may draw
inferences from evidence adduced in the proceeding at first instance. The court
also has a discretion as to whether
to hear further evidence.
am required to undertake a real review of the decision and the reasons of the
Associate Judge in order to determine whether the
Associate Judge erred in fact
or law. It necessitates my reviewing the evidence and findings below, and
forming my own view as to
the appropriate
the appeal to succeed it is necessary for Mr di Fede to establish error on the
part of the Associate Judge.
decision of the Associate Judge not to recuse himself is not a discretionary one
because the legal criterion applied (or purportedly
applied) by the Associate
Judge to reach the conclusion demanded a unique
Accordingly, the
correctness standard applies to this appeal so that the binary question to be
determined is whether or not the Associate
Judge should have recused
The decision of the
Associate Judge involved the balancing of competing considerations applied to a
legal standard.
pause to note that leave to appeal had already been given to Mr di Fede by the
Associate Judge. The Associate Judge determined
that the “novelty of the
application alone warrants a grant of leave to appeal should the practice and
approach outlined in
[his] reasons (and regularly undertaken) be found to be in
error”. The protective force of the requirement for leave to appeal
against interlocutory decisions exists to minimise delays and disruption to the
substantive proceeding. Whether or not it is in the
interests of justice to
grant leave to appeal from an interlocutory decision will generally focus upon
three inter-related questions:
(i) whether the decision is attended with
sufficient doubt to warrant its reconsideration on appeal; (ii) whether the
decision raises
an issue of principle or general importance; and (iii) whether
allowing the decision to stand would work a substantial injustice
In view of the
protective nature of the requirement for leave to be granted, and given the
subject matter of the interlocutory decision,
to my mind it may have been
preferable for the Associate Judge to have left this question for determination
in the appellate jurisdiction
of the court. As there was no contest to the grant
of leave, I consider it inappropriate for me to now reopen this aspect on
also note that at an earlier directions hearing I excused the respondents from
attending the hearing of this appeal. They were
not invested in the recusal
application and also declined to make any written submissions. Though I may have
been aided by their
submissions, the additional costs and time justified
excusing them from attending. Mr di Fede was not opposed to this
The test for apprehended bias and the merits of this
Legal principles
to this appeal is the question of whether the Associate Judge engaged in
conduct, in the management of the proceeding, which
gave rise to a reasonable
apprehension of prejudice, partiality or prejudgment.
principles governing a recusal decision for bias or apprehended bias are well
understood.
well established test for determining whether a judge should disqualify himself
on the basis of an apprehension of bias is that
of the fair-minded lay observer,
as explained by the plurality in the High Court decision of
[11] ... It has been established by a series of decisions
of this Court that the test to be applied in Australia in determining whether
judge is disqualified by reason of the appearance of bias (which, in the present
case, was said to take the form of prejudgment)
is whether a fair-minded lay
observer might reasonably apprehend that the judge might not bring an impartial
and unprejudiced mind
to the resolution of the question the judge is required to
[12] That test has been adopted ... for the reason that it gives due
recognition to the fundamental principle that justice must both
be done, and be
seen to be done. It is based upon the need for public confidence in the
administration of justice. "If fair-minded
people reasonably apprehend or
suspect that the tribunal has prejudged the case, they cannot have confidence in
the decision." The
hypothetical reasonable observer of the judge's conduct is
postulated in order to emphasise that the test is objective, is founded
need for public confidence in the judiciary, and is not based purely upon the
assessment by some judges of the capacity or
performance of their colleagues. At
the same time, two things need to be remembered: the observer is taken to be
reasonable; and
the person being observed is "a professional judge whose
training, tradition and oath or affirmation require [the judge] to discard
irrelevant, the immaterial and the prejudicial".
considering this matter, I also have regard to the reasonableness of any
suggested apprehension of bias having to be considered
in the context of
ordinary judicial practice, having regard to the exigencies of modern
litigation.
In this regard, it
was remarked in
Johnson v Johnson
trial level, modern judges, responding to a need for more active case
management, intervene in the conduct of cases to an extent
that may surprise a
person who came to the court expecting a judge to remain, until the moment of
pronouncement of judgment, as inscrutable
as the Sphinx. ... Judges, at trial or
appellate level, who, in exchanges with counsel, express tentative views which
reflect a certain
tendency of mind, are not on that account alone to be taken to
indicate prejudgment. Judges are not expected to wait until the end
before they start thinking about the issues, or to sit mute while evidence is
advanced and arguments are presented. On
the contrary, they will often form
tentative opinions on matters in issue, and counsel are usually assisted by
hearing those opinions,
and being given an opportunity to deal with them.
also have regard to the difficulties often encountered in determining the
boundary between acceptable engagements with counsel
and conduct that is
indicative of prejudgment and
This difficulty can be
heightened in matters where the judicial officer is assessing allegations of
their own bias, as is typically
the case. However, it is also the case that the
reasonable apprehension of bias must be “firmly established” before
prohibition
will issue. Sometimes the line of judgment is
“ill-defined”.
process by which I am to determine whether there is a reasonable apprehension of
bias has been referred to as a two-step
The first step is to
identify what was said or done by the judicial officer which is alleged to have
created a reasonable apprehension
of bias – to have decided matters other
than upon their legal and factual merits. The second step is to identify the
connection between what was said or done and the “feared deviation
from the course of deciding the case on its
A mere assertion
of a judicial officer appearing to be biased will be of no assistance in the
absence of an articulation of the connection
between the events giving rise to
the apprehension of bias and the possibility of departure from impartial
decision-making.
Assessment on the merits
crux of Mr di Fede’s complaint is that the Associate Judge behaved so as
to cause an apprehension that he was set against
having the matter resolved by
way of summary judgment. More particularly, the allegation is that he coached
and assisted the respondents
such that: (i) they were then in a position to
oppose his application for summary judgment, which he assumes would have
been successful, and (ii) they were also able to substantially improve
their case by amending their defence. To find apprehended
bias these matters
must be sufficient to create a reasonable apprehension of bias, and then must
also be logically connected to a
fear that the Associate Judge will not proceed
on the merits of the matter before him.
such an assessment in this case is difficult; any logical connection between Mr
di Fede’s complaints and the Associate
Judge not conducting himself in
accordance with the merits of the case management of the matter is necessarily
tenuous and prospective
because of the interlocutory nature of the impugned
conduct. I note that the Associate Judge has not had to make any findings in
respect of the substantive aspects of the case from which a logical connection
to apprehended bias might otherwise be drawn.
Knowledge of
the fair-minded lay observer
considering Mr di Fede’s complaint, having regard to the principles set
out above, I need to view the conduct of the Associate
Judge through the eyes of
the fair-minded lay observer who will not have a detailed knowledge of the law,
or of the character or
ability of a particular judge, but will have an
understanding of ordinary judicial practice.
my view, the knowledge that ought to be attributed to the fair-minded lay
observer in this case includes:
(i) knowledge of the factual nature of the pleaded claim and the pleaded
(ii) knowledge that the proceedings were still at a very early stage (without
the trial having been listed or any substantive timetabling
orders made for
trial) when Mr di Fede’s application for summary judgment was filed;
(iii) knowledge that the footage on the USB stick filed by Mr di Fede was from
the scene of the alleged assault;
(iv) knowledge of the documents filed by the parties, including their lists of
documents - which for the respondents included the
two earlier affidavits of Max
Tarca that had been filed in the Magistrates Court proceedings in 2021;
(v) knowledge of open correspondence between the parties in relation to the
proceedings copied to the Associate Judge’s chambers
or the court
(vi) knowledge that the alleged assault took place during the COVID-19 pandemic
and related to the sign-in requirements for customers
at retail venues;
(vii) knowledge that a judicial officer will be minded to proceed with caution
in determining an application for summary judgment,
particularly so in a matter
concerning damages for personal injuries suffered from an alleged physical
(viii) knowledge that modern judges legitimately play an active role in managing
proceedings leading up to trial, including to ensure
that all issues are
adequately addressed by pleadings such that there will be no surprises at trial,
and also to intimate as to matters
that will be relevant to a party in order to
avoid delays with the risk of late applications having to then be managed very
to trial; and
(ix) knowledge that judicial officers have promised by judicial oath or
affirmation and are trained and experienced to come to an
objective independent
decision without bias or prejudgment.
fact that Mr di Fede was unrepresented is also something of which I have had
It may be that the lay
observer would also be cognisant that one of the parties did not have the
benefit of counsel or legal representatives
to explain matters raised by the
Associate Judge. In those circumstances a judicial officer may need to be more
cautious about adopting
a forthright approach to engagement with the parties.
However, I do not think the Associate Judge acted to deny Mr di Fede
fair procedure
– particularly having regard to the matters favourable to
Mr di Fede as set out at paragraph 26 above.
Summary judgment
application
noted above, I have assumed the fair-minded lay observer would have some
knowledge of the difficulties of an application for summary
judgment in a matter
such as this. I hesitate to embark on a comprehensive analysis of this issue
because the application for summary
judgment remains extant. However, it is
necessary to say something about what is required in determining a summary
judgment application
because the fair-minded lay observer would be taken to have
such knowledge – at least in a general sense. It is also important
say something about applications for summary judgment as Mr di Fede considered,
wrongly in my view, that the Associate Judge’s
particularly the 9/12/2024 Email, deprived him of being successful on that
application.
di Fede’s application for summary judgment was made pursuant to
UCR 144.2(1)(a), which provides:
(1) The Court may, on application by a party, give summary judgment in favour of
an applicant –
(a) on a claim if there is no reasonable basis for defending the claim;
Relevantly,
for Mr di Fede’s application to be successful the court must be satisfied
that “there is no reasonable basis
for defending the claim”. The
High Court has said that in determining such an application a court “had
to be cautious
not to do a party injustice by summarily determining an action,
particularly where there were disputed issues of fact or law or mixed
law, merely because the court considered that the [defence] was unlikely to
This approach
was adopted in
Adelaide Brighton Cement Ltd v
Hallett Concrete Pty Ltd
in relation to an application for summary dismissal
and striking out of a claim, where Doyle J
[59] By way of summary of the approach articulated in
Spencer v Commonwealth,
it can be said that the power to determine a
claim summarily should not be exercised lightly. Exercise of the power requires
a practical
assessment of whether the applicant has real, as opposed to merely
fanciful, prospects of success. While the Court need not be satisfied
claim is hopeless or bound to fail, nevertheless it must be cautious not to do a
party injustice by summarily determining
an action, particularly where there are
disputed issues of fact or law or mixed fact and law, merely because the Court
that the claim is unlikely to succeed. However, beyond these very
general guidelines, the Court should focus upon the words used
in the rules and
avoid applying any judicial gloss.
[60] Related to the requirement that the Court undertake a
“practical” assessment is the notion that the Court should
embark upon a ‘mini trial’ of the claim. Rather, the claim should be
assessed in a summary manner, while being cognisant
of the incomplete nature of
the evidence upon which the Court’s decision must be based. Adversarial
argument may assist, and
indeed may result in the emergence of a sufficiently
clear answer to a complex issue that summary judgment is appropriate. On the
other hand, the need for prolonged argument may be indicative of a reasonable
basis for the claim.
relation to the evidence to be relied upon in determining an application for
summary dismissal, his Honour noted that there will
“often be greater
scope for reliance upon evidence so as to make good the proposition that the
applicant’s case itself
is deficient in some respect, or is otherwise
frivolous, vexatious or an abuse of
Significantly,
he went on to say, “the nature of the exercise will nevertheless differ
from that which is undertaken on a summary
judgment application ...[where] an
application for summary judgment is typically addressed more to a particular
defect in, or answer
to, an otherwise properly articulated and disclosed
case”. This is relevant to the “bare bones” defence of the
respondents, which I understand to be of kind which puts Mr di Fede to proof -
as opposed to pleading a positive defence (or answer)
to his claims. This kind
of defence was considered by Kourakis CJ in relation to a summary judgment
application, in
where he said:
(emphasis added)
In the case of a summary judgment application,
there is a reasonable basis for a claim, or a positively pleaded defence, when
is an evidential foundation for facts upon which arguable propositions of
law would result in judgment for the plaintiff or the defendant
as the case may
In cases in which the defendant merely denies the claim, there must be
reasonable grounds on which to contend that the plaintiff will
not discharge its
onus of proof or make good the propositions of law on which it relies.
the case of a SCR 232 application, the evidential basis or grounds must at least
be pleaded.
relating to the precursor provision to rule
the Chief Justice
contemplates that there will be sufficient material before the Court to
determine whether or not there is a reasonable basis
for the claim or defence.
Given the summary proceedings envisaged by the rule, that material will before
the Court either by way
of the affidavits of deponents, who are not required for
cross-examination, or by agreed facts. If the critical facts are disputed
the matter should go to trial. Summary judgment given pursuant to DCR 232 is a
final determination which supports
res judicata.
Cosenza v Roy Morgan Interviewing Services Pty
in the context of
defending an application for summary judgment under former DCR 232,
Livesey J (as he then was) held that a respondent
was not confined to the
evidence adduced by it and which would be admissible at a trial, ruling that the
respondent could rely upon
the applicant’s own evidence which demonstrated
the existence of disputed questions of fact and law.
Relevantly,
all cases note that caution is required in exercising the power to award summary
To this end I also
note that claims which are by their nature “fact rich and fact
intensive” may also be inappropriate
for summary judgment because the
question on the application is “a value judgment upon ascertained
In my opinion, in view of such matters, it was wrong for Mr di Fede to have
presumed that his application would have succeeded but
for the respondents
filing affidavits following receipt of the 9/12/2024 Email. That said, I accept
some of the Associate Judge’s
remarks may have left him with that
impression. In the end, I think that the fair-minded lay observer would be taken
to know that
summary judgment will not easily be granted, and that Mr di Fede
would have faced a contest of some kind even if the respondents
had not filed
affidavits. That issue is necessarily now a hypothetical one and it would be
inappropriate for me to postulate further
as to any likely outcome.
view of those matters, once the lay observer is taken to be imbued with
knowledge that there was no certainty of outcome of Mr
di Fede’s summary
judgment application - even prior to affidavits being filed on 9 December 2024,
the extent to which the 9/12/2024
Email would be viewed by the lay observer as
causing any real prejudice to Mr di Fede is diminished. Further, it is not
for parties to make applications for evidence to be filed at the
commencement of, or during, a hearing for argument on an application
for summary
judgment or like. It is impossible, if not inappropriate for me, to predict the
outcome of a hypothetical late application
in a matter such as this, but it is
relevant to note that the court will be guided by principles concerning the just
resolution of
civil disputes and promoting efficiencies and minimising costs.
Consideration
the central question of fact here is one of judgment and degree. In view of the
matters canvassed above, and for the reasons
that follow, I am not
satisfied that the Associate Judge’s conduct was of a nature such that a
fair-minded lay observer might
reasonably apprehend the Associate Judge had
departed from impartial and unprejudiced case management of the matter, or that
hear the summary judgment application other than on its merits.
acknowledge that Mr di Fede does feel very aggrieved by the assistance the
Associate Judge provided to the respondents, particularly
through the sending of
the 9/12/2024 Email and due to some of the remarks he made at the 13/12/2024
Hearing. For legal practitioners,
such kinds of vigorous engagements between an
Associate Judge and counsel are not uncommon – where claims and pleadings
tested with an eye to preparation for trial. It is understandable that Mr di
Fede, unrepresented, may have formed a dim view of the
process which appeared to
assist his opponents (who had legal representation). However, it is important
that those matters are viewed
in the context of the Associate Judge’s
overall conduct, including where he also gave helpful cues to Mr di Fede (see
26 above). The lay observer would consider all of the Associate
Judge’s remarks, including those that were directed to help
Mr di Fede and
those made for the purpose of efficient, timely, cost-effective and
proportionate resolution or determination of the
proceedings.
method and approach of judicial officers will vary and sometimes quite
considerably. Some judicial officers may demonstrate,
from time to time, a
tendency for forthright engagement with parties and sometimes with impatience or
a degree of aggression. It
is not to be suggested that these types of judicial
officers cannot be trusted to stay out of the arena and maintain objectivity.
my view, a fair-minded, lay observer would be fully cognisant of the fact that
some judges may be more plain-spoken than others
in expressing preliminary or
provisional views or in
judicial officer is more forthright in his approach does not lead the lay
observer to conclude he is favouring a party or
will not be open to persuasion
on the merits of any argument before him.
reading of the transcript of the 13/12/2024 Hearing is that the Associate Judge
was concerned about the underlying factual complexity
of the matters likely to
be in dispute between the parties at trial and he questioned the strategy
adopted by the respondents in
filing a defence replete with bare denials. It is
also clear to me that he was mindful of Mr di Fede being unrepresented, and
to inform him of the potential for adverse costs orders if he failed in
his summary judgment application - which could ultimately
prove to have been
unnecessarily incurred if he were to ultimately succeed at trial. These are the
kinds of matters regularly dealt
with as part of modern case management and
would not be viewed by the lay observer as bringing prejudice or partiality to
his management
of the proceedings.
Associate Judge did indicate to the respondents’ counsel the kinds of
defences that the respondents had not pleaded prior
to the 13/12/2024 Hearing,
which I accept were largely picked up in the proposed revised defence which the
respondents now have sought
This aspect of the
Associate Judge’s remarks were no doubt galling for Mr di Fede who
considered that without this assistance
the respondents may simply have
maintained their ‘defence-lite’ strategy. However, for reasons
expressed by the Associate
Judge (see paragraphs 24 and 25 above), I do not
think the Associate Judge’s remarks were sufficient to cause the
fair-minded
lay observer to consider that he might not bring an impartial and
unprejudiced mind to the matters before him in this proceeding.
I acknowledge
the difficulties in determining the boundary between acceptable engagements and
those which are indicative of bias,
but to my mind the testing of pleadings
during early case management does not cross the line into bias – even
where potential
causes of action and defences are aired and tested by the
judicial officer with the parties. There was no indication from the Associate
Judge that the positive defences canvassed would be successful – or that
they were even appropriate. I understood the Associate
Judge’s remarks to
be that if the respondents were intending to rely on any such positive defences
they needed to plead them.
It is within the role of the Associate Judge to point
such matters out at an early stage.
is also relevant to this appeal that the application for recusal is of an
Associate Judge, who will not have conduct of the trial
and will not finally
determine the substantive case or any relief to be granted. Of course, given my
decision, he may go on to hear
the application for summary judgment which could
finalise the question of liability. For the reasons already given, I do not
there is any logical connection between the matters relied upon by Mr
di Fede and the Associate Judge hearing the application for
summary judgment, or
continuing to case manage the principal proceedings, such as might cause a
fair-minded lay observer reasonably
to apprehend that he might not bring an
impartial mind to the case. There was no indication in the remarks of the
Associate Judge
that if he were to hear the argument on application for summary
judgment that he would not determine it on its merits – such
as to be open
to persuasion on any submissions and evidence before him. The Associate
Judge’s flagging to the parties of the
difficulties in bringing and
defending a summary judgment application would be viewed by the lay observer,
knowing the high bar for
summary judgment, as within the scope of proper case
management.
it is important that Associate Judges, who are tasked by the
District Court
and UCR with taking a modern approach to active case management of civil
proceedings, ensure that by the time a matter is ready for
trial all of the key
issues of dispute are identified such that there can be no ambush or surprise at
trial. In view of this, the
time to make his views known and to point out
potential problems for each party’s case is during this early case
process for which the Associate Judge was responsible. I appreciate
that some of the exchanges at the 13/12/2024 Hearing and the
Judge’s forthright style may have been unexpected and confronting to Mr di
Fede. This is particularly so because
he is unrepresented and inexperienced in
the conduct of civil proceedings. However, in my view, a fair-minded lay
observer with appropriate
knowledge would have seen the Associate Judge’s
conduct for what it was in the overall context of modern active case management.
The Associate Judge was correct not to recuse himself. I make the following
appeal is dismissed.
be no orders as to costs of this appeal.
Decision of Associate Judge
Blumberg emailed to parties on 12 March 2025 (FDN 36 – CIV-24-004488)
Claim (FDN 1).
Defence (FDN 4).
FDNs 7, 10 and 11.
Interlocutory Application (FDN
Record of Outcome (FDN
The full terms of the email
are set out in the Reasons at [57].
Reasons [68].
FDN 15, 16 and 17.
Record of Outcome (FDN
Interlocutory Application
(paragraph 3) (FDN 19).
Affidavit of Adrian Di Fede
made 8 January 2025 (FDN 20).
Record of Outcome (FDN
Record of Outcome (FDN 35)
and Reasons.
Mallios v Commissioner
[2024] SASC 131
Reasons [150]. In his
reasons the Associate Judge addressed each passage upon which Mr di Fede relied:
[147]-[186].
Described by the Associate
Judge as containing “bare denials” at [89] of his Reasons.
Reasons [116]-[139].
Reasons [121].
Reasons [73] and [74].
Reasons [69].
Reasons [68].
[2021] SADC 29
Rana v Hyatt Regency Hotel Ltd
[2007] SASC 7
Mossop Group Pty Ltd v 1KW Adelaide Pty Ltd
[2018] SASC 186
Reasons [121].
FDN 32 Summary of Argument
at [12] to [32].
See page 3 of the
Transcript (13/12/2024). An extract also appears in the Reasons at [84].
Reasons [86].
Reasons [85].
Reasons [90]-[93].
Reasons [103] and
Reasons [108].
Reasons [109]-[111].
Reasons [105].
Reasons [125] and
Reasons [129].
Reasons [130] and
Reasons [133]-[137].
Reasons [138].
Reasons [140]-[146].
Reasons [5].
FDN 35 Record of Outcome
(paragraph 4).
T7.18-38-T8.1;
T9.34-T13.1.
DT v Chief Executive of
the Department for Child Protection
[2021] SASC
Reid v Commercial Club (Albury) Ltd
(1908) 2 IR 285
[1994] HCA 30
Reasons [194]-[198].
Reasons [197]-[198].
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
Affairs v Jia Legeng
(2001) 205 CLR 507 at [72].
Ibid at [71].
Ibrahim Bilgin v
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[1997] FCA 1022.
Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural Affairs v Jia Legeng
(2001) 205 CLR 507 at [185].
T16.12-T17.9.
Reasons [206].
Reasons [211].
FDN 35 - CIV-24-004488.
Fox v Percy
214 CLR 118
Attorney-General v Sillem
[1864] EngR
(1864) 10 HLC 704
11 ER 1200.
Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
(1979) 142 CLR 531
Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
(2018) 264 CLR 541
Ibid at [41]-[43].
Attorney-General (SA)
[2023] SASCA 132
Johnson v Johnson
[2000] HCA 48
(2000) 201 CLR 488
. Also see:
Ebner v Official Trustee in
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
Johnson v Johnson
[2006] HCA 2
British American Tobacco Australia Services Ltd
[2011] HCA 2
(2011) 242 CLR 283
Wilson & Partners Ltd v Nicholls
[2011] HCA 48; (2011) 244 CLR 427
[2006] HCA 2
Spencer v Commonwealth
of Australia
[2010] HCA 28
(2010) 241 CLR 118
Adelaide Brighton Cement
Ltd v Hallett Concrete Pty Ltd
[2020] SASC 161
(2020) 137 SASR 117
Ibid at [68].
Collins v Djunaedi
[2016] SASCFC 48
Rule 232 of the District
Court Civil Rules 2006.
Jennings v Police
[2019] SASCFC 93.
Ibid at [35].
Cosenza v Roy Morgan
Interviewing Services Pty Ltd
[2020] SASC 65
Illman v Sterrey &
[2023] SASC 50
State of New South Wales v Spearpoint
Stone v Moore
[2015] SASC 46
122 SASR 54
CIV-24-004488 (filed on 31 January 2025).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (499 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter