URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCA/2025/126.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BURNETT v THE KING [2025] SASCA 126 (6 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Court of Appeal: Criminal)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
BURNETT v THE KING
[2025] SASCA 126
Judgment of the Court of Appeal
(The Honourable Chief Justice Kourakis, the Honourable Justice
Lovell and the Honourable Justice David)
6 November 2025
CRIMINAL LAW - APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - PARTICULAR GROUNDS OF APPEAL -
MISDIRECTION AND NON-DIRECTION - PARTICULAR CASES - WHERE APPEAL
CRIMINAL LAW - PARTICULAR OFFENCES - OFFENCES AGAINST THE PERSON - ACTS
INTENDED TO CAUSE OR CAUSING DANGER TO LIFE OR BODILY HARM
OR SERIOUS INJURY -
CHOKING, SUFFOCATION AND STRANGULATION
This is an appeal against conviction.
Following a trial by jury, the appellant was convicted of multiple offences
of violence against the complainant, his former domestic
partner, including the
offence of unlawful choking, suffocation or strangulation in a domestic setting,
contrary to s 20A of the
CLCA (Count 10).
The appellant appeals his conviction on Count 10 on the ground that the trial
Judge erred in his directions to the jury regarding
the elements of s 20A
offence of unlawful choking, suffocation or strangulation in a domestic setting.
Contrary to the trial Judge’s
directions, the appellant contends that:
prosecution must prove that an act of choking, suffocating or strangling is
constituted by the significant hinderance or restriction
of the victim’s
requisite fault element for s 20A requires proof that the appellant had an
actual intent to hinder or restrict the breathing of
the complainant, and
recklessness will not suffice; and
recklessness does suffice, and is invoked, the prosecution is required to prove
that the appellant foresaw the significant hinderance
or restriction of the
victim’s breathing as the probable (as opposed to possible) consequence of
their conduct and proceeded
to act, nonetheless.
Held, per Lovell
and David JJA, granting permission to appeal but dismissing the appeal:
to the physical elements of s 20A, there is no textual or contextual basis to
construe the words ‘choke’, ‘strangle’
‘suffocate’ as requiring a significant restriction of the
victim’s breathing. Any restriction or hinderance
of breath is
sufficient.
to the requisite fault element for s 20A, the prosecution must establish that
the appellant deliberately engaged in conduct intending
to restrict or hinder
the complainant’s breath or was reckless as to whether his or her conduct
would restrict or hinder the
complainant’s breath. Where recklessness is
invoked as the fault element, the prosecution is required to prove that the
engaged in conduct foreseeing that it was possible (as opposed to
probable) that his or her act would result in hindering or restricting
complainant’s breath but continued, nonetheless.
was no error by the trial Judge in his directions to the jury as to the elements
of s 20A offence.
Discussion as to the elements of the offence of
choking, suffocating or strangling in a domestic setting contrary to s 20A of
Held, per Kourakis CJ:
20A of the CLCA defines the proscribed conduct by words which encompass both the
conduct and the result. These verbs denote
both actions (the conduct which is
capable of restricting breath or interfering with the respiratory system) and a
result (the restriction
of breath). It is not permissible to judicially
deconstruct the words selected by the legislature into their component parts, of
both act and result, for the purpose of differentially applying a different
fault element to each part. To do so necessarily requires
a court to choose
between attaching no fault element at all, or attaching foresight of
probability, or alternatively, possibility,
of the result as the requisite fault
element. The making of choices of that kind is the exercise of legislative, not
judicial, power.
fault element applies to the result of choking, suffocating or strangling and is
satisfied by advertence to the likelihood that
the intended conduct would
restrict the breath of the victim. The requisite intention for the purpose of s
20A of the CLCA may be
proved by foresight of the probability of the restriction
of breath, even if that result is not desired.
3. The proper
construction of s 20A of the CLCA is:
presumption that conduct proscribed by statute is not an offence unless it is
accompanied by an intention to engage in that conduct,
often described as a
basic or general intention, applies to the conduct which results in the
restriction of breath. Recklessly making
is not enough to satisfy the presumption; and
of probability (being the equivalent of intention) applies to the result
element, namely a restriction of breath.
4. The direction of the
trial Judge on the element of s 20A of the CLCA was wrong in law.
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Coder Act 1899
(Qld) s 315A;
Law Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Law Consolidation (Section
20A) Amendment Bill (2024)
Statutes Amendment (Domestic Violence)
(SA), referred to.
He Kaw Teh v The Queen
[1985] HCA 43
(1985) 157 CLR 523
Vallance v The Queen
[1961] HCA 42
(1961) 108 CLR 56
Aubrey v The Queen
(2017) 260 CLR 305;
Director of Public
Prosecutions Reference No 1 of 2019
[2021] HCA 26
(2021) 274 CLR 177
Ducaj v The
(2019) 135 SASR 127
Gillan v Police (SA)
[2004] SASC 279
(2004) 149 A Crim R
He Kaw Teh v The Queen
[1985] HCA 43
(1985) 157 CLR 523
Kural v The Queen
[1987] HCA 16
(1987) 162 CLR 502
Laurie v Nixon
(1991) 55 SASR 46;
(1975) 10 SASR 528
Lim Chin Aik v The Queen
(1963) AC 160
MDP v The King
[2025] HCA 24
Police v Pfeifer
[1997] SASC 6172
(1997) 68 SASR 285
Re Director of Public Prosecutions (Vic) Reference (No 1 of 2019)
284 A Crim R 19
[2019] HCA 35
(2019) 269 CLR 507
R v Campbell
[1997] 2 VR 585
R v Coleman
[1985] HCA 22
(1985) 156 CLR 464
R v Cunningham
R v Green (No 3)
[2019] ACTSC 96
R v O’Connor
(1980) 146 CLR 64
[2020] QCA 73
(1974) 9 SASR
[1990] VicRp 55
[1990] VR 641
R v Reynhoudt
[1962] HCA 23
(1962) 107 CLR 381
Selig v Hayes
[1989] SASC 1855
(1989) 52 SASR 169
Sherras v De Rutzen
[1895] UKLawRpKQB 77
Sweet v Parsley
[1969] UKHL 1
(1970) AC 132
The Queen v Pembliton
[1874] LR 2 CCR 119;
Vallance v The Queen
[1961] HCA 42
(1961) 108 CLR 56
considered.
BURNETT v THE KING
[2025] SASCA 126
Court of Appeal – Criminal: Kourakis CJ, Lovell and David
KOURAKIS CJ:
Introduction
issue to be resolved on this appeal is the identification of the fault element
of the statutory offence of choking, suffocating
or strangling enacted by
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
’). I gratefully adopt the facts as outlined by David
JA and Lovell JJA in paragraphs [90] – [105] below.
is a common law presumption that conduct proscribed by statute is not an offence
unless it is accompanied by an intention to engage
in that conduct, often
described as a basic or general
Hereafter I will refer
to that presumption as the ‘intent presumption’.
there is a statutory omission to specify the fault element of an offence, the
common law applies the intent presumption in
the absence of a statutory
indication to the contrary. A court is not at liberty to fill the ellipses by
judicially legislating
the fault element it finds preferable.
Police v Pfeifer,
explained the application of the intent presumption to legislation creating
criminal offences:
The presumption which the court applied reflects a long standing common law
principle. Parliament is presumed to legislate in
the context of those
principles, because they are part of the fabric of our criminal law. Legislation
creating criminal offences
takes its place within the fabric of our criminal
law. Such legislation can be fully and properly understood only if one assumes
that Parliament intends legislation to operate within and affected by relevant
common law principles.
application of the intent presumption is sometimes problematic because the
elements of an offence can extend to the extant circumstances
in which a person
engages in the conduct. The decision of the High Court in
He Kaw Teh v The
established that if
conduct is proscribed only when it is accompanied by specified attendant
circumstances, the presumption that
that conduct must be intentional extends,
subject to a statutory indication to the contrary, to knowledge or foresight of
the probable
existence of those attendant circumstances.
Legislation
may also proscribe an offence according to conduct which achieves a specific
result. When the legislature so provides,
it may manifest an intention that no
fault element attaches to the result, in effect providing that it is sufficient
if the result
is a matter of happenstance (e.g. assault occasioning bodily
Fortunately,
statutes often expressly specify the result fault element—for example,
threatening to cause harm to a person and
being recklessly indifferent as to
whether such a fear is aroused in another. Statutes may also provide that the
result must be
intended—for example, wounding with intent to cause serious
harm. A fault element of that kind is commonly referred to as
intent. Alternatively, a provision may provide that the conduct must be
malicious, a term which has on occasion been
statutorily defined to mean
wantonness or recklessness, in the sense of engaging in conduct irrespective of
the risk that the prescribed
result ensues, not caring whether it does or not,
and acting without any lawful excuse. Whether or not the text manifests an
to exclude, or require, a result fault element is a question of
statutory construction.
and large, the current provisions of the
which proscribe conduct
that causes bodily harm prescribe either specific intent or recklessness as the
fault element attached to
the causation of harm. Recklessness is most commonly
defined to mean acting with foresight of the possibility of a specific result.
It is difficult to imagine how a result offence, which is expressed in terms of
distinct conduct and result elements, might be structured
other than by either
expressly providing that there is no fault element, or by expressly prescribing
the fault element which attaches
to the result. It is not surprising therefore
that there is no judicial authority on the default mental state which is
to attach to a result when no express provision is made.
offences which proscribe conduct by reference to its result do not always
differentiate the conduct from the result.
offence provision may proscribe conduct with a single word that encompasses both
the bodily movements of the actor and the result
effected by that conduct.
There is authority that in respect of offences so structured, the intent
presumption applies to both the
conduct which produces the result and to the
achievement of the result. Examples of offences which are so framed include
wounding, resisting or hindering a person and, as in this case,
choking, suffocating or strangling.
respect of the offence of unlawful wounding, the decision of the High Court in
Vallance v The Queen
supports the proposition that the intent presumption (in that case, codified
in the Tasmanian Criminal Code) applies to both the conduct
of the actor and the
applied the common law intent presumption to construe a provision which was
silent on the fault elements, the statutory
offence of hindering a police
officer, to require both a basic intent to perform the acts which have that
effect, including an intention
to bring about that effect, or a foresight of the
probability of the result.
is accepted by the Director of Public Prosecutions (‘the Director’)
that though s 20A of the
is silent as to the fault element
which must accompany the act of choking, suffocating or strangling, the conduct
which has the effect
of restricting breath must be proven to be
intentional.
This concession is
rightly made; it is required by the application of the intent presumption.
However, it means that an offence
against s 20A cannot be committed by
recklessly engaging in a struggle in the course of which there is unintentional
restricts a person’s breathing, even though the possibility
of that occurring was foreseeable.
controversy on this appeal is:
(a) whether or not any fault element applies to the result of choking,
suffocating or strangling (the restriction of breath); and
(b) if a fault element applies, whether it is satisfied by advertence to the
likelihood, or alternatively, the possibility, that
the intended conduct would
restrict the breath of the victim.
would answer those questions as follows:
(b) Intention for the purpose of s 20A of the
may be proved by
foresight of the probability of the restriction of breath, even if that result
is not desired.
observe that since judgment was reserved, Parliament enacted that
Criminal Law Consolidation (Section 20A) Amendment Bill 2024
providing for,
, a definition of the words
‘choking’, ‘strangling’ and ‘suffocating’.
The clarification prescribed
does not provide guidance or direction on the
question currently before the Court.
defines the proscribed
conduct by words which encompass both the conduct and the result—choking,
suffocating or strangling.
These verbs denote both actions (the conduct which
is capable of restricting breath or interfering with the respiratory system)
a result (the restriction of breath). It is not permissible to judicially
deconstruct the words selected by the legislature
into their component parts, of
both act and result, for the purpose of differentially applying a different
fault element to each
part. To do so necessarily requires a court to adopt one
of the alternative offence structures described in paragraph [7] above
choose between attaching no fault element at all, as the Director contends, or
attaching foresight of probability, or alternatively,
possibility, of the result
as the requisite fault element. The making of choices of that kind is the
exercise of legislative, not
judicial, power. The intent presumption can be
applied but once to the indivisible conduct described by the words chosen by the
legislature: choking, suffocating or strangling. The proper construction of
s 20A of the
intent presumption applies to the conduct which results in the restriction of
breath. Recklessly making contact which does produce
the result is not enough to
satisfy the presumption; and
of probability (being the equivalent of intention) applies to the result
element, namely a restriction of breath.
explicate my reasons further below.
Putting Aside
Distractions
is best first to put to one side some issues which do not arise in this
Issues not arising
case does not concern identification of the elements of a common law offence.
The identification of the elements of common
law offences requires the
application of precedent; it is not a question of statutory construction, and no
occasion arises to resort
to a presumption. The discussion in
which considered the
mental element of the common law offence of rape, is therefore of no assistance
in this case. For the same reason,
the fault element of the common law offence
of murder is of no assistance.
aforethought, which is the fault element peculiar to murder, means an intention,
or foresight of the probability, of causing
death or grievous bodily harm.
Accordingly, the reasoning in
has no application
Statutory malice
aforethought has always been distinguished from the common law concept of simple
malice, which was often pleaded in the indictments
for common law offences
simply to mean ‘wickedness’.
term has also been used as an element of statutory offences. It is sometimes
expressly defined by those provisions. But in the
absence of such definition the
term is typically judicially construed to include foresight of a possibility of
a risk, but not of
probability. Resort to the intent presumption is therefore
unnecessary. However, because malice is not an express element of s
, those cases shed no light on the questions before the
Nonetheless,
because of the Director’s heavy, and in my view misplaced, reliance on the
decision of the High Court in
Aubrey v The
it is necessary to
consider those authorities in some detail.
mentioned earlier that when used in indictments for common law felonies, malice
meant ‘wickedness’ in the sense of
a desire to cause harm. However,
almost seven decades ago in England in the matter of
it was held that
the word ‘maliciously’, when expressly prescribed as the fault
element of a statutory offence, meant
a person’s foresight of the
consequences of his or her conduct.
, the Court of Appeal considered s 23 of the
Against the Person Act 1861
which relevantly
shall unlawfully and maliciously administer to or cause to be administered to or
taken by any other person any poison or
other destructive or noxious thing, so
as thereby to endanger the life of such person, or so as thereby to inflict upon
such person
any grievous bodily harm, shall be guilty of felony...
Court of Appeal cited with approval as an ‘accurate statement of the
law’ the principle propounded by Professor C.S.
Kenny in the first edition
of Outlines of Criminal
statutory definition of a crime, malice must be taken not in the old vague sense
of wickedness in general but as requiring
either (1) An actual intention to do
the particular kind of harm that in fact was done; or (2) recklessness as to
whether such harm
should occur or not (i.e., the accused has foreseen that the
particular kind of harm might be done and yet has gone on to take the
it). It is neither limited to nor does it indeed require any ill will towards
the person injured.
We think that this is an accurate statement of the law. It derives some
support from the judgments of Lord Coleridge CJ and Blackburn
Pembliton’s
case. In our opinion the word
‘maliciously’ in a statutory crime postulates foresight of
consequence.
The Queen v Pembliton
the defendant threw a stone at a group of men, with whom he had been fighting in
a street, intending to hit one of them, but he missed
and broke a window in a
building behind them. He was charged with unlawfully and maliciously injuring
the property by causing damage
to the window. In a special verdict, the jury
found that he did not intend to break the window but made no finding on whether
foresaw the likelihood that he would break the
The Court of Crown Cases
Reserved held that the fault element (i.e. a malicious intention) was not
established by those limited findings.
Lord Coleridge CJ delivered the
these sections it seems to me that what is intended by the statute is a wilful
doing of an intentional act. Without saying
that if the case had been left to
them in a different way the conviction could not have been supported, if, on
these facts, the jury
had come to a conclusion that the prisoner was reckless of
the consequence of his act, and might reasonably have expected that it
result in breaking the window, it is sufficient to say that the jury have
expressly found the contrary. I do not say anything
to throw doubt on the rule
under the common law in cases of murder which has been referred to, but the
principles laid down in such
case have no application to the statutable offence
we have to consider.
not now to consider what would be malice aforethought to bring a given case
within the common law definition of murder; here
the statute says that the act
must be unlawful and malicious, and malice may be defined to be ‘where any
person wilfully does
an act injurious to another without lawful excuse.”
Can this man be considered, on the case submitted to us, as having wilfully
broken a pane of glass? The jury might perhaps have found on this evidence that
the act was malicious, because they might have found
that the prisoner knew that
the natural consequence of his act would be to break the glass, and although
that was not his wish, yet
that he was reckless whether he did it or not; but
the jury have not so found, and I think it is impossible to say in this case
the prisoner has maliciously done an act which he did not intend to do.
to the view expressed in
above, I observe that it might be
doubted that the decision in
supports a construction of the
word malice that makes possibility the requisite standard of foresight, rather
than probability (i.e.
consequence”),
resultant harm might be caused.
Court of this State considered the meaning of the word
‘maliciously’. Section 23 of the
, as it then was,
Any person who unlawfully and maliciously wounds or inflicts
any grievous bodily harm on any other person, either with or without
a weapon or
instrument, shall be guilty of a misdemeanour and liable to be imprisoned for a
term not exceeding five years...
word ‘maliciously’ was not statutorily defined.
held that it was an element of the offence that the
perpetrator of the conduct foresaw that it would
result in a
different constructions of the word ‘maliciously’ in
may be reconciled around an important difference in the
framing of the respective provisions. The text of s 23 of the
Against the Person Act
proscribed the act of administering a noxious
substance and, as a
element following the conjunctional
expression ‘so as thereby to’, endanger the life of, or inflict
grievous bodily harm
on a person. The conjunctional expression suggests that
the result must be something more than a mere happenstance of the conduct.
the other hand, s 23 of the
proscribed ‘wounding’
as the act which, in a single word, encompassed both the act of the perpetrator
and the result
of the conduct. In other words, the legislature’s semantic
was to define the proscribed conduct by reference to
the result, irrespective of the particular acts by which that result might have
been achieved, whereas in
, the construction of the word
‘maliciously’ is a product of the coherent application of the
concept of malice to both
aspects of the word ‘wound’.
modern times, the word ‘reckless’ has generally replaced
‘malice’ as the expressly prescribed fault element
of statutory
explained that:
background to statutory references to recklessness is the common law. The mental
element of nearly all common law offences was
either intention or recklessness.
The subject matter of the intention or recklessness depended on the specific
offence. Recklessness
always included awareness of a risk of the relevant
matter, whether it be causation of a consequence such as grievous bodily harm,
fact such as lack of consent by the complainant or some other matter. However
the level of risk of which the defendant had to be
aware differed according to
the offence. For example, at one extreme in the case of rape it was sufficient
that the defendant was
aware of the possibility that the complainant was not
consenting.
At the other extreme, in the case of
murder it was necessary that the defendant was aware of the probability (ie more
likely than
not) that the defendant’s conduct would cause grievous bodily
(citations included)
some time, there was conflicting authority as to whether recklessness required
awareness of ‘the probability or likelihood’
to satisfy the result
element of a statutory offence, or whether awareness of the
‘possibility’ of the result was
sufficient. The decision of
the High Court in
concerned the proper construction of
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW), which defined malice to include acting
recklessly or wantonly, and indifference as to the result. In
the majority in their joint judgment (comprising Kiefel CJ, Keane, Nettle and
Edelman JJ) held that foresight of possibility is
generally the appropriate
standard of recklessness to establish malice for statutory offences other than
The Court was, of
course, focused on the
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW), but there is good reason to
construe the word recklessly consistently when used in the criminal statutes of
Australian jurisdictions.
Nonetheless, the High Court recognised that,
“[t]he requirements in States other than New South Wales may vary
according to
the terms of each State’s
legislation.”
Re Director of Public Prosecutions (Vic) Reference (No 1 of
the Victorian Court
of Appeal affirmed the construction of the word ‘recklessly’ in
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic), as articulated by the decision of
R v Campbell
acting with foresight of the probability that the conduct engaged in would cause
serious injury.
The reason for
this construction was partly attributable to the legislative history of the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic), which included legislative amendments that
manifested an intention that recklessness in
of that Act meant acting
with foresight of the probability of
By special leave, a
majority of the High Court, in
Director of Public Prosecutions Reference No 1
found that the
Victorian Court of Appeal in
had correctly construed the meaning
of “recklessly” in the offence as requiring the foresight of
probability,
possibility.
As Edelman J
described, the “intention of the Victorian Parliament in enacting s 17
must have been to leave the development
of the meaning of recklessness in that
section to the courts from 1986 when the section
commenced.”
Subsequently,
amendments were made to the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) which appear to be
premised on that
construction.
Intent Presumption
common law presumption of a mental element in statutory offences was
comprehensively considered in
Those principles of
statutory construction have not been doubted and remain sound to this day. It is
those principles which are determinative
and to which I now turn.
the High Court considered the fault element attaching
to s 233B(1) of the
Customs Act 1901
which relevantly
provided that any person who ‘imports ... into Australia any prohibited
imports ... or without reasonable excuse
has in his possession or attempts to
obtain possession of any prohibited imports... shall be guilty of an
offence’. The majority
(comprising of Gibbs CJ, Mason, Brennan and
Dawson JJ) held that the presumption that
is required
before a person can be held to be guilty of a grave criminal offence is not
displaced in relation to that provision.
Accordingly,
element of the offence which the prosecution bore the onus of proving that the
accused knew of the existence of the prohibited
import which was in his
exclusive physical control.
majority further held that in respect of statutes that proscribe possession
offences, in the absence of an indication to the
contrary, knowledge of the
possession is an element of the offence, because the word
‘possession’ in itself necessarily
imports a mental element as an
ingredient of the offence.
leading judgment of the Court was delivered by Brennan J.
J explained that a criminal offence ordinarily comprises of three elements
– the ‘prohibited act or omission
(conduct), the circumstances in
which the act is done or the omission is made and, in some instances, the
results of the act or
‘these elements – conduct, circumstances and results –are what
Dixon CJ in
labelled “the external elements necessary to
Honour recognised that the mental element implied by the intent presumption
applies if the statute creates and defines an offence
only by reference to its
external elements.
thing to say that mens rea is an element of an offence; it is another thing to
say precisely what is the state of mind that
is required...Indeed, it may
connote different states of mind in respect of the several external elements of
the same crime. If A
strikes B and causes him bodily harm, A’s moral
blameworthiness may depend on whether A moved accidentally, or whether he was
unaware that B or anybody else was there, or whether he did not mean to cause
bodily harm and could not and did not foresee that
he would cause bodily harm.
The particular mental states that apply to the several external elements of an
offence must be distinguished,
not only as a matter of legal analysis, but in
order to maintain tolerable harmony between the criminal law and human
experience.
Moral excuses find counterparts in the categories of mental states that are
indifferently described as mens rea and that apply to
the several external
elements of an offence. Thus, voluntariness and intent are the mental
states ordinarily applicable to an act
involved in an offence, knowledge or the
absence of an honest and reasonable but mistaken belief is the mental state
ordinarily applicable
to the circumstances in which a relevant act is done or
omission is made and, where a mental state is applicable to results, it may
either foresight of the possibility of their occurrence (if recklessness is an
element) or knowledge of the probability (or likelihood)
of their occurrence or
an intention to cause them (if a specific intent is an element)...
that passage, Brennan J was surveying the range of fault elements found in
statutory and common law offences. His Honour was
not providing a menu of fault
elements from which a quasi-legislative selection could be made in applying the
intent presumption.
J explained that the fault element can extend to the attendant circumstances in
which a person engages in
‘act’ is described so as to include the circumstances in which the
muscles are contracted, a different state of
mind is applicable, ordinarily
called ‘intent’. Intent, in one form, connotes a decision to bring
far as it is possible to do so — to bring about an
act of a particular kind or a particular result.
Such a decision implies a desire or wish to do such an act or to bring about
such a result. Thus when A strikes B (the act) having
decided to or desiring or
wishing to strike him, it can be said that he intends to strike B. Intent, in
another form, connotes knowledge.
This appears more clearly if we divide an
action, somewhat artificially, into a mere movement and the circumstances that
are an integral
part of the action and which give it its character. When A
strikes B, his action can be divided into A's movement of his fist and
presence in the path of A's movement. Although A's movement may be voluntary, he
is not said to strike B intentionally unless
he knows that B (or someone else)
is in the path of his moving fist. If mens rea were imported into an offence
defined as striking
another — a definition that does not include a result
— two states of mind would normally be involved: voluntariness
of movement
and an intention to strike another — and intention is, for all practical
purposes, established by knowledge that
another person is, or is likely to be,
in the path of the movement. If the definition is extended to include a result
bodily harm — the statute may prescribe a further mental
element: ordinarily a specific or special intent to cause bodily harm.
the example illustrated by his Honour, the close presence of the victim, within
the path of a moving fist, is more aptly conceptualised
as an attendant
circumstance. However, with respect to the analysis of Brennan J, one can also
conceptualise the act of striking
as the intentional (or voluntary) movement of
a person’s arm which has the result of impacting the body of another
analysed, to ensure consistent outcomes, just as intentional conduct includes
awareness of an attendant circumstance, so too must
intentional conduct extend
to awareness of the likelihood of the result.
J explained the relationship between awareness of attendant circumstances and
awareness of foresight of result, on the one
hand, and intention on the other,
in the following
[V]oluntariness and general intent are distinct mental states. General intent
and specific intent are also distinct mental states.
General or basic intent
relates to the doing of the act involved in an offence; special or specific
intent relates to the results
caused by the act done. In statutory offences,
general or basic intent is an intent to do an act of the character prescribed by
statute creating the offence; special or specific intent is an intent to
cause the results to which the intent is expressed to relate.
Both general
intent and specific intent may be established by knowledge: the former by
knowledge of the circumstances which give the
act its character, the latter by
knowledge of the probability of the occurrence of the result to which the intent
is expressed to
relate. But existing circumstances can be known more certainly
than the probability of the occurrence of a future result, and therefore
specific intent is usually established by proof of a desire or wish to cause the
prescribed result, whereas general intent is usually
established by proof of
knowledge of circumstances prescribed by the statute as defining the act
involved in the commission of the
Of course, proof of an actual
desire or wish to do an act of the prescribed character is proof of a general
intent (cf.
practical purposes knowledge of the circumstances which give the act its
character when an act is voluntarily done is the
ordinary form of an intent to
do it. A specific intent to cause a prescribed result can be, but is not
ordinarily, established by
knowledge that such a result will probably (or is
likely to) occur:
Just as knowledge of the probable (or likely) results of an act establishes a
specific intent to cause those results
, so the doing of an act with
knowledge that the circumstances are probably such as to make the act criminal
establishes a general
intent to do an act of that character. That is not to say
that some state of mind less than knowledge is sufficient to establish
Actual knowledge is required (
Giorgianni v. The
but what is generally
required to be known is at least the likelihood that the prescribed result of an
act will occur (specific intent)
or at least the likelihood that the existing
circumstances are such as to give an act the character of the act involved in
the commission
of the offence in question (general intent).
(underlining added and citations included)
J then adumbrated the approach to the proper construction of criminal provisions
for the purpose of identifying the fault
Voluntariness,
general intent and specific intent are three categories of mens rea that may be
(but are not always) mental elements
applicable to the external elements of an
offence. Voluntariness and general intent are generally implied in a statute
creating an
offence as mental elements applicable to the act involved in the
offence; specific intent is not implied. When a specific intent
is expressed to
be an element, it is ordinarily expressed to apply only to results. The
definition of circumstances attendant upon
but not an integral part of the act
involved in the offence may (but does not always) imply another mental element:
knowledge or
the absence of an honest and reasonable but mistaken belief as to
the existence of those circumstances. The distinction between the
act and the
circumstances which attend its occurrence is frequently of no moment, because
for all practical purposes the same mental
element – knowledge – is
the requisite mental element ordinarily applicable both to the act and the
circumstances. But
if there be a legislative intention to apply a mental element
to the circumstances different from the mental element applicable to
involved in the offence, it is necessary to decide what circumstances are
defined to be an integral part of the act (to which
intent and therefore
knowledge will ordinarily apply) and what circumstances are defined to be merely
attendant (to which no mental
element may be intended to apply or to which a
mental element less than knowledge may be intended to apply). One of the
intractable
difficulties in the process of identifying the particular category
of mens rea that applies to the respective external elements of
an offence is
the identification of the prohibited act on the one hand and the circumstances
attendant on the doing of that act on
J stated the rules governing the application of the intention presumption as
is a presumption that in every statutory offence, it is implied as an element of
the offence that the person who commits the
actus reus does the physical act
defined in the offence voluntarily and with the intention of doing an act of the
defined kind.
is a further presumption in relation to the external elements of a statutory
offence that are circumstances attendant on the
doing of the physical act
involved. It is implied as an element of the offence that, at the time when the
person who commits the
actus reus does the physical act involved, he either
— (a) knows the circumstances which make the doing of that act an offence;
or (b) does not believe honestly and on reasonable grounds that the
circumstances which are attendant on the doing of that act are
such as to make
the doing of that act innocent.
state of mind to be implied under (2) is the state of mind which is more
consonant with the fulfilment of the purpose of the statute.
Prima facie,
knowledge is that state of mind.
prosecution bears the onus of proving the elements referred to in (1) and (2)
beyond reasonable doubt except in the case of insanity
and except where statute
otherwise provides.
statutory purpose which may alter the default position stated in the third rule
must appear from the text and context of the
statutory provision. The latter
includes the nature of the conduct the provision
Statutory Abrogation of the Intent Presumption
intent presumption is a common law rule of statutory construction which must
give way to any contrary legislative intention,
whether expressed or necessarily
implied; such an intention may be manifest in the state of mind required for the
element of intent
in a particular offence, more than other external elements
such as the nature, subject matter, or attendant circumstances of the
Regulatory offences are calculated to achieve their deterrent effect by
excluding any fault element. The legislature
is more likely to have excluded
the intent presumption where the statute deals with matters of economic or
social regulation,
or when the
provision enacts a status offence.
is in this context that the following passage from the judgment of Nettle J
Clubb v Edwards
understood:
contrast to the requirement for proof of a general intent to commit the act
charged, there is no presumption in relation to regulatory
statutory offences
that intent to cause specified consequences is an element of the offence
charged; and, in the case of a contravention
of s 185D comprised of
prohibited behaviour of the kind described in para (b) of the definition, there
is no reason to discern a
statutory intention that an accused must intend that a
charged communication be reasonably likely to cause distress or anxiety. To
contrary, the objectivity of the expression ‘reasonably likely to
cause’ and the difficulty which Parliament noticed
the Crown would face in
proving a specific intent to communicate in the stipulated manner bespeak a
conclusion that Parliament intended
it to be enough for the Crown to establish
that the conduct would be reasonably likely to cause distress or anxiety to a
person accessing,
attempting to access or leaving the premises whether or not
the accused intended it to have that effect. Once again, however, it
open to an accused to raise the possibility that he or she had an honest and
reasonable belief that the communication would
not be reasonably likely to cause
distress or anxiety; in which event the Crown would be left with the persuasive
if not evidential
burden of excluding that possibility beyond reasonable
Identifying the fault element of conduct defined by its
Leonard v Morris
this Court considered the fault element of the offence
of hindering a police officer in the execution of his duty. This Court,
the decision of the High Court in
accepted that the
knowledge that the person hindered was in fact a police officer in the execution
of his duty was not an element
of the offence, but that a genuine and reasonable
belief that the person was not might found a defence.
was agreed in
that ‘hindering’ required a conscious
and voluntary act.
was the fault element which applied to the conduct described as
‘hindering’. Chief Justice Bray held that
the fault element was an
intention (understood as a desire or purpose) to substantially impede a person
who happens, whether known
or unknown to him, to be a police officer, or
recklessness (defined as an awareness that what he is doing is likely to impede
person and deciding nonetheless to do
With regard
which constitutes hindering I accept it that, while
some overt act is required and mere inaction cannot amount to hindering
O’Hair v Killian
per Hogarth J, at p 9, per Mitchell J at 14), any act of interference or
obstruction which makes the duty of the police officer substantially
difficult of performance is a hindering within the meaning of the section
Plunkett v Kroemer
But the mere performance of a conscious and voluntary act which makes the duty
of the police officer substantially more difficult
of performance cannot be
enough to constitute the offence, otherwise a lame man crossing the road,
without adverting to the consequences
of his action and without any knowledge
of the circumstances, who causes a police car in pursuit of a fleeing criminal,
car, to slow down or stop so that the fugitive car gets away would be
guilty of the offence and that would be absurd. Some further
mental element is
necessary; in addition there may be possible justifications.
(Citations included)
J construed ‘hindering’ as
be proved against an alleged offender is conduct that, as a whole, is correctly
characterized as a hindering. ‘Hindering’
is a complex fact
comprising, in my opinion, acts by the alleged offender—movements or
sounds or both; knowledge or appreciation
that something is apparently being
done or attempted by another; a realization that the probable consequence of
what he, the offender,
is doing will be to impede or obstruct the other person's
acts or attempted acts; and an actual impeding or obstruction of the other
person's acts or attempted acts in consequence of what the alleged offender
is therefore authority for the proposition that the intent presumption, which
applies to performance of the physical actions of the
offence, carries over to
the effect (i.e. the result) of those actions, both of which in
are encompassed by the word ‘hinder’.
Vallance v The Queen
High Court considered the fault element of the offence of wounding contrary to
s 172 of the
Criminal Code Act 1924
which provided
that any person who unlawfully wounds or causes grievous bodily harm to any
person is guilty of an offence.
fault element was enacted by s 13(1) of the
Criminal Code
applied generally to all code offences, and provided that ‘no person shall
be criminally responsible for an act unless
it is voluntary and intentional,
nor, except as hereafter expressly provided, for an event which occurs by
chance.’ Section
13(1) of the
Criminal Code
was, in effect, the
statutory equivalent of the intent presumption.
circumstances of the offence in
conviction was of unlawfully wounding one Pauline Ann Latham, a girl seven years
of age. .... The applicant, a youth of seventeen
years, picked up an air-gun
which he knew to be loaded, aimed it in the general direction of the girl, and
pulled the trigger with
the intention of discharging the gun. A pellet from the
gun struck the girl and pierced her flesh. But the applicant, who gave
evidence, denied that he fired at the girl, and denied that he had any intention
of causing her to be hit. His story was that he
aimed at the ground close to
her, intending only to frighten her.
High Court unanimously held that the Full Court of the Supreme Court of Tasmania
was correct to allow the prosecution appeal
against Mr Vallance’s
acquittal, because the trial judge directed the jury that the prosecution must
prove that Mr Vallance
must have intended to wound or foresaw that possibility
and desired it. Dixon CJ and Windeyer J held that the proper
direction was
that it was sufficient that the prosecution prove that Mr Vallance
voluntarily and intentionally intended the girl to be
Kitto, Taylor and
Menzies JJ held that it was sufficient that Mr Vallance foresaw the possibility
that the victim might possibly
difference between the majority and the minority turned exclusively on the
proper construction of s 13 of the
Criminal Code
, and not any
question of legal principle. In particular, the difference turned on the meaning
of the words ‘by chance’
in s 13 and the broader contextual
implications for other offences in the
Criminal Code
, culpable homicide
in particular.
present purposes, what is material is the approach of Dixon CJ and Windeyer J to
the application of s 13(1) of the
Criminal Code
to an offence of
‘wounding’, and the equivalence they drew between intention and
acting with the foresight of the probability
of the result, both of which are
important for present purposes.
CJ explained:
case of unlawful wounding the punishable act is the wounding. In s. 172 the
words ‘by any means’ occur: they have
an historical explanation but
little present significance. However, they will serve to make the point. It is
not enough to say the
“means” used, or perhaps one should say the
use of the means, under s. 13 (1) must be voluntary and intentional and that
wounding need not. The wounding is the crime, the punishable act, and it is the
wounding which must be voluntary and intentional.
I regret that I find myself
unable to avoid this this reading of the words of s. 13 (1) because I find that
there is such a weight
of judicial opinion to the contrary. In its application
to s. 172 it means that the wounding must be intentional. But in s. 13 (1)
not read the word “intentional” as bearing a meaning which requires
that the end must be positively desired. I take
it in the sense explained by Sir
Courtney Kenny, an explanation he gave when he published his book in 1902. He
contrasts it with
the more ordinary use of the word which excludes a result that
a man does not desire but foresees as likely, one the risk of which
possibly with regret.
J adopted the same approach to the application of s 13(1) of the
to the conduct element of
general provisions of s. 13(1) have always to be read in relation to any
particular crime charged, and as qualified or affected
by any specific intent
that in that crime must accompany the doing of the criminal act or of any act
that is a specific ingredient
of the crime. In this case no difficulty arises.
The act is unlawfully wounding. There are no other ingredients in the crime
The question is: was this act intentional? It would, I consider, be
inconsistent with the scheme of s. 13(1) to regard the ‘act’
referred to as something less than the act of wounding; for it, and nothing
less, is what would, if done intentionally, give
rise to criminal
responsibility. It is the
corpus delicti
one likes that inelegant phrase. I am unable to accept the argument that on a
charge of unlawfully wounding the act to which
s. 13(1) refers is some action,
not of itself criminal, forming part, as it were, an act of wounding—some
conduct short of
wounding, such as pressing the trigger of a firearm. To wound
a person by discharging a firearm, is, of course, a complex act, involving
loading the piece, cocking it, presenting it, pressing the trigger. The act,
that if done voluntarily and intentionally would constitute
the crime, is the
whole deed whereby the bullet was caused to strike and wound. If the wounding
were done by stabbing, the act referred
to in s. 13(1) could scarcely be said to
be grasping the handle of the knife, raising the arm to strike, or anything less
stabbing that produced a wound. The relevant question would not be,
did the accused intent to grasp the handle or raise his arm,
but did he intend
to wound. Whether the wounding was done by a weapon wielded or a missile
projected seems to me immaterial for
the application of s. 13(1) to s. 172. The
word ‘act’ is used in different sense in different parts of the
in more than one place it is used, as one would expect it to be used,
to describe conduct that, when the required intent be present,
constitutes a
crime’ see e.g., s 3(1), s. 7 and cf. c 2. In s. 13(3) it appears in the
context ‘any person who with
intent to commit any offence does any
act’. But the word ‘act’ is there used in a difference sense
from that which
it has in the earlier sub-section. It is used for a different
purpose. Sub-section (1) exonerates a man from responsibility for
unintentional act that, if it had been done intentionally, would itself be an
offence. Sub-section (3) makes doing an act that
is not itself an offence, an
offence if it be done with intent to commit an offence and if it brings about an
unforeseen result.
That is how I read the two provisions. The argument that
the ‘act’ in s. 13(1) means, in relation to s. 172, some action
conduct short of wounding would mean, it seems, that a person could be
criminally liable if his intentional act resulted in an
wounding—as, for example, leaving broken glass where someone later walked
and was wounded.
the equivalence between acting intentionally and acting with a foresight of
possibility, Windeyer J explained:
The circumstances and probable
consequences of a man’s act are no more than evidence of his intention.
For this reason this
Court has often said that it is misleading to speak of a
man being presumed always to intend the natural and probable consequences
acts. And this, I do not doubt, is so. Because intent is a state of mind, it
becomes necessary to ask what is that state
of mind; what for the purposes of
the criminal law is comprehended in the idea of an intentional act. Under the
law apart from the
Code, an accused would be guilty of unlawfully wounding if
his actual purpose was to inflict a wound he would also be guilty if,
any actual purpose to wound anyone, but foreseeing that what he was about to do
was likely to cause a wound to someone, he
yet went on to do it. The common law
treats what was done recklessly, in that way, as if it had been done with actual
says that a man, who actually realizes what must be, or very
probably will be, the consequence of what he does, does it intending
consequence. The word ‘intentional’ in the Code carries, I think,
these concepts of the common law. I therefore
do not read s.13 as altering
these principles. It is, I may add, in my view undesirable to insist upon
desire of consequence as
an element in intention. There is a risk of
introducing an emotional ingredient into an intellectual concept. A man may
produce a result while regretting the need to do so.
Accordingly,
the only question is what fault element does the common law attach to the
conduct of choking, suffocating or strangling.
To apply the reasoning of Dixon
to the circumstances of this case, it is the act of
choking, suffocating or strangling to which the intent presumption must
construction of s 20A of the
must commence with the question whether
the intention presumption applies to each of the words ‘choke’,
‘suffocate,
and ‘strangle’. Plainly it does. The offence is
a serious criminal offence and is not a regulatory or status offence.
event, the Director does not contend otherwise.
acceptance of that proposition the answers to the questions posed by this appeal
follow inexorably. Each of the words encompasses
both the physical movements of
the person and their effect of restricting the victim’s breath and the
presumption therefore
applies to both. The legislature has not disaggregated
the conduct from the result. The legislature has not enacted an offence
‘restricting
a person’s breath by any means whatsoever’, or
‘engaging in conduct which occasions a restriction of breath’,
either of which would enable the application of the presumption to the physical
acts alone. If the legislature had so structured
the provision, no fault
element would attach to the result. Nor has the legislature enacted the offence
of engaging in conduct recklessly
indifferent to the risk that it may restrict a
person’s breath. Framing the provision in that way would allow the intent
presumption
to apply to the conduct and the fault element of foresight of
possibility to apply to the result.
primary contention of the Director that no fault element attaches to the
resultant restriction of breath requires a rewriting
of s 20A of the
so that it reads:
A person who intentionally applies pressure to
another’s neck;
any physical or chemical barrier on or close to the nose or mouth of
such that the
person’s capacity to breathe is affected is guilty of an offence.
rewrite of s 20A of the
in that way adopts the structure of s 20(4)
But the legislature chose not to adopt that template in
enacting s 20A of the
would not construe s 20A of the
in a way which accords with a
template which the legislature eschewed.
alternative contention of the Director that the result fault element is
foresight of the possibility that the victim’s
capacity to breathe will be
affected also requires s 20A of the
to be re-written to
A person who intentionally applies pressure to another’s
neck, or places any physical or chemical barrier on or close to the
mouth of another, reckless as to whether the person’s capacity to breathe
may be restricted is guilty of an offence.
s 20A of the
in that way adopts the form s 20AA(2) of the
save that the
latter provision requires the conduct which creates the risk of harm to be
intentional, but it is sufficient that the
very act by which the harm is caused
is foreseeable even if unintended.
provision so construed also bears some resemblance to ss 29 and 29A of the
in drafting the offence of choking, strangling or suffocating, the legislature
chose not to adopt those templates.
very contentions of the Director that it is open to the Court to construe s 20A
either in a way which imposes strict liability for the
result, or liability founded on recklessness exposes the quasi-legislative
the Court is being asked to exercise. I might add that if strict liability or
recklessness are available so must foresight
of probability. The nature of the
offence and statutory context are incapable of supporting a judicial choice
between the available
mental states. This Court has neither the expertise nor
information, whether by way of evidence or judicial notice, to be able to
confidently say whether one construction or another would make a material
difference to the protection of persons vulnerable to domestic
violence. Nor does it appear that the legislature had material before it which
may have informed its legislative choice.
the other hand, this Court is bound by the decision of the High Court in
which establishes the default presumption that, in the absence of a
statutory indication to the contrary, criminal provisions will
be construed to
include intention or foresight of probability as the fault element attached to
the proscribed conduct.
Accordingly,
I hold that the direction of the Judge on the fault element of s 20A of the
was wrong in law.
Director did not contend that the proviso should be applied if the direction was
erroneous. I would allow the appeal, set aside
the conviction and order a new
AND DAVID JJA:
The appellant was charged with the following offences of
violence against the complainant, his former domestic partner:
assault (Counts 1, 4, 8 and 11), contrary to
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) (‘the CLCA’);
assault causing harm (Counts 2 and 3), contrary to
of the CLCA;
choking, suffocation or strangulation (Counts 5 and 10), contrary to
threatening to cause harm (Count 6), contrary to
of the CLCA;
criminal trespass in a place of residence (Count 7), contrary to
the CLCA; and
serious criminal trespass in a place of residence (Count 9), contrary to
of the CLCA.
appellant allegedly committed the offences between 6 and 28 December 2021.
Following a trial by jury, the appellant was convicted
of Counts 6, 7, 9, 10 and
11, and an alternative offence to Count 2 (aggravated assault). The appellant
now appeals his conviction
on Count 10 on the sole ground that the trial Judge
erred in his directions to the jury regarding the elements of the offence of
unlawful choking, suffocation or strangulation in a domestic setting contrary to
the (amended) appeal notice, the appellant complains that the trial Judge made
errors of law in the directions he gave the
jury as to the elements of the
offence. Contrary to the trial Judge’s directions, the appellant contends
that the prosecution must prove that the act of choking
is constituted by the
significant
hinderance or restriction of the victim’s breathing;
and where recklessness is invoked as the fault element for
prosecution is required to prove that the accused foresaw the significant
hinderance or restriction of the victim’s breathing
(as opposed to
) consequence of his or her act and proceeded to
act, nonetheless.
the request of the Court, the parties provided further submissions as to the
requisite fault element for
In the appellant’s written
submissions, he now contends that the fault element for an offence contrary to
is an actual intent to commit the act of choking, suffocating or strangling
and recklessness will not suffice.
appeal ground requires a consideration of the elements of the
the reasons which follow, we grant permission to appeal but dismiss the
The evidence at trial
prosecution case relied primarily on the complainant’s evidence. In
addition, there was evidence adduced of implied admissions
made by the appellant
during a telephone conversation on 7 May 2023.
appellant did not give or call any evidence. Defence counsel, in his closing
address, suggested that the complainant was evasive,
inconsistent, unreliable
and inaccurate; that the jury should have no confidence in relying on her
evidence; and accordingly, the
prosecution had not proved the offence beyond
reasonable doubt.
The prosecution case
complainant gave evidence that she first met the appellant when she was 13 years
old. The appellant was aged between 16 and 18
years at the time. When she was
around 21 or 22 years old, she met the appellant again. From mid-2020 to July
2021, the complainant
was in a relationship with the appellant, although their
relationship was on and off until the end of December 2021. Their relationship
ended when the complainant discovered that she was pregnant with their child,
[K], born on 24 October 2021. The complainant has two
other children from a
previous relationship.
complainant gave evidence that the appellant was violent towards her. She said
that he would pull her hair, strangle her, slap
her repeatedly, put his hands
over her mouth and kick her. When he strangled her, he had two ways of doing it:
he would put his forearm
across her neck; or he would use his two hands to
squeeze her neck. She gave evidence that he strangled her with his hands to her
throat around three or four times, and he used his forearm on her throat around
four times.
The first charged incident, the subject of Counts 1–6, occurred on
6 December 2021 when the complainant and her three children
overnight at the appellant’s home. When the appellant picked up their
child, he said that the child smelt like another
man. The pair began arguing and
the argument escalated into physical violence.
second charged incident, the subject of Counts 7–8, occurred on
26 December 2021 when the appellant attended the complainant’s
and verbally abused her about her whereabouts on Christmas day. The complainant
asked the appellant to leave multiple times,
but he refused.
third charged incident, the subject of Counts 9–11, took place on
28 December 2021 when the complainant woke to find the
appellant in her
bedroom ripping the blanket off her bed. She said that he grabbed the
complainant and pressed his right forearm
across her throat with enough force to
prevent her from breathing. He then hit her to the head with an open hand
several times.
appellant was arrested and charged with all offences on an Information dated 23
September 2022.
to this appeal, in relation to the incident of alleged choking on
28 December 2021 (the subject of Count 10), the complainant
A: So this was the last time I had seen him. It was about
3:30, 3 o’clock in the morning and he broke into the house, like
the screen door, kicked the wooden door in and I woke up to him ripping the
blankets off me. I remember him pushing my face
into the pillows, all the
pillows into my face. I can’t quite recall which one that was. He had then
at some point was continuously
slapping me. He had put his forearm over my
throat. He had also strangled me while saying that he’ll let go if
with him forever and he gets full custody of [K], our son.
Q: You mentioned that he has placed his forearm over your neck.
impact did that have on you.
A: Well, for a second, I
couldn’t breathe, I was laying down with his arm (INDICATES) against my
Q: Now you mentioned about how he strangled you. How did you strangle you,
with one or two hands.
A: With two (INDICATES).
Q: Two up against your neck.
A: Yeah, like around my neck, yes (INDICATES).
Q: What impact did the strangling have on you?
A: I couldn’t breathe, and I couldn’t say anything.
complainant gave evidence that following this incident, she attended a police
station on 30 December 2021, at which time she
reported the alleged
addition to the complainant’s evidence, the prosecution relied on implied
admissions made by the appellant in a recorded
telephone conversation on
7 May 2023. During this phone call, the appellant agreed that he
attended the complainant’s home
at 3:00am in the morning on 28 December
2021 and strangled her. A transcript of the conversation was
and transcribed the
conversation in the following terms:
[Complainant]: ...but the
thing is [the appellant] what you did actually happened
[Appellant]: Yeah, look
[Complainant]: So it’s not really fair to sit there and make it sound
like I’m lying, that you never came to my house
that night and you never
strangled me, like, it’s also not fair for me when you know what happened.
[Appellant]: I’ve over-reacted in many stupid ways...I would agree
with everything you’ve got to say about any incident
[Complainant]: You shouldn’t have come to my house at 3 o’clock
that morning that night. That’s, that would, we
would not be in this
situation right now if it wasn’t for that one...last incident.
[Appellant]: I know what I should and shouldn’t have done, but I got
frustrated cause the whole like not seeing [K] and all
that, and you
disappearing for Christmas me not knowing where the fuck you were...
The defence case
defence case was that the complainant could not be accepted as a credible or
reliable witness. Defence counsel, in his closing
address, emphasised the
inconsistencies in the complainant’s evidence, particularly as they
related to the complainant’s
evidence of the choking incident on 28
December 2021. He said:
...ladies and gentlemen, all of the evidence
you heard about the accused putting his hands around the neck of the complainant
up for the first time as the complainant was giving evidence in this court.
Not contained in any of her previous statements including
the one that she
specifically gave about that incident when she attended at the police station on
30 December 2021. Not a mention
The prosecution case relies on the evidence of the complainant. Before you
could find the accused guilty you would need to be satisfied
both of the
complainant’s honesty and her reliability beyond a reasonable doubt, and
in my respectful submission, the complainant
was also suggested by defence counsel that during the recorded telephone
conversation on 7 May 2023, the appellant did not make
any admissions but
rather, he was trying to appease the complainant so that she would drop the
charges against him.
counsel put to the complainant that the alleged acts of choking simply did not
happen. It was suggested to the complainant
that she was motivated to fabricate
the allegations for three reasons: to deflect child abuse allegations against
her; to prevent
the appellant obtaining custody of their child [K]; and to avoid
her mother reporting her to the authorities because she was continuing
the appellant.
complainant was also cross-examined about being told by the appellant on 28
December 2021 that he intended to obtain custody
of [K], and the fact that it
was only then she reported the allegations to police. She agreed that on the
morning of 28 December
2021, the appellant told her that he intended to obtain
custody of [K] but denied having fabricated the allegations.
defence case (as put to the complainant and articulated during the closing
address) was that the alleged choking incident the
subject of Count 10 did not
happen at all.
The trial Judge’s directions
referring to the evidence of the complainant, the trial Judge gave the jury the
following directions as to the elements of
move on to consider the offence of unlawful choking, suffocating or strangling
in a domestic setting. The offence is charged
as count 5 and 10 on the
Information. To prove this offence, the prosecution must prove five elements
beyond reasonable doubt. These
are: (1) the accused was or had been in a
relationship with the other person; (2) the accused choked, suffocated or
strangled a person
by applying pressure to her neck or throat; (3) the other
person did not consent to the choking; (4) the accused’s actions
deliberately intending to choke, strangle or suffocate [the complainant] that
is, intending to hinder, restrict or stop
her breathing or he was reckless as to
whether [she] was choked; and (5) the accused’s act was unlawful and I
will now explain
those four elements and how they apply in this case.
The second element is that the accused choked, suffocated or strangled [the
complainant] by applying pressure to her neck or throat.
In relation to the offence of unlawful choking, in count 10 of the
Information, the prosecution case, based on its opening address,
is that on 28
December 2021, the accused choked [the complainant] by placing his forearm over
her throat, preventing her from breathing.
The prosecution relies on the
evidence of [the complainant] to prove this element of the offence under count
10 on the Information.
In her evidence [the complainant] said that the accused put his forearm over
her throat for a second and she could not breathe. She
said she was lying down
with his arm against her throat.
On the defence case this incident did not occur. You will recall that an
aspect of the defence case to which I have already referred,
whereby it was
suggested that [the complainant] had let [the appellant] into the house that
morning and cooked a frozen meal for
her which they ate together. You will
recall the defence suggested to [the complainant] that [the appellant] had fed
the child and
they slept together after he had told her there was a female
friend staying at his house. That is a female friend of his sister's
his house. You will recall that it was suggested that [the complainant] woke up
some time later and became angry about
a woman staying over at [the
appellant’s] house and that she attacked him.
It was suggested on the defence case that [the appellant] then ended the
relationship and told [the complainant] that he intended
to get custody of [K].
On the defence case [the complainant] fabricated the allegations of 28 December
2021, including the choking
incident, to prevent [the appellant] from reporting
her for child abuse and obtaining custody of their child.
Before you find this charge proven, you must be satisfied of the evidence of
[the complainant] beyond reasonable doubt that the choking
incident involved the
allegation that the accused
hindered her breathing
by placing his
forearm over, across her throat. You must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
that [the complainant] did not fabricate
the allegation to prevent a child abuse
report against her and to prevent [the appellant] obtaining custody of [K].
The fourth element of the offence of unlawful choking that the prosecution is
required to prove is that the accused did the alleged
act deliberately,
intending to choke, strangle or suffocate [the complainant] or that he was
reckless about whether [the complainant]
was choked, strangled or suffocated.
That means that the prosecution must prove that [the appellant] specifically
intended to hinder,
restrict or stop her breathing. Alternatively, it must prove
that he was reckless about whether he choked her by hindering or stopping
breathing. Reckless means that the accused foresaw the
possibility
that her breathing would be hindered, restricted or stopped by his
actions. That is by applying pressure to her neck, but he continued
nonetheless.
(Emphasis added.)
appellant challenges the correctness of the trial Judge’s directions in
relation to the second and fourth elements of the
appeal ground
ground of appeal (as amended) is particularised as follows:
trial Judge erred in directing the jury that the element of recklessness for the
purposes of
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
required foresight of no more than the possibility of choking or hinderance of
the breathing of the complainant.
trial Judge erred in failing to direct the jury that the element of recklessness
for the purposes of
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
required foresight of a significant hindering or restriction to the breathing of
the complainant.
mentioned earlier, the appellant also contends that the fault element for
requires the prosecution to prove that the appellant had an actual intent to
significantly hinder or restrict the breathing of the
complainant, and
recklessness will not suffice.
appeal grounds (as amended and further refined in the appellant’s later
written submissions) raise the antecedent issue
of the correct elements of an
offence contrary to
of the CLCA. This in turn raises questions of
statutory construction.
The elements of
At the time of the alleged
section 20A
CLCA provided:
20A – Choking, suffocation or strangulation
in a domestic setting
(1) A person who–
is, or has been, in a relationship with another person; and chokes,
suffocates or strangles that other person, without that other
consent, is guilty of an offence.
Maximum penalty: Imprisonment for 7 years.
(2) However, conduct that is justified or excused by law cannot amount to an
offence against this section.
(a) a jury is not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that a charge of an offence
against this section has been established; but
(b) the Judge has instructed the jury that it is open to the jury on the
evidence to find the defendant guilty of an offence of assault;
(c) the jury is satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the offence of assault
has been established,
the jury may return a verdict that the defendant is not guilty of the offence
charged but is guilty of assault.
is convenient to commence with a consideration of the physical elements of
of the CLCA, and the second part of the appeal ground.
the time of the alleged offence, the words ‘choke’,
‘suffocate’ and ‘strangle’ were not defined
in the CLCA.
Therefore, the identification of the elements of
requires the ordinary
application of principles of statutory construction. A statutory offence or
penal provision, such as
, is to be construed by reference to the ordinary
principles of construction including the text, context and purpose of the Act.
the High Court considered the correct approach to construing the meaning of
the words used in an offence provision. In
, the appellants were each
charged with an offence of ‘genital mutilation’ contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
appellants challenged their convictions on the basis that the trial Judge had
misdirected the jury on the meaning of
‘otherwise mutilates’ in
In relation to construing a penal provision
in a joint judgment, Kiefel CJ and Keane J
method to be applied in construing a statute to ascertain the intended meaning
of the words used is well settled. It commences
with a consideration of the
words of the provision itself, but it does not end there. A literal approach to
construction, which requires
the courts to obey the ordinary meaning or usage of
the words of a provision, even if the result is improbable, has long been
by this Court. It is now accepted that even words having an apparently
clear ordinary or grammatical meaning may be ascribed a different
legal meaning
after the process of construction is complete. This is because consideration of
the context for the provision may point
to factors that tend against the
ordinary usage of the words of the provision.
Consideration of the context for the provision is undertaken at the first
stage of the process of construction. Context is to be understood
in its widest
sense. It includes surrounding statutory provisions, what may be drawn from
other aspects of the statute and the statute
as a whole. It extends to the
mischief which it may be seen that the statute is intended to remedy.
“Mischief” is an
old expression. It may be understood to refer to a
state of affairs which to date the law has not addressed. It is in that sense
defect in the law which is now sought to be remedied. The mischief may point
most clearly to what it is that the statute seeks
to achieve.
This is not to suggest that a very general purpose of a statute will
necessarily provide much context for a particular provision or
that the words of
the provision should be lost sight of in the process of construction. These
considerations were emphasised in the
decisions of this Court upon which the
Court of Criminal Appeal placed some weight.
The joint judgment in
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of
Territory Revenue
rejected an approach which paid no regard to the words of
the provision and sought to apply the general purpose of the statute, to
revenue, to derive a very different meaning from that which could be drawn from
the terms of the provision. The general purpose
said nothing meaningful about
the provision, the text of which clearly enough conveyed its intended operation.
Similarly, in
Saeed v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
below was held to have failed to consider the actual terms of the section. A
general purpose of the statute, to address
shortcomings identified in an earlier
decision of this Court, was not as useful as the intention revealed by the terms
of the statute
Baini v The Queen
, it was necessary to
reiterate that the question of whether there had been a “substantial
miscarriage of justice” within
the meaning of the relevant provision
required consideration of the text of the provision, not resort to paraphrases
of the statutory
language in extrinsic materials, other cases and different
legislation.
These cases serve to remind that the text of a statute is important, for it
contains the words being construed, and that a very general
purpose may not
detract from the meaning of those words. As always with statutory construction,
much depends upon the terms of the
particular statute and what may be drawn from
the context for and purpose of the provision.
None of these cases suggest a return to a literal approach to construction.
They do not suggest that the text should not be read in
context and by reference
to the mischief to which the provision is directed. They do not deny the
possibility, adverted to in
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club
, that in a particular case, “if the apparently plain words of a
provision are read in the light of the mischief which the statute
was designed
to overcome and of the objects of the legislation, they may wear a very
different appearance”. When a literal
meaning of words in a statute does
not conform to the evident purpose or policy of the particular provision, it is
entirely appropriate
for the courts to depart from the literal meaning. A
construction which promotes the purpose of a statute is to be preferred.
High Court made plain that when construing the legal meaning of words used in an
offence provision, a consideration of context
is undertaken at the first stage
of the process. Moreover, context is to be understood as including the whole of
the statutory provisions
of the relevant Act, its legislative history, the
purpose and policy of a provision and the mischief that the statute is intended
is to be accepted that where doubt exists in the construction of a penal
provision, courts should interpret the provision so as
not to extend criminal
liability. However, this principle is only applicable when ambiguity is
intractable. In
, Kiefel CJ and Keane J observed of this
old rule, that statutes creating offences should be strictly construed, has lost
much of its importance. It is nevertheless
accepted that offence provisions may
have serious consequences. This suggests the need for caution in accepting any
construction of an offence provision. The language of a
penal provision should not be unduly stretched or extended. Any real ambiguity
as to meaning is to be resolved in favour of an accused. An ambiguity which
calls for such resolution is, however, one which persists
after the application
of the ordinary rules of construction.
Section 14 of the
Legislation
Interpretation Act
(2021) (SA) (‘the
LIA’) is also applicable. It relevantly
14—Interpretation best achieving purpose or
(1) In interpreting a provision of an Act or a legislative instrument, the
interpretation that best achieves the purpose or object
of the Act or the
instrument (whether or not that purpose or object is expressly stated in the Act
or instrument) is to be preferred
to any other interpretation.
(2) This section does not operate to create or extend any criminal liability.
s 14(2) is intended to be a safeguard so as not to create or extend criminal
liability, it does not preclude the purposive
interpretation of an offence or
penal provision.
mentioned earlier, the appellant contends that the words ‘choke’,
‘suffocate’ and ‘strangle’
should be construed as
requiring a
significant
restriction or hindering of the victim’s
breathing consistent with the literal meaning of the words and the text of s
On the other hand, it is the Director’s contention that having regard
to the context and purpose of the provision, and the
mischief which the statute
is intended to remedy, it is only necessary for the prosecution to establish
restriction of the victim’s breathing in proof of this element
of the offence.
to the Macquarie Dictionary, the words choke, strangle and suffocate have the
following ordinary
(transitive verb)
stop the breath of, by squeezing or obstructing the windpipe; strangle; stifle;
stop, as the breath or utterance, by or as by strangling or stifling;
check or stop the growth, progress or action of: to choke off discussion;
stop by filling; obstruct; clog; congest;
suppress, as a feeling or emotion;
fill chock-full;
enrich the fuel mixture of (an internal-combustion engine) by diminishing the
air supply to the carburettor; or
stop the forward motion of (a load) by strapping it down tightly: to choke the
Suffocate (transitive verb):
kill by preventing the access of air to the blood through the lungs or analogous
organs, as gills;
impede the respiration of;
cause discomfort to through lack of cool or fresh air; or
overcome or extinguish; suppress.
Strangle (transitive
kill by compression of the windpipe, as by a cord around the neck;
kill by stopping the breath in any manner; choke; stifle; suffocate; or
prevent the continuance, growth rise, or action of; suppress.
is noteworthy that the dictionary definitions of the words, ‘choke’,
‘suffocate’ and ‘strangle’
each have a meaning involving
acts that have the consequence of compromising a person’s ability to
breathe. While recognising
that s 20A is a non-fatal offence, the relevant
physical element should reflect this common aspect of the ordinary meaning of
words. Further, it is also apparent from the dictionary definitions that the
words can, depending on their context and emphasis,
be used interchangeably.
This suggests each of the concepts is to be construed as overlapping.
more directly to matters of context and purpose, it is permissible to have
regard to extrinsic materials when determining
the objectives underlying
20A was introduced into the CLCA by the
Statutes Amendment (Domestic
Violence) Bill 2018
(SA). On the second reading of the Bill, the
Attorney-General described the main objective of the Bill as a measure to combat
and family violence:
The Attorney-General
inserts a new stand-alone offence of choking, suffocation or strangulation in a
domestic setting. The new offence has a maximum
penalty of seven years’
imprisonment and will apply if a person who is or has been in a relationship
with another person, chokes,
suffocates or strangles that person without their
consent. There is no requirement that harm be intended or caused. Rather, it is
the conscious and voluntary act of choking, suffocating or strangulation that
proves the offence.
The creation of a new offence, rather than simply relying on existing
offences such as causing harm or serious harm, endangering life
or attempted
murder, serves a number of purposes: firstly, it increases the penalty for this
behaviour where no harm is caused; secondly,
it recognises the inherent
dangerousness of this conduct in a domestic setting and its indication of
escalation to domestic homicide;
thirdly, it educates police and the community;
and, finally, it assists in the assessment of risk to the victim. In addition to
new offence, new subsection (4) provides for an alternative verdict of
assault where a jury is not satisfied beyond a reasonable
doubt that the
strangulation offence has been established.
is plain Parliament’s rationale for introducing a separate offence was to
capture conduct described as choking, strangling
or suffocating, which occurs in
a domestic setting, was not only the inherent dangerousness of this conduct, but
also the fact it
is a predictor of the escalation of domestic violence to
domestic homicide. The provision was also designed to provide a significant
penalty for the conscious and voluntary act of choking, suffocating or
strangulation without any requirement to prove that harm was
intended or caused
to the victim.
meaning of ‘choking’ has been considered in the context of two
similar offence provisions in Queensland and the ACT.
R v Green (No 3)
the defendant was charged with an offence contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT). That section provides that ‘a person who
intentionally and unlawfully chokes, suffocates or strangles another person
is guilty of an offence...’. In
, at the close of the
prosecution case, the defendant made a no case to answer submission on the basis
that choking means stopping
the victim’s breath as opposed to merely
restricting the breath; and there was insufficient evidence to establish this
of the offence. Justice Loukas-Karlsson construed the meaning of the
word ‘choke’ as ‘stopping the breath’
and on that basis
found there was no case to answer.
Loukas-Karlsson arrived at this conclusion on the basis that the terms
‘choke’, ‘suffocate’ and ‘strangle’
have dictionary definitions involving a stopping of breath and considered that
this meaning was consistent with the nature of
the other offences encapsulated
Her Honour also relied on statutory principles of construction
applicable to a penal provision, and
Finally, as
this is a penal statute, where doubt exists in the construction of a penal
statute, courts should interpret the statute
so as not to extend a category of
criminal offences. Therefore, consistent with this approach, to stop the breath
(albeit for one
breath or one second) is in my view the correct statutory
construction of this statute. The alternative construction of impeding
restricting the breath is an ambiguous construction in the context of construing
a penal statute. It would be difficult to administer
an offence which is based
on restricting the breath as opposed to stopping the breath. Therefore, stopping
the breath, an inability
to breathe, is in my view the correct construction. The
alterative construction invites the question of the requisite extent of
restriction
necessary to constitute the offence. Obviously, an alternative
charge of assault is available in such circumstances.
is important to recognise that
was decided before the High Court
delivered the judgment of
the present case, while the appellant accepts that the words
‘choke’, ‘suffocate’ and ‘strangle’
mean the stopping of breath, he submits that the reasoning in
supports his contention that a
significant
restriction or hindering
of the victim’s breathing is necessary in proof of the physical element of
the offence consistent
with the literal meaning of the words
‘choke’, ‘strangle’ or ‘suffocate’ and the
text of s 20A.
the Queensland Court of Appeal declined to follow
. The issue on
was the correct construction of the word
‘choke’ in s 315A of the
Criminal Code Act 1899
(Qld). This
section provides:
315A—Choking, suffocation or
strangulation in a domestic setting
(1) A person commits a crime if—
(a) the person unlawfully chokes, suffocates or strangles another person,
without the other person’s consent; and
(b) either—
(i) the person is in a domestic relationship with the other person; or
(ii) the choking, suffocation or strangulation is associated domestic violence
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 2012
Maximum penalty—7 years imprisonment.
(2) An assault is not an element of an offence against subsection (1).
construing the meaning of the word ‘choke’, the Queensland Court of
Appeal referred to
and (2) of the
Acts Interpretation Act
(Qld) which are not materially different to
and (2) of the
LIA, as well as the High Court decision in
After referring to
various extrinsic materials,
gravamen of the offending conduct which the offence seeks to deter is the action
of one domestic partner towards the other that
is described as either choking,
strangling or suffocating the victim and not the consequence of the act. The
rationale for the offence
is that even though one incident in the domestic
context of choking, strangling or suffocating may not result in any serious
the conduct must be deterred, because it is inherently dangerous and
experience shows that if it is repeated, death or serious injury
may eventually
Court proceeded to decline to follow
order to achieve the purpose of the introduction of this offence,
“chokes” must be construed as the act of the perpetrator
hinders or restricts the breathing of the victim and does not require proof that
breathing was completely stopped, although
the hindering or restriction of the
breathing would encompass the stopping of the breathing. The act of choking will
not be proved,
unless there is some detrimental effect of the breathing of the
victim, because otherwise it would not constitute the act of choking.
the restriction of the breathing, as a result of the action of choking the
victim, is of short duration, without any lasting
injury, and does not result in
a complete stoppage of the breath of the victim, that will be sufficient, as the
offence is directed
at deterring that type of conduct from occurring at all.
To the extent that the reasoning in
justified the construction
that choking means stopping the breath, because of the difficulty of
administering an offence which is
based on restricting the breath, that concern
can be addressed in respect of s 315A by focusing on the act that amounts to the
strangling or suffocating of the victim. There is no choking, if the
perpetrator merely puts his or her hands to the neck of the
victim. In order to
amount to choking, there must be some pressure that results at least in the
restriction of the victim’s
breathing. As the evidence in this trial
illustrated, there were overt signs in the consequences the complainant
described of her
struggle to breathe, her inability to speak, the black dots in
her vision, the pain in her chest, and her feeling disoriented from
could be inferred there was some restriction of her breathing, as result of the
appellant’s hand around her neck.
The consequence of the restriction of
the complainant’s breathing [is] not a separate element of the offence,
but the evidence
required to prove the act of choking.
mentioned earlier, it is plain from the extrinsic materials that
Parliament’s intention in enacting
was multifaceted. The enactment
of the provision sought to capture unlawful conduct meeting the description of
choking, suffocating
or strangling; identify this conduct as predictive of the
escalation of domestic violence to domestic homicide; denounce this type
offending; and deter others, more generally, from engaging in the conduct. The
creation of a standalone provision with a significant
penalty, which requires no
proof that harm was intended or caused to the complainant, recognised the
inherent dangerousness of the
act of choking, strangling or suffocating a
domestic partner, even where there is no consequential harm caused to the
regard to the extrinsic materials and the mischief which the provision sought to
remedy, and the fact that the ordinary meaning
of each of the words choking,
suffocating and strangling includes compromising a person’s ability to
breathe, we consider
there is no textual or contextual basis to construe the
words choke, strangle or suffocate as requiring a
significant
restriction
of the victim’s breathing. To construe the provision in this way would not
give effect to the purpose for which
it was introduced, namely, to denounce and
deter this type of conduct from occurring at all.
there is an obvious difficulty in administering an offence under
particular level of restriction or impediment is required in proof of the
physical element of the offence. Such conduct will
generally occur in a volatile
environment, and in the context of other violent offences. To require proof that
a victim’s breathing
significantly
stopped in order to
constitute the physical element of the offence would be difficult, almost
impossible, to measure and would add
an unnecessary layer of complexity which
would serve to undermine the purpose of the offence provision.
construed, we are satisfied that for the purposes of
, an act constitutes
choking, suffocating or strangling if it hinders or restricts the
complainant’s breathing. Accordingly,
there was no error by the trial
Judge as to this aspect of the physical elements of
The fault element of
makes no explicit reference to a fault element. However, there is a
presumption that mens rea, or knowledge of the wrongfulness of
the act, is an
essential ingredient in every
That presumption can be
displaced either expressly, or by necessary implication. In deciding whether the
presumption has been displaced,
regard is to be had to the words of the statute
creating the offence, the subject matter with which the statute deals, and the
at which the statute is aimed.
Brennan J said in
He Kaw Teh v The Queen
requires clear language before it can be said that a statute provides for a
person to do or to abstain from doing something
at his peril and to make him
criminally liable if his conduct turns out to be prohibited because of
circumstances that that person
did not know or because of results that he could
not foresee. However grave the mischief at which a statute is aimed may be, the
presumption is that the statute does not impose criminal liability without mens
rea unless the purpose of the statute is not merely
to deter a person from
engaging in prohibited conduct but to compel him to take preventive measures to
avoid the possibility that,
without deliberate conduct on his part, the external
elements of the offence might occur. A statute is not so construed unless
precautions can be taken to avoid the possibility of the occurrence of
the external elements of the offence.
J went on to explain what is meant by the external elements of an offence (or
conduct, circumstances or results) in the following
...Criminal
responsibility depends not only upon a person's act or omission but also upon
the circumstances in which the act is done
or the omission made, usually upon
his state of mind at that time and sometimes upon the results of his act or
omission. However,
the definition of a criminal offence ordinarily comprehends
only the prohibited act or omission (conduct), the circumstances in which
act is done or the omission is made and, in some instances, the results of the
act or omission. These elements – conduct,
circumstances and results
– are what Dixon C.J. in
Vallance v. The Queen
called "the external
elements necessary to form the crime". When a statute creates and defines an
offence only by reference to its
external elements, a mental element is usually
implied in the definition. A person who engages in prohibited conduct is not
responsible for it unless the mental element is present. The mental
element is mens rea or guilty mind...
(citations omitted).
was common ground between the parties, and it is to be accepted, that
implicitly contains a fault element. The criminal nature of the offence and the
significant penalty which attaches to it, support
a conclusion that the
presumption of mens rea has not been displaced.
that the presumption of mens rea as described in
displaced, the issue on this appeal concerns a constructional exercise
identifying the mens rea or fault element applicable
This in turn
raises three further questions of statutory construction.
First, whether the external element of ‘choking, suffocating or
strangling’ is an amalgamation of two elements, namely
the physical act of
applying force to the complainant’s neck or throat, and the consequences
or result of that conduct (the
inhibition or restriction of the
complainant’s breath). Or, alternatively, whether the external element of
suffocating or strangling’ is indivisible and one
proscribed act.
if the external element is divisible, whether a fault element attaches to the
consequences or result of applying force
to the complainant’s neck or
throat, and if so the identification of the fault element which attaches to the
consequences or
if recklessness is sufficient as the fault element, whether it requires
foresight of the
possibility
of the relevant consequences or result; or,
alternatively, foresight of the
probability
of those consequences.
undertaking this constructional exercise, it is necessary to again consider the
external elements of the
offence. Textually, the offence is comprised of
the following physical or external elements:
1. The accused is or
was formerly in a relationship with the complainant;
complainant does not consent to being choked, suffocated or strangled; and
3. The accused “chokes, suffocates or strangles” the
complainant.
appellant contends that the third external element – that the accused
engages in conduct of ‘choking, suffocating
or strangling’ –
is not divisible because the proscribed act encompasses or subsumes the
consequence or result of that
act (that is, the restriction of breath). The
proscribed act of ‘choking, suffocating or strangling’ is limited to
conduct required to prove the offence. Accordingly, there is no integral or
attendant circumstance that might be proved by a lesser
species of intent.
to the appellant’s contention, the third external element is made up of
two parts: that the accused engages in an
act or conduct (that is, applies force
to the victim’s neck or throat) with the consequence that the
complainant’s breathing
was impeded or restricted. The act or conduct of
applying pressure to an airway is divisible from the effect of that action (the
hinderance of breath). As the Director submits, the hinderance of breath is
properly characterised as a result. ‘Choking, suffocating
strangling’ connotates a
relationship between the
application of force to the complainant’s neck or throat and the
restriction of breath. A restriction
in a person’s ability to breathe at
the same time (but not caused by) the application of force is not sufficient to
this element.
conduct is choking because of its effect on the airway of the victim. For that
reason, the restriction or hinderance of breath
is properly characterised as a
determining the fault element which applies to the third external element, the
characterisation of each part of this element takes
on some significance. In
, Brennan J explained
Moral excuses
find counterparts in the categories of mental states that are indifferently
described as mens rea and that apply to
several external elements of an offence.
Thus, voluntariness and intent are the mental states ordinarily applicable to an
act involved
in an offence, knowledge or the absence of an honest and reasonable
but mistaken belief is the mental state ordinarily applicable
circumstances in which a relevant act is done or omission is made, and, where a
mental state is applicable to results, it
may be either foresight of the
possibility of their occurrence (if recklessness is an element), or knowledge of
their probability
(or likelihood) of their occurrence or an intention to cause
them (if a specific intent is an element)...
does not necessarily follow from the amalgamation of two parts to an external
element in a single term that Parliament’s
intention was to attach a fault
element to both the act and result which make up that term; nor indeed that
Parliament intended to
attach the same fault element to each part. In
the external
elements which comprised ‘wounding’ (an act and a result) were
divisible with separate fault elements attaching
to each (despite them being
amalgamated in one word).
that the presumption of a fault element is not displaced, and the external
element of choking, suffocating and strangling
is an amalgamation of an act and
a result, the question remains as to whether a fault element attaches to the
Director contends that the fault element only attaches to the accused’s
act or conduct (the application of force to the
neck or throat), and not the
result. That is, an accused must intend to apply force to the
complainant’s neck or throat and
this force, in fact, results in the
restriction or impediment of the victim’s breath. In support of this
contention, the Director
submits that the mischief which the provision seeks to
remedy is conduct which has the potential to cause death or serious injury
not the consequences of the act, or proof of harm. The Director submits that to
construe the fault element as attaching to the
result or consequences of an
accused’s act would be inconsistent with a purposive construction of the
construing the provision, and when considering the Director’s contention
as to the reach of the fault element, it is first
important to recognise, as
outlined above, that the third external element of the offence will not be
proved unless the accused’s
act or conduct results in some detrimental
effect on the breathing of the victim. Otherwise, the impugned conduct would not
choking, strangling or
suffocating.
Bearing in mind
that the provision is a standalone offence which seeks to capture conduct of a
particular nature (i.e. the application
of force to the area of the neck and
throat which has the consequence of a restriction of the victim’s breath),
and the significant
penalty which attaches to the provision, the fault element
should extend to the whole of the impugned conduct. Should it not, there
also be little work for the statutory alternative offence of assault because it
difficult to envisage a situation where there is
a deliberate application of force to a victim’s neck or throat which does
result in any restriction of the victim’s breath.
follows that for the purposes of
, the fault element of the offence extends
to both the act and the result, which together constitute ‘choking,
suffocating or
strangling’.
to the second issue, accepting that the presumption is not displaced and the
fault element extends to both the application of
force and its consequence or
result, there remains the question of identifying the appropriate fault element
which attaches to the
result. There can be no doubt that an accused person must
deliberately engage in the conduct of applying force to the victim’s
or throat, and the reckless application of force will not suffice. The question
remains as to the appropriate fault element
which applies to the consequence or
result of that conduct.
common law, depending upon the nature of the particular offence the requirement
of mens rea or a guilty mind may involve intention,
foresight, knowledge or
awareness with respect to some act, circumstance or
consequence.
The presumption of
mens rea (described in
) does not ascribe (as a matter of
presumption) the species of a fault element attaching to a result. As submitted
by the Director,
there is available to the Court a constructional choice as to
the fault element. Pursuant to Brennan J’s taxonomy, the constructional
choice as to the fault element applying to the result is between specific intent
(including knowledge of probability of occurrence)
and foresight of possibility
(recklessness). The constructional choice between these options will turn on the
text, context and purpose
of the provision under consideration.
outlined earlier, the broad legislative purpose for enacting
prevent conduct described as choking, strangulation or suffocation in all its
forms. Such conduct is considered to be a common
feature of domestic violence
and is a predictive risk-factor for escalating domestic violence, including
domestic homicide. A fault
element which includes recklessness is more consonant
with the fulfilment of the purpose of the statute.
and contrary to the appellant’s submissions, the express inclusion of
recklessness as a fault element for results
in some offences in the CLCA
(discussed in more detail below) does not ultimately demonstrate that
recklessness as to a consequence
or result must be specified in a provision in
order for it to suffice. Rather, the function served by the explicit references
recklessness is the demarcation of those offences from offences requiring a
specific intent (where both are specified).
those reasons, the text and purpose of the provision warrant the importation of
recklessness as a fault element attaching to
the consequence prescribed.
As to the third question, and the identification of the appropriate fault
element which attaches to the “result”, the
appellant contends that
if (contrary to his other submissions) recklessness is implied as a fault
element attaching to the result,
the prosecution is required to prove that the
accused applied force to the complainant’s neck or throat foreseeing that
that the victim’s breathing would be hindered or
restricted. Accordingly, the appellant contends that the trial Judge erred
directing the jury that ‘recklessness’ required foresight of the
possibility
that the complainant’s breathing would be hindered or
restricted.
Recklessness, generally, is not defined in the CLCA. However,
‘recklessness’ or ‘reckless indifference’
is defined in
various provisions of the CLCA. For the purposes of the offence of causing
serious harm contrary to
, and the offence of causing harm contrary to s 24,
recklessness is defined in
That section provides that a person is reckless
if they have an awareness of a ‘substantial risk’ that their conduct
‘could’ result in the relevant consequences and proceed despite that
risk and without adequate justification. This definition
appears to draw upon
South Australian common law authorities as to the meaning of reckless
indifference in the context of the now
abolished offence of unlawful wounding
which required ‘foresight of the likelihood that harm of that type would
result from
the act and a determination to proceed with the act
notwithstanding.’
concept of recklessness is also defined in other provisions of the CLCA in
similar terms as in
appellant contends that if the fault element of
as to the result is
satisfied by recklessness it should be construed to import the same meaning as
provided in
Ducaj v The Queen
Court of Criminal Appeal considered the fault element of recklessness for the
purposes of
of the CLCA. That section provides that a person is guilty
of an offence ‘where a person, without lawful excuse, does an act
an omission – knowing that the act or omission is likely to cause harm to
another; and intending to cause such harm
or being recklessly indifferent as to
whether such harm is caused.’ Recklessness is not explicitly defined in
the relevant
provisions.
Court held that for the purposes of
, mere advertence to the
possibility
of the consequence is not sufficient because the provision
requires knowledge of the
of the consequence. As Chief Justice
Kourakis explained:
The alternative element of recklessness, on the other hand, must be
adapted to its particular context in the
offences. That is because the
concepts of recklessness and reckless indifference are protean. Recklessness may
be used to refer to
the conduct, or objective, element of an offence, in which
case it generally denotes gross or criminal negligence. It is not used
Plainly enough, it is one of two alternative fault elements set
out in paragraph (b) of each subsection. Alternatively, recklessness
fault, or subjective, element, in which case recklessness generally refers to
“the unreasonable or unjustifiable taking
of a risk which is known to the
Recklessness, as a fault element, generally requires some, not necessarily
much, foresight of the possibility or probability of the
proscribed consequence.
However, for the purposes of
offences, mere advertence to a possibility of
the consequence is not sufficient, because, as we have seen, subparagraph (a) of
of the subsections requires
the consequence.
consistent with the protean nature of the concept of recklessness, the Chief
Justice observed that the fault element of
recklessness for the offence of
manslaughter is satisfied by foresight of
consequences, as is
the statutory definition of ‘reckless indifference’ provided by
in relation to an offence of rape contrary to
of the CLCA.
is not the case that the meaning of recklessness for the purposes of
necessarily informed by the definition of recklessness or reckless indifference
contained in other provisions of the CLCA. Rather,
it is necessary to return to
ordinary principles of statutory construction including the purpose for which
the provision was enacted.
High Court has provided recent guidance on whether recklessness requires
foresight of the probability of the consequences contemplated
for offences other
than statutory or common law murder, or foresight of the possibility of those
consequences.
the High Court held that the test for recklessness for the purposes of common
law murder is foresight that death or serious bodily
consequence of the relevant
The Court held that
knowing that death or grievous bodily harm is merely possible is not
sufficient.
Subsequently,
R v Coleman
the New South Wales Court of Appeal considered whether the test for recklessness
applied to the offence of maliciously inflicting actual bodily
harm with intent to have sexual intercourse, contrary to s 61C of
(NSW). In that matter, the appellant was alleged to have inserted a
bottle into the complainant’s anus. The trial Judge directed
the jury that
the malicious infliction of injury was established if the appellant had wielded
the bottle with the intention of causing
some injury, such as was in fact
caused, or if he did so recklessly. The trial Judge defined the concept of
recklessness as a realisation
of the possibility that some injury might result,
but nevertheless proceeding to act. The appellant contended this was a
misdirection
and that a realisation of the possibility of injury is
insufficient; rather, the realisation must be of the
probability
likelihood of injury. The appellant relied on
in support of this
contention. The New South Wales Criminal Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal
and held that in relation to statutory
offences other than murder, the test for
recklessness to establish that an act was done ‘maliciously’ was a
realisation
on the part of the accused that the particular kind of harm done
might, or may
, be inflicted yet the person nonetheless proceeded
to act. Hunt J (with Finlay and Allen JJ agreeing)
degree of reckless indifference required for the crime of murder, amounting to
an act done “of malice” (or malice
aforethought) is altogether of a
different order to that required for lesser crimes. The contemplation by the
accused of the probable
consequence of death is required for murder because it
has to be comparable with an intention to kill or to do grievous bodily harm.
Such a test of probable consequences is by no means required in relation to
lesser crimes as a matter of law, of logic, or of common
Aubrey v The Queen
the High Court considered whether recklessness required proof that the accused
foresaw the probability (rather than possibility)
of his act resulting in
grievous bodily harm and the correctness of
the appellant was charged with one count of maliciously causing
the complainant to contract a grievous bodily disease contrary to
’) and, in the
alternative, one count of maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm upon the
complainant contrary to
High Court held that for the purposes of establishing that the accused acted
recklessly within the meaning of
and therefore
maliciously within the meaning of that section and
, it was sufficient for
the prosecution to establish that the accused foresaw the possibility (as
opposed to probability) that the
act of sexual intercourse with the other person
would result in the other person contracting the grievous bodily disease. The
held that the correct standard of recklessness to apply to statutory
offences other than murder is foresight of the probability of
harm, approving
the reasoning of Hunt J in
Court observed that at the time of
, the view taken in England, and
generally in Australia, was that the degree of recklessness required to
establish malice for the
purposes of statutory offences other than murder was
foresight of the possibility of harm and ‘...nothing said in
in relation to the degree of recklessness required any change to
Court explained that ‘...the reason for requiring foresight of probability
in the case of common law murder was the near
moral equivalence of intention to
kill or cause grievous bodily harm and the foresight of the probability of
death. The same does
not necessarily, if at all, apply to statutory offences
other than murder.’
was recognised, however, that the requirements for recklessness in States other
than New South Wales may vary according to the
terms of each State’s
legislation.
, the High Court also referred to recent decisions in England which
have held that, for an accused to be convicted of recklessly causing
bodily harm, it is necessary to show not only that the accused foresaw the
possibility of harm and proceeded nonetheless,
but also that it was unreasonable
for the accused to take that risk in so proceeding. The appellant in
advanced an argument that recent developments in England should
lead the High Court to change the test for recklessness from a requirement
foresight of possibility to foresight of probability. The Court rejected that
submission observing that ‘...the reasonableness
of an act and the degree
of foresight of harm required to constitute recklessness in so acting are
logically connected. So much is
implicit in the notion of an accused’s
willingness to “run the risk” or to proceed notwithstanding a
, the majority referred to the Victorian Court of Appeal’s
decision in
R v Campbell
as an exception to the general approach of construing statutory provisions which
involved recklessness as requiring foresight of
the possibility of harm. In
the Court held that for the purposes of the offence of reckless
infliction of grievous bodily harm contrary to
(Vic), the prosecution is required to establish foresight of the
probability of grievous bodily harm. The Court reasoned that the
principles in
applied to an offence under
and relied on an earlier decision
Victorian Court of Appeal had applied a test of probability of foresight to the
offence of recklessly engaging in conduct
endangering life under
(Vic). The Court held that the same test for
recklessness should apply to all sections in this group of offences.
Director of Public Prosecutions Reference No 1 of 2019
the High Court considered whether
was correctly decided. The
majority (Gaegler, Gordon and Steward JJ, and in a separate judgment, Edelman J)
declined to overrule
on the basis that subsequent legislative
enactment was predicated upon the Victorian Parliament accepting the correctness
. Edelman J referred to three constraining factors, namely:
prior to the decision in
, the decision in
not be considered plainly wrong; the decision of
informed the
background for amendments to provisions and penalties in the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic); and the meaning of recklessness in
has been adopted
in Victorian courts for the ensuing 26 years. In a joint judgment
the minority (Kiefel CJ, Keane and Gleeson JJ) held that
wrongly decided and the test for recklessness should be
corrected. It
is apparent that but for the re-enactment presumption, the
meaning of recklessness in the context of
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) would have been construed by the High Court in accordance with
now return more directly to the question of the correct standard of recklessness
to be applied to s 20A of the CLCA. While the
principles enunciated in
are instructive,
concerned with determining the mental element of a statutory offence that did
not expressly state a mental element. As the High
Court recognised, the
principles articulated in
DPP Reference 2019
subject to the ordinary rules of statutory construction by reference to the
text, context and purpose of s 20A.
outlined earlier, the purpose for which s 20A was enacted is plain from the
extrinsic materials; namely, to identify conduct meeting
the description of
choking, suffocating and strangling which is predictive of the escalation of
domestic violence to domestic homicide,
to denounce this type of offending and
to deter others more generally. There is also no requirement of proof of harm
under the provision
which distinguishes the standalone provision s 20A from
other causing harm offences and recognises the inherent dangerousness of
in mind Parliament’s evident purpose for enacting s 20A, we consider there
to be no principled reason to align the
meaning of recklessness under s 20A with
the meaning of recklessness in offences involving murder. There is no moral
equivalence
between an intention to kill or commit grievous bodily harm and
foresight of the probability of hindering or restricting a person’s
does the statutory context in which s 20A appears support such a construction.
There is no reason for recklessness for the purposes
of s 20A to be construed so
as to import the meaning expressed in s 20AA (causing harm to emergency
workers), s 29A (shooting a police
officer) and s 32AA (discharging firearms to
injure). Recklessness (or reckless indifference) is defined differently in
to the offence of rape; and as discussed earlier, it is the explicit
terms of the offence provisions in
of the CLCA which mean that recklessness
for the purpose of
offences require foresight of the probability of the
proscribed consequences.
relation to the development of the law in England (discussed in
DPP Reference 2019
) where it has been held that it is not only
necessary that the accused foresaw the possibility of harm and proceeded
nonetheless,
but that the risk must be unreasonable in the circumstances known
to the accused, in the context of s 20A, this development does
not support a
test for recklessness of foresight of probability. It is difficult to envisage
any situation where the risk of hindering
or restricting the breath of a
domestic partner was not unreasonable (not covered by the requirement that it be
without lawful excuse).
Such an act is generally devoid of any social utility.
in mind the purpose for which s 20A was enacted, and the mischief Parliament
intended to remedy, and having regard to the
principles enunciated in
it is sufficient for the purposes of s 20A that the accused
foresaw the possibility (as opposed to the probability) that his or her
would result in the hindering or restricting of the complainant’s breath.
Accordingly,
the elements of an offence contrary to s 20A of the CLCA may be stated as
1. The accused is, or was formerly, in a relationship with
the complainant.
accused deliberately engaged in conduct which ‘choked, suffocated or
strangled’ the complainant (‘the physical
choke, suffocate or strangle is to engage in conduct that hinders or restricts
the breathing of the complainant; it does not require
proof that the restriction
upon the breathing be significant or that the breathing was completely stopped,
although the restriction
of the breathing would encompass the stopping of the
suffocating or strangling requires proof that the accused engaged in conduct
which resulted in some detrimental effect on
the breathing of the complainant
because otherwise it would not constitute the act of choking.
accused deliberately engaged in conduct intending to hinder or restrict the
complainant’s breath or was reckless as to whether
the conduct would
restrict or hinder the complainant’s breath (‘the mental
recklessness is invoked as the fault element, the prosecution is required to
prove that the accused engaged in conduct foreseeing
that it was possible (as
opposed to probable) that his or her act would hinder or restrict the
complainant’s breathing but
continued, nonetheless.
complainant did not consent to being choked, suffocated or strangled.
act of choking, suffocating or strangling the complainant was done without
lawful justification.
follows that the trial Judge did not err in his directions to the jury as to the
mental element of recklessness.
if we were of the contrary opinion, on the facts of this case, where the
appellant’s case at trial was that the prosecution
had not proved that he
placed his forearm against the complainant’s neck, and there was no real
dispute that the act (if proved)
did hinder or restrict the complainant’s
breathing, there was no real chance that the jury would not have been satisfied
the restriction of the complainant’s breath would have been foreseen
as probable or likely but were satisfied that it was a
possible consequence.
There was no ambiguity in the complainant’s evidence that when the
appellant placed his forearm against
her neck, her breathing was restricted.
Accordingly, any error was not material in the sense that it had the capacity to
realistically
affect the jury’s reasoning to
We grant permission but dismiss the appeal.
R v O’Connor
(1980) 146 CLR 64
, 77-78, 81-84 (Barwick CJ), 111 (Mason J).
Police v Pfeifer
[1997] SASC 6172
68 SASR 285.
Police v Pfeifer
[1997] SASC 6172
68 SASR 285
[1985] HCA 43
(1985) 157 CLR 523
Section 20(4)
, which replaces
(assault occasioning actual bodily harm)
now provides:
“A person who commits an assault that causes harm to another is
guilty of an offence.
Maximum penalty:
(a) for a basic offence—imprisonment for 3 years;
(b) for an aggravated offence (except one to which
paragraph (c)
applies)—imprisonment for 4 years;
(c) for an offence
aggravated by the use of, or a threat to use, an offensive
weapon—imprisonment for 5 years;
(d) for an offence
aggravated by the circumstances referred to in
section 5AA(1)(c)
—imprisonment for
Note: The conjunction that serves the same purpose as the word
‘occasioning’, and consistently with the legislative history
provision, no fault element attaches to the result.
[1961] HCA 42
(1961) 108 CLR 56
(1975) 10 SASR 528
Transcript of Proceedings,
Burnett v The King
(Court of Appeal, SCCRM-24-004269, Kourakis CJ, Lovell
and David JJA), 21 October 2024) 15.10-28.
(1975) 10 SASR 139.
[1985] HCA 22
(1985) 156 CLR 464
(2017) 260 CLR 305
[1957] 2 QB 396
24 & 25 Vict, c 100 (‘
Offences Against
the Person Act
[1874] LR 2 CCR 119
(Blackburn J).
(1974) 9 SASR 531
(2018) 131 SASR 491
, 502-503 [34]
(Kourakis CJ, Blue and Doyle JJ).
[1985] HCA 22
156 CLR 464
Royall v The Queen
[1991] HCA 27
(1991) 172 CLR 378
400, 412, 416-417, 424.
(2020) 284 A Crim R 19.
(1997) 2 VR 585
JA and Crockett AJA).
(2020) 284 A Crim R 19
[29], 32 [51] (Maxwell P, McLeish and Emerton JJA); See
[1990] VicRp 55
[2021] HCA 26
(2021) 274 CLR 177
DPP Reference No 1
DPP Reference No 1
201-203 [35] (Gageler, Gordon and Steward JJ, Edelman J agreeing)
DPP Reference No 1
DPP Reference No 1
200-202 [53]-[59] (Gageler, Gordon and Steward JJ); 214-216 [89]-[95] (Edelman
565-566; See also
Sherras v De Rutzen
[1895] UKLawRpKQB 77
(1895) 1 Q.B. 918
, 921 (R.S Wright
(1962) 10 CLR 381,
[1976] A.C 210.
[1985] HCA 22
(1985) 156 CLR 464.
[1985] HCA 29
(1985) 156 CLR 473
[2019] HCA 11
(2019) 267 CLR 171.
[2019] HCA 11
(2019) 267 CLR 171
(1975) 10 SASR 528
[1962] HCA 23
(1962) 107 CLR 381.
(1971) 1 SASR 1.
[1934] SAStRp 25
[1934] SASR 124.
[1961] HCA 42
(1961) 108 CLR 56
Criminal Code Act
, 62 (Kitto
(Dixon CJ); 79-82 (Windeyer J).
(Kitto J); 68-69 (Taylor J); 73-74 (Menzies J).
(Dixon CJ).
Vallance v The Queen
[1961] HCA 42
(1961) 108 CLR 56
Conduct which may result in
choking or strangling.
Conduct which may result in
suffocating.
See ss 20AA(2), 23(3) and
24(2) of the
Trial Exhibit VDP2 at
AB 100–102.
Criminal Law
Consolidation (Section 20A) Amendment Bill 2024
(SA) came into operation on
1 May 2025 and creates a new offence of choking, suffocation or strangling in a
domestic setting causing
harm. The terms ‘choking’,
‘strangling’ and ‘suffocating’ are now also defined for
the purposes
of both s 20A and the newly inserted offence. Pursuant to the new
provisions, ‘choking’ or ‘strangling’ a
person means the
applying of pressure to the person’s neck to an extent that is capable of
affecting the breath or the flow
of blood to the head of the person; and
‘suffocating’ includes a reference to (i) obstructing, to any
extent, any part
of the person’s respiratory system; or (ii) interfering,
to any extent, with the operation of the person’s respiratory
(iii) impeding, to any extent, the person’s respiration.
[2019] HCA 35
[2019] HCA 35
[2019] HCA 35
(Mullins JA).
Macquarie Dictionary, as of
21 October 2024.
Legislation
Interpretation Act 2021
Parliament of South
Australia, House of Assembly, Hansard, 24 October 2018, 3131.
Parliament of South
Australia, House of Assembly, Hansard, 24 October 2018, 3131.
R v Green (No 3)
[2019] ACTSC 96 (Loukas-Karlsson
R v Green (No 3)
[2019] ACTSC 96
(Mullins JA, McMurdo and Boddice JJA agreeing).
–[58] (Mullins JA, McMurdo and Boddice JJA agreeing).
He Kaw Teh v The
[1985] HCA 43
(1985) 157 CLR 523
at 594 (Dawson J);
Lim Chin Aik v The Queen
(1963) AC 160
at 173 (Viscount Radcliffe, Lord Evershed and Lord Devlin);
Sweet v Parsley
[1969] UKHL 1
(1970) AC 132
at 152 (Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest).
[1985] HCA 43
(1985) 157 CLR 523
(Brennan J).
He Kaw Teh v The
[1985] HCA 43
(1985) 157 CLR 523
at 564–565 (Brennan J).
An accused person may be
liable to be convicted of the alternative offence of assault contrary to
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
He Kaw Teh v The Queen
[1985] HCA 43
(1985) 157 CLR 523
(Mullins JA, McMurdo, Boddice JJA
Kural v The
[1987] HCA 16
(1987) 162 CLR 502
Selig v Hayes
[1989] SASC 1855
(1989) 52 SASR 169
at 174–175;
Laurie v Nixon
(1991) 55 SASR 46 at 51–52;
Gillan v Police
[2004] SASC 279
(2004) 149 A Crim R 354
For example,
sections 20AA
(causing harm to, or assaulting, certain emergency workers), 29A (shooting at
police officers), and 32AA (discharging firearms to
Ducaj v The Queen
(2019) 135 SASR 127.
Ducaj v The Queen
(2019) 135 SASR 127
at [13]-[14].
[1985] HCA 22
156 CLR 464.
[1985] HCA 22
156 CLR 464
[1985] HCA 22
156 CLR 464
at 469–470.
R v Coleman
19 NSWLR 467.
R v Coleman
(1990) 19 NSWLR 467
Aubrey v The
(2017) 260 CLR 305.
Aubrey v The
(2017) 260 CLR 305 at [46] (Kiefel CJ, Keane, Nettle and Edelman JJ).
Aubrey v The
(2017) 260 CLR 305 at [47] (Kiefel CJ, Keane, Nettle and Edelman JJ).
Aubrey v The
(2017) 260 CLR 305 at [49] (Kiefel CJ, Keane, Nettle and Edelman
R v Campbell
[1997] 2 VR 585.
[1990] VicRp 55
Director of Public
Prosecutions Reference No 1 of 2019
[2021] HCA 26
(2021) 274 CLR 177.
MDP v The King
[2025] HCA 24.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (711 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter