URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASC/2025/179.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:05:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BURNER v CITY OF SALISBURY; BAWDEN v CITY OF SALISBURY [2025] SASC 179 (30 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Civil: Judicial Review)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
BURNER v CITY OF SALISBURY; BAWDEN v CITY OF
[2025] SASC 179
Judgment of the Honourable
Justice McDonald
30 October 2025
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - JUDICIAL REVIEW - GROUNDS OF REVIEW - PROCEDURAL
FAIRNESS - BIAS - APPREHENSION OF BIAS
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - JUDICIAL REVIEW - GROUNDS OF REVIEW - IMPROPER
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - JUDICIAL REVIEW - GROUNDS OF REVIEW -
UNREASONABLENESS
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - JUDICIAL REVIEW - GROUNDS OF REVIEW - RELEVANT
CONSIDERATIONS
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - JUDICIAL REVIEW - GROUNDS OF REVIEW - PROCEDURAL
LOCAL GOVERNMENT - REGULATION AND ADMINISTRATION - COUNCILLORS AND
In November 2022, the applicants (Ms Bawden and Ms Burner) were elected as
councillors for the City of Sailsbury (‘the Council’).
From January
2023, the applicants engaged in conduct that was alleged to have breached the
behavioural standards for council members
established pursuant to
Local Government Act 1999
(SA) (‘the Act’). The conduct
resulted in a number of complaints against the applicants which were
investigated by the
The applicants failed to attend numerous Council meetings held between March
2023 and June 2023. For the meetings held between March
and April 2023, reasons
were provided by the applicants. From about April 2023, Ms Burner sought a
leave of absence. The request
was considered but not granted by Council. By
June 2023, the applicants had failed to attend three or more consecutive
meetings of the Council, without leave from the Council to do so. As a
result, in June 2023, the applicants were removed as councillors
of the Council
by unanimous vote pursuant to
of the Act.
These are applications for judicial review of those decisions. The
applicants seek an order quashing the decisions and a declaration
decisions are void and of no effect. Further, Ms Bawden seeks an order quashing
the decision of Council to refuse her a
leave of absence and a declaration that
the refusal is void and of no effect.
The respondent contends that it took a conservative and cautious approach to
its application of
of the Act. In relation to Ms Bawden’s
leave of absence, the respondent contends that there was no obligation upon the
Executive Officer to consider the request and that the information given
by Ms Bawden at that time was contradictory.
Held: The applications are dismissed.
Local Government Act 1999
referred to.
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural
[2023] HCA 15
(2023) 279 CLR 148
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
Affairs v Jia Legeng
(2001) 205 CLR 507;
Isbester v Knox City Council
[2015] HCA 20
(2015) 255 CLR 135
; Re Refugee Review Tribunal; Ex parte H
(2001) 179 ALR
McGovern v Ku-ring-gai Council
[2008] NSWCA 209
(2008) 72 NSWLR 504
Hot Holdings
Pty Ltd v Creasy
[2002] HCA 51
(2002) 210 CLR 438
Stollery v Greyhound Racing Control
[1972] HCA 53
(1972) 128 CLR 509
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant
Services and Multicultural Affairs v CQZ15
(2021) 284 FCR 455
[2000] HCA 48
(2000) 201 CLR 488
The Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte Epeabaka
[2001] HCA 23
(2001) 206 CLR 128
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural
[2022] FCAFC 41
(2022) 288 FCR 218
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v
Peko-Wallsend Ltd
(1986) 162 CLR 24
Ryan v Heiler
[1990] NSWSCA 160;
Ryan v Heiler
(1990) 69 LGRA 307
Minister for Immigration and Border
Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
(2018) 264 CLR 541
Burgess v Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection
[2018] FCA 69
(2018) 259 FCR 197
, considered.
BURNER v CITY OF SALISBURY; BAWDEN v CITY OF
[2025] SASC 179
Civil: Judicial Review
McDONALD J.
Bawden and Severina Burner (‘the applicants’) were elected as
councillors for the City of Salisbury (‘the
Council’) in November
2022. Both were removed from office as members of the Council following a
unanimous decision of the
other Council members at a special council meeting on
13 June 2023.
19 June 2023, the applicants filed originating applications for judicial review
challenging the decisions made by the Council.
Although their applications are
generally very similar, and both relate to decisions made at the special council
meeting, there
is a difference in the orders that they seek. Both applicants
challenge the exercise of power under
Local Government
(SA) (‘the Act’) to remove them as members of the
Council on the basis that they had been absent, without leave of the
from three consecutive ordinary council meetings. Ms Burner seeks the quashing
of that decision and a declaration that
the decision is void and of no effect.
Ms Bawden seeks the same orders, however, she also seeks orders quashing a
decision, made
at that same meeting, to refuse her a leave of absence from
meetings held on 27 March 2023 and 24 April 2023 and a declaration that
refusal is void and of no effect.
is a considerable history that sits behind these applications. Given the nature
of the issues raised by the applicants, and
the arguments made by the
respondent, it is necessary to set that history out in some detail.
applicants were elected to office as members of the Council in the 2022 local
government elections conducted in accordance with
Local Government
(Elections) Act 1999
(SA). Neither had previously held such an office.
applicants attended the first ordinary meeting of the newly elected Council on
28 November 2022. At that meeting, the Council
moved to schedule ordinary
meetings at 6.30pm on the fourth Monday of every month.
resulted in a number of complaints central to
the dispute, that led to a series
of events resulting in their removal from office.
1 January 2023, Ms Burner shared a post on Facebook that juxtaposed a picture of
a futuristic metropolis entitled “It’s
called a smart city”,
collaged with a picture of a concentration camp endorsed “Because if they
called it a concentration
camp, you might not want to live there”.
Alongside the post, Ms Burner included the caption “A concentration camp
pretty interactive lights and music coming to a place near you. Oh what
fun” (‘the Concentration Camp Post’).
Council received four complaints about the Concentration Camp Post between 14
January 2023 and 2 February 2023.
dates unknown, but at a similar time, Ms Bawden posted two statements on
Facebook which read “Not-so-SMART Cities are being
rolled out by stealth
and in tiny increments you don’t even know about or have a say in, from
LED lights, CCTV cameras with
Facial Recognition, sensors and
microphones”, and “YES THIS IS ABOUT GLOBAL ENSLAVEMENT and if you
are more worried about
your footpaths, you should worry much more about your
children’s future” (‘the Enslavement Post’).
Bawden’s posts were picked up by and reported in the Messenger North
Newspaper. That report included a collage comprising
of the Enslavement Post of
Ms Bawden, along with the caption of the Concentration Camp Post of Ms Burner.
20 January 2023, the Council received a complaint about the Enslavement Post.
that same date Ms Bawden published, as her Facebook cover photo, an image of the
backs of four suited men, passing money and documents
to each other. One of the
men had been labelled ‘Councillor’ and appears to be giving money to
a man labelled ‘WEF/UN’
in exchange for some documents (‘the
Corruption Post’). The image is headed with “WE HAVE INVESTIGATED
AND FOUND OURSELVES TO BE INNOCENT - ***Future SMART City
Councils***”.
21 January 2023, Ms Burner commented on an endorsement under
Ms Bawden’s Corruption Post, with a graphic of a megaphone
the words “Say it Loud” (‘the Corruption Endorsement’).
On 23 January 2023, a complaint was made
Corruption Endorsement also attracted two complaints around that time.
22 January 2023, Ms Bawden posted an article on Facebook entitled “STILL
DON’T UNDERSTAND SMART CITIES? Here’s
a Hitchhikers Guide...”.
The article, amongst other things, makes conspiracy type allegations about smart
cities, councillors
and “other Globalist entities”. It states
“In the longer term these people will become the equivalent of Kapos
(Jewish prison guards) whose role will be to keep you compliant with the most
draconian measures the world will ever know, as it
moves “Lockstep”
with the directives of multinational Corporations, World Bank, World Economic
Forum (WEF), World Health
Organisation (WHO) and United Nations (UN)”
(‘the Kapos Post’).
following day two complaints were made about the Kapos Post.
special council meeting was held on 23 January 2023. During that meeting an
exchange took place between Ms Burner and another,
Cr MM. That exchange
became the subject of a complaint by a third party. Included in that complaint
was an allegation that Ms Burner
had yelled inappropriately. The complaint
referred to Ms Burner’s conduct towards Cr MM as
“disgraceful”.
applicants left the meeting early, during a break.
25 January 2023, Ms Burner responded to a Facebook post made by Ms Bawden which
said “Mobbing behaviour by Councillors is
never okay. Yours are selling
out the interests of local residents to foreign interests just so that they can
get a hot pizza delivered
in 5 minutes by drone”. Ms Burner’s
response included a ‘laughing face emoji’, the words “So true
...” and the words “... we should be ashamed of not cowering to evil
trash” (‘the Evil Trash Post’).
The Evil Trash Post was the
subject of a complaint.
29 January 2023, an employee of the Council posted a public notice to the effect
that the Salisbury Council chambers would close
at 4.30pm because of security
concerns surrounding a SMART Cities protest. This fell on the scheduled date of
the ordinary council
meeting. This led to a series of posts by both applicants
effectively mocking the public notice saying things like “Its
‘extremist’
to push back agains [sic] Globalist ideals of
enslavement” and “... it appears to me that [the Mayor and most
Councillors]
are deliberately shutting down anyone who disagrees with them ...
Don’t trap people in a 15 minute city, and they won’t
fearful”. The applicants’ various posts became the subject of
complaints.
or about that same day, the ordinary meeting was rescheduled to take place on
31 January 2023 and the agenda for that meeting
was published by the
Council. On the agenda was a “Motion on Notice: Right to Peaceful
Assembly” which proposed a resolution
requesting the Mayor to write to the
City of Onkaparinga expressing (among other things) that the reported views of
the applicants
“do in no way represent the views of the City of Salisbury
Council” (‘the apology motion’).
was amongst others, another motion on the agenda being “Motion on Notice:
Community Education of Council’s SMART
City Technology”.
or before 31 January 2023, Ms Burner published a response to the apology motion.
She said “Before I get silenced tonight,
I want the world to know that I
DO NOT consent to the bullying and intimidation of the Advertiser nor anybody
else. I do NOT apologise
to the Onkaparinga Mayor because I believe she and her
Council deliberately antagonised their constituents who just wanted a LITTLE
common decency and respect by allowing them to hear what is going down in the
Public Meeting. I say that the news about angry protestors
was fabricated
ordinary meeting took place on 31 January 2023 as rescheduled. Both of the
applicants attended. The apology motion was debated.
The resultant Council
resolution included a request for Ms Burner to publicly apologise “to the
Mayor of Onkaparinga”.
Council then moved on to the motion in relation to community education about
SMART technology. Ms Burner was given the opportunity
to speak against the
motion for over 30 minutes, on the invitation of other Council members (the
normal time limit was five minutes).
In the course of which she said, amongst
other things:
Musk has worked on a brainchip. He has one. He has put it in his robots. There
are robots - four bots that that went a bit
funny and they, as the people tried,
the workers tried to disassemble two of them. They did that successfully, and
while they were
disassembling the third one, the 4th one used its AI technology,
which is what you’re installing to get on the net and find
repair itself. And then it killed 9 employees. ...
motion without notice was then moved by another councillor in relation to a
“International Day of Commemoration in Memory
of the victims of the
Holocaust”. The applicants absented themselves on the basis of a material
conflict of interest. The
debate referred to, amongst other things, Ms
Burner’s Concentration Camp Post and Ms Bawden’s Kapos Post. The
resolved to condemn those publications and to request that the
applicants publicly apologise for their comments.
letters dated 20 February 2023, the Mayor and the Chief Executive Officer
(‘the CEO’), enquired whether each of the
applicants would be
willing to provide the requested apology. No response was forthcoming.
24 February 2023, Ms Burner emailed a media release and reference book to the
Council entitled “Council Uses Stasi-Style
Tactics to Prove It Values
Citizens’ Freedom to Protest”. The following references were
contained within it: “In
a “trial by voodoo”, Council has
taken it upon itself to punish Councillors exercising their Constitutional right
participate in public meetings, gatherings or protests by forcing them to
apologise for doing just that”, and that the Council
had “exact[ed]
a public lynching of dissenting Councillors, including making slanderous &
defamatory accusations in very
public forums through flagrant breaches of
Council meeting procedures”.
Burner described the Council as “tyrants” who “detest ...
freedom & democracy”.
25 February 2023, a joint statement/media release was emailed by the applicants
to the Council. It was entitled “Councillors
Condemn City of Salisbury
for Suppressing Free Speech”. The contents related to the apologies which
the Council by resolution
had requested. It included: “We are deeply
sorry that the Council believes it can trample on our Constitutional rights
deny us the ability to represent our constituents” and “it is
ironic that Council claims to pay its respects to Holocaust
survivors whilst
behaving like total dictators and
following day a further joint personal statement/media release was emailed by
the applicants to the Council. It was entitled
“Councillors Forced to
Apologise for Their Opposition to Fascist Ideologies”. Although couched
in terms of an apology,
the statement reflected a defiant attitude and instead
purported to make an apology on behalf of the Council to their constituents.
way of example, amongst other matters that are the subject of the
“apology” is a statement that the Council “Feels
justified in regulating anyone’s God-given right to free speech in a free
& democratic country, by using tactics
seen only under
dictatorships”.
or about that date, the agenda for the ordinary meeting scheduled on 27 February
2023 was circulated. It included a “Motion
on Notice: Chip
technology” that contained a request that Ms Burner apologise to Elon Musk
for her brain chip speech, parts
of which had, by that time, been reported in
the Advertiser. In addition, that she apologise publicly at the upcoming
Council meeting
for providing inaccurate and misleading information regarding
Elon Musk and his technological developments and for “repetitively
providing inaccurate and misleading statements to the
community”.
ordinary Council meeting was held on 27 February 2023. Cr KG spoke in
favour of the relevant motion and three other councillors
spoke in support. Ms
Burner then spoke and alleged that Cr KG had lied in an attempt to smear
her name. From this point, the meeting
appears to have degenerated, becoming
chaotic with various motions, interjections and increasing hostility on the part
of Ms Burner
in particular. Ms Burner was asked to leave for five minutes on
the basis that she had disrupted the meeting. The Council subsequently
to suspend Ms Burner for the remainder of the meeting on the basis that she had
behaved in an improper manner.
Bawden then spoke to the relevant motion without interruption, following which,
she sought leave of the meeting and then left.
The applicants
commence failing to attend at Council meetings
1 March 2023, Ms Burner sent an email to the CEO and the Manager Governance of
the Council, claiming that the Council was actively
seeking to punish her. In
that context, she
Can someone
also follow up on facilitating the meeting tonight from the safety of our own
And, how do I formally seek stress leave? I’m seeing a GP this
Manager Governance responded one hour later and
Hi Severina,
I hope you’re going ok.
Further to your request, a Teams link was created and I understand this was
e-mailed to you. Please advise if this did not come through.
Just click on the Teams link at the time of the start of the meeting, and you
can then attend the briefing session online.
In relation to your leave request: Council can resolve to grant you leave of
absence. You can e-mail the CEO with such request and
the duration (start and
If this is something you would be interested in, please advise and I will
send you the details around this.
With kind regards,
3 March 2023, in response to the investigation into the complaints about the
Concentration Camp Post and the Corruption Endorsement,
Ms Burner sent an
email stating that she would “not dignify such allegations with a
response”. Following that, on 5
March 2023, Ms Burner posted an image on
Facebook of a person contorted into the position of a swastika, with a caption
when I’m asked to kneel and apologise for being right”.
The word “right” had been superimposed over the word
“white” (‘the Swastika Post’).
8 March 2023, the date of a special Council meeting, Ms Burner sent an email to
the Mayor and CEO on behalf of herself and Ms
Bawden. In the email she said the
Dear Gillian
Please accept apologies from myself and Cr Bawden indefinitely.
We are both seeking instruction on formally applying for stress leave.
I no longer wish to be present with people who wish me ill health and then
beat me when I’m down. As though it wasn’t
clear I have suffered
some kind of mental trauma at our last council meeting, you choose to continue
the witch-hunting.
If this was any other Australian workplace, we would never have been treated
FOR THE RECORD...
I AM NOT A NAZI!
I HAVE NEVER BEEN A NAZI SYMPATHISER
YOUR MEDIA COMMENTARY TO THAT EFFECT IS SLANDER AND DEFAMATION.
special council meeting went ahead on 8 March 2023. In the minutes of the
meeting the applicants were recorded as an apology
and under the heading
“Leave of Absence”, there was the entry of
the meeting, the Council debated what it might do about the Swastika Post. The
Council resolved to: (a) request (not require)
Ms Burner to publicly apologise
at the next Council meeting (the 27 March meeting); and (b) request that Ms
Burner undertake two
nominated human rights training courses at her own cost,
and two free human rights training courses, by 30 April 2023. Ms Burner
did none of those things.
9 March 2023, the CEO responded to Ms Burner’s email from the day before.
The response
you please clarify if you are indicating you will not be attending Council
meetings, Council committee meetings, CEO briefings
and other information or
workshop sessions indefinitely.
Please note that pursuant to
section 54(1)(d)
Local Government Act
you may be removed from office by the Council on the ground that you
have been absent, without leave of the Council, from three or
more consecutive
ordinary meetings of the Council. Providing an apology for a Council meeting
does not constitute a leave of absence
from the Council.
Can I suggest that if you are indeed intending not to attend Council meetings
that you seek a leave of absence from the Council. You
may request a leave of
absence by putting your request in writing to me and/or the Mayor. If you do
request a leave of absence this
would be considered by the Council at the next
ordinary meeting of the Council. Whilst I cannot pre-empt the Council’s
I suggest if you do request a leave of absence that you specify a
period of time you will be absent rather than indefinitely.
If Cr Bawden also intends to request a leave of absence it is necessary for
Cr Bawden to make that request herself.
16 March 2023, the CEO forwarded the same email to Ms Bawden.
pause there to observe that the necessary steps required to seek a leave of
absence could not have been made clearer than was conveyed
in these emails.
or about 19 March 2023, both of the applicants provided a medical certificate to
the CEO. The certificate for Ms Bawden was from
Dr Kandasamy, it stated
that she was “unfit for work” for the period between 19 March 2023
to 2 April 2023.
certificate for Ms Burner was from Dr Aslam, it stated that she was
“unfit for her normal work” from 19 to 25 March
22 March 2023, having received the medical certificates, the CEO wrote to the
applicants. Both emails contained the
note you’re not deemed to be in City of Salisbury employment and no such
medical certificate is required or requested.
As clarified before, Leave of Absence can be requested.
Pursuant to
section 54(1)(d)
Local Government Act 1999
removed from office by the Council on the ground that you have been absent,
without leave of the Council, from three or
more consecutive ordinary meetings
of the Council. Providing an apology for a Council meeting does not constitute a
leave of absence
from the Council. Therefore I suggest that if you are indeed
intending not to attend Council meetings that you seek a leave of absence
the Council. You may request a leave of absence by putting your request in
writing to me and/or the Mayor. If you do request
a leave of absence this would
be considered by the Council at the next ordinary meeting of the Council. Whilst
I cannot pre-empt
the Council’s decision I suggest if you do request a
leave of absence that you specify a period of time you will be absent.
If you’re not intending to submit a leave of absence, and rather
provide an apology at the meeting for being absent, please
accordingly.
Failing this you will be listed as “absent”.
the case of Ms Burner, the CEO added:
As expressed before, if you
have any specific concerns around Elected Member behaviour, please escalate this
together with supporting
evidence in accordance with the Behavioural Management
22 March 2023, the applicants emailed a co-signed letter to the CEO, dated 21
March 2023, with a heading “Re: Public Interest
Disclosure”. The
letter commences:
are writing to make a disclosure under the Public Interest Disclosure Act 2018
(PID Act) regarding what we believe is irrefutably
evidence of corruption,
misconduct & maladministration in public administration by the City of
applicants went on to make complaints of “extreme bullying, humiliation,
provocation, denigration & harassment by Council”,
stating this
behaviour was instigated by five council members.
the letter makes allegations of an extremely serious nature, there were no
particulars to the complaints and no examples
identified or incidents referred
to. Rather, there are repeated allegations of misconduct by the Council in
highly inflammatory
terms. The applicants provided little by way of substance
to back up their allegations.
27 March 2023, Ms Burner wrote to the CEO about a number of issues, the list
send apologies for the Council meeting tonight.
action my request for sick leave or [sic] at least 2 months.
am attempting to heal my soul, whilst still navigating the constant attacks
against me and the many legal cases I’m forced
ordinary council meeting took place on 27 March 2023, neither of the applicants
were in attendance.
the meeting, the Corruption Post, the Concentration Camp Post and the Corruption
Endorsement were the subject of debate. The
Council resolved to require Ms
Bawden to present a public apology at the next Council meeting, to be included
in the meeting minutes,
and to publish an apology in the same manner that she
had published the Corruption Post (i.e. by Facebook post). In relation to
Burner, the Council resolved to require her to present a public apology at the
next Council meeting, to be included in the meeting
minutes, and to publish an
apology in the same manner that she had published the Concentration Camp Post
(i.e. by Facebook post).
Neither of the applicants complied with any of the
resolutions.
following day, the CEO wrote to Ms Burner responding to her 27 March 2023
email, again addressing the issue of sick leave. On
this topic he
In relation to
point 6 of your requests re sick leave I draw your attention to my email titled
private and confidential dated 22
March at 3.06pm (attached to this
email) wherein I noted the fact that a work sick leave is not the appropriate
means of seeking
leave of absence and identified the appropriate and necessary
course of action of seeking the leave of Council for being absent from
for whatever period you seek . ...
on 28 March 2023, Ms Bawden wrote to the CEO and said “I have had to work
extra shifts this week to make ends meet
financially...”.
Just found out
my puppy has broken his back leg and needs surgery this afternoon urgently... I
won’t be able to attend tonight
because of this unexpected emergency...
send my apologies. Thank you.
Also attached is my new STRESS LEAVE CERTIFICATE from my Doctor..
was another doctor’s certificate from Dr Aslam stating that Ms Bawden
would be “unfit for her normal work from
Wednesday 19 April 2023
to Friday 28 April 2023 inclusive. Please accommodate as STRESS LEAVE”.
CEO responded to the email two hours later at 12.00pm. In his response, after
offering his condolences about the dog, he reiterated
his advice of 16 and 22
March 2023 in relation to not being in a position to attend the Council meeting
and offering apologies for
her non-attendance.
Importantly,
the CEO drew Ms Bawden’s attention to s 54(1)(d) of the Act and
Please note
that pursuant to
section 54(1)(d)
Local Government Act 1999
removed from office by the Council on the ground that you have been absent,
without leave of the Council
, from three or more consecutive ordinary
meetings of the Council.
Providing an apology for a Council meeting does not
constitute a leave of absence from the Council
. Therefore I suggest that if
you are indeed intending not to attend Council meetings that you
seek a leave
of absence from the Council
. You may request a leave of absence by putting
your request in writing to me and/or the Mayor. If you do request a leave of
this would be considered by the Council at the next ordinary meeting of
the Council. Whilst I cannot pre-empt the Council’s
decision I suggest if
you do request a leave of absence that you specify a period of time you will be
(Emphasis in original)
the CEO could not have been clearer about the necessary process to obtain a
leave of absence.
that same day, at 4.53pm Ms Burner sent an email to the CEO requesting a leave
of absence. The email relevantly
email dated 8 March, and I believe on more than one occasion, I have written to
express my need for leave from Council.
Given that I don’t see this situation changing overnight, I would like
to formally request the Council to allow me three month’s
leave. It is not
my intention to subject myself to any further bullying, threatening or
misconduct by council and it is clear that
tonight’s Confidential meeting
has been orchestrated to exact further reprisals against Cr Bawden and
ordinary Council meeting went ahead as scheduled on 24 April 2023.
Neither of the applicants were in attendance.
Burner’s request for leave of absence was considered and debated at that
meeting. The minutes of the meeting disclose that
concerns were raised by
members of the Council about the absence of evidence supporting Ms
Burner’s allegations of bullying
Concerns were also raised
community in circumstances
in which she continued to be paid and was still
posting on Facebook as a
councillor.
following is recorded in the outcomes of the
the request and reasons for Leave of Absence from Cr Burner as provided to the
CEO and Mayor “
I would like to formally request the Council to allow me
three month’s leave. It is not my intention to subject myself to any
further bullying, threatening or misconduct by council
not grant a Leave of Absence.
That Council
the reasons for the Leave of Absence request from Cr Burner and requests the CEO
to write to Cr Burner requesting that she provides
details of the
unsubstantiated allegations in accordance with the reporting provisions of the
Model Behaviour Management Policy and
again provides information to Cr Burner on
how to make such complaints.
note, there is no challenge to this decision.
28 April 2023, the CEO wrote to Ms Burner to advise her that her leave of
absence had not been granted. In the letter the CEO
advised Ms Burner that
in relation to her allegation of bullying, it was open to her to employ the
process set out in the Model Behaviour
Management Policy (a copy of which was
attached), should she wish to report any allegations of misconduct by the
Council. Ms Burner
did not respond to this invitation.
next ordinary meeting of the council took place on 22 May 2023. Neither
applicant attended. During the meeting there was a
motion without notice in
relation to the failure of the applicants to attend three consecutive ordinary
council meetings. It was
noted in the minutes that the applicants were aware of
s 54(1)(d) of the Act as they had been explicitly reminded of this
provision. The Council moved to request that the Mayor and CEO write
to the applicants, seeking a written explanation for their
ongoing absence from
Council meetings by 12.00pm, 29 May 2023, and advising them that their responses
would form part of a public
report to Council for further consideration.
was during the course of the debate that took place at the meeting on 22 May
2023 that some adverse comments were made about the
applicants by other
councillors. These comments are the subject of some of the complaints made by
the applicants about how the process
leading up to their removal was carried
set out the comments relied upon, in the context in which they were made, as the
context will be important when I come to consider
the submissions made about the
impugned comments.
And it’s disappointing to know that through my interactions with many
members of the public,
including [Cr CB’s] ward and [Cr DH’s]
ward, which my understanding is not being very well represented by some of my
that we’re talking about tonight Councillor Bawden and
Councill Burner. They’re receiving the same allowance that we
all are. And
to me, in my opinion, and it’s my view only that they don’t appear
to be doing the same amount of work.
That’s quite evident in number of
meetings that they’ve missed and as we had one motion speaks that this is
now the third
General Council meeting, the committee meetings is one thing,
that’s fine, but General Council is where all the full decisions
and it’s really important that all of us as a council make an effort to
actually comply with what our public elected
us to do and that is to come in
here to deliberate, participate in discussions, come up with a solution that
better serves our community
and they haven’t done that and I’m not
too sure why. So I look, I don’t want to harp on about it because you just
every council meeting seems to take up a lot of time on topics similar to this.
But I do request that you write to both of them and
seek a formal response as to
why they’ve not turned up for the last three council meetings and that
that response is returned
to council so we can consider it moving
I whole fully support this motion having the 100% attendance rate for the last
term I’m actually pretty upset about
the attendance rate for some
councillors for this term. Being an elected member is there to represent your
community and I’ve
we’ve mentioned this on multiple occasions that
it doesn’t seem like the two wards are actually being represented
Now I’m happy to pick up the slack and I know
councillors are happy to pick up the slack
at the moment. But these two
wards deserve representation from both councillors and I’m happy to
support this motion 100%”.
It’s disappointing that we’re at this stage where we’re having
to obviously take some serious such serious
measures. But I think it’s
important that we do give these two councillors an opportunity to provide an
explanation and certainly
be able to inform the council of some of the things
they’ve been up to. And certainly some of the reasons that’s why
they’ve been able to unable to sort of I suppose participate in what we
consider traditional council functions. But I’m
much rather actually like
to speak at this meeting and just like to thank [Cr CB] and [Cr DH] for the hard
work they’ve been
doing over these last couple of months. Certainly this
term. I’ve been lucky enough to know those [Cr DH] and [Cr CB] during
last term of council and know they’re hard workers. But I know
particularly very recently they’ve been extremely hard workers they have
had to pick up the slack
, they have had to dig that little bit deeper and we
all know that councillors rewarding role. It’s a time consuming role. ...
So I’d certainly like to just emphasize my thanks to [Cr CB] and [Cr DH]
for their continued efforts in in making sure that
Central Ward and North Ward
receive a degree of representation that they deserve. I’m certainly
looking forward to hearing
what response we might
We are all very busy people. We all have lives and we all came onto this
together for I thought we did for the better.
As everyone around the table knows
and maybe members of the gallery might not know but I’m a shift worker and
I work at night.
I work until 11:30 sometimes, quite well beyond depending the
overtime I would get. And I know I’ve been an apology a few times
couple of committee meetings. I’ve never missed a general council meeting.
It’s a commitment that I made when I
when I put myself up for nomination
for election that I will make myself available and I think it’s this
particular motion,
I think, and we all talk about it every week. We know we
notice the empty chairs. ... So I think, I think that report will hopefully
allow them to reflect on their attendance, or should I say lack thereof and
hopefully prompt my colleagues to come and join. Because
l’d love to have
a good working relationship with everyone, like [unclear] everyone is in this
room. Unfortunately, I haven’t
been afford the opportunity to have any
sort of relationship with these others, with Councillor Burner and Councillor
Bawden, just
because they’ve not been here and they’ve not made
themselves available to that. So I’d be interested to see what
this report
brings back”.
requested by the Council, on 23 May 2023 the CEO wrote to the applicants in the
terms suggested. In particular, the applicants
were requested to provide
written explanations for their ongoing failure to attend Council meetings by
12.00pm, 29 May 2023. Neither
applicant responded in that time frame.
special Council meeting was called to take place at 6.30pm on 29 May 2023.
Notice was given to each of the applicants about the
meeting. Without
explanation neither applicant attended.
the special Council meeting it was noted that there had been no explanation from
the applicants about their absences. The Council
determined that it intended to
exercise its power under s 54(1)(d) of the Act to remove the applicants on
the basis of their three
consecutive absences from ordinary Council meetings,
subject to the receipt and consideration of further submissions from the
applicants.
Council requested the Mayor and CEO to write to the applicants seeking a
submission to be made to the Council by Friday, 2 June
2023 as to why the
Council should not exercise its powers under s 54(1)(d) of the Act to
remove them from office as members of the
further special Council meeting was called to take place at 6.30pm on 5 June
2023 to consider any submission made by the applicants
and what further action
should be taken.
30 May 2023, the Mayor and CEO wrote to the applicants, drawing their attention
to what had occurred at the special Council meeting
the evening before. It was
explained that the purpose of the letter was to specifically request a
submission about why the applicants
should not be removed from the Council. The
letter drew attention to the fact that the Council intended to remove the
subject to their response.
the applicants did not respond within the nominated timeframe.
2.15pm on 5 June 2023, agendas for the special meeting to take place that day
were forwarded to the councillors, including the
applicants.
appears to have finally spurred the applicants into action because at 4.44pm, on
the same date, the applicants’ solicitor
emailed a letter to the
solicitors of the Council.
that letter the solicitor
Notwithstanding
that the deadline has passed, Councillors Bawden and Burner each would like to
make submissions in respect of the
special resolution to be considered by the
Council tonight and request an extension of time in which to make those
submissions to
close of business Friday
The letter provided no explanation as to why the applicants had failed to
make any submission prior to this date.
applicants’ solicitor’s letter was considered at the special Council
meeting. After some debate, it was determined
to accommodate the request for
further time. The Deputy Mayor
more than happy to move this motion because I think it’s absolutely
important that given the nature of the decision
that Council is going to be
asked to consider tonight as a result of a unanimous motion at the last Council
meeting. Giving consideration
to any action in relation to
Section 54(1)(d)
Local Government Act
is quite a serious matter and it shouldn’t be
done lightly and I think as democratically elected members it is incumbent on
to ensure that someone who is democratically elected to public office has every
opportunity and right to be afforded procedural
fairness. It should be noted as
part of the motion that I put forward tonight that Council has provided
procedural fairness on more
than one occasion now. And we are actually going
even further Madam Mayor. Although the request for an extension certainly was
of the previous time that we allowed a response for, it’s only
fair that given that we have received a response albeit at the
hour that we afford the individual member the opportunity to provide that
response. ...
9 June 2023, the applicants’ solicitor provided their submissions. Common
to both sets of submissions were the following
explanations:
They had limited
experience as councillors and the motions had arisen relatively early in their
They were then
the subject of a number of complaint investigations;
Fellow elected
members had made comments within Council meetings and to the media concerning
their conduct as councillors (no particulars
were given);
Concerns and
consequences from perceptions of bullying and associated anxieties are well
previously identified “the toll” of the present environment (no
particulars given);
The Mayor and
the CEO should have inferred that “the issues” would have been
exacerbated by attendance at various meetings;
“entirely unreasonable and inappropriate” to expect them to attend
the relevant meetings and it would have been
detrimental to their health;
The substance of
Council business at those meetings made their attendance inappropriate; and
The Council
should “move past childish taunting and bullying over differences in
ideology and expression”.
addition to this, Ms Bawden raised:
She had never
received advice on how to apply for leave due to email issues; and
She had medical
certificates for the 27 March 2023 and 24 April 2023 meetings and consequently
the Council was obliged to grant leave
of absence for those dates.
letter addressed the applicants’ failure to provide the apologies as
required by the Council, nor to failing to undertake
the training that the
Council had also required. The letters demonstrated no contrition and did not
suggest that the applicants
would moderate their conduct such as to comply with
the Behavioural Standards for Council Members (‘Behavioural
Standards’)
in the future. Each of the applicants continued to portray
themselves as the victims and failed to take responsibility for their
special Council meeting was held at 6.30pm on 13 June 2023. The
applicants’ responses were attached to the agenda and circulated
advance of the meeting.
agenda contained two items. These were the “Absenteeism Cr Severina
Burner” and “Absenteeism Cr Grace Bawden”.
comprised of two parts, the second being confidential. At the outset of the
agenda there was a discussion about the
need for confidentiality. It stated
that pursuant to s 83(5) of the Act, the CEO had indicated that if the
Council so determined,
the agenda items could be considered in confidence. It
was determined that the meeting would be conducted in private on the basis
the principle that the meeting should ordinarily be conducted in a place open
to the public, had been outweighed because the
meeting “relates to
information the disclosure of which would involve the unreasonable disclosure of
information concerning
the personal affairs of any person (living or
is of note that the agenda was lengthy and set out a very detailed history of
the events that had led up to that point, including
the applicants’
explanations for what had taken place.
agenda recommended that one of two options be adopted. These were that the
applicants be reminded “of the importance of
attending Council meetings as
a member of the governing body of the Council and in order to represent
residents, businesses and ratepayers
of the City of Salisbury” (option 1);
or to remove the applicants from office under s 54(1)(d) of the Act with
immediate effect
(option 2).
to the commencement of the meeting there was some informal discussion between
members of the Council and others present. The
content of some of those
conversations is a central limb of the applicants’ apprehended bias
meeting and the informal premeeting conversations were recorded. Only audio is
available for about the first 13 minutes of the
premeeting. From that point,
there is also video footage available. I have been provided with a copy of that
recording as well
as transcripts.
video component commences during the informal conversations and continues to the
end of the formal proceedings.
made the following observations about what occurred during both the informal and
formal components of the meeting that took place
on 13 June 2023:
recording commences with indistinct chatter. It is not clear how many people
are present or who they are.
footsteps can be heard to suggest the arrival of others.
everyday social exchanges take place about innocuous matters, like what people
did over the weekend.
There is some
light-hearted banter of the type to be expected amongst people known to each
video commences:
Only a small
portion of the room is captured on the video, showing six to eight people at any
given time.
To the left of
the screen is a bench at which various Council staff members are seated. The
Deputy Mayor is also seated at this table,
although is generally out of vision.
The talking that can be heard on the audio recording continues once the video
camera is turned
on and, at that point, it is evident that those engaged in
those conversations are seated at the staff table.
second bench, at right angles with the staff bench, running across the screen.
It is agreed that this is the bench at
which councillors were seated, although
only two can be seen in the footage. There is no informal conversation taking
or coming from, that bench. The mood appears sombre and one of the
councillors appears to be engrossed in the paperwork in front
of her. Prior to
the commencement of the formal meeting, there appears to be no interactions
between the councillors except when
one is brought a drink.
commencement of the formal proceedings, the mood turns more serious and there is
no further joking or banter.
is no dispute that the meeting was over very quickly and there was no
substantive debate on the motion to remove the applicants,
which was carried
unanimously.
Legislative context –
Local Government Act
are a number of sections of the Act that are relevant to a consideration of the
disposition of these applications.
central is s 54(1)(d). Section 54 – “Casual vacancies”
provides for circumstances in which the office of
a member of a council becomes
vacant. It was s 54(1)(d) that the respondent relied upon, which allows
for the removal of a member
of council “on the ground that he or she has
been absent, without leave of the council, from three or more consecutive
meetings of the council”.
further section of the Act that has a particular relevance to an assessment of
the competing arguments is s 75B – “Dealing
with general
conflicts of interest”. Subdivision 4 of the Act sets out a regime to
deal with the issue of conflicts of interest
arising for Council members. It
does so by dividing conflicts of interest into “general conflicts”
and “material
conflicts”. A material conflict of interest involves
a benefit or loss to a Council member or identified related entity due
outcome of a matter considered by the Council. There is no suggestion that any
material conflict of interest arose on the
facts of this case.
issue was one of general conflicts of interests. There is no dispute that a
number of the Council members developed a general
conflict of interest in
relation to decisions about Ms Bawden and/or Ms Burner over the course of the
relevant events. Section 74(1)
of the Act provides that:
member of a council has a general conflict of interest in a matter to be
discussed at a meeting of the council if an impartial,
fair-minded person might
consider that the member’s private interests might result in the member
acting in a manner that is
contrary to their public duty.
“private interest” is defined as “any direct or indirect
interest of a member that does not derive from their
public duty and does not
include an interest that is only a matter of personal opinion or
duty” is defined as “the responsibilities and obligations that a
member has to members of the public
in their role as a
75B sets out the manner in which a council member must conduct themselves in the
event that they believe that they have a
general conflict of interest. It
75B—Dealing with general conflicts of
(1) If a member of a council has a general conflict of interest in relation
to a matter to be discussed at a meeting of the council,
the member must deal
with the interest in a transparent and accountable way and, in particular, must
inform the meeting of—
(a) the member’s interest in the matter; and
(b) whether or not the member proposes to participate in the meeting in relation
to the matter; and
(c) if the member proposes to participate in the meeting in relation to the
(i) how the member intends to deal with the general conflict of interest,
including whether the member intends to vote on the matter;
(ii) the member’s reasons for participating (and, if relevant, voting) in
relation to the matter.
(2) If a quorum at a meeting cannot be formed because a member of a council
proposes to exclude themself from the meeting in order
to comply with subsection
(1), the member will not be taken to have contravened subsection (1) by
participating (including by voting,
for example) in the meeting in relation to
the matter if the attendance of the member, together with any other required
members, forms a quorum for the meeting.
(3) If a member of a council discloses a general conflict of interest in a
matter to be discussed at a meeting of the council, the
following details must
be recorded in the minutes of the meeting:
(a) the member’s name;
(b) the nature of the interest, as described by the member;
(c) the manner in which the member dealt with the general conflict of
(d) if the member voted on the matter, the manner in which the member voted;
(e) the manner in which the majority of persons who were entitled to vote at the
meeting voted on the matter.
To avoid doubt, it is declared that non-participation in a meeting of
a council is not the only way in which a member of the council
may appropriately
deal in a transparent and accountable way with a general conflict of interest of
the member in a matter to be discussed
at the meeting.
(Emphasis added)
is to be observed that this section appears to endeavour to strike a balance
between transparency and pragmatism, and certainly
does not suggest that in
circumstances of a general conflict the relevant council member should absent
themselves from the room.
To the contrary, it is envisaged that council members
with a general conflict may remain in the room and participate in the meeting.
addition to the “removal” and “conflict” sections of the
Act, there are a number of other, more general
sections which relate to the
power and purpose of a council and its members, which sit as a backdrop to these
particular sections.
6 of the Act sets out the “Principal role of a
A council is, under the system of local government
established by this Act, established to provide for the government and
of its area at the local level and, in particular—
(a) to act as a representative, informed and responsible decision-maker in the
interests of its community; and
(b) to provide and co-ordinate various public services and facilities and to
develop its community and resources in a socially just
and ecologically
sustainable manner; and
(c) to encourage and develop initiatives within its community for improving the
quality of life of the community; and
(d) to represent the interests of its community to the wider community; and (e)
to exercise, perform and discharge the powers, functions
and duties of local
government under this and other Acts in relation to the area for which it is
constituted.
59 of the Act specifies the “Roles of members of
(1) The role of a member of a council is—
(a) as a member of the governing body of the council—
(i) to act with integrity; and
(ii) to ensure positive and constructive working relationships within the
council; and
(iii) to recognise and support the role of the principal member under the Act;
(iv) to develop skills relevant to the role of a member of the council and the
functions of the council as a body; and
(v) to participate in the deliberations and activities of the council;
(vi) to keep the council’s objectives and policies under review to ensure
that they are appropriate and effective; and
(vii) to keep the council’s resource allocation, expenditure and
activities, and the efficiency and effectiveness of its service
delivery, under
review; and
(viii) to ensure, as far as is practicable, that the principles set out in
section 8 are observed; and
(ix) to participate in the oversight of the chief executive officer’s
performance under the council’s contract with the
chief executive officer;
(x) to serve the overall public interest; and
(b) as a person elected to the council—to represent the interests of
residents and ratepayers of the council, to provide community
leadership and
guidance, and to facilitate communication between the community and the council.
(2) A member of a council may, with the principal member’s authorisation,
act in place of, or represent, the principal member.
(3) A member of a council has no direct authority over an employee of the
council with respect to the way in which the employee performs
(Emphasis added)
75E – “Behavioural standards” enables the Minister to
establish behavioural standards for council members.
Section 75E(3) requires a
member of the council to comply with the behavioural standards set by the
Minister. It was some of these
behavioural standards that it was alleged that
the applicants had breached.
Grounds of review
applicants rely on a number of grounds. These are apprehended bias, improper
exercise of power and legal unreasonableness, wrong
question and/or wrong issue
and/or misunderstanding of the law, failure to give proper, genuine and
realistic consideration to the
merits, and an absence of procedural
the applicants maintain each of the grounds of review, as this matter has
progressed the focus has in large part settled
on the issue of apprehended bias.
For that reason I will first consider whether this ground has been established
before considering
the others.
Apprehended bias
is the applicants’ contention that there are a number of aspects of the
respondent’s conduct which support a conclusion
that a fair-minded lay
observer, properly informed of all relevant facts, might reasonably apprehend
that the Council might not approach
the exercise of power with a mind open to
persuasion. These are:
attitude demonstrated towards the applicants at the 22 May 2023 meeting, by
statements made by councillors, demonstrating a “slant
or a leaning”
against the applicants.
tone and manner in which the councillors conducted themselves before and during
the meeting on 13 June 2023.
made by individual councillors before the 13 June 2023 meeting.
each of the relevant motions involving the applicants were considered in
confidence.
number of conflicts declared by the councillors at the meeting on 13 June 2023,
coupled with the fact that unlike on previous
occasions, despite the conflicts,
they remained in the room and voted.
is well settled that the test for apprehended bias is whether a fair-minded lay
observer might reasonably apprehend that the decision
maker might not bring an
impartial mind to the resolution of the issues to be decided.
the High Court explained in Ebner v Official Trustee in
Bankruptcy:
principle gives effect to the requirement that justice should both be done and
seen to be done, a requirement which reflects
the fundamental importance of the
principle that the tribunal be independent and impartial. It is convenient to
refer to it as the
apprehension of bias principle.
The apprehension of bias principle may be thought to find its justification
in the importance of the basic principle, that the tribunal
be independent and
impartial. So important is the principle that even the appearance of departure
from it is prohibited lest the
integrity of the judicial system be undermined.
There are, however, some other aspects of the apprehension of bias principle
should be recognised. Deciding whether a judicial officer (or juror)
might not bring an impartial mind to the resolution of a question
that has not
been determined requires no prediction about how the judge or juror will in fact
approach the matter. The question
is one of possibility (real and not remote),
not probability. Similarly, if the matter has already been decided, the test is
which requires no conclusion about what factors actually influenced the
outcome. No attempt need be made to inquire into the actual
thought processes
of the judge or juror.
application of the criterion was identified to involve a three step process that
has been reiterated in the most recent High
Court exposition of the principles
applying to a consideration of the question of apprehended bias in
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural
... (1) identification of the factor which it is said
might lead a judge to resolve the question other than on its legal and factual
merits; (2) articulation of the logical connection between that factor and the
apprehended deviation from deciding that question
on its merits; and (3)
assessment of the reasonableness of that apprehension from the perspective of a
fair minded lay observer.
their joint judgment, Kiefel CJ and Gageler J emphasised the importance of the
analysis being undertaken from the perspective
of a lay person. They
undertaking that assessment, “it is the court’s view of the
public’s view, not the court’s own view which
determinative”. The hypothetical fair-minded lay observer is a deliberate
and necessary construct which tethers the court’s
analysis to the ultimate
purpose of maintaining public confidence in the impartiality of the judicial
system. The construct provides
the “standard by which the courts address
what may appear to the public served by the courts to be a departure from
of impartiality and independence which are essential to the
maintenance of public confidence in the judicial system”.
(Footnotes omitted)
is important to note, in the context of the issues arising on this application,
that prejudgment or a closed mind is not the absence
of a blank mind or a
neutral mind. The concept of a decision maker approaching their task with
predisposition to a certain position
was discussed by Gleeson CJ and Gummow J in
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Jia Legeng
Decision-makers, including judicial decision-makers, sometimes approach their
task with a tendency of mind, or predisposition,
sometimes one that has been
publicly expressed, without being accused or suspected of bias. The
question is not whether a decision-maker’s
mind is blank; it is whether it
is open to persuasion. The fact that, in the case of judges, it may be easier to
persuade one judge
of a proposition than it is to persuade another does not mean
that either of them is affected by bias.
... The state of mind described as bias in the form of prejudgment is one so
committed to a conclusion already formed as to be incapable
of alteration,
whatever evidence or arguments may be presented. Natural justice does not
require the absence of any predisposition
or inclination for or against an
argument or conclusion. ...
(Footnotes omitted)
the test for apprehended bias was formulated in the context of judicial
decision-making, it remains applicable to administrative
In an administrative
context or quasi-judicial tribunal, however the test for apprehended bias is
less exacting than when applied
discussed the rationale behind this difference in approach:
in this country make decisions by procedures that are both formal and
adversarial. They do so by the application of rules for
decision-making which,
although not always defined with absolute certainty, are generally discernible
before the contest is joined
and are set by legislative or judicial processes
which are external to the judge. The process of adjudication is generally
in open court. The judge must give reasons for the decision that is
Importantly, the rules about judicial prejudgment recognise that, subject to
questions of judicial notice, judges, unlike administrators,
must act only on
the evidence adduced by the parties and must not act upon information acquired
otherwise. No less importantly, the
rules about judicial prejudgment proceed
from the fundamental requirement that the judge is neutral. That requirement for
is buttressed by constitutional and statutory safeguards. Those
safeguards include not only the provisions for security of terms
of office and
remuneration but also extend to statutory provisions prohibiting interference
with the course of justice. A judge
can have no stake of any kind in the
outcome of the dispute. The judge must not “[descend] into the arena and
... have his
vision clouded by the dust of the conflict”. The central task
and, it may be said, the only loyalty, of the judge is to do
justice according
Decisions outside the courts are not attended by these features. Reference
need only be made to a body like the Refugee Review Tribunal
established under
Pt 7, Div 9 of the
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) to show that this is so. The
procedures for decision-making by that body are much less formal than those of a
court. There
is no provision for any contradictor and the procedures are,
therefore, not adversarial. The decision-maker has little security of
and, at least to that extent, may be thought to have some real stake in the
outcome. The decision-maker, in a body like the
Refugee Review Tribunal, will
bring to the task of deciding an individual’s application a great deal of
information and ideas
which have been accumulated or formed in the course of
deciding other applications. A body like the Refugee Review Tribunal, unlike
court, is expected to build up “expertise” in matters such as
country information. Often information of that kind is
critical in deciding the
fate of an individual’s application, but it is not suggested that to take
it into account amounts
to a want of procedural fairness by reason of
prejudgment.
The analogy with curial processes becomes even less apposite as the nature of
the decision-making process, and the identity of the
decision-maker, diverges
further from the judicial paradigm. It is trite to say that the content of the
rules of procedural fairness
must be “appropriate and adapted to the
circumstances of the particular case”. What is appropriate when decision
disputed question is committed to a tribunal whose statutorily defined
processes have some or all of the features of a court will
differ from what is
appropriate when the decision is committed to an investigating body. Ministerial
decision-making is different
Consideration
of the statutory framework is central, as is the identification of the task of
the decision-maker. In
, Hayne J illustrated the point
with a comparison of the role of a judge with other tribunals. His Honour
In the case of
a court, it will usually be self-evident that the issue, if an issue of fact, is
one which ought to be considered afresh
for the purposes of the particular case
by reference only to the evidence advanced in that case. Other decision-makers,
may be under no constraint about taking account of some opinion formed
or fact discovered in the course of some other decision. Indeed,
already pointed out, the notion of an “expert” tribunal assumes that
this will be done. Conferring power on
a Minister may well indicate that a
particularly wide range of factors and sources of information may be taken into
account, given
the types of influence to which Ministers are legitimately
subject. It is critical, then, to understand that assessing how rules
bias, or apprehension of bias, are engaged depends upon identification of the
task which is committed to the decision-maker.
The application of the rules
requires consideration of how the decision-maker may properly go about his or
her task and what kind
or degree of neutrality (if any) is to be expected of the
decision-maker.
Hayne went on to explain how the nature of the decision to be made impacts on a
consideration of the scope of a complaint
of apprehended
recognised that there are elements of the decision-making process about which a
decision-maker may legitimately form and
hold views before coming to consider
the exercise of a power in a particular case, it is evident that the area within
which questions
of actual or apprehended bias by prejudgment may arise is
reduced accordingly. ...
the instant circumstances, ch 5,
, div 1, sub-div 4 of the Act modifies
the complexion of apprehended bias by, necessarily, removing the possibility of
drawing adverse
inferences when councillors declare general conflicts and then,
in accordance with s 74B participate in the meeting.
McGovern v Ku-ring-gai Council
the New South Wales Court of Appeal was required to consider the question of
apprehended bias in the context of a decision made by
a council. In that case,
a council approved an application for consent to further develop a residential
property, over the objection
of the applicants’ neighbours. Prior to
voting on the matter, two councillors had come to the view that the application
be approved and they had expressed that view in strong terms on more than
one occasion.
was “how the [apprehended bias] test operates in
relation to a local government authority, constituted by elected councillors,
which has a diversity of functions including the broadly political (see
Government Act 1993
and those of an administrative decision-maker
granting authority for specific developments, in accordance with statutory
as in the present
was considered by Spigelman CJ to be of particular significance that the
relevant statutory power was vested in a democratically
elected council,
exercising a discretionary power expressed in broad terms to which multiple
considerations applied and in respect
of which there might be a range of
permissible opinions. At a practical level, it is also to be expected that a
person in the position
of a councillor will form opinions and may express them
before voting takes place.
Basten JA observed, considering
can be no doubt that the position of councillors sitting on a local government
authority are far removed in the exercise of
their functions from a judicial
paradigm. In those circumstances, a significant degree of care must be taken in
applying a test,
the language of which is deemed appropriate both in respect of
courts and in respect of elected administrative decision-makers.
JA suggested that in considering the issue of apprehended bias in the context of
a decision by members of a
real question is what, with the appropriate level of appreciation of the
institution, the fair-minded observer would expect
of a councillor dealing with
a development application. The institutional setting being quite different from
that of a court, the
fair-minded observer will expect little more than an
absence of personal interest in the decision and a willingness to give genuine
and appropriate consideration to the application, the matters required by law to
be taken into account and any recommendation of
council officers.
was observed in
it would be
unrealistic to expect a political decision‑maker to modify his or her
behaviour in order to conform to higher standards
than required by his or her
decision-makers are elected to represent the community and in the case of a
council member, their constituency. It is
those interests that are to be put
first. It necessarily follows that they are expected to hold and state views
firmly and, on occasion,
emphatically. Those views may be adverse to a person
seeking a favourable outcome. This alone cannot give rise to an apprehended
considering each of the complaints made by the applicants that are said to form
the basis of apprehended bias in this case,
I make some observations about the
attributes of a hypothetical fair‑minded observer.
hypothetical fair‑minded observer assessing possible bias is to be taken
to be aware of the nature of the decision and
the context in which it was
as well as to have
knowledge of the circumstances leading up to the
The observer is
assumed to have knowledge of the relevant legal framework, the identity and
nature of the decision‑maker,
the nature of the decision and issues in
question, the relevant facts and circumstances leading to the decision and the
observer is necessarily
and neither
complacent or unduly sensitive or
suspicious.
finding of apprehended bias is not to be reached lightly; it must be firmly
established.
An allegation of
apprehended bias against an administrative officer must be distinctly made and
clearly proved.
A vague sense
of unease or disquiet is
insufficient.
1. Statements
made by councillors at the 22 May 2023 meeting that demonstrated a “slant
or leaning” against the applicants
comments relied on in support of this contention are the highlighted portions of
the transcript from the meeting of 22 May 2023,
set out at [67].
is important that these comments are not considered in a vacuum, but in the
context of the events that had led up to the meeting,
what took place at the
meeting and what occurred afterwards prior to the decision to remove the
applicants. The fair‑minded
lay observer would be in possession of all of
this history.
have already set out in some detail the tumultuous events that led up to the 22
May 2023 meeting. I do not propose to repeat them,
other than to make the
observation that regardless of who was in the right and who was in the wrong,
the conflict between the applicants
and the other Council members had dominated
Council business and that state of affairs was no doubt contrary to the best
of the community. Council meetings are the forum at which decisions
are made by the Council. To be a member of the Council involves
attending and
participating at those meetings. The importance of doing so is reflected in
s 54(d) of the Act. As a matter of fact,
the applicants had failed to
attend three consecutive meetings, having been disruptive at earlier
such circumstances it is unsurprising that a degree of frustration was
developing amongst some members of the Council. It would
have been unnatural
for that not to have occurred. Such a common and expected human reaction could
not be a basis for drawing an
inference that a month later, when the motion was
moved to remove the applicants, that members of the Council had a closed
said that, when the impugned comments are considered in context, they were in
fact a temperate response to how events were
1. “...Councillor [CB’s] ward and
Councillor [DH’s] ward, which my understanding is not being very well
represented...”
first observation to be made about this comment is that it was made by Cr AG who
was not present at the meeting on 13 June 2023.
statement is factually correct, in that by failing to attend three meetings, the
applicants’ wards were not being well
represented. Cr AG made it plain
that he was expressing a personal view to the effect that the applicants were
neglecting an important
part of their roles in failing to attend and represent
their constituency.
Critically,
however, the relevant passage ends with a request by Cr AG that the Mayor and
the CEO write to the applicants to obtain
their reasons for not attending. He
concludes by saying that when the response is received, the Council can consider
it and move
forward. This is hardly suggestive of a closed
2. “... it doesn’t seem like the two wards
are actually being represented 100%. ... other councillors are happy to pick
the slack...”
the councillor who made this comment, Cr KG was at the meeting on 13 June 2023,
the observations that I have made about the
previous impugned comment (1), are
equally applicable to what was said by Cr KG.
it should be noted that the motion that followed this debate was to write to the
applicants to seek their explanation.
particularly very recently ... they have had to pick up the
broader context in which this comment was made is important. Prior to the
passage relied upon by the applicants, Cr PJ emphasised
the importance of giving
the applicants an opportunity to put their version of events before the Council.
The choice of words used
by Cr PJ reflects an absence of judgement of the
applicants. He spoke in terms of them being “unable” to
participate.
Cr PJ was in no way critical of the applicants and chose to focus
instead on commending the extra efforts that other members of
the Council had
made in their absence.
4. “We are all very busy
people. We all have lives and we all came onto this together for I thought we
did for the better.
As everyone around the table knows and maybe members of the
gallery might not know but I’m a shift worker and I work at night.
until 11:30 sometimes, quite well beyond depending the overtime I would get.
And I know I’ve been an apology a few
times to a couple of committee
meetings. I’ve never missed a general council meeting. It’s a
commitment that I made
when I when I put myself up for nomination for election
that I will make myself available and I think it’s this particular
I think, and we all talk about it every week. We know we notice the empty
chairs. ... So I think, I think that report will
hopefully allow them to
reflect on their attendance, or should I say lack thereof and hopefully prompt
my colleagues to come and
join. Because l’d love to have a good working
relationship with everyone, like [unclear] everyone is in this room.
Unfortunately,
I haven’t been afford the opportunity to have any sort of
relationship with these others, with Councillor Burner and Councillor
just because they’ve not been here and they’ve not made themselves
available to that. So I’d be interested
to see what this report brings
was said by the applicants that this statement reflects a degree of frustration
on the part of Cr AG about the unfair distribution
again make the observation that Cr AG was not at the meeting on 13 June
2023 and did not participate in the vote to remove the
applicants.
I accept that this passage may reflect a degree of frustration, it is
frustration that would be readily understandable to
a reasonable observer, armed
with the knowledge of the events that had led up to this point.
frustration is, however, tempered by an apparent decision to move forward in the
hope of the applicants taking up a meaningful
role in the Council. Cr AG spoke
of the applicants being afforded an opportunity to reflect on their attendance
and of being desirous
of having a good working relationship with them.
Individually,
or in combination, there is nothing that was said during the meeting that took
place on 22 May 2023 that may lead a
fair-minded lay observer to find that the
members of the Council who moved the motion on 13 June 2023 may not have done so
impartial mind.
is even more so when the time frame and context in which these comments were
made, is considered
the date of the motion to remove the
applicants. The comments were made almost a month earlier and resulted in a
request for the
applicants to explain their absences. Subsequent to this, there
were further meetings and written communications. It would be to
draw a very
long bow to suggest that these passing remarks created an impression of bias
when considering the events of 13 June 2023.
2. The tone and
manner in which the councillors conducted themselves before and during the
meeting on 13 June 2023
I have said, I have listened to and viewed the recording of the meeting that
took place on 13 June 2023. I have set out my observations
do not accept the applicants’ counsel’s characterisation of the
meeting as involving a “concerning...sense of
jocularity”.
the contrary, whilst at times, prior to the formal meeting, there was a
“lightness” to some of the conversation, involving
a degree of
social banter, that was not universal for all of those present. However, when
the formal proceedings commenced, the
mood changed and to my observation became
appropriately professional and business like.
would be an extreme case in which it could be inferred from laughter that
Council members may not have brought an impartial mind
to bear, given the myriad
of reasons for why someone may laugh.
circumstances of this meeting fall a long way short of that, and in my view
there is no factual basis for this submission.
3. Remarks made by
individual councillors before 13 June 2023 meeting
is the applicants’ contention that there were some exchanges that took
place between members of the Council during informal
conversations prior to the
commencement of the formal proceedings on 13 June 2023 that suggest that some of
those present had a closed
mind to the matters on the agenda. It was submitted
that these comments demonstrate a failure by the relevant councillors to fairly
consider the materials provided to them, in such a way that it would create the
apprehension of bias in the fair-minded lay observer.
are a number of problems with this submission, however before coming to these
issues, I note that as a starting point it is
necessary for the applicants to
establish that it was members of the Council who made the relevant comments as
opposed to the various
members of the Council staff who were present. In my
view they fail at this first hurdle.
have been provided with a transcript that is said to reflect some of the
conversation that can be heard on the audio recording
commencing at about 06.18
into the meeting.
set that transcript out in full:
MALE 1: Mate, that report took me forever to write-
MALE 2: Yeah, I know-
MALE 1: Ahhhm, I started on, like, Friday afternoon, so that’s like
pretty much a whole day
MALE 1: It’s a good report isn’t it?
MALE 3: Yeah, and within, like, 48 hours
through this one
[YES] that I’m not 100% certain of-
MALE 4: Gotta read the report
MALE 3: -and I’ll get back to you (unclear), thank you very much for
last weekend.
MALE 5: Unless you don’t want to be bothered reading it, and just see
what the two options are.
MALE 5: Skip to the end
FEMALE 1: Just look at the option and-
MALE 4: Read the preamble or read the choices
FEMALE 2: Oh God
for the respondent does not accept that the transcript fairly or entirely
reflects what can be heard on the recording; it
is at least incomplete.
have listened to the recording a number of times, using the transcript as an
aide memoire. I have noted that the words recorded
on the transcript can be
heard on the recording, although there are clearly other undecipherable words
being spoken in the background.
Whilst the transcript attributes certain
comments to Male 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, and Female 1 and 2, I am not confident that
is an accurate
reflection as to who said what.
have previously set out my observations of what can be seen once the video
camera was turned on. Based on the uninterrupted nature
of the conversation and
what can be seen on the video, in my view the only logical inference is that the
comments recorded in the
transcript were made by Council staff and not
councillors. It is the council staff who are seen to be animated and talking
themselves when the video commences. That inference is further
supported by the fact that it would have been a member of staff and
councillor who would have been responsible for drafting the report. It would be
anticipated that members of the Council staff
would have copies of the agenda
and relevant documents available to them at the meeting.
on the evidence before me, the applicants have not established that any of the
relevant remarks relied upon were even heard
by members of the Council and in
all likelihood they were made by members of the staff seated in a separate area.
all of the circumstances, there is no need to consider any of the competing
submissions made about these comments any further.
the relevant motions involving the applicants were considered in
public were in attendance during the premeeting on 13 June 2023. The first item
on the agenda under the heading “Orders
to exclude the public” were
recommendations that the Council consider proceedings in confidence for the
motions in relation
to the applicants. It reads as
C1 Absenteeism
Cr Severina Burner
Recommendation
Pursuant to
section 83(5)
Local Government Act 1999
Executive Officer has indicated that, if Council so determines, this matter may
be considered in confidence under
Local Government Act 1999
on grounds that:
Section 90(2)
and (3)(a) of the
Local Government Act 1999
, the principle that
the meeting should be conducted in a place open to the public has been
outweighed in relation to this matter
- it relates
to information the disclosure of which would involve the unreasonable disclosure
of information concerning the personal
affairs of any person (living or
weighing up the factors related to disclosure,
- disclosure
of this matter to the public would demonstrate accountability and transparency
of the Council’s operations
- Personal Affairs of the person would be implicated
On that basis the public’s interest is best served by not disclosing
Absenteeism Cr Severina Burner
item and discussion at this point in
Section 90(2)
Local Government Act 1999
it is recommended the Council
orders that all members of the public, except staff of the City of Salisbury on
duty in attendance,
be excluded from attendance at the meeting for this Agenda
the outset of the meeting, after the Welcome to Country, the prayer and
apologies, the Deputy Mayor raised that there were only
two agenda items and
that there were proposed orders to exclude the public whilst those items were
being debated. The motions to
exclude the public were moved and the remainder
of the meeting was held in confidence.
applicants’ contention about the exclusion of the public is twofold. The
first was founded on a misunderstanding of what
in fact occurred. It was the
applicants’ submission that the disinhibited jocular behaviour was
inconsistent with how the
Council members would have behaved, had the
proceedings taken place in public and that this in some way founds a submission
of apprehended
bias. This submission is factually flawed at a number of levels.
As I have found, there was nothing untoward about the level and
timing of the
jocularity at the meeting. Also, it was Council staff who were engaged in these
conversations. Finally, the public
were in fact in attendance for that portion
of proceedings.
second aspect to this submission appears to be a suggestion that there was
something untoward, or something to be kept secret
at the meeting that founded a
desire for these events to take place in private. Again, the submission is
without factual foundation.
There was a proper basis to conduct this meeting in
confidence, given the particular sensitivities of the situation. Further, a
review of the transcript of the proceedings after the public were requested to
leave, demonstrates nothing untoward or sinister took
place, such that the
Council would be concerned about it becoming public knowledge.
is no merit to the complaint about the proceedings taking place in
confidence.
5. The number of conflicts declared by the
councillors at the meeting on 13 June 2023, coupled with the fact that unlike on
occasions, despite the conflict, they remained in the room
the outset of the first motion (to remove Ms Burner) a general conflict of
interest was declared by Cr KG, Cr BB, Cr LB and Cr
SM. Each councillor
explained that the conflict arose from being involved in the complaints process
and that, whilst they would
remain in the meeting and vote in the best interest
of the community, they would not participate in the debate.
when it came to the motion for the removal of Ms Bawden, Cr PJ, Cr LB, Cr BB and
Cr KG declared a general conflict of
interest as a result of having been
involved in the previous complaints process. They adopted the same approach as
had been undertaken
in relation to Ms Burner, which was to remain in the room
and vote in the best interest of the community, however they indicated
would refrain from participating in the debate.
was contended by the applicants that for councillors who had openly declared a
general conflict of interest, to remain in the
room and participate in the vote,
may lead a fair-minded lay person to reasonably apprehend that the Council,
particularly those
who had declared a conflict, might make a decision based on
considerations, other than on the legal and factual merits.
was said to be particularly so when contrasted against the approach that had
been taken on votes at previous meetings involving
allegations about the
applicants’ conduct. On those occasions, when conflicts were declared,
the relevant councillors had
absented themselves from the room for the debate
was submitted that the situation in relation to Cr KG was all the more extreme
because she went on to move the motion for the
removal of the applicants.
there is a superficial appeal to this argument, upon closer scrutiny of
s 74 of the Act and, what had occurred at previous
meetings and on this
occasion, the argument falls away.
the 13 June 2023 meeting the matter under consideration was the exercise of the
power to remove the applicants using the power
under s 54(1)(d) of the Act.
That was distinct from the focus of motions that took place in relation to the
applicants at earlier
meetings. On previous occasions the subject of the debate
had been complaints made by members of the public and other councillors
contraventions of the Local Government Code of Conduct and what action should be
taken in response to those complaints. In
those circumstances, understandably,
it was untenable for a councillor who had been involved in making a complaint to
stand in judgement
of the merits or outcome of the complaint. That councillor
would properly be regarded as standing in the role of accuser. Clearly,
would be inappropriate for the councillor who had been involved in making the
complaint to deliberate on whether the complaint
should be upheld, or what the
penalty for the conduct should be. The course that was adopted, with the
relevant councillors declaring
the conflict and absenting themselves from the
room, was an appropriate outcome in those circumstances.
purpose behind the 13 June 2023 meeting was entirely different. It was not part
of the complaint process or an event that followed
from the complaint process.
It was a meeting convened to determine the consequences of the applicants’
failure to attend at
three consecutive ordinary Council meetings. This was a
situation in which no particular councillor was the accuser. It was no
for that reason that each of the councillors who declared a conflict adopted a
different approach; to choose to not leave the
room and to remain to participate
in the vote. Arguably, the decision to declare a conflict was a cautious one,
given the nature
of the matter under debate.
submissions counsel for the respondent suggested that it was likely that this
conservative approach was adopted because the
letter written on behalf of the
applicants, providing their explanation for their failure to attend previous
meetings, contained
allegations of bias. It was submitted that such an
interpretation of the reason for which the councillors came to declare a general
conflict of interest was supported by the fact that at a previous meeting when
the s 54(1)(d) removal had initially been raised,
no one had declared a
of the explanation, I accept the submission that the declaration of conflicts on
13 June 2023 was a conservative and cautious
addition, the conduct of the councillors needs to be considered through the
prism of ss 74 and 75B of the Act. Section 74(1)
defines a general
conflict of interest consistently with the common law. That
...A member of a council has a general conflict of interest in a
matter to be discussed at a meeting of the council if an impartial,
fair-minded
person might consider that the member’s private interests might result in
the member acting in a manner that is
contrary to their public duty.
75B requires a councillor to deal with a general conflict by dealing with the
interest in a transparent and accountable way.
In order to do so, the
counsellor must inform the meeting of the interest, whether or not they propose
to participate in the meeting,
if they choose to participate, the reason for
doing so and then how they intend to deal with the conflict of interest . Each
the relevant councillors complied with these requirements.
75B(4) makes it plain that the Act envisages that there are alternative means by
which to deal with a general conflict other
than non-participation, that will
satisfy the requirement that the conflict be dealt with in “a transparent
and accountable
combined effect of ss 74 and 75B is to make provision for Council members who
have an interest, that satisfies the definition
of a general interest, to make a
declaration and leave it to those members to decide how to best deal with that
interest. It does
not necessarily require non-participation.
plainly follows that making a choice to continue to participate cannot of itself
invalidate a decision. What s 75B(4) explicitly
authorises to occur cannot, of
itself, then give rise to apprehended bias.
submissions, counsel for the applicants focused particular attention on the
conduct of Cr KG, so it is necessary to separately
consider the position that
she adopted at the 13 June 2023 meeting.
the outset of the meeting Cr KG declared a general conflict of interest in
relation to Ms Burner in the following
Chair. Firstly I would like to declare a general conflict of interest in regards
to this matter some guidance in regard
to information forwarded by Cr Burner and
I will deal with that by partaking,
I won’t be raising issues with the
general conflict
that has been raised but I will remain in the room and vote
in accordance to my community. ...
(Emphasis added)
Subsequently
to this, Cr KG moved the motion that option 2 (to remove Ms Burner) be adopted.
That motion was seconded by Cr LB.
The Deputy Mayor then asked Cr KG whether
she wished to speak to the motion. She took up that opportunity and
Yes I do wish
to state that given all of the information that we have received I do note in
there that there’s some discrepancy
between the attended meetings, I would
like it noted that the 27
of March was a, was not attended by Cr
Burner. In fact I believe she is referring to the previous week where she
attended via Teams
to a committee meeting not a full Council meeting. Just in
regards to this, we have given this fair and considerate consideration
matter and I think it’s about time that we being able to move forward.
motion to remove Ms Burner was then moved unanimously.
meeting moved on to consider the second agenda item. Cr KG again declared a
general conflict. This time she
Once again I
will be declaring a general conflict of interest based on the fact that I may
have been a submission of the complaint
against Cr Bawden but I will remain in
the meeting and
only discuss the absenteeism of Council in regards to this
and I will vote in the best guidance of my constituents and I am happy
(Emphasis added)
motion was seconded by anther councillor. Again, the Deputy Mayor asked Cr KG
if she wished to speak to the motion. She
it all speaks for itself noting that the medical certificates that were
provided, it is quite well known that Council members
are not actually
considered employees therefore the certificates are not required. But it all
speaks for itself given all the evidence
motion to remove Ms Bawden was then unanimously moved.
for the applicants was highly critical of the role that Cr KG played during the
meeting, given that she has previously made
a complaint against each of the
applicants. It was
the case of [Cr KG] (who was conflicted, and declared as much) she not only
moved the motion in each case, but despite saying
she would not participate in
the deliberation (with the minutes showing as much), she was the only Councillor
in favour of the motion which was ultimately passed
unanimously in each case. No Councillor present at the meeting spoke against
(Emphasis in the original)
was the applicants’ submission that Cr KG’s conduct at the meeting
was such as to create an apprehension of bias.
do not accept that submission. Again, it is important to look closely at what
was said and done by Cr KG. She herself drew the
distinction between the
complaints that had been made about the applicants and the decision that the
Council was required to make
as a result of the applicants’ failure to
attend three consecutive ordinary Council meetings.
KG did what she had said that she would do, that is, not discuss the complaints
made against the applicants and only discuss their
absences at the meetings.
Whilst Cr KG made a recommendation in support of option 2, I accept the
respondent’s submission
that this was of no moment. There was option 1
and there was option 2, which were effectively two sides of one coin. If option
2 was put forward and refused, it would revert to option 1.
moving of a motion in the circumstances was no more than a catalyst for moving
the meeting forward. It was a mechanism for permitting
consideration of the
motions, which were then declared and carried unanimously.
than that, the entirety of the role of Cr KG was to correct a factual error
and to make the apposite
observation that “... we have given this fair and considerate
consideration on this matter and I think
it’s about time that we being
able to move forward”. There was nothing about Cr KG’s conduct that
created or contributed
to a perception of bias at the 13 June 2023 meeting.
my view, taking into account each of the matters raised by the applicants
individually and in combination, the test for apprehended
bias has not been
Mandatory relevant considerations and relevant
“relevant considerations” ground of judicial review is only
available when a decision maker is bound to take the
omitted factor into
account, in the sense that the legislature intended that a decision made without
taking the matter into account
high point of the applicants’ argument on this ground is based on the New
South Wales Court of Appeal decision of
In that case
the plaintiff was an alderman of a local council who had been removed from the
council on the basis that he had been
absent without the leave of the council
from three consecutive ordinary meetings. On the third occasion the plaintiff
had sent an
apology and two other aldermen then moved that the apology be
accepted and a leave of absence be granted to the plaintiff. At the
instance hearing and on appeal, issues were raised about the meaning of the word
“absent” and the difference between
a “leave of absence”
and an “apology”.
applicants placed reliance on an observation made by Samuels JA on the appeal
and leave of absence. His
Honour said:
have thought that an apology was the necessary prerequisite to having the
question of leave of absence considered. Without
an apology the absence of the
member might very well pass unnoticed or at least without anyone coming forward
as an auxiliary to
propose that leave of absence be granted.
was submitted that the apologies made by the applicants, and the circumstances
in which they were offered, ought to have enlivened
the Council’s mind as
to whether or not leave was being sought. There were three matters that the
applicants argued should
have alerted the Council to consider whether leave of
absence should have been granted. These were the sick certificates provided
Ms Burner and Ms Bawden, the email sent by Ms Bawden to the CEO on behalf of
both applicants, with apologies for the next three
months, and also the
representation made on 8 March 2023 that “we are both seeking instruction
on formally applying for stress
was submitted that the combination of these matters meant “that the
Council was required to turn its attention, as a mandatory
consideration, in respect of each applicant and on each month for which the
request for leave related, to whether leave
should be granted or
do not accept that submission. An apology is a very different concept to leave
of absence. An apology is to ask for forgiveness
for failing to attend when
required; a leave of absence is to obtain dispensation from the requirement to
attend. As Young J, the
judge at first instance in
Ryan v Heiler
There is thus
an essential philosophic distinction between leave of absence, which is a
dispensation from a requirement which might
otherwise exist on the one hand, and
an apology, which is an indication that the obligation that exists has not been
met and a request
for absolution. In particular the proffering of an apology is
only part of the process. It is merely to indicate one’s repentence,
if I can keep the analogy going, absolution is not obtained until the apology is
passage cited at [194] from the judgment of Samuels JA goes no higher than to
suggest that an apology may trigger an application
for leave – which falls
a long way short from mandating that the Council must consider whether to grant
leave of absence whenever
there is an apology. If that were so, it would mean
that on every occasion that a councillor provided an apology for failing to
attend a meeting, the Council would be required to consider whether to grant a
leave of absence.
putting that to one side, there are problems with the factual basis upon which
the applicants rely.
Mrs Burner submitted a sick certificate, it did not cover any of the dates of
the meetings that she failed to attend. Ms
Bawden’s sick certificates
covered two of the meetings, however, provided no more by way of explanation
other than that she
was “unfit for her normal work”. That
explanation was inconsistent with those that she provided to the CEO for failing
to attend. A day after she provided the first sick certificate, Ms Bawden
wrote to the CEO and said, “Apologies for being
a bit late in my reply. I
have had to work extra shifts this
In April, Ms
Bawden provided the second sick certificate, however, sent an email saying,
“Just found out my puppy has broken
his back leg and needs surgery this
afternoon urgently...I won’t be able to attend tonight because of this
unexpected emergency...”.
suggest that, in the face of such highly contradictory explanations, the Council
was required to consider whether the applicants
should be granted leave of
absence is novel and without any legal foundation.
is no merit to this ground.
Improper exercise of power and
legal unreasonableness
speaking, the “test for unreasonableness is necessarily stringent”
and “the courts will not lightly interfere
with the exercise of a
statutory power involving an area of
discretion”.
threshold is “usually
There is “an
area within which the decision-maker has a genuinely free discretion which
resides within the bounds of legal
reasonableness”
Court should not interfere “just because the court would have exercised
the discretion in a different
standard of legal reasonableness does not involve substituting a court’s
view as to how a discretion should be exercised
for that of the
decision‑maker. Legal reasonableness is concerned mostly with the
existence of justification, transparency
and intelligibility within the
decision‑making process. It is also concerned with “whether the
decision falls within
a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are
defensible in respect of the facts and the
These principles
have added force when the discretion conferred by s 54(1)(d) of the Act is so
broad and in unqualified terms.
circumstances such as these, in which there were no reasons provided for the
decision and there is no duty to give reasons, the
Court’s only option is
to look at the outcome to see if it contains an intelligible justification.
support of this ground, the applicants rely on the “jocularity” of
the meeting and the comments that they allege were
made by councillors in the
pre‑meeting. I have already set out my findings on this topic at
[144]-[148]. I do not propose
to repeat them.
is no doubt that to make good this complaint, the applicants have to meet a very
high bar. That is particularly so in circumstances
in which there is
essentially an unfettered public interest discretion reposed in the Council that
has to be exercised for the purposes
of the statute.
was clearly an intelligible basis to arrive at this decision. The
was that when the
applicants had previously attended, they made strident remarks and would not
meaningfully engage with other councillors.
Those extreme remarks were posted
on social media. The applicants were the subject of numerous complaints that
were investigated
with adverse findings made against them. There were Council
resolutions under the Act which required apologies, however, none were
forthcoming. The applicants’ response was to disengage and make broad,
sweeping and non-specific allegations of bullying.
On my review of the minutes
of the Council meetings over the relevant period, the topic of the
applicants’ conduct dominated
the meetings. I would go so far as to say
that their conduct had the potential to bring the Council into disrepute. Not
there no basis to claim that the decision of the Council to remove the
applicants was unreasonable, but rather it is difficult to
see how any contrary
decision could have been arrived at. Their explanation for their failure to
attend at three consecutive council
meetings was entirely unreasonable.
Wrong question and/or wrong issue and/or
misunderstanding
tribunal will fall into jurisdictional error if it identifies a wrong issue,
asks itself the wrong question, ignores relevant material,
relies on irrelevant
material, or, in some circumstances, makes an erroneous finding or reaches a
mistaken conclusion.
to the applicants’ argument on this ground are the letters that were sent
by the CEO to the applicants dated 30 May
2023. The letters advised the
applicants of what took place at the meeting on 29 May 2023 and then
This letter is
to advise you of these resolutions and specifically requesting your submission
to the Council by Friday 2 June 2023,
why the Council should not
exercise its powers
section 54(1)(d)
Local Government Act 1999
to remove you from office as a member of the Council.
(Emphasis added)
is the applicants’ contention that this passage demonstrates a
misunderstanding of the relevant legal test in that “it
approached it as
though, once those jurisdictional facts of being absent for three consecutive
months, ... they were inclined to
say ‘We’re ready to go, to pull
the trigger’”.
was the applicants’ submission that had the proper legal test been
applied, the letter would have read, “There appears
to be these
power should be exercised” and depending
on the response, take it
do not accept the submission that the letter reflects a misunderstanding of the
law on the part of the Council. Again, the letter
cannot be considered in
isolation but must be read in the context of the events that had preceded
Council resolution that resulted in this letter is an appropriate starting point
and a complete answer to the argument advanced
by the applicants.
minutes of the meeting note that, to date, no written explanations had been
provided by the applicants for their non-attendance
that it intends to exercise its power under
section 54(1)(d)
Government Act 1999
to remove Cr Severina Burner and Cr Grace Bawden from office
as a member of the Council, on the grounds that Cr Severina Burner and
Bawden have been absent for three (3) consecutive ordinary Council meetings
(namely 27 March 2023, 24 April 2023 and 22
May 2023) without the leave of the
Council subject to the receipt and consideration of further submissions from Cr
Severina Burner
and Cr Grace Bawden.
the Mayor and Acting Chief Executive Officer to write to Cr Severina Burner and
Cr Grace Bawden seeking a submission to the
Council by Friday 2 June 2023, 12pm
as to why the Council should not exercise its powers under
section 54(1)(d)
Local Government Act 1999
to remove them from office as a member of the
a Special Council meeting to occur on Monday 5 June 2023 6.30pm to consider any
submissions received as a result of
above, and whether to exercise its
powers under
section 54(1)(d)
Local Government Act 1999
minutes reflect that the Council properly appreciated the test to be applied.
The letter of 30 May 2023 was written to provide
the applicants with procedural
fairness, advising of the tentative view that had been reached by the
is no merit to this ground.
Failure to give proper, genuine,
and realistic consideration to the merits
a decision-maker contemplates the possible exercise of a statutory power adverse
to an individual’s interests, that person
is ordinarily entitled to
procedural fairness. In this case, the Council was obliged to give the
applicants an opportunity to address
them on the issue of their possible
removal. There can be no dispute that this opportunity was afforded to the
applicants on more
than one occasion.
a person takes up that opportunity and addresses the decision‑maker, the
decision-maker must give proper, genuine and
realistic consideration to the
submission that has been put. It is one aspect of procedural fairness.
onus was on the applicants to persuade the Court that this did not occur. The
only factual matter relied on by the applicants
is that the debate that took
place on 13 June 2023 was brief. It was the applicants’ contention that
the failure of the Council
to meaningfully discuss and debate the explanations
provided by the applicants suggests that they failed to give their written
submissions
proper consideration.
support of that argument, the applicants relied on a decision of
Charlesworth J in
Burgess v Minister for Immigration and Border
In that case, Charlesworth J considered whether the Minister’s
consideration of materials comprising 89 pages could have been
realistically
achieved in no more than 15 minutes. In discussing the relevant principles to
be applied, her Honour
Carrascalao
said (at [47]) that the determination of whether or
not a decision-maker has engaged in the requisite active intellectual process
a particular case:
... requires the Court to conduct an evaluative judgment, taking into
account the available evidence and reasonable inferences, as
to all the relevant
facts and circumstances of each case. These include, but are not limited to, the
nature and volume of the material
placed before the Minister to assist his
decision-making, as well as other matters which arise from the relevant
statutory context
Charlesworth
J found that, on the facts before her, the Minister could not have considered
all of the relevant documents in the timeframe
that was available to him. Her
Honour concluded:
all of the circumstances, I consider it more probable than not that the Minister
did not engage in the active intellectual process
of reviewing the September
Materials. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the Minister did not properly decide
the issues bearing on
the exercise of the power conferred by s 501(3) of the Act
in relation to Mr Burgess’ visa on their substantial merits. The
evidentiary value that would otherwise repose in the reasons for the decision is
outweighed in the present case by probative evidence
to the contrary, namely the
limited time in which the statutory task was purportedly undertaken (being no
more than 15 minutes),
the range and nature of the issues to be determined and
the nature and volume of the materials to be considered.
circumstances of this case are very different to from those in
Here, the Council invited submissions from the applicants and extended the time
to enable them to provide those submissions. The
debate surrounding the
decision to extend the time reveals that the councillors who spoke considered
that the provision and consideration
of submissions from the applicants was an
important part of the process. They were keen to hear the applicants’
explanations.
submissions provided by the applicants were before the Council as attachments to
the report of the CEO. These documents and
the agenda were circulated several
days before the meeting. Given the interest previously shown by the councillors
in hearing the
applicants’ version of events, it would have been
counterintuitive for them to have not read the submissions when they were
received. In addition to that, it must be assumed, absent evidence to the
contrary, that elected councillors will endeavour to undertake
their duties
honestly and diligently.
the meeting, the Council resolved that it had considered the applicants’
submissions and explicitly noted them at Resolution
1.2. Section 91(11) of the
Act provides that:
A document purporting to be minutes of
proceedings at a meeting of a council, or a council committee, or to be a copy
of or extract
from such minutes, and to be signed by the chief executive
officer, will be accepted as proof, in the absence of proof to the contrary,
the matters contained in the document.
such circumstances, the absence of debate does not prove a failure to give
genuine consideration.
Procedural fairness
procedural unfairness that the applicants rely upon was the failure to be
afforded an opportunity to respond to the comments
that I have identified at
[67]. I have considered those comments in their proper context, and, in
summary, they all related to the
circumstances in which the applicants were
failing to attend at meetings. That was the very topic upon which they were
put a submission to before the Council.
my view, the applicants were afforded procedural
is no merit to any of the grounds raised by the applicants.
applications are dismissed.
FDN 40, Affidavit of Felice
D’Agostino made on 15 July 2024 at 56 (‘D’Agostino
Affidavit’).
FDN 13, Affidavit of Paul St
Leger Kelly made on 21 August 2023 at 726 (‘Kelly Affidavit’).
D’Agostino Affidavit at
D’Agostino Affidavit at
Kelly Affidavit at 125.
Kelly Affidavit at 739.
Kelly Affidavit at 198.
Kelly Affidavit at 762.
Kelly Affidavit at 136.
Kelly Affidavit at 763.
Kelly Affidavit at 782.
Kelly Affidavit at 785.
Kelly Affidavit at 780,
Kelly Affidavit at 811.
Kelly Affidavit at 791.
Kelly Affidavit at 790.
Kelly Affidavit at 787.
Kelly Affidavit at 794.
Kelly Affidavit at 796.
Kelly Affidavit at 805.
D’Agostino Affidavit
D’Agostino Affidavit
Kelly Affidavit at 374.
D’Agostino Affidavit
D’Agostino Affidavit
D’Agostino Affidavit
at 174-175 (Emphasis added).
D’Agostino Affidavit
at 175-176.
Kelly Affidavit at 865.
The letter is incorrectly dated 6 June 2023.
Kelly Affidavit at 866.
The letter initially said 6
June 2023, but was subsequently corrected.
D’Agostino Affidavit
Local Government Act
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
[2023] HCA 15
(2023) 279 CLR 148
[2023] HCA 15
(2023) 97 ALJR 419
(2001) 205 CLR 507 at
[71]-[72] (‘
Isbester v Knox City
[2015] HCA 20
(2015) 255 CLR 135
Re Refugee Review Tribunal; Ex parte H
(2001) 179 ALR 425
at [27]-[32].
McGovern v Ku-ring-gai
[2008] NSWCA 209
(2008) 72 NSWLR 504
[178]-[181].
Ibid at [187].
Ibid at [192].
[2008] NSWCA 209
(2008) 72 NSWLR 504.
Ibid at [77].
Ibid at [80].
Hot Holdings Pty Ltd v
[2002] HCA 51
(2002) 210 CLR 438
Stollery v Greyhound
Racing Control Board
[1972] HCA 53
(1972) 128 CLR 509
Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs v CQZ15
(2021) 284 FCR 455
[2000] HCA 48
(2000) 201 CLR 488
Ibid at [53].
The Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte Epeabaka
[2001] HCA 23
(2001) 206 CLR
Chen v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2022] FCAFC 41
288 FCR 218
Ibid at [40].
Kelly Affidavit at 21.
D’Agostino Affidavit
D’Agostino Affidavit
D’Agostino Affidavit
D’Agostino Affidavit
Applicants’ Written
Submissions at [12.3].
Minister for Aboriginal
Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
(1986) 162 CLR 24
[1990] NSWCA 160
Applicants’ Written
Submissions at [32].
(1990) 69 LGRA 307
Kelly Affidavit at 787.
Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
(2018) 264 CLR 541
Ibid at [11], [52], [89],
Ibid at [97].
Ibid at [86].
Ibid at [82].
Kelly Affidavit at 826.
Kelly Affidavit at 534.
[2018] FCA 69
(2018) 259 FCR 197.
Ibid at [82].
Ibid at [93].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (600 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter