URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SALGCmr/2006/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:01:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Adelaide Juventus Sports & Social Club [2006] SALGCmr 1 (26 May 2006)
GAMING MACHINES ACT, 1992
ORDER OF THE LIQUOR AND
GAMBLING COMMISSIONER
Application No:
Licence No:
ADELAIDE JUVENTUS SPORTS & SOCIAL CLUB
LITCHFIELD HOUSE, FOSTERS ROAD
OAKDEN 5086
ADELAIDE JUVENTUS SPORTS & SOCIAL CLUB INC
Effective Date:
26 May 2006
APPLICATION FOR A GAMING MACHINE LICENCE
Section 14(1)
The Adelaide Juventus Sports and Social Club Inc, the holder of a club
licence in respect of premises at Litchfield House, Fosters
Road Oakden has
applied for a gaming machine licence for those premises. The Club is eligible
to hold a gaming machine licence under
section 15(1)(b)
Gaming Machines
which provides that
“15(1) The following persons only are eligible to hold a gaming
machine licence
(b) the holder of a club licence, or two or more holders of separate club
licences jointly;
The application attracted objections from
Hotel Windsor
North East Hotel
Roosters Club
Before granting a gaming machine licence I must be satisfied as to
the requirements of
sections 15(4)
Mr Costello, for the three hotel objectors, submits that this application
must be refused under
section 15A(1)(a)
of the Act which provides that
(1) Despite any other provisions of this Act, the Commissioner cannot
after the commencement of this section grant an application
for a gaming machine
licence in respect of licensed premises, or grant any other application under
this Act in respect of licensed
premises that are subject to a gaming machine
licence, if to do so would result in the licensed premises, or the whole or part
a gaming area of the licensed premises, being located.
(a) under the same roof as a shop, whether or not on the same level or
floor as the shop.”
is defined in 15A(5) to mean
which goods are sold to the public by retail.”
Evidence was given during the hearing that a travel agency was operating from
an office in the northern part of the club room building.
I have on file a
letter from Mr Justin Carter, Rising Stars Sports Management advising that they
will vacate the current tenancy
at the club on 24 March 2006 as they have found
new premises at Prospect. Therefore, this application is no longer caught by
section 15A(1)(a).
section 15(5)
which provides that :
“15(5) In determining an application for a gaming machine licence,
the Commissioner must
(a) have regard to the likely social effect of the grant of the licence on
the local community and, in particular, the likely effect
on problem gambling
within the local community; and
(b) in that regard, take into consideration any guidelines issued by the
but must not have regard to the economic effect that the granting of the
licence might have on the business of other licensed premises
in the relevant
locality (except insofar as that economic effect may be relevant to an
assessment of the likely social effect of
the grant of the licence on the local
community).”
The Independent Gambling Authority (“the Authority,”) issued its
gaming machine licensing guidelines on 2 November 2005.
The guidelines
“1. Purpose
The purpose of these guidelines is, without limiting the scope of the
enquiries or actions which might be taken by the Liquor and
Commissioner, to promote the intent of
section 15(5)
Gaming Machines Act
that the process of granting gaming machine licences have appropriate
regard to the likely social effect the grant of a proposed
licence might have on
the local community and, in particular, the likely effect of problem gambling
within the local community.
2. Application contents
(1) Prior to completing an application, the applicant should
(a) consulted with the relevant local government council;
(b) consulted with funded gambling rehabilitation providers likely to
provide services to the people of the locality of the proposed
(2) Applications should include—
(a) a demographic and social profile of the locality 1 of the proposed
licensed premises;
(b) the business plan 2 for the proposed gaming business, accompanied by
an explanation of how the demographic and social profile
of the anticipated
patron group relates to the profile of the locality;
(c) an explanation of the proposed premises design, including any features
designed to assist in monitoring for problem gambling behaviour
and for barred
(d) details of the consultations with local government and gambling
rehabilitation providers, including their suggestions and feedback,
those matters
have been taken into account in the application;
(e) enforceable undertakings proposed by the applicant to be included as
conditions of the licence when granted, relating to venue-based
responsible
gambling measures to be undertaken by the applicant.
1 The locality should be matched to existing statistical sources—so
as to enable analysis
and comparison on a statistical local area, or
local government area, basis.
2 This would be expected to include
projections of gaming revenue over the following 3
years and an
indication of where this revenue might come from.
(3) All applications should be required to be advertised, including by
the placement of notices in daily newspapers and on the
proposed premises.
3. Determination process
(1) The Commissioner should take steps to ensure that a full range of
opinion of the appropriateness or otherwise of premises licensed
for gaming is
available in the application and determination process. For that purpose, the
Commissioner should give consideration
to inviting the participation of the
relevant local government council and agencies with skill and expertise in
responsible gambling
or gambling rehabilitation. This is a matter which would
need to be assessed on a case by case basis.
(2) The Commissioner should give consideration to the imposition of
licence conditions to ensure that, if a licence is granted, the
licensed gaming
business is, and continues to be, conducted in the manner foreshadowed in the
application, noting that a change in
the manner of operation would then be able
to be scrutinised through a process to amend licence conditions.
(3) The Commissioner should give consideration to the imposition of
licence conditions to ensure that, if a licence is granted, any
venue-specific harm minimisation measures are, and continue to be, implemented.
A change in the harm minimisation program
would then be able to be scrutinised
through a process to amend licence conditions.
I invited each of the parties to make submissions on the validity of the
Authority’s guidelines.
Mr Roder for the Australian Hotels Association, as amicus curiae, submits
that the guidelines are ultra vires and are not authorised
section 15(5)
the act. He submits that they provide no guidance and should not be considered
in determining this application.
Mr Firth for the applicant also submits that the guidelines are ultra vires.
section 15(5)
of the Act, the guidelines must be comprised of matters
or criteria that must be taken into consideration by the Commissioner in
determining an application for a gaming machine licence having “regard to
the likely social effect of the grant of the licence
on the local community and,
in particular, the likely effect on problem gambling within the local
community.” The guidelines
are to elaborate on this criteria and cannot
be about the process that should have occurred.
Clause 2 of the guidelines deals with the form and content of the application
or its advertising. The Act leaves the form of applications
to the Act and
regulations, section 18 and schedule 1 and section 29 deals with the advertising
of applications.
Section 18(1)(a) provides that “an application for a licence must be
made in the prescribed manner and form and schedule 1 specifies
prescribed form for an application for a gaming machine licence is a form that
complies with the following requirements:
1. Application for gaming machine licence
The prescribed form for an application for a gaming machine licence is a
form that complies with the following requirements:
(a) the form must specify—
(i) the full name, address for service and contact details of the
(A) if the applicant is a partnership—the name of the
partnership
(and be accompanied by a copy of the partnership agreement);
(B) if the applicant proposes to hold the licence as a trustee of
trust—the name of the trust and details of the type of trust (and be
accompanied by a copy of the trust deed);
(C if the applicant is a corporate entity—the name, ACN number and
registered address of the entity (and be accompanied by a
copy of the
constitution of the entity); and
(iii) the address of the premises or proposed premises to which the
application relates; and
(iv) the name that the premises is or is to be known as; and
(v) whether or not the applicant holds the requisite liquor licence and,
if he or she does, sufficient information to identify the
licence; and
(vi) the number of gaming machines sought to be authorised by the
licence; and
(vii) the hours during which it is proposed to conduct gaming
under the licence (on ordinary week days, public holidays and
proposed special occasions);
(b) the form must include information relating to each of the
(A) if the applicant is a natural person—the applicant;
(B) if the applicant is a trust or corporate entity—each person who
occupies a position of authority in the trust or entity;
(ii) each person proposed to be approved as a gaming machine manager or
gaming machine employee;
(c) the information must include—
(i) the full name, date of birth and sex of the person; and
(ii) a statement of the capacity in which the person acts or is to act
that results in the information being required; and
(iii) if the person is or has previously been—
(A) a licensee; or
(B) a person occupying a position of authority in a trust or corporate
entity that is a licensee; or
(C) an approved gaming machine manager; or
(D) an approved gaming machine employee,
a statement of that fact and details sufficient to identify the relevant
licence or approval; and
(iv) personal and financial details as required by forms available from
the Commissioner for the purposes of section 19 or 42 of the
(d) the form must be signed and dated by the applicant.
Under section 18(4) of the Act, the application must
be accompanied by a plan of the
proposed licensed premises that
delineates the gaming area or gaming areas within
which the gaming
machines are to be installed and the layout of the machines
each gaming area.”
Schedule 1 does not require that applications should include those matters in
subclauses 2(2)(a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) of the guidelines.
Section 29 requires that all applications for a gaming machine licence must
be advertised and subsections 29 (2) (a) and (b) specify
the form of that
advertising but this does not require the placement of a notice on the proposed
premises as purported by clause
2(3) of the guidelines.
In my opinion, clause 2 of the Authority’s guidelines is ultra
Sub-clause 3(1) purports to require the Commissioner to consider, on a case
by case basis, whether to invite councils and agencies
with skill and expertise
in responsible gambling or gambling rehabilitation to participate in the
application and determination process.
This is a matter of process and is not
supported by the guideline making power.
Subclause 3(2) refers to the imposition of conditions to ensure the licensed
gaming business
“is, and continues to be, conducted in the manner
foreshadowed in the application.”
To the extent that this relies on
matters imposed by clause 2 it is also ultra vires.
In summary, clauses 2 and 3 of the guidelines are ultra vires because they
deal with process and not the criteria to which the Commissioner
regard to in section 15(5) of the Act.
I turn to section 15(5). Key factors to be determined under section 15(5)
are ‘the local community’ and ‘ relevant
Mr Roder for the AHA made the following submissions on the issues of
‘local community’ and locality:
“Local Community”
The AHA submits that it is necessary as a matter of fact to identify the
relevant “local community” as a first step in
considering the
matters referred to in s. 15(5).
The word “local” generally qualifies the meaning of the word
“community” in that it distinguishes a smaller
body of people from a
larger one and whilst it is not necessarily strictly limited to a clearly
defined geographical location it
imports notions of physical or geographical
The term is to be distinguished from “locality”. What
constitutes a “local community” may not in all cases
constitute the
“locality” (as that term has been interpreted and applied in liquor
licensing cases). The words “local
community” focus on a particular
community of people rather than a geographical area. A “locality”
by reference to the proposed facility, whilst a “local
community” will generally have an existence as a community independently
of the proposed facility.
Some assistance may be derived from the way in which the word
“locality” has been interpreted and applied in the context
licensing (in particular, in the determination of the “locality” in
which the relevant premises are situated
for the purposes of determining the
public demand for liquor, and whether or not it is being satisfied, in the
“locality”).
The interpretation and application of
“locality” in this context has been considered on more than one
occasion by the
Supreme Court of South Australia. Often referred to is the case
Nepeor Pty Ltd-v-Liquor Licensing Commissioner & Ors
, in which von Doussa J said (at page 214):
“In the Licensing Court and in this Court, counsel concentrated upon
identifying the ‘locality’ as if it were an
area which could be
marked out with precision on a map. In my opinion the notion of
‘locality’ is far too indefinite
and flexible to permit such
precision as a matter of course... I would respectfully adopt the view that the
word ‘locality’
should be treated in a much less exacting matter
than has hitherto been the practice in the application of these sections. I
the word is used in the Act to denote, in a general way, the fact of
being local, or neighbouring, as opposed to distant or remote.
‘locality’ is, as a matter of fact, not a matter for dispute as the
relevant area is geographically discrete
as, for example, in the case of a
country town... In other cases particular physical features of the area, such as
a river, or some
other significant obstruction to the free moment of people,
might provide the basis for including or excluding particular reason
consideration in a precise way. However, in a case like the present one, where
the proposed premises are within a built-up
region which, in any view, extends
well beyond areas which could conceivably be relevant to the inquiry, precise
delineation or definition
will rarely be possible. Nevertheless, if the concept
and purpose of the section is recognised, it is capable of rational application
in a practical way.”
The words of Zelling J in
Buttery-v-Muirhead
[1970] SASR 334
(quoted by von Doussa J in
) are also of assistance:
“’Locality’ is a word which will differ from application
to application according to the type of community that
is envisaged, the type of
work which they do, the way in which they use common transport and other
facilities, and in general whether
they are a group bound together as a
community having common interests”.
Similarly, “local community” is not a term capable of precise
definition in the abstract. What is the “local community”
from case to case. However, in importing notions of collective or shared
characteristics, and other features of a body
of people, beyond their mere
physical or geographical location (although that is also relevant), “local
community” requires
consideration of the particular characteristics and
features of the particular body of people in question, as a matter of fact in
each case. In much the same way as the needs of the public has been said to
inform the interpretation and application of “locality”
licensing cases, the interpretation and application of “local
community” must take account of the intent and
purpose of the section and
inquiry to which the Commissioner’s mind is being directed.
Mr Costello submits that local community means more than
‘locality’ and refers to the case of Hollow and Kaye - v - State
Planning Authority (1980) 27S.A.S.R. at 34 in which Wells J said (at page
“The word “community” in my opinion has a much wider
significance than the word locality. In its widest sense,
of course, it could
embrace the entire South Australian community: and I do not say that there may
not be cases in which the interests
of the community as a whole in South
Australia might not be relevant. But it can also apply to a community of a
lesser purview than
the entire State. For example, I should think it would be
entirely consistent with par. (b) to speak of the northern primary production
areas of the State as a community. I should think it would be proper to speak
of the farmers of Eyre Peninsula as a community.
I think it would be quite
possible to speak of the grazing community in the Southeast and so on.
“Community” I repeat,
seems to me, to have a much wider
significance than just ‘locality’ and correspondingly a much wider
range of interests
to consider.”
Mr Firth in his opening submission argued that local community and locality
should be read as interchangeable. I do not agree. I
prefer Mr Roder’s
and Mr Costello’s arguments.
Clearly, local community will vary from case to case. It is not simply a
question of a set radius around the premises. Mr Roder
submitted that the
Queensland Gaming Commission’s Guidelines - Community Impact Statement
provide a useful guide under “local
community area’ of the factors
that should be considered in determining local community and locality. These
size and type of
characteristics;
distribution of membership base for clubs;
distance - drive
time rather than radial;
barriers to site access;
location of
other gaming venues;
cultural or
social factors;
I agree that these are useful factors which combined assist in
reaching a conclusion on local community and locality. For example
a small club
seeking to operate say five gaming machines from a modest venue would in my view
have a far smaller local community
and locality than a large modern purpose
built multi purpose facility with forty gaming machines.
In this case, the evidence is that the facility will be on a par with the
best venues in the State. The premises are being upgraded
at a cost of up to
$3.2 million, it is hoped that they will operate 40 gaming machine depending on
the availability of gaming machine
entitlements from Club One and the club will
provide all facilities expected of such a facility, eg bars, dining, members
sports bar and outdoor areas. On the evidence I have no hesitation in
finding that the completed premise will be of a similar standards
State’s best club facilities and on a par with the objector hotels, all of
which are of a very high standard.
This together with the club’s membership and the fact that Adelaide
Juventus is an extremely successful soccer club that plays
its senior matches at
Oakden should mean that it will have a significant patron base comprising
members and guests, soccer followers,
local residents and those prepared to
travel to experience a ‘top facility.’ This latter point should not
be under estimated.
While I have regard to Prof. Del Fabro’s evidence
which I will consider later, from my own experience of gaming in South Australia
since its inception, I recognise that there is a significant transient gaming
population. If a venue provides quality meals and
services people will travel
In his report in support of this application Mr David M Hutchinson B.A.
M.P.I.A. of Access Planning has adopted a locality which is
defined by a 2
kilometre radius from the premises. This locality includes established suburbs,
including part of Valley View, Gilles
Plains, Ingle Farm and Windsor Gardens
together with the new suburbs of Northgate, Oakden and Walkley Heights and the
old suburbs
of Northfield and Hillcrest.
Mr Smith, for the objectors, adopted as a local community, an area defined by
a circle having a radius of 3 kilometres from the proposed
facility. In doing
so he had regard “to the nature of the proposed facility” and to
the fact that as a sporting club
it would have a “distinct, rather than
predominant local or neighbour hood focus.”
He concluded that
“in my opinion this area described by the 3
kilometre radius would have a reasonable physical proximity to the proposed
to the extent that the resident community in the area I have
identified, could be considered to have an ‘association’
premise, as a local, neighbourhood and district sporting club
I prefer the broader concept of locality and local community and I note that
on cross examination Mr Hutchinson did not “take
great issue with 3
kilometres” because in his opinion there was no significant difference
between his 2 kilometres and Mr Smith’s
3 kilometres. I agree.
Mr Firth submitted that I should be guided in determining locality by Judge
Kelly’s finding on locality in an application by
Woolies Liquor Stores Pty
Ltd for a retail liquor merchants licence at premises situated at the corner of
Fosters Road and Follard
Avenue Northgate and to Debelle J’s finding in
Woolies Liquor Stores Pty Ltd v Liquorland (Aust) Pty Ltd that Judge Kelly had
correctly identified the locality.
“The judge held that the relevant locality was bounded on the north
by Grand Junction Road, on the west by Hamstead Road, on
the south and east by
North East Road and on the east by Sudholz Road.
He held that it also included areas close to and on the other side of
those roads. One suburb he expressly identified was Clearview
on the western
side of Hampstead Road. He believed that the most relevant potential customers
were those residing in the suburbs
of Northgate, Northfield and
Clearview.”
In his report, Mr Smith contends that the core residential area in this local
community, based on his 3 kilometres radius, is bounded
by Grand Junction Road,
Sudholz Road, North East Road, Muller Road and Hampstead Road.
Professor Del Fabbro, a recognised expert in the field of problem gambling
gave evidence that people typically travel 3 to 5 kilometres
to patronise gaming
venues but the closer a person lives to a venue the higher the level of
gambling. This is not inconsistent with
the finding in the Northgate Cellars
application nor with the localities and local communities proffered by Mr
Hutchinson and Mr
In my opinion, Grand Junction Road poses a barrier for those living to the
north, namely Walkley Heights and Valley View. However,
given their close
proximity to the proposed venue and good access via Walkleys Road I believe it
reasonable to include Walkley Heights
and Valley View in the locality. I
include the Roosters Club in the locality.
For the record, I have highlighted this area in green in attachment 1 to Mr
Smith’s report, exhibit 28. This locality can roughly
be described as
being bordered by Grand Junction Road to the north, Main North Road to the west,
Regency Road and Mullers Road to
the South and then Hampstead Road down to North
East Road and then north along North east Road to Grand Junction Road (refer map
on file - exhibit 32) plus Walkley Heights and Valley View. While the
established suburbs of Windsor Gardens and Klemzig to the
east and Hampstead
Gardens and Manningham to the south fall within this 3.5 kilometre radius they
are on the other side of major
arterial roads and in my opinion are peripheral
to the locality and local community. They are also serviced by prominent
established
gaming venues, namely the Hampstead Hotel, OG Hotel and the Windsor
In summary, I find that the key suburbs for the purpose of this application
are Oakden, Northgate, Northfield, Hillcrest, Gilles Plains,
Greenacres,
Clearview, Enfield and Walkley Heights with Windsor Gardens and Klemzig being
peripheral. I accept that the south western
areas of Enfield are marginal.
The key locality had a population, as at the 2001Census, of 28878 with those
peripheral suburbs having a population of 9186. Unfortunately
this data is now
five years old and all the evidence before me leads me to find that there has
been significant population growth,
particularly in the key suburbs of Oakden
and Northgate since 2001.
Of the key locality population, 70% were born in Australia, with 10% being
born in Northwest Europe, 5.7% in Southern and Eastern
Europe and 5.4% in Asia.
This compares to 75%, 10.4%, 4.6% and 2.7% for the whole of South Australia and
70%, 20%, 6.1% and 3.5%
for Northern Adelaide, 69%, 7.1%, 10.8% and 4.9% for
Western Adelaide, 75%, 13%, 3% and 2% for Southern Adelaide and 71%, 12%, 7.7%
and 4.2% for Eastern Adelaide.
2.2% of the key locality population is Indigenous (1.3% Indigenous persons
over 18 years) compared to 1.5% (.8% over 18 years) for
the whole of South
Australia and 1.5% (.7%) for Northern Adelaide, 1.3% (.8%) for Western Adelaide,
.7% (.36%) for Southern Adelaide
and .46%(.3%) for Eastern Adelaide. Clearly
the key locality has a significant Indigenous population with the majority being
in Northfield, Enfield, Gilles Plains and Clearview.
With the exception of the Indigenous population in Northfield, Enfield,
Gilles Plains and Clearview the population mix for the key
locality is similar
to that of the whole State and the four key metropolitan statistical
locality average of 65%. This compares to 69% for the
whole of the State, and
70% for Northern Adelaide, 63% for Western Adelaide, 73% for Southern Adelaide
and 66% for Eastern Adelaide.
The percentage of the key locality population in rental accommodation ranges
from 38% in Gilles Plains to .5% in Walkley Heights with
the locality average
being 28.5% compared to 25% in Northern Adelaide, 31% in Western Adelaide, 22%
in Southern Adelaide and 26%
in Eastern Adelaide.
At the time of the 2001 Census home ownership was slightly lower than for
the whole of the State and the four major metropolitan
areas and rental was also
slightly higher.
The percentage of the population with tertiary qualification ranged form
17.7% and 19.1% in Greenacres and Northfield to 34% in Valley
View and 39% in
Walkley Heights with the key locality average being 27.2%. This compares to
32% for the State and 28% for Northern
Adelaide, 30% for Western Adelaide, 35.5%
for Southern Adelaide and 43% for Eastern Adelaide.
The key locality area had a tertiary education level slightly below the State
As at the 2001 Census the State median weekly individual income lay in the
range $300 to $399. Of those suburbs in the key locality
only Walkley Heights
with a median weekly individual income of $500 to $599 and Oakden $400 - $499
were above the State median with
Hillcrest and Valley View being equal to it and
all others falling into the $200 to $299 category. This compared to $300 - $399
for Northern Adelaide, Western Adelaide and Southern Adelaide and $400 - $499
for Eastern Adelaide.
The median weekly household income ranged from $400 - $499 for Clearview and
Northfield, $500 - $599 for Enfield, Greenacres and Gilles
Plains to $600 - $699
for Hillcrest, $800 - $999 Oakden and $1000-$1199 Walkley Heights with Northgate
having a median of $1200 -
$1499. The State median weekly household income was
$600 - $699 with Northern Adelaide and Western Adelaide having a median of $600
- $699, Southern Adelaide a median of $700 - $799 and Eastern Adelaide $800 -
$999. 63% of the population of the key locality had
a median weekly household
income below the State median.
To further understand the key locality I have looked at four key indices,
the index of
relative socio economic disadvantage which is derived from attributes such as
low income, low educational attainment,
high unemployment, jobs in relatively
unskilled occupations and other variables that reflect disadvantage such as
Indigenous, Separated/Divorced.
Low values indicate a high level of disadvantage
with many low income families, little education and high unskilled occupation.
Conversely, a high value reflects a lack of disadvantage;
the index of
relative socio-economic advantage/disadvantage which is a continuum of
advantage to disadvantage. Low values indicate
areas of disadvantage and high
values indicate areas of advantage;
the index of
economic resources which reflects the profile of the economic resources of
families. A low score indicates the area
has a relatively high proportion of
households on low incomes etc.
the index of
education and occupation which as the name suggests reflects the educational
and occupational structure of a community.
A low score indicates an area with
concentrations of either people with low educational attainment, people employed
in unskilled
occupations or the unemployed.
The State index of relative socio-economic disadvantage was 995.7.
Only four suburbs, Walkley Heights 1070.47, Northgate 1056.09,
Oakden 1022.10
and Valley View 1023.21 were above the State average with the others having
scores of Hillcrest 986.34, Greenacres
929.6, Enfield 928.77, Clearview 923.47,
Gilles Plains 896.47 and Northfield 864.64. That is 63% of the key locality
falls within a level of socio-economic disadvantage below that of the
The same applies to the index of socio-economic advantage/disadvantage with
only Northgate 1054.75, Oakden 1045.33 and Walkley Heights
1028.13 having a
score higher than the State score of 975.70. The other suburbs having scores of
Valley View 974.04, Hillcrest 958.70,
Enfield 933.44, Clearview 914.58,
Greenacres 914.51, Gilles Plains 899.21 and Northfield 864.64. 80% of the key
locality population
falling below that of the State figure.
The index of education and occupation mirrors these indices with the State
score being 978.39 and Northgate 1049.20, Oakden 1049.24
and Walkley Heights
992.66 being above the State score while Hillcrest 975.33, Valley View 975.19,
Enfield 955.71, Clearview 931.98,
Greenacres 924, Gilles Plains 918.43 and
Northfield 885.95 all fell below the State score.
The economic resources index has a State score of 968.26 with Walkley Heights
1037.71, Northgate 1033.23 and Oakden 1027.49 being
above this and Valley View
965.01, Hillcrest 942.36, Enfield 915.97, Greenacres 913.92, Clearview 907.86,
Gilles Plains 898.07 and
Northfield 876.65 falling below the State score.
This Census data leads me to conclude that as at 2001, the immediate suburbs
of Oakden, Northgate and Walkley Heights would have
to be regarded as
advantaged suburbs with all others being disadvantaged, in particular Hillcrest,
Northfield and Greenacres which
are next in proximity to the proposed
That is in 2001, of the population living in the suburbs in the immediate
vicinity of the premises, 38% could be regarded as advantaged
disadvantaged while the next level of suburbs in the key locality, that is
Gilles Plains, Clearview and Enfield could all
be regarded as disadvantaged.
However, that is not the end of the matter because there is no doubt that
there has been significant development in the key locality
since the 2001
In his report, prepared for the applicant, Mr David Hutchinson, who is
recognised planning consultant concluded.
“The locality is one of the few developed metropolitan areas to be
showing significant and sustained population growth as a
consequence of the
release and development of large areas of vacant land for housing.
As indicated, over the past 10 years at least, and most certainly in the
last 5 years, three new suburbs have effectively been developed
in the locality
resulting in an increased population in the order of 5000 to 6000 people, with a
further 4000 to be added in the
next 3 to 5 years as the last stage of the
Northgate development is released onto the market.
The additional development created by the redevelopment of Housing Trust
areas at Northfield and Hillcrest and the general reduction
in Trust ownership
in these two areas from about 80% to about 15% will significantly change the
socio-economic status and provide
further opportunity for population
It is expected that private and SA Housing Trust redevelopment of the
suburbs of Northfield and Hillcrest will continue for another
3 to 5 years,
although redevelopment in Hillcrest is well advanced of that in
Northfield.
The significant development occurring in the locality has fundamentally
changed the demographics of the locality in a gentrification
of existing urban
areas and a higher socio-economic profile generally throughout the
While Mr Hutchinson’s locality does not equate exactly to the locality
I determined, it does to a significant degree and having
inspected the locality
extensively, I accept that Mr Hutchinsons conclusions are accurate and apply
equally to the locality as defined
Mr Jeffery Raymond Smith, for the objectors, also a recognised planning
consultant does not disagree with this general conclusion.
Sales data obtained from an analysis of house, unit and land sales in 353
metropolitan suburbs, reported in the Advertiser 25 February
2006 (exhibit 4)
shows that Hillcrest has experienced a 230% ten year growth with Greenacres
having 223% ten year growth. This
puts them in the top 10 performing suburbs
along with Port Adelaide 480%, Kent Town 313%, Exeter 279% Unley Park 239%,
Seacliff 234%,
Toorak Gardens 228%, Ferryden Park 227% and Kensington Park 226%.
This data may have its limitations but it clearly supports Mr Hutchinson’s
conclusion of a significant gentrification of these two significant key locality
Northfield and Clearview which have experienced 167% growth putting them in
the top 22% performing suburbs and Gilles Plains 154%
growth (top 37% of
suburbs) also support his conclusion.
There is no doubt that pockets of the key locality must still be considered
to be socio-economically disadvantaged, but these areas
are and will continue to
diminish as more and more private and public land is redeveloped.
Any assessment must be subjective given the time since the 2001 Census but I
am absolutely convinced that there is now no reason to
treat this locality as a
significantly socio-economically disadvantaged area and therefore it is
reasonable to apply normal State
standards in assessing the likely social
effect of the grant of the licence on the local community and, in particular,
effect on problem gambling within the local community.
Gaming Machine Density: There are currently 6 licensed gaming machine venues
within the locality with 180 gaming machine entitlements.
For the purpose of assessing gaming machine density I have adjusted the 2001
Census population of 28878 persons in the key locality
to reflect club members
and soccer followers. I have already found that Adelaide Juventus is an
extremely successful soccer club
that plays its senior matches at Oakden and
attracts a large soccer following. It is not unreasonable to increase the local
population to 31500 to accommodate the club’s members, guests,
soccer followers and local residents in the key locality.
Adopting this population base this community has 1 gaming machine for every
175 persons compared to a State figure of 1 gaming machine
per 116 persons and
1 gaming machine per 145 metropolitan South Australians. If this application is
granted, the ratio based on
this population will be 1 gaming machine per 143
persons which is well above the State figure and on a par with metropolitan
In his submission, Mr Hutchinson opined that there would have been a 35%
increase in the key locality population since the 2001 Census.
In reaching this
conclusion he had regard to the fact that the 2001 Census did not take into
consideration the development that
has occurred in Northgate as the majority of
development occurred since 2001. He then provided evidence that Northgate
1100 allotments, of which 1050 have been sold. Simply allowing for
this development and a median household size of 2.3 people would
result in an
increase of 2415 people over the 2001 Census population.
I have also been provided with development application figures for 2003 to
2006 which show that 3390 development applications were
made for those suburbs
in the key locality, with Northgate having 924. While the data includes all
development applications including
alterations and additions it would be
reasonable to assume that the majority in Northgate and Oakden (1084) relate to
new dwellings.
Even if I adopt a far more conservative growth figure of 15%, which I believe
is realistic given the extend of development in these
suburbs, I arrive at a
total local community population of around 36150 people. This then equates to 1
gaming machine per 200 people
at present and 1 gaming machine per 164 people if
this application is approved. This is well above the State figure of 1 per 116
people and the metropolitan average and I conclude that there is no over
representation of gaming machines in the local community
and neither will there
be if this application is approved.
Net Gaming Revenue: The average NGR per machine in the locality for the
period 1 July 2005 to 31 December was $49,438 with the average
for hotels being
$57,795 and clubs $26,701. This compares to a State average for the same period
of $30,387 with hotels averaging
$32,082 and club $19,303 and a metropolitan
average of $37,349 with hotels averaging $39,751 and clubs $22,457. That is the
average NGR is 80% and the club average NGR in the locality is 40% above
the State average NGR and 45% and 18% respectively above
the metropolitan
average NGR.
This is in part a reflection of the fact that two of the objector hotels
consistently fall within the top 10% performing gaming hotels
and the objector
club is consistently one of the top 3 clubs.
The high average NGR for the six venues located within the key locality would
suggest a high level of gaming activity but this is
tempered by the fact that 3
of the venues, namely the Roosters Club, the Windsor Hotel and the OG Hotel are
each locate on the roads
bordering the key locality and as such serve other
significant gaming localities.
The average NGR per machine for clubs for the period 1 July 2005 to 31
December 2005 was $24,337 in Northern Adelaide, $18,601in
Southern Adelaide,
$6,387 in Eastern Adelaide and $27,830 in Western Adelaide. For the same
period, the State average NGR, per machine
for clubs with 36 - 40 machines was
$29,972 with the average NGR per machine in metropolitan clubs being $30,254.
The metropolitan
figure can be broken down to $34,073 for Northern Adelaide,
$25,336 for Southern Adelaide, $6241 for Eastern Adelaide and $30,810
Western Adelaide.
The average NGR per machine for the top five South Australian clubs for the
same period was $37,497. Two of these clubs are located
on main roads close to
busy shopping precincts while three are located at the club’s sporting
facility. I am convinced that
this facility will perform well given its clubs
membership, its success as a soccer club and its location. However, it will not
attract the level of passing trade of those venues near busy shopping precincts.
It will rely on patrons making a conscious decision
to attend the venue. Be
that as it may I anticipate that the venue will when fully operational fall
within the top 5 to 10 performing
clubs and will have an annual NGR of between
$2.5 and $3 million.
Will this represent a significant increase in gaming activity in the locality
or will it be a combination of a redistribution of gaming
activity from existing
venues in the locality, an inflow of gaming activity from those living outside
the locality (members, soccer
followers in general and match day attendees) and
a general increase in gaming activity. From my experience of the industry I
that it will be the latter.
If this assumption that there will be some redistribution of gaming activity
from hotels in the locality to the Adelaide Juventus
Sports and Social Club is
correct then there may well be a significant benefit to the community through
money being channelled into
junior soccer development.
Much evidence and argument was put to me on the validity of the club’s
projected business plan which was submitted in accordance
with clause 2(2) (b)
of the gaming machine licensing guidelines. I have already determined the
validity of the guidelines. Mr Costello
argues that I should have regard to
viability in determining credit worthiness under section 19(2)(b) of the Act.
Mr Firth argues
that it is not relevant to the question of credit worthiness. I
agree with Mr Firth and in doing so refer to my decision in Adelaide
Sports and Social Club application for a club licence, decision dated 21
December 2005, in particular
“ Mr Byrt submits that the licensing authority cannot be satisfied
that the applicant is
creditworthy given the proposed business plan. He argues that viability of
the proposal must be taken into consideration in determining
creditworthiness.
He cited two authorities:
• Imperial Hotel - Licensing Court 29 August 1996 His Honour Judge
B St. L Kelly
• Hydra Café - Licensing Court 25 February 1994 His Honour
Judge B St. L Kelly
In the first, His Honour Judge B St L Kelly found:
“Mrs Bennett has borrowed some $10,000 to enable her to reopen the
old Imperial Hotel at Terowie in the mid north of South Australia.
money spent on it to bring it up to Council
and Commission standard before I
would contemplate re-licensing it. Patch up jobs, as seem to have taken place
recently are generally
not enough in my experience. In addition to repairs Mrs
Bennett (currently on a pension) has to purchase stock, equipment, pay her
solicitor’s fees, meet interest payments on the loan, meet overheads and
make a profit from the proceeds of the hotel before
it can possibly be said that
this is a financially viable project. I am not prepared to licence people and
projects which are shown
to be probably unprofitable and personally, lacking
creditworthiness. This person and this project have been so shown. Mrs
evidence and her cross examination left me in no doubt that she
has not given this project proper thought. Rather she is venturing
wing and a prayer” and will not, so I find, succeed. Indeed her financial
demise and that of her hotel would be
swift and sure and though she may not
appreciate this now I think I am doing her a favour by refusing the
application.”
In the latter, His Honour Judge B St L Kelly said:
“There is still a dilemma. Whilst I might be prepared to grant a
General Facility Licence for the entertainment side of the
application only I am
told that such a grant would not lead to viability. I should not grant a licence
which will necessarily fail
on a certain non profitability. It can only be
profitable if the café side of the operation is encompassed within the
of the licence. Yet that operation is not needed within the terms of
Section 63 at least. Indeed it is difficult to imagine how,
given that view, the
provisions of Section 44(1)(a) could positively apply either. A positive finding
in that area would seem to
be a direct contradiction.”
Mr Firth argues that the two cited cases were exercises of discretion
under section 53(1) of the Act and not determinations as to
creditworthiness.
I agree with this position and in doing so refer specifically to the
reference in the Imperial
Hotel matter to “I am not prepared to licence people and projects
which are shown to be probably unprofitable and personally
creditworthiness.”
It seems to me that His Honour made a distinction between a project being
unprofitable and personal creditworthiness.
The same can be said of the Hydra Café finding. His Honour did not
find that the applicant was not creditworthy, rather that
to grant a licence
“for the entertainment side of the application only .... would not lead to
viability” and that he
“should not grant a licence which will
necessarily fail on a certain non profitability.”
In my opinion neither of the cited cases are definitive in saying that the
licensing authority must consider financial viability in
determining
creditworthiness. Rather, the first, in particular, was an, extreme case where
His Honour exercised his discretion both
in the interest of the industry and of
the applicant.”
Even if I am wrong on the issue of viability being a consideration in
determining credit worthiness, I am satisfied that the proposed
operation will
be viable when fully operational and will as I have said earlier be one of the
top performing clubs in South Australia.
I note that the National Australia Bank has approved in principle finance up
to $3.2 million to assist with the development of the
facility. I am satisfied
as to the club’s credit worthiness.
I turn to the evidence of Dr Delfabro. I will not detail his qualifications
and experience, suffice to say he is recognized as a
subject expert by all
Dr Delfabro gave evidence based on the Productivity Commission findings
(1999) supported by various State studies that
“showed clear positive
relationships suggesting that (at the State level) a greater density of EGMs
per capita was associated
with higher per capita expenditure and higher problem
gambling prevalence rates”.
“problem gambling
prevalence rates were also positively related to the density of EGMs per 1000
He then gave evidence of a Commission analysis which
examined the relationship between the demand for counselling services and EGM
densities per 1000 people using data maintained by the Victorian Department of
Human Services for counselling services in different
parts of Victoria. The
result showing that
“there was greater demand for problem gambling
counselling services in areas with a high density of EGMs”
tempered somewhat by the observation that “it may also be that counselling
services are more strongly promoted in
areas where there are more
Subsequent studies Livingstone (2001), Marshall and Baker (2001) and Delfabro
(2002 have generally been very consistent with the Commission’s
I accept these as authorative studies and findings. However, the
concentration of gaming machines in this locality is less than the
average, currently 1 gaming machine per 200 people and 1 gaming machine per 1164
people if this application is approved compared
to a State figure of 1 per 116
Dr Delfabro also provided summaries of research that found “net
expenditure and EGM densities were found to be significantly
and negatively
correlated with indices of social disadvantage. I accept this but I have
already found that with the exception of
some pockets of social disadvantage the
locality should not be classified as significantly socially disadvantaged.
Mr Costello also called evidence from two residents who live in the near
vicinity of the club on the issue of the likely social effect
of the grant of
the licence on the local community. Mr Firth submits that this is not relevant
but I agree with Mr Costello that
section 15(5)(a) requires me to have regard to
this. The emphasis may be on problem gambling but the social effect of the
is not limited to this.
Mr Jesse Robert Carino
255 Fosters Road
Mr Carino has lived at his current address, which is across the road from the
proposed venue, for 4 years. In brief his evidence
he found out
comfortable with the proposal;
community environment and gaming machines do not represent ‘what the
community is about’ - the community is about
rehabilitation;
he believes that
gaming is inappropriate for this community;
there are other
venues on the perimeter of this community with gaming machines, eg Roosters
Club, Highlander, Windsor and the Enfield.
On cross examination by Mr Firth, Mr Carino said:-
he is aware of
the OG Hotel and Grand North - he hasn’t been to Grand North but does play
the pokies at the OG Hotel;
he is not a
problem gambler;
he would use the
dining facilities at the Juventus Club but would not play the gaming machines as
a mater of principle;
he is not a
member, does not follow soccer and does not use ‘the club’s existing
facilities.
Ms Judith Ann Marie Moule
Ms Moule has lived at her
current address with her husband and 3 children for 5 years. In brief her
evidence is:
the prospect of
the facility with gaming machines does not please her;
the crime rate
will go up;
children will be
attracted to the club;
property values
will go down;
there are enough
gaming facilities in the area
she is generally
opposed to gaming machines but does go to venues with gaming machines;
she does not
play gaming machines.
Mr Costello submits that this is the only evidence before me to
indicate the community’s attitude to a 40 machine gaming machine
the locality.
In part he is right, but I also have the evidence of the club membership,
though its executive, that the membership supports this
Having heard Mr Carino and Ms Moule I come to the conclusion that Mr Carino
is of the view that gaming machine venues can be tolerated
if they are located
in someone else’s backyard and Ms Moule simply is opposed to gaming
machines, particularly in this locality.
There is no evidence before me to
support her position that the existence of a further gaming venue in the
locality will lead to
an increase in crime or that housing values will
The issue of social impact is of course subjective but having regard to the
key locality profile, the number of gaming machines per
head of population in
the key locality, the average NGR for existing venues and the expected increase
in NGR for the club, I am satisfied
that to grant this application will have
very little adverse impact on the local community and in particular on the
level of problem
As I have already said, I believe that there may be an adverse impact on the
level of gambling at existing venues, in particular,
the super profitable
hotels, but I suspect that may well be a benefit to the community.
I am satisfied as to the requirements of section 15(4), 15(5) and 15(A) of
the Act, and I see no reason to exercise my discretion
to refuse this
application. Therefore I grant the application subject to the conditions agreed
by the club being imposed on the
LIQUOR AND GAMBLING
COMMISSIONER
Date of Order: 26 May 2006
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (124 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter