URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACAT/2025/49.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:53:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
EKS v YGP [2025] SACAT 49 (23 June 2025)
NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] SACAT 49
Member Frawley
23 June 2025
HEARING DATE
13 June 2025
SACAT FILE NO.
2025/SA000526
This decision deals with an application by the mother of a six-year-old
child to approve a proposed change of his name pursuant to
Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act 1996
. The applicant
sought to remove her son’s middle name (which is his paternal
grandfather’s name) and change his surname
to a combination of his
paternal father’s surname and his mother’s partner’s surname.
The applicant sought to change the child’s name on the basis that the
child has limited contact with his father and that he
may experience confusion
and distress at having a last name that is different from the rest of the family
with whom he primarily
resides. She gave evidence of the child referring to
himself by using combined surnames and that he refers to her partner as his
father, whereas he refers to his biological father by his first name.
The application was opposed by the biological father of the child as he
submitted the child was too young to understand the implications
change, and that it would dilute his connection to the paternal side of his
family. The father gave opposing evidence about
how the child refers to himself
as his father. He also told the Tribunal about how the child was scheduled to
see a psychologist
to determine why he has been resistant to spending time with
his paternal family.
Held, dismissing the application:
The Tribunal is
reasonably satisfied that the child is unable to understand the meaning and
implications of a change of name;
Tribunal’s opinion, this application is premature;
It is not in the
child’s best interests to change his name until he is more mature and able
to understand the meaning and implications
of the application and form an
independent view of it, until his parents seek further counselling and improve
their communication,
until he seeks psychological assistance to determine the
reasons for him refusing contacting with his father and paternal grandparents
and until there is more clarity as to whether his father’s contact will
increase with him or not.
Births, deaths and marriages – Application to change a child’s
name – Best interests of the child – Child
is unable to understand
the meaning and implications of the change of name
LEGISLATION CONSIDERED
Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act 1996
CASES CONSIDERED
[2023] SACAT 88
Beach v Stemmler
[1979] FCWA 1
(1979) FLC 90-692
Chapman v Palmer
[1978] FamCA 86
(1978) 4 Fam LR 462
[2021] SACAT 73
[2021] SACAT 4
[2022] SACAT 5
[2021] SACAT 68
[2022] SACAT 72
[2024] SACAT 2
[2023] SACAT 76
YIR v VYW & Anor
[2023] SACAT 64
[2018] SACAT 52
REPRESENTATION
The applicant appeared in person
The respondent appeared in person
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s decision pursuant to
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
. The parties and participants of the proceedings have been
de-identified in accordance with the Tribunal’s anonymisation policy.
Other facts and details that may lead to the identification of any person may
have also been anonymised or omitted. These changes
do not affect the
Tribunal’s decision or its reasons for decision.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Dismissal of an application to register a change of child's
Made under the
Births, Deaths and Marriages
Registration Act 1996
Findings of the Tribunal
application is made by the applicant mother, EKS, of the child, HQH born in
December 2018. She seeks the Tribunal's approval
to change the child's name to
current first name, current last name, stepfather’s surname or, in the
alternative, to current
first name, father’s surname-stepfather’s
application is made under
Births, Deaths and Marriages
Registration Act 1996
(the Act), which provides that an application for
registration of a change of a child's name may be made by one parent if the
approves the change of name.
other parent named on the birth certificate, YGP, has been served with the
application and supporting documents and opposes the
proposed name change.
Accordingly, the matter proceeded to a hearing.
of the Act provides that the Tribunal may, on application by a child's
parent, approve a proposed change of name for the child if
satisfied that the
change is in the child's best interests.
of the Act also provides that a change of a child's name must not be
registered unless:
26(a) The child consents to the change of name; or
26(b) The child is unable to understand the meaning and implications of the
change of name.
considering the principles to apply when determining whether the proposed change
of name is in the child's best interests as required
of the Act,
I have had regard to the case of
[2018] SACAT 52
Justice Hughes considered the principles set out in two decisions of the Family
Court of Australia, namely
Chapman v Palmer
[1978] FamCA 86
(1978) 4 Fam LR 462
Beach v Stemmler
[1979] FCWA 1
(1979) FLC 90-692.
Justice Hughes expressed the view
that the Tribunal should be guided by the approach taken in those cases when the
Tribunal is considering
the application of
of the Act and the
concept of the child's best interests as set out in the Act.
relevant principles and criteria that must be considered and applied
7.a The desires of the parents are of secondary importance when
put alongside the welfare and, where applicable, the wishes of the
children involved. The welfare of the child is the paramount consideration and
must be determined on the facts of the particular
7.b The short and long term effects of any change to the child's surname;
7.c Any embarrassment likely to be experienced by the child if his name is
different from that of the parent with custody or care
and control;
7.d Any confusion of identity which may arise for the child if his name is
changed or is not changed;
7.e The effect which any change of surname may have on the relationship
between the child and the parent whose name the child bore
marriage/relationship;
7.f The effect of frequent or random changes of name;
7.g The advantages both in the short term and in the long term which will
accrue to the child if his name remains as it is now;
7.h The contact that the other parent has had and is likely to have in the
future with the child: and
7.i The degree of identification that the child will now have with each
and YGP commenced a relationship in or around January 2014 and HQH was born in
December 2018.
name was formally registered on the Registrar of Births, Deaths and Marriages as
current first and middle names, father’s
surname. EKS says that HQH's
first name was agreed upon well before his birth date and his surname was
assumed and never questioned
at the time. EKS says that YGP attempted to change
HQH's first name to "current middle name", HQH's Paternal Grandfather's name,
however she vehemently opposed this. Nevertheless, YGP was insistent that his
father's name be utilised so whilst in a state of recovery
(and somewhat
non-cognisant), she agreed to adopt the current middle name as HQH's middle
YGP disputes this and says
that HQH's name was registered with the full agreement of EKS.
and YGP married in September 2019.
From around October 2019, the relationship between EKS and YGP broke down and
EKS began to spend several nights each week at her
parents' home with HQH. By
the beginning of 2020, EKS and HQH were residing permanently at her parents'
commenced a relationship with MEF, HQH’s stepfather, in or around May
2020. MEF has had full-time contact with HQH since
June 2020. EKS and MEF
married in November 2021. They have two children together, AMK (born May 2021)
and XQH (born May
has had the same contact with HQH for a while, namely:
Wednesdays from 3.30pm - 7.00pm;
(b) Fridays from 3.30pm - 7.00pm; and
(c) Saturdays from 9.00am - 3.30pm.
are no orders under the
Family Law Act 1975
concerning parental
responsibility for the child or the parents spending time and having contact
with the child.
There are no
intervention orders in place and the father pays child support for the
matter proceeded as a contested hearing on 13 June 2025. Present at the hearing
were EKS, MEF, YGP, and HQH's paternal grandparents.
to an order by Senior Member Rainford on 29 April 2025, both EKS and YGP agreed
that it was not appropriate for the Tribunal
to interview HQH given his young
age of six. Hence, HQH was not present at the hearing and nor was he interviewed
by the Tribunal.
the hearing, EKS provided detailed evidence on oath and also made submissions.
In summary, she said that:
(a) HQH lives with her and MEF on a full-time basis and has done so since June
2020 and this is unlikely to change in the immediate
HQH has called MEF "dad"
from a very early age through no encouragement or
On the few occasions that
HQH does mention YGP, he always refers to him by his first name;
(b) HQH has refused to have any sleepovers with YGP for over one and a half
years. HQH mentioned that YGP forced him to stay at
his house one night even
though he cried continuously for EKS and wanted to call her, but YGP did not let
him. Ever since then, HQH
has not wanted to stay overnight at YGP's
(c) She does not believe that changing HQH's surname will have any deleterious
effect on him in the short or long term. If anything,
it will enhance his
security and sense of identity being integral to both
(d) Changing HQH's surname will simplify the identification process when
dealing with schools, doctors, professionals and other
(e) She has been reluctant to adopt MEF's last name for fear it will make HQH
feel ostracised from their family. Nevertheless, it
is something that she will
be doing shortly. If HQH's last name is different from EKS, MEF and that of his
sisters, this will only
serve to cause him extreme anxiety and confusion. It
will also cause him embarrassment when AMK is due to start school at the
(f) HQH has already started expressing embarrassment about YGP being involved in
his school life and school friends. It is the reason
he does not want YGP to
pick him up from school, attend school events such as sports day and swimming
lessons. HQH has become
"so distressed, volatile and angry at the thought of
[YGP] taking him"
swimming. One reason HQH has provided is that his best
"will think it's
HQH has been
anxious, stressed, embarrassed, kicking, screaming and heightened at times of
(g) Not changing HQH's surname will result in severe confusion for him and make
him question his identity, something which no six-year-old
child should have to
question. HQH is likely to suffer emotional or psychological distress if his
surname is not changed and this
could perhaps be exacerbated if a change of
surname is delayed until he is
(h) Changing HQH's surname should not affect the relationship he has with YGP or
his family. To make HQH feel the most safe and secure,
EKS would expect YGP and
his family to embrace a change of surname and promote familial relationships on
both sides. If HQH's name
is legally changed but people important to him fail to
use that name, then HQH will experience confusion and possibly
provided evidence on affirmation and also made submissions. In summary, he
(a) He is supportive of EKS's application to the Tribunal;
(b) HQH says that his name is "current first name, father’s surname,
stepfather’s surname" in their home;
(c) It would be better for HQH's identity if he had the same surname as his two
(d) He is concerned that HQH may view himself as not part of the family if he
has a different surname;
(e) HQH did not want to see his paternal grandparents this year when YGP was
overseas but did the year prior.
provided evidence on oath and also made submissions. In summary, he
(a) He respectfully opposes the application;
(b) He was never aware there were any issues with HQH's name until he received
notice of the Tribunal application;
(c) Six and a half is too young to fully grasp the implications of a name
(d) If HQH's name is changed to either current first name, father’s
surname, stepfather’s surname or, in the alternative,
to current first
name, father’s surname-stepfather’s surname, it may dilute HQH's
connection to the paternal side of
his family. He is also concerned about the
change of name if EKS and MEF were to end their relationship;
(e) HQH has never told him his name is "current first name, father’s
surname, stepfather’s surname". HQH knows his name
is "current first name,
current middle name, father’s surname " and refers to himself in this way
in his father's care;
(f) HQH’s name was agreed upon at birth. HQH’s middle name comes
from his paternal grandfather and he denies there was
any attempt to change his
name while EKS was in recovery from birth;
(g) There are many children that keep their father’s surname even when
their parents have divorced.
(h) In his experience talking with his son, his son has told him that he enjoys
swimming, and he has never indicated embarrassment
to him about him taking him
places and nor has he expressed any embarrassment about his name to him;
(i) He does acknowledge that although he wants increased time with HQH, this
desire is not currently reciprocated by HQH and he
is distressed by his
son’s reluctance to spend time with him. He would like to be more involved
in his son’s life, including
sports day and further time and overnights.
He acknowledges that HQH is living exclusively with his mother, but in his view,
with HQH should be shared evenly between himself and EKS and that is what
he would like in the future. The last sleep over was approximately
ago. He acknowledges that his son did cry for his mother at night but then
settled and was happy in the morning and said,
“sleepovers are fun
aren’t they?”
. The was the last sleep over;
(j) In recent months, his contact with HQH has improved;
(k) A name change is not a priority at the moment and, in his opinion,
emotional and attachment issues should be addressed prior;
(l) He is concerned that his son acts differently between the two split
households. For example, at his home, his son refers to
him as “dad”
and only refers to him by his first name when he is being cheeky. His son refers
to MEF in his home by his
first name and does not call MEF “dad’;
(m) He is concerned about parental alienation. HQH will sometimes not want to
attend contact with him due to missing out on other
exciting family events and
he is concerned these exciting family events are scheduled at the same time as
his contact with HQH. There
have been occasions when EKS has refused to
encourage contact with him and HQH. He also received a text message from EKS to
that HQH may never want contact with him again. He has also called
the home for scheduled telephone contact and EKS did not answer
(n) He feels that a precedent was set at the beginning of the break up that EKS
was the primary carer and he regrets this precedent
was set. Another precedent
that has been set is that HQH knows that if he argues against contact then the
(o) He and EKS have had some counselling in an attempt to improve their
relationship and the plan is for HQH to then seek some psychological
assistance,
and he is awaiting the date of an appointment.
paternal grandfather provided evidence on oath. In summary, he said he and the
paternal grandmother went to grandparents day last
year and EKS ignored them. He
and his wife used to be very close to HQH. When they came over, EKS did not
encourage any contact and
they then left.
reply, EKS said, in summary:
(a) The application was precipitated by HQH’s conversation with his
sister AMK. When I questioned how this was the case, EKS
explained that her
daughter, AMK came home when HQH was approximately five years old and referred
to herself by her full name, including
her surname because there are lots of
girls with the same first name and her surname was used to identify her. HQH
then said his
name was current first name, father’s surname,
stepfather’s surname and this was not corrected by EKS or MEF;
(b) When I questioned whether the application was premature given that the plan
is for HQH to see a psychologist, EKS denied that
the application is premature.
She said she is reluctant to get HQH assessed by a psychologist because she
feels that there has been
a lot of focus on HQH and his issues when there should
be focus on what his parents can do to support him emotionally. EKS said it
important that she and YGP work on better communication before HQH receives
support from a psychologist;
(c) She agrees that HQH acting differently in the two households is
concerning;
(d) For YGP to suggest she may break up with MEF is offensive;
(e) It is not her responsibility to make HQH’s grandparents feel
comfortable and HQH’s grandparents could have said
her on grandparents’ day. In her opinion, HQH’s paternal
grandparents appeared as cold to her
as she would have appeared to them. EKS was
busy on that day and was already there with her parents and MEF’s
(f) She has always acted in HQH’s best interests and has not alienated
him from his father.
I questioned EKS about the alleged text message she sent to YGP, she admitted
that she did send a text messages to him that said
“he doesn’t
want to see you voluntarily and don’t think he would have an issue never
seeing you again”.
When I questioned her as to how she would come to
this conclusion, she admitted that she should not have sent the message but came
to the conclusion HQH would not have an issue not seeing his father based on his
emotionally distressed behaviours when he saw his
Does HQH consent to the change of name or is he unable to
understand the meaning and implications of the change of name?
EKS feels that HQH agrees to the change of name, all parties agreed at the
hearing that, given his age, HQH is unable to
understand the meaning and
implications of a change of name.
is young and, in my view, likely to be influenced by the parent with whom he is
spending the majority of his time. This consideration
goes to the weight to be
given to the evidence about the wishes of
HQH’s age of six, the fact that I did not interview him, the evidence that
he uses different names in different households
and the totality of the evidence
before me, I cannot be satisfied that he consents to the change of name. Given
his young age, I
am reasonably satisfied that he is unable to understand the
meaning and implications of a change of name.
What is in the best interests of HQH?
have considered all of the material before me, including EKS’s application
to the Tribunal, lodged 17 February 2025, and supporting
documentations,
including identification documentation, marriage and divorce documentation,
email from EKS dated 29 April 2025, email
from YGP, dated 28 April 2025,
statutory declaration by EKS, dated 28 March 2025 and submissions from EKS dated
13 June 2025. I have
also considered the oral submissions and evidence provided
at the hearing.
have considered that EKS and MEF would like HQH’s surname to be changed
and that YGP would like HQH’s surname to remain
as it is. I have placed
weight on their wishes, however, their wishes are of secondary importance.
my view, this application is premature and it is not currently in the best
interests of HQH to grant this application. Both parties
agree that the child
should not be interviewed and is unable to understand the meaning and
implications of a change in
I accept this is no bar to
me approving the name change application, but I have heard evidence that this
child is showing signs of
emotional distress at times of contact with his father
and is refusing contact with his paternal family. Both EKS and YGP accept
the child may be acting differently between the two split households. For
example, he calls YGP “dad” at his home
and MEF “dad” at
EKS’s home. EKS and YGP are currently engaged in counselling and the plan
is for the child to
have some psychological sessions to determine what is behind
his reluctance to see his father. YGP would like to have increased time
son and is unsure whether he will seek family court orders in the future. YGP
says that recently his contact with HQH has
improved. It is simply too early to
say with any certainty what sort of relationship YGP will have with HQH and how
a change of name
might affect HQH’s best
psychological evidence, at this stage, it is not possible to make a finding as
to why HQH is refusing contact with his biological
father. However, YGP has
raised parental alienation as a concern. Given the age of HQH, being six, I was
concerned about the text
message that EKS sent YGP that
doesn’t want to see you voluntarily and don’t think he would have an
issue never seeing you again”.
To her credit, she acknowledged sending
the message, admitted it should not have been sent and admitted that it would be
for her and YGP to obtain further counselling to address their
relationship. I am also concerned about the child’s reaction
with his father and evidence that he has also recently refused contact with his
paternal grandparents. EKS informed me
at the hearing that it is not her
responsibility to make HQH’s paternal grandparents feel comfortable. This
may be so, but
I am concerned about HQH’s current connection with his
biological father and paternal family.
my opinion, it is too early to say what are the short and long term effects of
any change of the child’s surname and whether
there are any advantages for
HQH if his name remains as it is. EKS argues that there will be no deleterious
effects on him in the
short or long term and, if anything, it will enhance his
security and sense of identity being integral to both families. However,
is no psychological or medical evidence supporting this submission. Much of the
evidence I heard suggests that HQH feels part
of EKS and MEF’s household
but is resistant to contact with his biological father and paternal
grandparents. The reasons for
this are not currently known, but YGP has raised a
concern about parental alienation.
also argues a change of name will simplify the identification process when
dealing with schools, doctors, and other Government
bodies. I accept this may be
so, but I place little weight on this submission as there are many families with
multiple children that
have different surnames.
reject the submission of EKS that if I do not change HQH’s name, he may
not feel accepted and an intrinsic part of both
The evidence is that
HQH has a very strong familial association and identification with MEF and EKS
and his sisters. HQH also has
a strong connection to MEF’s parents whom he
sees on a weekly basis.
anything, the evidence is that HQH is struggling with the connection with his
paternal family. For unknown reasons, he is resistant
to contact with his father
and paternal grandparents when he used to enjoy this contact.
submits that HQH will suffer embarrassment if his name is not changed
particularly when AMK starts school next year. EKS refers
to embarrassment HQH
has already suffered due to YGP being involved in his school life and
However, a name change
will not change the fact that YGP is HQH’s biological father, and it will
not stop HQH being embarrassed,
if he is, about his father. EKS also refers to a
concern that when she changes her surname, she has a fear HQH will feel
from her family. I accept it is possible HQH may feel some
embarrassment should his siblings, stepfather and mother have a different
surname and I have placed weight on this submission. However, if HQH’s
surname were changed to his stepfather’s as proposed,
he would no longer
have the surname of his biological father and he would no longer have the middle
name which connects him to his
paternal grandfather. If HQH’s surname were
changed to “father’s surname-stepfather’s surname”, he
would still have a different surname to every person that he lives with and he
would also no longer have his paternal grandfather’s
name as a middle
submits that, if his name is not changed, HQH will suffer severe confusion and
it will make him question his identity. EKS submits
that HQH is likely to suffer
emotional and psychological distress if his surname is not changed and this
could perhaps be exacerbated
if a change of surname is delayed until he is
EKS submits that she will
be changing her surname to MEF’s surname shortly and if HQH’s last
name is different from hers,
MEF’s and his siblings, this will cause him
extreme anxiety and confusion.
Unfortunately, from the evidence I heard, HQH is already confused about his name
and is acting in different ways between the two
split households. I accept the
evidence that he uses the name “first name, father’s surname,
stepfather’s surname”
when he is with EKS and MEF. However, I also
accept the evidence from YGP that when HQH is with him, he refers to himself as
name, paternal grandfather’s name, father’s
surname”. I do not consider a name change would reduce his confusion.
also submits that any reference to YGP’s family tradition of being named
after his paternal grandfather is anachronistic
and of little relevance. I
reject this submission as it can be tradition and create meaning and belonging
for families to call children
after family members. In
, Senior Member Rainford said
“the views expressed by the
father of the child regarding the passing on of a last or surname as a
‘birthright’
in today’s modern (and generally, more receptive
and accepting) society is quite anachronistic and is not in keeping with best
interest considerations. Today, it cannot be considered the norm to assign a
child the father’s last name, particularly where
the parents were not
legally married. More and more, we are seeing cases of hyphenated last names (of
both parents) and in cases
such as this, where the parent who has the day-to-day
care and responsibility of the child has remarried and had other children,
best interest considerations may gravitate towards a change of last name to the
name of that parent.”
I accept the considerations of Senior Member
Rainford. However, in my view, this case is different. YGP did not express that
his surname
should be used as a “birthright” but rather indicated
that it was important to him that his surname be used and it was
agreed upon at
birth with EKS.
says that she
“doubts [HQH] has any knowledge of his middle name and
would not be able to state it if
also submits that changing his surname would only affirm to him that he is
related to his sisters and he would be confused and
distressed if he knew his
surname is different to that of his
I reject this given
YGP’s evidence that HQH does know his legal name and refers to his legal
name when he is with YGP. In any
event, even if HQH was not aware of his legal
name (on the balance of probabilities, I find he is aware of his legal name), it
not possible to change a child’s surname so it never existed on a birth
certificate.
In relation to
EKS’s submission that she was never fully on board with the paternal
grandfather’s name, that may have
been the case but the reality is that
HQH was registered with that name and named after his paternal grandfather.
have considered EKS’s submission about HQH’s sensitive nature and
that he is likely to be very self-conscious and sensitive
to any negative
attention or even bullying by his peers – whether actual or
I accept her
submission that he does have a sensitive nature. However, there is no evidence
before me to suggest that HQH will have
negative attention or be bullied due to
his name. The only evidence to suggest any concern from peers is that his best
friend thought
it would be weird if his father took him
I did not understand
the concern expressed by HQH’s best friend to be connected to HQH’s
surname. I reject the submission
“is not doubt that he is
likely to experience negative emotional impacts if his surname is not changed at
this time.”
The evidence from YGP is that HQH knows his name and has
never demonstrated embarrassment about his name. EKS has given evidence that
“We always tell [HQH] that each family is different and in doing so,
want to assure him that having two dads is ‘normal.’
We would never
want [HQH] to feel different as a result of circumstances not of his own making.
We advocate a healthy relationship
with [YGP] and are encouraging of him
spending time with [YGP] even during periods where he has absolutely
. Given this evidence, should any negative emotions arise, EKS
and MEF can explain to HQH that many children have different surnames
siblings and parents and this makes them no less a part of the family. As said
by Senior Member Ward, it is a common modern
phenomenon, for reasons to do with
blended families, remarriages and the like, that a child may have a surname that
is different
from their primary carer’s
accept that there have been no frequent or random name changes for HQH.
my view, it is too soon to say whether a change of surname will affect
HQH’s relationship with YGP. He is currently resistant
to contact and the
reasons for this are not clear. YGP is concerned that there may be parental
alienation. If this is true, a name
change may further alienate HQH from YGP and
his paternal family. I cannot make a finding that there is parental alienation
balance of probabilities however I was concerned about some of the
evidence including the text message from EKS to YGP indicating
that HQH may
never want contact with YGP, EKS allegedly refusing to come to the door to
encourage contact, YGP calling during scheduled
telephone contact with no answer
by EKS, EKS’s attitude on grandparents’ day that it was not her
responsibility to make
the paternal grandparents comfortable, and an allegation
that exciting events are organised during HQH’s contact with his father.
On the other hand, I also heard evidence that EKS denies there is any parental
alienation, that she has encouraged contact, that
HQH was upset at a sleepover
at YGP’s home and YGP refused to allow him to call his mother and this is
why HQH has refused
further sleepovers, there have been occasions that YGP has
persisted with contact despite HQH not wishing to attend and one occasion
used insulting and foul language towards EKS, which scared HQH and
EKS has also submitted that
given her agreement to meet with a psychologist to determine why HQH is so
reluctant to spend time with
YGP, this should highlight her willingness and
proactiveness in encouraging HQH to have a better relationship with YGP for
own mental and emotional
well-being.
have considered both proposed name changes and for the reasons provided, in my
view, this application is premature and it is not
in HQH’s best interests
to grant either of the proposed names. I accept that it is not necessarily the
norm to assign a child
the father’s last name and that more cases are
being seen of hyphenated last names. However, this alone, does not mean the
application is in HQH’s best interests. I do not consider it in
HQH’s best interests that his name be changed at this
stage. He is too
young to understand the implications of a change of name and put his views to
the Tribunal. Further, I heard evidence
that he is acting differently between
the household of his mother and father and I am concerned he is currently
have considered EKS’s argument that she and MEF have full-time care of HQH
and it is in his best interests that both parents
are recognised as well as his
siblings. I accept the surname of HQH’s mother, stepfather and siblings
are relevant and he may
shortly become the only member of the household that he
lives in with that has a different surname and this may cause him some
embarrassment.
I also accept that HQH’s siblings are close in age and he
is likely to have a life-long relationship with them and I place
weight on this
as relevant. However, the proposal is to change the surname to include reference
to MEF’s surname not EKS’s
surname. I accept EKS’s evidence
that she intends to shortly change her name, but she has not yet done so.
Further, as I have
already found, in my view HQH already feels connected to MEF
and EKS’s family so I do not consider a change of surname will
improve the
connection that he already has. The evidence I heard suggests, for unknown
reasons, he is not feeling connected to his
paternal family.
referred to a number of cases to support her application. Although case law is
relevant to consider, she appropriately acknowledges
that each case needs to be
considered on its merits. In summary, I note:
(a) The decision of
[2023] SACAT 88
is very different to this
case. In that case, the children had no contact with their father and were able
to consent to the application.
Further, in that case, there was evidence from a
psychologist supportive of no contact. The children in that case were 12 and 10
years old respectively at the time of the Tribunal agreeing to a name change;
(b) The decision of
[2021] SACAT 68
involved a case whereby there
was an error in the previous recording of a child’s name and the child did
not know about the
error. Further, there were Family Court orders approving the
name. In that case, unlike here, the child was able to consent to the
change and the child was 10 years old at the time of the Tribunal agreeing to a
name change;
(c) The decision of
XCK v OVW & Anor
[2023] SACAT 76
involved a case
whereby there was an intervention order between the parents. In that case, there
was an altercation between the children’s
mother and the father’s
parents which was traumatising to the children and a significant factor in them
wishing to change their
surname. Unlike in this case, there was independent
evidence from a school principal and a psychologist and there was no meaningful
the decision to change the name of an eight and
seven year old child;
(d) The decision of
[2022] SACAT 72
involved an application that
was primarily brought in response to the father being charged with offences
related to terrorism and
neo-Nazi ideology, and the consequent media attention.
In that case, Senior Member Rainford said,
“Today, it cannot be
considered the norm to assign a child the father’s last name, particularly
where the parents were
not legally married. More and more, we are seeing cases
of hyphenated last names (of both parents) and in cases such as this, where
parent who has the day-to-day care and responsibility of the child has remarried
and had other children, then best interest considerations
may gravitate towards
a change of last name to the name of that parent.”
However, in that
case, the child was 12 and able to consent to the name change and had not had
months which is very different to the facts
(e) The decision of
YIR v YVW and Anor
[2023] SACAT 64
is, again, very
different to this case. That case involved a child with no registered name which
caused difficulties which impacted
negatively on the child as he had no Medicare
card, and his carer was unable to deal with Centrelink in relation to him. This
similar to the case of
[2021] SACAT 73
that also involved a
child with no registered name;
[2021] SACAT 4
, the evidence there was that the three
year old female child did not realise she had a different surname from the
people with whom
she lived. This is unlike the situation here whereby HQH uses
his correct legal name at his father’s home.
my opinion, this application is premature. It is not in HQH’s best
interests to change his name until he is more mature and
able to understand the
meaning and implications of the application and form an independent view of it,
until his parents seek further
counselling and improve their communication,
until he seeks psychological assistance to determine the reasons for him
refusing contact
with his father and paternal grandparents and until there is
more clarity as to whether his father’s contact will increase
with him or
the key factors I consider relevant to this application being premature and not
being in HQH’s best interests to grant
is the young age of HQH, HQH using
different names in his father and mother’s households, concerns of
parental alienation,
the current uncertainty regarding the father’s
reasons for his refusal of contact with his father. This psychological input
could be highly relevant to any future change of
name consideration.
said by Senior Member Rainford in
[2021] SACAT 73
I am mindful that in determining an appropriate name for the child,
that I am not tasked with deciding who is the better parent. I
have no doubt
that both the mother and father love the child equally in their own way, despite
the acrimony and differences between
am not satisfied that it is HQH’s best interests to have a legal change of
name at this point in time.
does not prevent future applications as access arrangements are resolved, HQH
matures and things are clearer in terms of what
is in his best interests when it
comes to his surname.
Tribunal does not imply that HQH’s best interests is to bear his
father’s surname because it is his father’s
surname. Had HQH been
given his mother’s surname at birth and the father brought an application
to have it changed, the Tribunal
would have similarly rejected the application
as not being in HQH’s best interests. The conclusion is simply that,
having been
given that name, it has not been demonstrated it is in HQH’s
bests interests to change the name at this point in
Tribunal is not satisfied on balance that the proposed change of name is in
HQH’s bests interests and accordingly approval
for the changes sought,
either the name “current first name, father’s surname,
stepfather’s surname” or,
in the alternative, “current
surname, father’s surname-stepfather’s surname” is not
Orders of the Tribunal
application for approval to change the name of a child is
Applicant’s submissions,
paragraph 5.1.
Statutory Declaration of EKS,
dated 28 March 2025, paragraph 2.
Applicant’s submissions,
paragraph 5.1.
Applicant’s submissions,
paragraph 5.1.
Applicant’s submissions,
paragraph 5.1.
Order of Member Aglieco, dated
18 March 2025.
Order of Member Aglieco, dated
18 March 2025.
Applicant’s submissions,
paragraph 5.1; 2021/SA011602
Applicant’s submissions,
paragraph 5.9.
Applicant’s
submissions, paragraph 5.8.
Applicant’s
submissions, paragraph 5.2.
Applicant’s
submissions, paragraph 5.3.
Applicant’s
submissions, paragraph 5.3.
Applicant’s
submissions, paragraph 5.3.
Applicant’s
submissions, paragraph 5.4.
Applicant’s
submissions, paragraph 5.5;
[2024] SACAT 2.
XCK v OVW & Anor
[2023] SACAT 76
at paragraph
Order of Senior Member
Rainford, dated 29 April 2025.
Applicant’s
submissions, paragraph 5.9.
Applicant’s
submissions, paragraph 5.9.
Applicant’s
submissions, paragraph 5.3.
Applicant’s
submission, paragraph 5.4.
Applicant’s
submissions, paragraph 5.3.
Applicant’s
submissions, paragraph 9.
Applicant’s
submissions, paragraph 6.
Applicant’s
submissions, paragraph 13.
Applicant’s
submissions, paragraph 5.3.
Re HQM & EEM
[2022] SACAT 5
Email from EKS to the
Tribunal, dated 29 April 2025.
Email from EKS to the
Tribunal, dated 29 April 2025.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.35 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter