URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SADC/2025/125.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:55:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS FOR THE STATE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA v MUSOLINO [2025] SADC 125 (3 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Civil: Interlocutory Application)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS FOR THE STATE OF SOUTH
AUSTRALIA v MUSOLINO
[2025] SADC 125
Decision of Her Honour Judge
(ex tempore)
3 October 2025
INTERLOCUTORY INJUNCTIONS - RELEVANT CONSIDERATIONS
CRIMINAL LAW - PROCEDURE - CONFISCATION OF ASSETS - FORFEITURE OR
CONFISCATION - PROCEDURE - GENERALLY
CONSENT ORDERS - GENERAL CONTRACTUAL PRINCIPLES - SETTLEMENTS AND
COMPROMISE - VARIATIONS AND STAYS
These proceedings relate to an urgent application by the Respondent for an
interlocutory injunction seeking to restrain the Director
of Public Prosecutions
from executing a sale of land contract for property forfeited pursuant to
consent orders. The application
also sought to have other orders made by consent
varied or stayed. The consent orders were made following agreement reached
to which the Director gave up rights to forfeited assets under the
Criminal Assets Confiscation Act
and the Respondent and the First
Interested Party (his wife) agreed to the Director acting to dispose of other
property notwithstanding
an anticipated appeal of the Respondent's criminal
conviction.
1. Insufficient grounds established for interlocutory injunction.
2. Application for stay or variation of consent orders refused.
Criminal Assets Confiscation Act 2005
Uniform Civil Rules
(SA), referred to.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS FOR THE STATE OF SOUTH
AUSTRALIA v MUSOLINO
[2025] SADC 125
respondent, Mr Musolino, has brought an urgent application for an injunction to
stop the imminent sale by the Crown of the property
at 28 Emmet Road, Crafers
West, South Australia, (the “Crafers West property”). The property
was automatically forfeited
to the Crown upon his conviction on 12 December 2024
for a serious drug offence under s.32(1) of the
Controlled Substances
disposal of the Crafers West property is presently being undertaken by the Crown
in accordance with the consent orders made on
13 June 2025
The application and procedural background
Musolino confirmed through his counsel that he was seeking only an injunction
for a short time to prevent the imminent signing
by the Director of the contract
for sale of the property. Though, ultimately, the application seeks broader
relief about setting
aside the consent orders. I have raised a concern in this
matter with counsel for Mr Musolino that the application for injunction
be appropriate to achieve the kind of relief his client substantially seeks.
This was particularly so in view of the terms
of the earlier consent orders
being akin to a compromise or settlement having been reached with the Director
for substantial resolution
of these confiscation proceedings.
have difficulty in reconciling the court now ordering an injunction that would
be at odds with the disposal orders previously made
by consent on 13 June 2025.
It seems to me that the relief sought would necessarily require a variation or
partial stay of the disposal
orders, and that this is actually the form of
relief sought by Mr Musolino. In any event, I have power to deal with such
pursuant to UCR 12.1. I will now turn to the key
Appeal of criminal conviction
factor particularly relevant to Mr Musolino's application concerns his appeal
against conviction for a prescribed drug offence.
Director has pointed out that the parties were aware of the appeal back in June
when the consent orders were made; so much is
apparent from recital (I) of the
consent orders which expressly mentions the appeal proceedings relating to the
commercial drug offence
as ‘still pending’. Mr Musolino's
application for bail pending hearing of the appeal was granted by orders of
on 24 July 2025 (see FDN14 of SCCRM-25-016421). The hearing of the
appeal has been set-down for 18 February 2026, being the first
hearing the bail application Bleby J formed a view that Mr Musolino has
reasonable prospects of success on one ground of appeal
and to some extent on
another ground of appeal. I should draw attention to the fact that the criminal
proceedings are separate to
these confiscation proceedings which are in the
civil jurisdiction of this court and governed by the
Criminal Assets
Confiscation Act
which I also refer to as the “
whilst the criminal proceedings are relevant to the confiscation proceedings
they are different proceedings and an appeal against
conviction does not operate
to stay these proceedings. I will say more about this in terms of the provisions
is apparent that in view of the appeal, there is now a prospect of Mr Musolino's
conviction being overturned or quashed. This,
of itself, does not change the
course of the confiscation proceedings; and, more relevantly to the application
here, does not affect
the consent orders, including disposal orders for the
Crafers West property. I will now turn to the Crafers West
Crafers West property
Crown is the current registered proprietor of the Crafers West property and in
accordance with the 13 June consent orders has
been preparing the property for
sale. The Crown has identified a buyer and a contract for sale has been
prepared. The Director was
scheduled to sign it earlier in the week, but that
has been deferred because of the hearing of Mr Musolino's application.
and Mrs Musolino purchased the Crafers West property in 2004 and Mr Musolino has
said his family, including their two adult children,
have a sentimental
attachment to it and the Adelaide Hills region. Further, I have been informed
this morning that loan arrears continue
to accrue to the National Australia Bank
(“NAB”) in relation to this property and there is a prospect of a
sale by NAB. I accept this risk is present regardless of the Crown's
current holding of the property, as NAB's interests as mortgagee
are preserved.
I will now turn to the consent orders of 13 June 2025.
orders of 13 June 2025
consent orders are critical to the determination of this application.
Importantly, both Mr and Mrs Musolino were legally represented
when the consent
orders were made on 13 June 2025.
affidavit of Mr Khor for the Director, that was admitted into evidence earlier
this week, provides a detailed history of the
negotiations between the Director
and Mr and Mrs Musolino's legal representatives (they were separately
represented) in relation
to the properties that were subject to forfeiture,
including not only the Crafers West property, but also the home at Wilsden
in Walkerville. This morning, Mr Musolino sought to contest the extent of
his involvement in the making of those consent orders,
but the evidence before
me is clear that he voluntarily agreed to those orders via his legal
representative at the time, being Mr
is evident from the materials filed by the Director that Mrs Musolino initiated
a proposal for the early sale of the Crafers West
property in a formulation of
draft consent orders, which led to negotiations concerning the proposed form of
consent orders with
the Director. I refer to the exhibits to Mr Khor's
affidavit, particularly at JK-9, JK-10, JK-12 and JK-14, as evidencing those
negotiations.
In the interest of time I will not repeat the terms of the consent
orders in detail. They are before the court. However, I do wish
recital J of the consent orders. It records:
The Applicant, the Respondent and the First Interested Party (“the
Parties”) have come to a negotiated settlement as
to the Respondent's
property [earlier defined as both the Crafers West property and the Walkerville
property] interests as a ‘prescribed
drug offender’ under the Act.
This settlement deals with all of the filed Applications for Exclusions in these
proceedings.
essence, the orders provide for the Musolinos to retain ownership of the
Walkerville home, and for the Crown to have and dispose
of the Crafers West
property - with proceeds from the sale being applied to expenses, a payment to
Mrs Musolino of $120,000 and the
balance to be paid into the District Court
Suitors' Fund where the balance of those proceeds would remain, subject to
Mrs Musolino is then barred by the orders from making any further
claim in relation to the Crafers West property.
Crown proceeded to act on these consent orders and certain extensions of time
were given for the Musolinos to remove personal
effects and hand over keys to
the property. The Director is engaging with an interested buyer of the Crafers
West property and the
Crown also informed the court that preparations for the
sale of the property have been undertaken by the Crown since the consent
were made, noting that further work would be required prior to settlement due to
the dilapidated condition of the property.
am satisfied that in agreeing to the consent orders the Crown has given up
certain rights it would have otherwise retained, particularly
having regard to
the dealings with the Walkerville home by the terms of the consent orders and
its exclusion from forfeiture.
is also apparent from the letter of 22 July 2025, mentioned at JK-18 to Mr
Khor's affidavit, and surrounding correspondence between
Mr Lister for Mr
Musolino and the Director's office, that Mr Musolino had regrets about entering
into the consent orders. That correspondence
indicates the reasons he wishes the
Director to not execute the orders, including:
circumstances where Mr Musolino was suffering financial difficulties flowing
from his arrest and the restraint of his properties
at the time the orders were
condition of the Crafers West property meaning that its sale would result in a
substantially diminished return; and
the prospects of
his ultimate acquittal on appeal which would see the property returned to him if
it is not sold.
are no doubt difficult and harrowing circumstances for the Musolinos. The
operation of the
is designed to result in harsh financial
consequences for serious drug offenders and their families. Mr Musolino's
situation is not
a unique one and this court deals with such matters numerous
times per week.
to my consideration of the application - I am not satisfied that the
circumstances Mr and Mrs Musolino experienced represent
coercion of their will
or duress when agreeing to the consent orders; they were legally represented
and, particularly in Mrs Musolino's
case, very keen to save the Walkerville home
from possession orders. Further, it could not be said that the circumstances
the Musolinos as a consequence of Mr Musolino being charged and
convicted of a serious drug offence were at the hand of the Director.
Director is required, as is the court, to take certain actions under the
. It is apparent from the correspondence between the parties to the
consent orders that the Director was made an offer by Mrs Musolino's
Bidhendi, and that those orders for consent were not initiated by the
will turn now to briefly point out some relevant provisions of the
. Before considering the relief sought, it is necessary to say something
particularly as it
applies where a criminal conviction is subject to appeal. Section 56A(3) of the
provides that the
applies to a deemed forfeiture order
in all respects as if it were a forfeiture order made under s 47(3)(a) in
relation to conviction
for the conviction offence. That is the forfeiture order
relevant in Mr Musolino's case.
Subdivision
then deals with the effect of acquittals and the
quashing of convictions in relation to such forfeiture orders made or taken to
made under s 47(3)(a) being the provision that applies to Mr Musolino's
forfeiture.
64(1)(a) of the
provides, inter alia, that a forfeiture order
made under s 47(3)(a), in relation to a person's conviction of a serious
discharged if the conviction is subsequently quashed. I note
provision exists for the Director to apply, nevertheless, to have the
order confirmed in those circumstances pursuant to s 64(1)(b).
provides for when the Crown can begin dealing with
property specified in a forfeiture order. Relevantly, if a forfeiture order was
made in relation to a person's conviction of a serious offence under
s 91(1)(b)(ii), the Crown may only dispose of, or otherwise
property specified in a forfeiture order after, and only if the order is still
in force - if an appeal against the conviction
has been lodged, the appeal
lapses or is finally determined. That means that the matter would have taken a
different course under
s 91 had the consent orders not been entered into.
91(2) of the
does, however, permit the Crown to dispose of, or
otherwise deal with, property specified in a forfeiture order at an earlier time
with the permission of, and in accordance with any directions of, the court.
That is a matter which I will return to.
Injunctive relief
will only spend a brief moment talking about the injunctive relief sought. As
mentioned, Mr Musolino's application at FDN37 seeks
to set aside the consent
orders made on 13 June 2025 on the grounds that there is a pending appeal; and
further seeks injunctive
relief to restrain the Director from signing a contract
for sale of the Crafers West property.
for Mr Musolino, during the hearing, indicated that it was only the injunctive
aspect of the relief that was to be urgently
pressed - to prevent the signing of
the sale contract, with him seeking the other relief relating to the setting
aside of the orders
to be listed for a later date. Ultimately, for the reasons I
will come to - and also foreshadowed earlier today (refer to the transcript),
am not satisfied that this is a satisfactory course.
principles relevant to the granting of injunctive relief are well-known. It is
suffice for me to deal with them briefly. First,
I note Mr Musolino's counsel
confirmed he would give the usual undertaking as to damages, though I accept
grounds may exist for the
Crown to not be satisfied as to Mr Musolino's
financial capacity to meet that undertaking - ultimately, it is unnecessary to
this issue further.
the court must determine whether the applicant, Mr Musolino, has a prima facie
case - it is not clear to me what prima
facie case or cause of action underpins
the relief being sought, that is the injunctive relief being sought. Here, the
criminal conviction is a separate proceeding and will not affect the
operation of the consent orders as they stand. It seems to me
that if injunctive
relief is to be considered (which I am not sure is appropriate) there must be a
claim directed to a breach of
the consent orders or other grounds for them to be
set aside or varied.
the face of the application and the supporting affidavit, I am not satisfied
that there is any such prima facie case articulated
before me. I will shortly
turn to consider the issue arising from the potential application of s 91
, though ultimately, I am not satisfied this forms a basis
for overturning or varying the consent orders or for ordering of an interim
injunction.
I must consider the balance of convenience and determine whether the
inconvenience or damage to Mr Musolino if the injunction
is refused outweighs
the inconvenience or damage to the Crown if the injunction were granted. As I
have found no prima facie case
underpinning the application for injunction, it
is not strictly necessary for me to go on to deal with the balance of
convenience
element. In any event, I will attempt to deal with it briefly. I am
not satisfied that Mr Musolino will have any significant loss
if the injunction
is not granted. He has deposed to an emotional or sentimental connection to the
Crafers West property and the Adelaide
Hills region. I am not convinced that
such an emotional or sentimental connection establishes a sufficient
inconvenience. To my mind,
the interests of the Crown are detrimentally impacted
if the injunction is granted because the sale of the land will not proceed
the works undertaken by the Crown to date for preparation of the sale will have
been fruitless, at least for a period of time.
I accept that the Crown gave away rights when it entered into the consent orders
particularly concerning the forfeiture
of the Walkerville home - where I have
been informed that title is now solely in the name of Mrs Musolino. I accept
that the Crown
would now suffer detriment if those orders are now interfered
with by an injunction (or the granting of any subsequent relief to
orders aside).
determining whether damages are an adequate remedy for Mr Musolino is also a
relevant consideration. As I have found, there
is a flaw in the element
concerning establishing a prima facie case - so this element does not arise. In
any event, even on Mr Musolino's
case - he will - if his conviction is finally
quashed or set aside, be entitled to financial compensation in respect of the
of his interest in the property.
by Mr Musolino is also a relevant consideration. It is simply unclear to me why
there has been a three-month delay in bringing
this application. Such a delay is
significant in the context of consent orders enabling the Crown to proceed to
dispose of the Crafers
West property - and which it has acted upon. The delay in
bringing the application is a significant factor in my refusing relief.
these reasons, I decline the application for the injunction sought to restrain
the Director from signing the sale contract. I
will now deal with the broader
orders sought by the application for relief as to setting aside certain of the
consent orders. I think
there is good reason to address those aspects
Legal principles relating to the setting aside or
variation of consent orders
Ultimately,
at the heart of the substantive relief sought by Mr Musolino, is the
interference with the consent orders by a variation,
stay, partial-stay or
orders sought for setting them aside.
a general principle, if terms of settlement or compromise of pending proceedings
are expressed in a consent order then there is
an agreement between the parties
for good consideration and the parties are then precluded from proceeding
further with the action
except for the purpose of enforcing the agreement
embodied in the consent order. The consent orders made in this matter are of the
nature of a settlement having been reached between the parties as to the
substantive issues in dispute, particularly having regard
to the applications
for exclusion that had been filed by Mrs Musolino.
such, the consent orders may only be set aside on grounds which would justify
setting aside a contractual arrangement, like a
settlement deed, upon which a
settlement or compromise was based. I will not refer to the many authorities
which support this principle
but note paragraph [12.210] of Australian Civil
Procedure by Bernard Cairns, 12
Edition, and paragraphs
[11.62]-[11.65] of Zuckerman on Australian Civil Procedure, LexisNexis 2018,
provide details of these authorities
and the principles in play. Such grounds
are those which would justify a court voiding or invalidating a contract, such
duress, misrepresentation, undue influence, unconscionability, and the
like. I now turn to consideration of those principles against
Consideration
application of the legal principles concerning interfering with consent orders
means that Mr Musolino would need to establish
fraud, duress, mistake or another
like ground in order for the court to be in a position to make further orders
concerning the rights
of the parties as reflected in the consent orders.
do not consider any allegations of that kind have been made or would be
available for me to find on the evidence before the court.
this regard, I note that the parties all had legal representation at the time
the consent orders were made, and negotiated; and
there is no claim of duress,
fraud or other grounds that would be capable of voiding or invalidating a
contract. So much is evident
from the material appended to Mr Khor’s
affidavit (FDN 40).
is, however, one aspect peculiar to the
which deserves further
attention. It is the extent to which the consent orders might be taken to be
inconsistent with s 91(1) of
. If they were inconsistent
then there would be a basis for the court to declare them to be invalid. As I
have mentioned already (refer
to the transcript), s 91(1), if operative,
would have required the Director or Crown to refrain from disposing of the
Crafers West
property until the appeal of Mr Musolino's conviction lapses or is
finally determined. This is in contrast to the consent orders
providing for the
Crown to dispose of the property; a process which is already underway.
Importantly here, s 91(2) operates so that
the Director is not compelled to
comply with s 91(1) - and may therefore proceed to dispose of the Crafers West
property - if the
property is disposed of, or otherwise dealt with, “with
the permission of, and in accordance with any directions of, the court”.
issue therefore arises on the face of the consent orders as to whether disposal
of the Crafers West property is permitted in terms
of s 91(2) because of
the operation of the consent orders which represent permission from the court to
deal with and dispose of the
property. I note that rules of construction
applicable to orders generally apply to consent orders. The orders must be
as a whole and given effect to on their terms - and where they give
effect to the compromise of a dispute, and there is ambiguity,
it is permissible
to take into account the same material which would be admissible in construing a
contract (including surrounding
circumstances known to the parties). (For
reference to that principle see Perry Hertzfeld and Thomas Prince,
Interpretation, Third
Edition, 2024, Law Book Company of Australasia at
paragraph [36.110]).
my opinion, having regard to: (i) the fact that the pending appeal was known to
the parties at the time the consent orders were
agreed and made; and (ii) this
was a fact referred to in the recitals of the consent orders, the clear import
of the orders is to
permit a dealing with the Crafers West property by the Crown
so as to bring about its disposal. As such, I find that there is permission
the kind contemplated by s 91(2) of the
and the Crown is
not bound by s 91(1) to refrain from disposing of the property pending
final determination of the appeal.
am also fortified in reaching this conclusion by the general principle relevant
to interpretation of court orders that requires
orders to be construed so as to
give them valid effect, if possible.
it would be inappropriate for the court to set aside or otherwise interfere with
the consent orders made by the parties
to compromise the substantial issues in
the confiscation proceedings. Simply put, there is no sound basis for the court
I note that there is also a public policy reason for refusing to interfere with
the consent orders; to do so would inevitably
expose other compromises entered
into by the Crown and made subject to court orders to be reopened. It would also
foster a reluctance
on the part of the Director to entertain settlements of
confiscation matters which are typically advantageous to not only the parties
but to the efficient use of court resources.
view of these matters, I think there is utility in dealing with the
interlocutory application in toto today. To not do so leaves
uncertainty for the
Director in continuing his dealings with the Crafers West property.
I turn to the orders.
For these reasons, I make the following orders:
respondent’s, Mr Musolino's, application is refused.
am also going to make an order as to costs because I do not see any reason for
costs not to follow the event in this matter.
So order 2 is:
respondent, Mr Musolino, is to pay the Director's costs of the application.
Is there any correction or anything counsel wish to point out to
me? I'm sorry that was rather lengthy.
MR SLOCOMBE: Your Honour, thank you. We simply don't seek any further date
for this matter at this stage. In the event there is an
issue with costs, we
just simply seek liberty to call the matter on. Thank you.
HER HONOUR: Thank you, Mr Slocombe. I will allow you to depart the bar table,
MR JOYCE: Yes, I'm very grateful.
HER HONOUR: And thank you for your earnest submissions and attempts to deal
with the difficulties you were facing.
MR JOYCE: I'm very grateful for that, your Honour. Thank you.
HER HONOUR: We'll adjourn the court.
ADJOURNED 1.16 P.M.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (365 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter