URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SADC/2025/126.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:55:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
WANG v DU [2025] SADC 126 (23 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
[2025] SADC 126
Judgment of her Honour Judge
23 October 2025
CONTRACTS - GENERAL CONTRACTUAL PRINCIPLES - CONSTRUCTION AND
INTERPRETATION OF CONTRACTS
CONTRACTS - GENERAL CONTRACTUAL PRINCIPLES - FORMATION OF CONTRACTUAL
RELATIONS - MATTERS NOT GIVING RISE TO BINDING CONTRACT - VAGUENESS
UNCERTAINTY
CONTRACTS - GENERAL CONTRACTUAL PRINCIPLES - DISCHARGE, BREACH AND
DEFENCES TO ACTION FOR BREACH - REPUDIATION AND NON-PERFORMANCE
DAMAGES - ASSESSMENT OF DAMAGES IN ACTIONS FOR BREACH OF CONTRACT - PROOF
AND EVIDENCE
The applicant and respondent were equal shareholders and directors in a
company formed to purchase an abattoir and butchery business
in Port Lincoln.
In the first week of trading the company’s new business, they fell into a
bitter dispute about the operation
of the business. Their disagreement
escalated to the point where their relationship broke down irretrievably and
they began discussing
one or other selling his shares to the other to resolve
their conflict. With the assistance of the priest from their local church,
parties negotiated a one-page share transfer agreement written in Chinese
characters.
It is common ground that the share transfer agreement provided that the
respondent would purchase the applicant’s shares in
the company for a
price of $389,500 by 11 July 2020 if he were successful in obtaining a loan. On
9 July 2020, the respondent’s
solicitor informed the applicant that the
respondent had been successful in obtaining a loan.
The applicant claims that by his solicitor’s email correspondence the
respondent repudiated his purchase obligation, entitling
the applicant to
terminate which he did after the date for payment had passed. The applicant
claims he has suffered loss and damage
in the amount of the unpaid purchase
price without any deduction for the value of the shares he did not transfer to
the respondent.
The respondent’s primary defence is that the contract, properly
construed, does not provide the applicant with any entitlement
respondent for default of his purchase obligation. He contends the
applicant’s only recourse was to purchase the
respondent’s share on
the same terms, which he failed to do. In the alternative, the respondent
contends the contract is unenforceable
for uncertainty on grounds that there is
no reliable translation of the Chinese characters into English, its terms are
and incomplete.
There are disputes about the English translation of the share transfer
agreement, unpleaded aspects of the respondent’s defence
admissibility of extrinsic evidence as an aid to construction, the
respondent’s alleged anticipatory breaches and
repudiation of his purchase
obligation under the contract, the applicant’s purported acceptance of the
respondent’s repudiation
and termination of the contract and the
applicant’s entitlement to damages as a remedy for breach of contract.
should be judgment in favour of the applicant in the sum of $389,500.00 plus
pre-judgment interest of $120,969.10.
respondent’s express denial of his purchase obligation under the share
transfer agreement is sufficient to put in issue
the translation and
construction issues. The applicant must therefore establish as fact what the
Chinese characters are in English
words and what those words mean in law when
read objectively applying the settled principles for the construction of
commercial contracts.
withdrawn at the start of trial his cross claim and substantial parts of his
defence and made two unsuccessful attempts to
amend, the respondent should be
confined to his pleaded case and not permitted to press a new case of an oral
agreement for access
to business documents being made on 27 May 2020.
regard to the two translations in evidence, the Court does have before it a
reliable English translation of the relevant parts
of the share transfer
agreement. The respondent’s contention that the significant differences
between the translations cannot
be resolved should be rejected.
applicant’s construction of the contract should be preferred. The
respondent’s preferred construction of ‘simple
reciprocity’
has no foundation in the text, context or object of the contract or the
evidence. It is contrary to the express
words of the contract and should be
rejected. The respondent’s contention that the absence of default clauses
support his
case should also be rejected, as should his contentions about
alleged conditions precedent and the meaning of “financial reports”
in clause IV.
share transfer agreement included all of the terms the parties regarded as
essential and were legally necessary for a share transfer.
respondent’s purchase obligation under the share transfer agreement was
unconditional.
the evidence, a clear inference of repudiation should be drawn from the
respondent’s solicitor’s emails and his failure
to pay the purchase
price by 11 July 2020 or at all. This was not a case where the
solicitors’ correspondence merely sought
an indication of the
applicant’s attitude to the proposed settlement method and supplementary
terms because they were not covered
by the share transfer agreement.
applicant did not elect to terminate before the deadline for performance.
Instead, he kept his options open, insisting on performance.
His erroneous
assertion as to the operation of the share transfer agreement should the
respondent fail to perform his purchase obligation
does not alter this
conclusion.
applicant validly terminated the share transfer agreement on 12 July 2020 by the
email he sent the respondent’s solicitor.
applicant established that he was ready, willing and able to perform his
obligation of delivering a duly signed share transfer
form to the respondent.
In the circumstances of the respondent’s anticipatory breaches and
repudiation of the contract, there
was no point in the applicant providing his
bank details or nominating a solicitor to attend the settlement ultimately
by the respondent.
circumstances where the applicant did not transfer his shares to the respondent,
the economic value of the performance of the contract
at the time when
performance was promised is not simply assessed by reference to the amount the
applicant was not paid. Since the
applicant must satisfy the Court both as to
the loss he suffered by reason of the respondent’s breach and as to its
it was necessary for the applicant to address the question of the value
of his shares at the date of breach to prove his case.
neither party addressing the value of the applicant’s shares at the date
of breach, it should be concluded his shares
were actually worthless at that
date. It follows that on a comparison between the position the applicant was in
as a result of the
respondent’s breach of contract and the position he
would reasonably have expected to be in had there been no breach and the
contract performed, the applicant is entitled to damages of $389,500.00 as at 11
as to the admissibility of the second and third translations made.
admissibility of extrinsic evidence as an aid to construction
considered.
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
Evidence Act
District Court Act 1991
(SA), referred to.
Aerial Advertising Co v Batchelor’s Peas Ltd
[1938] 2 All ER
Agricultural and Rural Finance Pty Ltd v Gardiner
(2008) 238 CLR
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited v Delor Vue Apartments CTS 39788
[2022] HCA 38
Ashington Piggeries Ltd v Christopher Hill Ltd
Associated Newspapers Ltd v Bancks
[1951] HCA 24
(1951) 83 CLR 322
Fire Sprinklers Pty Ltd v Watson
[1946] HCA 25
(1946) 72 CLR 435
Banque Commerciale SA
(in Liq) v Akhil Holdings Ltd
(1990) 169 CLR 279
Bellgrove v
[1954] HCA 36
(1954) 90 CLR 613
Berry v CCL Securities Pty Ltd
[2020] HCA 27
Biggin & Co Ltd v Permantite Ltd
[1951] 1 KB 422
(1998) 195 CLR 232
Clark v Macourt
[2013] HCA 56
Construction Pty Ltd v State Rail Authority of New South Wales
Concut Pty Ltd v Worrell
[2000] HCA 64
(2000) 176 ALR 693
Crown Melbourne
Ltd v Cosmopolitan Hotel (Vic) Pty Ltd
[2016] HCA 26
(2016) 260 CLR 1
Custom Credit
Corporation Ltd v Cenepro Pty Ltd
[1991] NSWCA 68
Dare v Pulham
(1982) 148 CLR 658
Duke Group Ltd (in liq) v Pilmer
[1999] SASC 97
(1999) 73 SASR 64
Ecosse Property Holdings Pty Ltd v Gee Dee Nominees Pty Ltd
Electricity Generation Corporation v Woodside Energy Ltd
[2014] HCA 7
Equuscorp Pty Ltd v Glengallan Investments Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 55
Essential Beauty Franchising (WA) Pty Ltd & Ors v Pilton Holding
Pty Ltd & Ors
[2014] SASC 84
European Bank Ltd v Evans
[2010] HCA 6
240 CLR 432
Fire & All Risks Insurance Co Ltd v Callinan
[1978] HCA 31
Foran v Wight
[1989] HCA 51
(1989) 168 CLR 385
Freeth v Burr
[1874] UKLawRpCP 4
G. Scammell & Nephew Ltd v Ouston
[1941] AC 251
[1970] UKHL 3
[1971] AC 886
Godecke v Kirwan
[1973] HCA 38
(1973) 129 CLR 629
Hadley v Baxendale
(1854) 1546 ER 145;
Heyman v Darwins Ltd
Huppert v Stock Options of Australia Pty Ltd
[1965] HCA 30
(1965) 112 CLR 414
Immer (No 145) Pty Ltd v Uniting Church in Australia Property Trust (NSW)
[1993] HCA 27
(1993) 182 CLR 26
Jireh International Pty Ltd v Western Export Inc
[2011] NSWCA 137
Johnson v Perez
[1988] HCA 64
(1988) 166 CLR 351
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
L Albert & Son v Armstrong Rubber Co
(1949) 178 F. 2d 182;
Laurinda Pty Ltd v Capalaba Park Shopping Centre Pty
[1989] HCA 23
(1989) 166 CLR 623
Luna Park (NSW) Ltd v Tramways Advertising Pty
[1938] HCA 66
(1938) 61 CLR 286
Mannai Investment Co Ltd v Eagle Star Life
Assurance Co Ltd
[1997] UKHL 19
[1997] AC 749
March v E & MH Stramere Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 12
(1991) 171 CLR 506
Matson v Attorney-General (Cth)
[2021] FCA 161
MBP (SA) Pty Ltd Pty Ltd v Gogic
(1991) 171 CLR 657;
Switzerland Insurance Australia Ltd
[2000] HCA 65
(2000) 203 CLR 579
McDonald v Dennys
Lascelles Ltd
[1933] HCA 25
(1933) 48 CLR 457
Modern Engineering (Bristol) Ltd v
Gilbert-Ash (Northern) Ltd
[1974] AC 689
Mount Bruce Mining Pty Ltd v
Wright Prospecting Pty Ltd
[2015] HCA 37
(2015) 256 CLR 104
Pacific Carriers Ltd v BNP
[2004] HCA 35
(2004) 218 CLR 451
Perri v Coolangatta Investments Pty Ltd
(1982) 149 CLR 537
Peter Turnbull & Co Pty Ltd v Mundus Trading Co
(Australasia) Pty Ltd
[1954] HCA 25
(1954) 90 CLR 235
REALESTATE.com.au v
[2022] HCA 39
Robinson v Harman
[1848] EngR 135
(1848) 154 ER 363
Ross T Smyth & Co Ltd v TD Bailey Son & Co
[1940] 3 All ER 60
RTS Flexible Systems Ltd v Molkerei Alois Müller GmbH & Co KG (UK
Production)
[2010] UKSC 14
[2010] 1 WLR 753
Sargent v ASL Developments Ltd
[1974] HCA 40
131 CLR 634
Shevill v Builders Licensing Board
[1982] HCA 47
(1982) 149 CLR 620
Simic v NSW Land and Housing Corporation
[2016] HCA 47
(2016) 260 CLR 85
Gdanska SA v Latvian Shipping Co
[1998] UKHL 9
[1998] 1 WLR 574
Tabcorp Holdings Ltd v
Bowen Investments Pty Ltd
(2009) 236 CLR 272
The Commonwealth v Amann
Aviation Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 54
(1991) 174 CLR 64
Toll (FGCT) Pty Ltd v Alphapharm Pty
(2004) 219 CLR 165;
Upper Hunter County District Council v Australian
Chilling & Freezing Co
(1968) 118 CLR 419
Vargas Pena Apezteguia y
Cia SAIC v Peter Cremer GmbH
[1987] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 394;
[1972] HCA 43
(1972) 127 CLR 454
Western Export Services v Jireh International
[2011] HCA 45
, considered.
[2025] SADC 126
applicant Mr Wang advances a claim in contract for damages based on the alleged
failure of the respondent Mr Du to pay by 11 July
2020 or at all the purchase
price for Mr Wang’s shares in a company they jointly owned and
controlled. Their agreement was
made in writing on 27 May 2020 in circumstances
where their relationship had irretrievably broken down over disputes arising
the operation of the company’s business. At the time of their
agreement, the key areas of dispute concerned serious accusations
made by Mr Du
business and Mr Du’s alleged lack of access
to the company’s books
and records for the business despite Mr Du working in the business. Mr Wang was
deeply offended by
Mr Du’s accusations and denied them.
Wang relies on the terms of a share transfer agreement written in Chinese
characters. There are threshold issues about the English
translation of the
document. There is contention about unpleaded aspects of Mr Du’s defence
case and the admissibility of evidence
of extrinsic matters for the purpose of
construing the written agreement. Questions arise about performance, breach and
repudiation
of Mr Du’s purchase obligation under the written agreement, Mr
Wang’s purported acceptance of Mr Du’s repudiation
Wang’s entitlement to damages as a remedy for Mr Du’s failure to
purchase his shares.
Wang should have judgment in his favour on his claim against Mr Du in the sum of
$389,500.00 plus pre-judgment interest of $120,969.10
for the following
THE TRIAL AND THE EVIDENCE
Narrowing of the Pleaded Issues
trial began on the then current
Wang’s Case
Wang’s case as pleaded and pressed at trial was simply put.
In a nutshell, Mr Wang alleges
that pursuant to the share transfer agreement, Mr Du agreed to purchase on or
before 11 July 2020
all of Mr Wang’s shares in the company in exchange for
payment of the purchase price of $339,500 and a purchase fee of
Mr Du was provided with
the company’s financial statements for the purpose of Mr Du obtaining
finance for payment of the purchase
price and fee. Mr Du successfully
obtained finance, thereby satisfying the only condition precedent to Mr
Du’s purchase obligation
under the share transfer
Wang claims that by failing to pay the agreed purchase price and fee by 11 July
2020 or at all, Mr Du breached an essential term
of the share transfer
thereby repudiating his
purchase obligation and entitling Mr Wang to terminate the share transfer
Mr Wang further claims
that in email exchanges between Mr Wang and Mr Du’s solicitor Mr Xiao
between 9 and 14 July 2020, Mr
Du repudiated his obligations under the
share transfer agreement,
Mr Wang to accept his repudiation and terminate the share transfer
agreement, which he claims he validly did by a series
of emails as well as by
commencing this proceeding.
Wang claims he has suffered loss and damage by reason of Mr Du’s breach of
contract in the sum of the purchase price and
fee plus costs and
were serious inadequacies in the pleaded defence and cross claim Mr Du relied on
at the start of the trial. Some difficulties
apparently arose because his
defence responded to a superseded version of Mr Wang’s claim that had not
been revisited since
and a translator was not involved in preparing the case for
trial until the Friday before it started. Serious generalised allegations
misconduct in operating the business were made against Mr Wang and his son in
both the defence and cross claim without any proper
particulars. A bare
allegation that business income had been diverted by Mr Wang and his son
was repeated a number of times. The
enforceability of the share transfer
agreement was challenged on the ground it did not record the subjective
intention of the parties
consequential relief sought in the cross claim were declarations that the
and that Mr
Wang is to purchase Mr Du’s shares for $389,500.
these difficulties were raised with Mr Du’s counsel at the outset of the
trial, Mr Du’s case was confined to one
of construction and
unenforceability.
first withdrew all but the rectification claim in his cross claim and disclaimed
the allegations about diversion of cash from
the business as no longer being
Paragraph 3
of the defence alleging misconduct in operating the business by Mr Wang and his
son was then withdrawn and Mr Du’s
counsel foreshadowed a ‘tidy
up’ of the remaining defence
On the second day of
trial Mr Du abandoned further parts of his
his rectification
and made two unsuccessful
attempts to reformulate his remaining defence including by the introduction of a
new construction case
based on numerous matters extrinsic to the written
document. Mr Du’s application to amend was
Mr Du withdrew all the generalised allegations in his defence and cross claim
the subject of dispute between the
parties both before and after the share transfer agreement was made. The
withdrawal of these allegations
puts beyond doubt the irrelevance of the merits
of the underlying disputes about the operation of the business to any remaining
in dispute in this proceeding. Plainly, the fact that certain accusations
were made by Mr Du about the operation of the business
is a different
matter and, to the extent the making of these allegations was a relevant fact,
it was not controversial these allegations
had been made and caused a bitter
dispute between the parties and the breakdown of their relationship.
a result, the scope of what remains of Mr Du’s pleaded defence is
relatively confined and comprises essentially three limbs.
First, it puts
Mr Wang to proof of his claim for common law damages for Mr Du’s
alleged breach of his contractual obligation
to pay Mr Wang for his shares by 11
July 2020 under the share transfer agreement. Secondly, it challenges
the enforceability of
their agreement on grounds of uncertainty and
incompleteness and for being
“defective”
recording the subjective intention of the
Thirdly, it
puts in issue satisfaction of the condition precedent to Mr Du’s purchase
obligation, namely whether Mr Du was
provided with
“a financial report
of the Businesses as at 3 May 2020 and
closing submissions, Mr Du’s primary case had shifted to one of
“commercial construction of the language”
used by the parties
in a written agreement where
“there is no reliable
translation”
Ultimately, relying on ‘surrounding circumstances’, Mr Du contends
the parties’ common assumption was that there
break, by one or other, getting all the shares so they could run the business
without the other.”
reason of their common assumption, the parties intended a reciprocal agreement
whereby one or other would purchase the other’s
shares, with Mr Du to have
the first opportunity to do so. If Mr Du did not purchase Mr Wang’s
shares then it was agreed Mr
Wang would purchase Mr Du’s shares for the
same price and on the same terms.
support of his new construction case of ‘simple reciprocity’, Mr Du
further contends the parties never contemplated
Mr Wang would have any right to
sue Mr Du for damages for breach of contract if he did not purchase Mr
Wang’s shares for any
reason. As such he submits Mr Wang’s
remedy should have been limited to purchasing Mr Du’s shares and,
somewhat inconsistently,
seeking specific performance of Mr Du’s
purchase obligation.
Du also relies in closing submissions on an unpleaded oral agreement allegedly
made on 27 May 2020 that Mr Wang would provide Mr
Du with access to
all the paper and electronic records of the business as soon as
Mr Du ultimately
submits access to the company records was
“essential to run the
business ASAP and for the purpose of obtaining arm’s length
allegations involve further unpleaded twists to Mr Du’s evolving
construction case.
a result, it is necessary to first consider the extent to which Mr Du should be
confined to his pleaded case and secondly, the
legal basis of Mr Du’s
‘subjective intention’ defence in circumstances where he abandoned
his rectification claim
and the ‘surrounding circumstances’ in
paragraph 3 of his defence and his counsel disavowed any defence case that no
contract existed because the parties did not intend to bind themselves.
Confinement
to his Pleaded Case
serve two important functions. The first is to define the issues for decision.
The second is to state with sufficient clarity
the case that must be met and
ensure the basic requirements of procedural fairness that a party should have
the opportunity of meeting
the case put against them.
are well-established reasons for confining Mr Du to what remains of his pleaded
case and not permitting him to advance a new
unpleaded case without the
Court’s leave.
In circumstances where his earlier application
to amend was opposed by Mr Wang and dismissed by the Court, it would be
anomalous and
unjust to permit Mr Du to depart significantly from his pleaded
defence during the course of the trial. The prejudice to Mr Wang
and the public
interest in preventing such prejudice are obvious. If Mr Du were permitted
to advance a new case for the first time
in closing submissions when evidence
had closed, Mr Wang would be denied his right to a fair opportunity to meet
the unpleaded case
ultimately put against him.
oral closing submissions, Mr Wang challenged two aspects of Mr Du’s
ultimate case as unpleaded and not relevant. The first
was the reliability of
the English translation of the document written in Chinese characters. The
second was the proper construction
of the share transfer agreement.
The Translation and Construction Issues
Wang submits the English translation he relies on was admitted in Mr Du’s
defence and not the subject of any positive case
pleaded by Mr Du. He submits
Mr Du’s challenges to it are irrelevant to the pleaded disputes. He
submits it is
“a [barren]argument that exists in a vacuum”
because there was never any pleaded defence challenging Mr Wang’s
construction of the share transfer
to Mr Wang’s submissions, there is no admission of the English translation
or of the terms of Mr Du’s alleged
purchase obligation in Mr Du’s
pleaded defence. Apart from limited admissions that do not bear on the
translation or construction
issues, Mr Du denies Mr Wang’s pleading of
Mr Du’s purchase obligation, putting Mr Wang to proof of his
Du’s express denial is sufficient to put in issue the English translation
and the proper construction of the relevant terms
of the share transfer
agreement upon which Mr Wang relies. To prove his case, Mr Wang must
therefore establish as fact what the Chinese
characters are in English words and
what those words mean in law when read objectively applying the settled
principles for the construction
of commercial contracts.
Accordingly,
Mr Du should not be precluded from making submissions about the proper
construction of the relevant terms of the share
transfer agreement in answer to
Mr Wang’s construction case.
Access to Documents
Du pleads that it was a condition precedent of the share transfer agreement that
Mr Wang would provide him with
“a financial report of the Businesses as
at 3 May 2020 and prior”
but it was not
This plea at its
highest raises questions of construction and performance of the share transfer
closing, Mr Du advances an unpleaded claim about the existence of an oral
agreement allegedly reached on 27 May 2020 for Mr Wang
to provide Mr Du with
access to all the paper and electronic records of the
He submits he was to
“access to all the business documents electronic and
purportedly
relying on his and Mrs Du’s oral evidence that it was promised by Mr Wang
27 May 2020 that this would happen once he signed the share transfer
agreement. By contrast, Mr Du submits the Court should reject
evidence in cross-examination of this topic.
Du should be confined to his pleaded case and not permitted to press a new case
of an oral agreement for access to business documents
being made on 27 May 2020.
The prejudice to Mr Wang is all the more obvious in circumstances where
Mr Du withdrew the allegations
in his defence and cross claim concerning
access to the company books and records, including specifically the allegation
Wang and his son refused to give them to him, and the trial
proceeded on that basis.
is therefore not strictly necessary to resolve the conflict between Mr Wang and
Mr Du’s evidence about what was discussed
all the company books and records.
any event, there are good reasons for rejecting Mr Du’s contentions that
any such an agreement was made. First, the evidence
shows that the character of
the discussions on 27 May 2020 was in the nature of a negotiation, with
successive drafts being typed
by the priest and despite discussing that
“all documents concerning the business should be written in clause 4,
but this was not
If there was
such an earlier oral agreement or consensus, it was discharged and the
parties’ agreement was recorded in
Accordingly, it is the
share transfer agreement that governs the parties’ resolution of their
deadlock as equal shareholders.
Secondly, such an oral agreement contradicts
the terms of the written share transfer agreement properly construed.
Mr Du’s ‘Subjective Intention’ Defence
Du’s pleaded defence challenges the enforceability of the share transfer
agreement on the separate ground of its failure
to record the ‘subjective
intention’ of the parties.
The legal basis of these pleas is unclear and there is no apparent merit to
Mr Du’s defence properly acknowledges, the subjective intentions of the
parties are not relevant to the Court objectively
construing the share transfer
accepting that where
the parties’ actual intentions amount to a concurrence or a common
understanding, this might inform the
parties’ presumed objective
intentions.
The question then
arising is one of construction, not unenforceability.
only possible relevance of these pleas of ‘subjective intention’ was
Mr Du’s rectification claim which was withdrawn,
giving rise to the
question whether these pleas should have been withdrawn with the rectification
conclusion is fortified when proper regard is had to the nature and purpose of
the equitable remedy of rectification. It is not
a defence. Rectification is a
remedy concerned with a mistake as to what is recorded in a written instrument
and the conscience of
the parties.
Its purpose is to make a written instrument conform to the ‘true
agreement’ of the parties where the writing by common
or unilateral
mistake fails to express the parties’ agreement
accurately.
is incumbent on an applicant seeking rectification to show precisely the form to
which the agreement should conform and, where
proven to the satisfaction of the
Court, it is necessary for the Court to make orders changing the words of the
instrument to conform
with the parties’ contractual intentions. No
question of unenforceability of the written instrument arises where there is a
mistake recorded in it because it is rectified by order of the Court.
is therefore not necessary to consider Mr Wang’s submissions on the topic
of Mr Du’s ‘subjective intention’
It is incontrovertible
that the parties intended to bind themselves to the terms of the share transfer
agreement negotiated and
signed on 27 May 2020 and Mr Du accepts that is so. The
relevant question to be resolved is whether the parties’ agreement,
properly construed, is unenforceable for uncertainty or
incompleteness.
The Issues to be Determined
issues to be determined are therefore as follows.
What are the words of the share transfer agreement in English? This is the
translation issue.
What do its terms mean? There are a number of construction issues arising.
Was the share transfer agreement unenforceable for uncertainty or
incompleteness? These are the unenforceability questions.
Was Mr Du’s purchase obligation unconditional?
Did Mr Du breach or repudiate his purchase obligation?
Did Mr Wang accept Mr Du’s repudiatory breach and terminate?
What loss or damage did Mr Wang suffer by reason of any repudiatory breach by Mr
Du’s purchase obligation under the share transfer
Documentary Evidence
Joint Tender Book
trial, the parties prepared a three-volume joint tender
identifying the documents
each party proposed to tender. Following objections to the tender of specific
documents and the narrowing
of the pleaded issues, a substantial number of
documents were withdrawn from the joint tender book by the agreement between
reached after the trial
Ultimately, the
documentary evidence comprised a single volume.
Translation
trial, the parties were unable to agree on the English translation of the share
transfer agreement written in Chinese characters
to be put before the Court.
Wang included in the joint tender book a written Chinese to English translation
made on 4 June 2020 by certified translator Mr
Ningjia Han (the
Translation
written opening, Mr Du challenged the accuracy of the Han Translation,
particularly as to clause III, by reference to a second
written translation made
on 1 July 2020 (the
Translation
was described by Mr Du as
completely correct in clause
the start of trial, the tender of the Second Translation was the subject of
objection by both Mr Wang as being
“unsatisfactory”
because its certification stamp was
and by Mr Du on the
ground that its authenticity/provenance was not established and translation was
submissions, albeit in reference to the Shi Translation, Mr Wang (wrongly)
contended that translation was not in issue
because there was no pleaded defence
challenging his interpretation of how the share transfer agreement
Second Translation was referred to and relied on by Mr Du in his closing
submissions numerous times. Despite this, it was ultimately
excluded from the
joint tender book by agreement between
It was not tendered
separately and was therefore not in evidence at the close of the trial.
the obvious inference that Mr Du’s legal representatives had either
omitted the Second Translation from the final version
of the joint tender book
index or referred to it in closing submissions in error, the Court invited the
parties to make further written
submissions on the issue.
further submissions, Mr Du confirmed the Second Translation had not been
tendered but submitted it was an oversight
“[to be] addressed now by
[Mr Du] applying to tender [it]”,
and advanced reasons in favour
of its admission into evidence ‘now’ without anything further being
Mr Wang also
confirmed the Second Translation had not been tendered by agreement of the
parties but objected to any reliance on
it, noting no application to re-open Mr
Du’s case had been made.
Du then made an oral application to re-open for the sole purpose of tendering
the Second Translation.
evidence was tendered to further explain the error made by Mr Du’s legal
representatives. Mr Du concedes the evidentiary
weight of the Second Translation
is not significant,
limited compared to the Han Translation and a third one made by certified
translator Ms Mengchang Shi (the
Shi Translation
) during the
However, he contends the
Second Translation is not new evidence having been ventilated as part of the
translation issue at trial
and is relevant and therefore admissible evidence
supporting both his construction and uncertainty cases and should be before the
Court for completeness.
Wang objects to Mr Du’s application to re-open and the tender of the
Second Translation primarily on the ground of its inadmissibility,
objected to its tender at the start of trial and not resiled from that position
throughout. Mr Wang further submits the Second
Translation should be afforded no
weight by reason of its indecipherable certification stamp and the absence of
any certification
as to the accuracy of the translation. Moreover, the
translator was not called and it was not put to Mr Han in cross-examination.
is no dispute about the principles to be applied in considering an application
to re-open.
compass of this application is relatively confined and does not disturb the
public interest in litigation being conducted efficiently
and expeditiously or
in the public interest of finality of litigation. Nor is delay a real issue,
despite the lateness of the application.
The Second Translation is not new
evidence and was the subject of closing submissions, despite Mr Wang’s
objection to its admissibility
from the start of trial. Neither party proposes
to take the matter further, whatever ruling is made by the Court.
Ultimately,
the Courts’s discretion to grant leave to re-open turns on the
significance of the proposed ‘new’ evidence
in context of the issues
in dispute. Three observations should be made.
contrary to Mr Wang’s submissions, the Second Translation is relevant and
therefore admissible to the extent that it
confirms the reliability of the
relevant parts of the Han Translation or not (although the differences in parts
of clause III are
not relevant, contrary to Mr Du’s submissions as
previously explained). However, its relevance is only cumulative to the
confirmation
already provided by the Shi Translation and therefore its potential
significance is slight.
little or no weight should be afforded to the Second Translation. Its provenance
is unknown and there is no evidence on
this topic. It was not certified in the
same way as the Han Translation was and the stamp identifying the translator and
their practitioner
identity number is illegible.
the translator was not called and never proposed to be called by Mr Du. The
differences in it were not put to Mr Han in
cross-examination. If the Second
Translation were admitted into evidence there would be unfairness in Mr Du using
it to bolster his
uncertainty case in closing submissions when there was no real
opportunity for Mr Wang to meet that case in the evidence.
these reasons, the Second Translation should not be admitted in evidence under
Evidence Act 1929
Accordingly, Mr Du’s
application to re-open should be refused, with the result that it remains the
case that the Second Translation
is not in evidence. It must therefore be
disregarded in determining the issues in dispute in this
proceeding.
The Shi Translation
further challenge to the reliability of the Han Translation arises from Mr Du
subsequently seeking to rely on the Shi Translation.
It was made on
21 February 2024 (after Mr Han had given evidence). As part of the
Court’s judgment, Mr Du seeks a ruling on
his application to tender it and
be granted leave to rely on the oral evidence of Ms Shi against the
objection of Mr Wang on the
ground of relevance and prejudice in terms of the
time at which it was tendered. As to relevance, Mr Wang contends
Mr Du impliedly
admitted the operative terms of the share transfer
agreement in his defence.
Ruling on the Shi Translation
the following reasons, the Shi Translation and Ms Shi’s oral evidence are
admissible and relevant to the extent they address
the English translation of
the Chinese characters constituting the terms of Mr Du’s purchase
obligation under the share transfer
agreement. These are matters of
fact that Mr Wang must establish to prove his case. Any prejudice arising is the
result of a forensic
decision made by Mr Wang’s counsel to call Mr Han
knowing that Mr Du was obtaining another translation without knowing its
translation question is in issue by reason of the express denial pleaded in
Mr Du’s defence.
Shi Translation is probative of this question and relevant to an assessment of
the reliability of the Han Translation that Mr
Wang relies on to prove his
The Parties’ Supreme Court Affidavits
substantial part of the joint tender book in evidence comprises parts of some
affidavits filed in the application Mr Wang brought
in the Supreme Court of
South Australia on 14 October 2020 to wind up the company on just and
equitable grounds.
are two affidavits made by Mr Wang in support of his application to wind up the
company. One made on 13 October
and one on 17 March
There are two affidavits
made by Mr Du. The first was made in opposition to the winding up application on
17 November 2020
second was made on 25 November 2021 in support of an application for an
injunction restraining the joint administrators from
making a distribution of
funds under the deed of company
arrangement.
affidavits and their annexures are voluminous and detailed. Their subject matter
is highly contentious. At trial, the parties
made limited use of this
evidentiary material, their counsel adopting the approach they would made
express reference to anything
Mr Wang relies on Mr
Du’s affidavits to challenge his credit on discrete inconsistencies
between his oral evidence at trial
and his previous affidavit evidence. Mr Du
relies on part of his November 2020 affidavit to
“detail [his]
extensive requests for documentation”
in support of his unpleaded oral
agreement made on 27 May 2020 for Mr Wang to provide Mr Du with all the
paper and electronic records
permissible uses of these affidavits requires careful consideration for the
following reasons.
for the purpose of construing the relevant terms of the share transfer
agreement, these affidavits are largely irrelevant and
therefore inadmissible to
the limited extent they evidence the parties’ words and conduct reflecting
their actual or subjective
intentions and expectations in making their agreement
and antecedent negotiations.
Moreover, these affidavits were made after the parties were in dispute about
their obligations under the share transfer agreement
and the institution of this
proceeding.
evidence of surrounding circumstances (events, circumstances and things external
to a written agreement) cannot be adduced
to displace or alter its plain
meaning. Contrary to Mr Du’s submissions as discussed
properly construed, there
is no ambiguity or uncertainty about the meaning of
in clause IV of the share transfer agreement. Nor is it
appropriate to resolve Mr Du’s unpleaded allegation that a different
agreement was made during the course of negotiation on 27 May 2020 given the
withdrawal of Mr Du’s rectification claim at trial
and his counsel’s
disavowal of any defence case that the parties in making their agreement lacked
the requisite intention to
in having proper regard to the purpose or object of the making of the share
transfer agreement, it is not necessary to determine
the merits of the
underlying disputes about Mr Jun Wang’s conduct in operating the business
or Mr Du’s requests for access
to company records and information.
In this case, it is sufficient to appreciate that the object or purpose of the
share transfer
agreement was to give one or other of them complete ownership of
the company to resolve the deadlock between equal shareholders over
operation of its business.
whilst the subsequent conduct of the parties may generally not be referred to in
construing the terms of a previously concluded
contract, it may be relevant to
the question of damages arising from Mr Du’s alleged breach of
the context in which these affidavits were made is important. They were made in
winding up proceedings instituted after
the parties’ continuing disputes
views about
whether the company should be wound up, the parties’ evidence
shows significant dysfunction in the day-to-day operations of
the company was
caused when its bank account was frozen, Mr Wang and his son were excluded from
the business by Mr Du and he continued
to operate it on a cash basis. In
November 2020, the business ceased trading.
affidavits provide important and obvious insight to the reliability of both
parties’ evidence at trial to the limited
extent their evidence is
relevant. On their face, these affidavits show the parties’ entrenched
beliefs in the correctness
of their own positions in a series of bitter,
escalating disputes about the operation of the business. By trial, both
recollections of dated events were indelibly coloured by their
long-running deep mutual animosity. To complicate matters, their
evidence was further clouded by translation issues given their evidence was made
through interpreters.
these reasons, the parties’ previous affidavit evidence should be
approached with caution. Generally, where there are conflicts
between the
parties’ affidavit evidence, neither party’s evidence should be
accepted as reliable and given weight unless
it is consistent with other
reliable evidence.
Evidence from the Company’s
Administration
joint tender book also includes an affidavit made in the winding up proceedings
by Mr Andrew Heard on 3 December
Mr Heard was one of
the two joint and several administrators of the company appointed by the parties
on 9 April 2021. His affidavit
discloses the outcome of the adjourned second
meeting of creditors of the company held on 21 June 2021 at which the creditors
in favour of a deed of company arrangement proposed by Mr Wang, refers to
the proposed final distribution of company’s funds
solicitor’s correspondence with Mr Du about Mr Du’s objections
to the proposed final distribution.
party challenges Mr Heard’s evidence. This evidence should be accepted as
reliable and given weight in so far as it
is relevant to the question of Mr
Wang’s entitlement to damages in this proceeding. Bearing in mind their
purpose and the qualifications
made about their limitations, the various
creditors reports in evidence by their inclusion in the joint tender book should
treated as reliable where relevant.
The Witnesses at
Translation
none of the lay witnesses speak fluent English, they gave evidence through an
interpreter. As a result, there was at time some
confusion and ambiguity in
their evidence. Save for the simplest question, much of the subtlety of their
evidence was lost in translation.
As the transcript shows, much of the
witnesses’ evidence was expressed in the broken English of the
interpreter.
Cross-examination
of the witnesses on documents written in English was particularly difficult and
generally did not elicit any useful
testimony. This was apparent when the
interpreter said it was
“not her job to read”
any documentary
evidence put to the
was therefore necessary to be careful about the inferences to be drawn from the
witnesses’ oral evidence and in forming any
adverse judgments about their
credit and reliability.
Wang relied on his trial affidavit made on 12 February
through a certified
translator as his evidence in chief. It repeats substantially the same matters
to the time of making the share
transfer agreement as set out in his
13 October 2020 affidavit filed in the winding up proceedings. Much of it
is otiose following
Mr Du’s withdrawal of his rectification claim and
paragraph 3 of his defence.
Wang’s oral evidence addresses some further relevant topics, including the
provision of the company’s financial reports
to Mr Du on 5 June 2020, Mr
Du’s loan approval, his July 2020 correspondence with Mr Xiao, his
preparedness to settle and subsequent
events. There is no reason to doubt the
reliability of
Mr Wang’s evidence on these topics.
Wang was cross-examined about the meeting at the priest’s house on 27 May
2020, his preparedness to settle the share transfer
and Mr Du’s requests
for documents. Much of his evidence about the course of negotiations and what
was in the share transfer
agreement was inadmissible given its only use was as
an aid to construction.
prime example is the following evidence given by Mr Wang in cross-examination
that repeated his written
and assertions made in
his email correspondence
didn’t buy your shares, you would buy his shares.
A. That was in the agreement.
from the ambiguity of this evidence, Mr Wang’s subjective intentions and
expectations about what was in the share transfer
agreement are inadmissible. It
is for the Court to construe the terms of the parties’ contract, not the
witnesses. This line
of cross-examination did not concern the purpose of the
parties’ contract or the common assumption that was advanced in closing
submissions and ultimately was not probative of any relevant matter.
Mr Wang should be accepted as a truthful witness. There was only one topic of
relevance on which his reliability was seriously
challenged.
Wang was cross-examined about Mr Du’s requests for access to the books and
records of the business. Mr Du submits Mr Wang’s
evidence on this point
should be rejected and the Court should find Mr Wang agreed to provide those
documents as soon as possible
after 27 May 2020, consistent with Mr
Du’s evidence. It is unnecessary to make such a finding because this line
of cross-examination
is not relevant for the reasons already discussed which Mr
Du’s counsel accepted at
Du gave oral evidence through an interpreter and said that he did not speak or
read English, only understanding a couple of words.
Mr Wang gave contrary
evidence, saying that Mr Du understands English and referred to being with him
when he spoke in English to
the employees and to a supplier about buying sheep.
Mr Wang’s evidence was shown to be correct when during the trial it
evident Mr Du understood what was being said in English and responded before
the interpreter had translated. Mr Du’s denial
that he had understood the
Court’s direction in English that he was required to answer a question
that he was avoiding before
it was translated was not
persuasive.
Du was cross-examined at length about the extent of Mr Wang’s involvement
in the business, Mr Du’s access to the company’s
bank account and
business records including through the company’s accountant. Mr Du was
often uncooperative, giving non-responsive
and sometimes unnecessarily rude or
emotive responses. Aspects of his oral evidence were shown to be inconsistent
with his affidavit
evidence and previous correspondence with Mr Wang. Some
answers were clearly exaggerations and a repetition of his strong view that
Mr Wang totally controlled the business from the outset (despite Mr Du
working in it and Mr Wang not) and Mr Wang had denied him access
to the company
books and records (despite Mr Du working in Port Lincoln where the business
operated and having access to the bank
account on his mobile).
notable example of hyperbole was Mr Du’s evidence that Mr Wang
“took all my money – all my salary, he took all my salary”
when he was only asked to confirm that Mr Wang was not paid a salary in
the business, having just given evidence that he (Mr Du) was
paid a salary
because it was his role to manage the business when this had not previously been
contentious.
Other examples were
Mr Du’s evidence on the topic of the parties’ contributions to
working capital
interpretation of Mr Wang’s responses to Mr Xiao’s July 2020
aside, much of Mr Du’s evidence was not relevant to the issues in dispute
and is of little assistance in resolving the
issues in dispute. That said, Mr
Du’s evidence did confirm the share transfer agreement was the result of
negotiations at a
meeting held for the purpose of
“resolving the
conflicts and issues between church brothers and
his evidence of pre-contractual negotiations is generally inadmissible as an aid
to construction of the share transfer
Du’s evidence was brief and largely concerned the meeting of 27 May 2020.
She gave evidence through an interpreter and there
were difficulties with her
understanding of questions put to her at times. Mrs Du frankly acknowledged she
was nervous and had difficulty
remembering what was discussed almost four years
ago. She confirmed she was in Court to support her husband. Mrs Du’s
also confirmed that the discussions held on 27 May 2020 were in the
character of negotiations. Save for this one matter, her evidence
was of little
assistance in resolving any of the issues in dispute.
Call Witnesses
parties criticise one another for not calling the priest and his wife about what
occurred at the 27 May 2020 meeting. Mr Du also
criticises Mr Wang for not
calling his son Mr Jun Wang about the underlying dispute about access to company
parties’ submissions about the other’s failure to call witnesses
should be accepted. The rule in
has no application in
this case where there was no issue to be answered by the evidence of the
witnesses who were not called. Contrary
to both parties’ submissions,
what occurred at the 27 May 2020 meeting or the merits of Mr Du’s
complaints about access
to company records are not in issue having regard to
what remained of Mr Du’s pleaded defence case following withdrawal of
cross claim. The parties’ negotiations cannot be used to alter the plain
meaning of the share transfer agreement or prove
an unpleaded oral agreement
proceeding.
these circumstances, the evidence of the priest and his wife about the
parties’ negotiations on 27 May 2020 is of no assistance
to the Court in
determining the relevant issues in dispute.
for Mr Jun Wang’s evidence, the merits of the accusations made by Mr Du
are not relevant. What is
relevant is that Mr Du made serious allegations about Mr Jun Wang’s
conduct in operating the business,
and this and other disputes led to the making
of the share transfer agreement. Mr Jun Wang’s evidence about
“circumstances relating to the Agreement”
would not add
anything to the evidence about the object or purpose of the share transfer
inference should not be drawn from the failure to call evidence which is merely
cumulative.
relevant background to the disputes that led to the negotiation and execution of
the share transfer agreement on 27 May 2020 is
relatively uncontroversial.
Wang and Mr Du and their wives were once close friends, having first met through
their local church. As friends, Messrs Wang and
Du decided to go into business
together. In July 2019, they entered into a sale contract to purchase a
substantial established business
that operated two butcher shops and an abattoir
from leased premises in Port Lincoln, trading as Port Lincoln Gourmet Meats. The
purchase price under the contract was $550,000 for goodwill and plant and
equipment plus $100,000 as the estimated value of stock-in-trade.
August 2019, the parties incorporated the company AFD Foods Pty Ltd to purchase
and carry on the business. As trustees of their
family trusts they were each
issued and held non-beneficially 50% of the company’s shares (600 fully
paid shares each) and
were appointed its directors.
the vendor’s sales agent, the parties negotiated new lease arrangements
for the two butcher shops and the abattoir,
the transfer of 25 employees and
business systems.
Wang and Du speak Mandarin Chinese. Neither speaks nor writes fluent English.
Mr Wang’s son, Mr Jun Wang, speaks fluent
English. They agreed he
would work full-time in the business. In the winding up proceedings there was
contention about Mr Jun Wang’s
agreed role in the company and the
authenticity of two versions of his written employment agreement dated November
2019. These matters
are not relevant to the issues in dispute in this proceeding
and are unnecessary to resolve. It is sufficient to acknowledge the
animosity created by the parties’ dispute over Mr Jun Wang’s role in
the company and the allegation he diverted
cash from the business.
of the business sale contract was deferred and occurred on 3 February 2020. The
amount paid for the business at settlement
(including $116,269.23 for
stock-in-trade and after adjustments) was $672,115.42. There is no reason to
consider the business was
purchased at anything but market price or that there
was any material change to its value between contract and settlement.
parties equally funded the purchase price. Unsecured loans to the parties were
recorded as liabilities in the company’s
balance sheets in evidence. Those
liabilities were at 30 April 2020, $339,500
at 27 May 2020, $324,000
for Mr Wang and $329,093 for Mr
and at 30 June 2020,
$324,000 for Mr Wang and $329,242 for Mr
According to Mr Du’s
unchallenged evidence, there was no specific agreement as to when these loans
would be repaid.
after settlement, the parties agreed that Mr Du would go to Port Lincoln to work
in and assist manage the business and be
paid the same wage as Mr Jun Wang. It
was agreed that Mr Wang would not work in the business or be paid a wage. Mr
Wang had other
business interests to occupy his time.
the first week of operation, a dispute arose about the reconciliation of daily
takings. Mr Du accused Mr Jun Wang of diverting
cash from the business and not
accurately interpreting Mr Du’s instructions to other employees. Mr Du
then complained about
lack of access to the business records. Mr Du’s
accusations led to a bitter personal dispute between the parties that continued
to escalate as time passed.
March 2020, the parties’ relationship had broken down to the point that
they began negotiating which of them would purchase
the other’s shares in
the company.
late May 2020, the parties were no longer speaking to one another and Mr Du
threatened to bring legal proceedings about access
to company records and
information. The priest was aware of their dispute and intervened by inviting
the parties and their wives
to attend bible studies at his home on 27 May
Mr Du put it, the meeting progressed into an informal
conciliation led by the priest during the course of which the parties negotiated
and ultimately signed a share transfer agreement written in Chinese characters
Approval of Mr Du’s Loan Finance
5 June 2020, the company’s accountant provided both Mr Wang and Mr Du with
a financial report for the company for the year
ended 30 April 2020 she had
Du made inquiries about finance and obtained finance to fund the purchase of Mr
Wang’s shares. His success was communicated
to Mr Wang by
Mr Du’s solicitor Mr Xiao by an email sent on 9 July 2020 at
3:31 pm that advised Mr Wang that Mr Du’s
purchase [Mr Wang’s] shares has been
July 2020 Emails
7 and 14 July 2020, emails were exchanged between Mr Wang and Mr Du’s
solicitor Mr Xiao about settlement of Mr Du’s
purchase of
Mr Wang’s shares under the share transfer
English translation of these emails is
7 July 2020, Mr Xiao sent Mr Wang an email in English informing him that he was
acting for Mr Du and inquiring as to whether Mr
Wang had a new legal
representative. Mr Wang did not then have any lawyers acting for him.
Ultimately,
settlement of the sale of Mr Wang’s shares did not occur on 11 July 2020
or at all. There is a dispute between the
parties about the legal effect of the
email correspondence exchanged between Mr Wang and Mr Xiao in July 2020. It is
convenient to
deal with the detail of this correspondence in the context of the
questions of Mr Du’s alleged repudiation of the share transfer
agreement and Mr Wang’s purported acceptance of his repudiation
Subsequent Events
to Mr Du’s unchallenged affidavit evidence, on 20 July 2020 at
3:00 pm, Mr Xiao sent Mr Wang a further email proposing
settlement take
place on 22 July 2020, asked for Mr Wang’s bank account details and sought
confirmation that Mr Wang would
provide the documents requested by Mr Du at
settlement.
This email is not
in evidence although it is relied on by Mr Du to support his contention that Mr
Wang was in breach of contract.
20 July 2020, Mr Wang’s then newly appointed solicitor Mr Jelbert sent
Mr Xiao an email attaching a pre-action claim and
offer to settle. An
extract of that attachment was tendered without objection for the purpose of
showing that Mr Wang was no longer
willing to sell his shares to Mr
18 August 2020, Mr Wang instituted this proceeding seeking an order for
specific performance of Mr Du’s purported obligation
under the share
transfer agreement to sell Mr Du’s shares to him for $389,500 (albeit
based on an erroneous construction of
its terms):
The Applicant
claims the Respondent is liable to perform on an agreement between them to sell
his shares to the Applicant for an agreed
price. The Applicant relies on a
signed written agreement in making his claim and alleges the Respondent is bound
by those terms.
The Applicant therefore alleges the Respondent does not have a
defence to the claim.
parties did not resolve their disputes over the share transfer agreement.
Mr Du and Mr Jun Wang continued to work in the business.
parties’ disputes escalated in early September 2020 into even more
acrimonious disagreement over the business and Mr Jun
Wang’s role in it.
On 3 September 2020, Mr Du removed Mr Jun Wang as a signatory to the
company’s bank account without
consulting Mr Wang. Mr Wang
retaliated by reinstating Mr Jun Wang as a signatory and froze the company
bank account. Mr Wang alleges
Mr Du then effectively removed him and Mr Jun
Wang from the business operations and Mr Jun Wang’s employment was
without reason on 4 September
Mr Du accepts he
terminated Mr Jun Wang’s employment but alleges it was justified by
Mr Jun Wang’s misconduct.
Solicitor’s
letters were exchanged. The parties disputes continued on a broader and public
front that began to significantly
disrupt business operations.
Du continued operating the company’s business on a cash basis, accepting
only cash sales and making cash payments for wages
and payments to suppliers in
September 2020. In October 2020, Mr Wang paid the company’s creditors
from his own funds. The
business operations were substantially scaled down.
Sales decreased significantly, employees resigned or were let go and suppliers
refused to supply on credit. By 17 November 2020, there were only eight
remaining employees. In the opinion of the joint administrators,
this method of
operation was not sustainable and the business collapsed by the end of November
was also the joint administrators’ opinion that the value of the goodwill
of the business ($550,000 at cost) was lost when
the business ceased
Soon after, the
company’s landlords retook possession of the three leased premises from
which the business operated. After
this time there is less clarity about control
of the company’s assets and the actions of various
Mr Du apparently
retrieved some plant and equipment and put it in storage, otherwise it was left
in the landlords’ premises.
on 14 October 2020 Mr Wang instituted proceedings in the Supreme Court
of South Australia to wind up the company and appoint
a provisional liquidator
on just and equitable grounds. Mr Du opposed the winding up, contending in his
first Supreme Court affidavit
that the business had continued to operate
profitability despite the freezing of the company bank account and operations
scaled up again and it would operate more profitability when the bank
account was unfrozen. Ultimately, no provisional liquidator
was appointed.
on 9 April 2021 the parties appointed Mr Andrew Heard and Mr Anthony Phillips as
voluntary administrators of the company.
May 2021, the joint administrators reported to creditors on the company’s
current financial position. It had total cash
at bank of $579,646. The value of
the only tangible assets comprising plant and equipment was estimated to be
between $50,000 to
$120,000 and for motor vehicles was between $37,000 and
Unsecured creditors
including the parties were estimated at $1.204
their concerns about the inaccuracy of the company’s financial statements
given the way in which the company’s
financial records were maintained
(particularly after 3 September 2020 on the advice of the bookkeeper), the joint
administrators
were of the opinion that the company traded profitably until
early September 2020.
Du’s affidavit evidence that the company continued to trade profitably
thereafter should be rejected as unreliable.
Ultimately,
the joint administrators recommended to creditors that it would not be in their
interests to end the administration because
the company was insolvent
deep dispute between the Directors that means returning control of the Company
to them would be impractical.
up the company was not recommended either because either of the deeds of company
arrangement (
proposed by the parties would result in far
larger dividend return to unrelated creditors.
the adjourned second meeting of creditors held on 21 June 2021 the creditors
voted in favour of entry into a DOCA proposed by Mr
Wang. The DOCA was executed
on 12 July 2021.
ceased to be a director of the company as a term of the DOCA.
company is still registered and the parties remain its equal shareholders.
evidence concerning the finalisation of the administration is incomplete. The
evidence there is discloses that under the terms
of the DOCA all of the
company’s assets were realised to pay unrelated creditors and there was
ultimately no surplus to meet
all of Mr Wang’s and Mr Du’s
related party claims as creditors or to return any funds to the company. Whilst
received a dividend for the payments he made to creditors, it is common
ground that both Mr Wang and Mr Du lost their initial loans
to the company
to fund the purchase of the business.
THE TRANSLATION
The Parties’ Submissions
support of his uncertainty case, Mr Du contends the Chinese characters in the
share transfer agreement are ambiguous and uncertain
and incapable of reliable
translation. Mr Du submits, on the assumption that the Shi Translation will be
admitted into evidence,
the agreement written in Chinese characters
the subject of 3 different translations by 3 different
translators”
“there are significant
differences.”
oral closing, Mr Du put his submission more forcefully: three translators
“whose credibility is not challenged”
, all trying their best
“three entirely different
translations.”
Du further submits the differences cannot be resolved by the Court preferring
one translation over another because that
“is in effect a Court
assuming and writing some of the terms for the parties, as opposed to having
reliable translated
a result, Mr Du contends the Court does not have a reliable translation capable
of objective construction and
enforcement.
answer, Mr Wang submits Mr Du’s challenges to the translation evidence
have no bearing on the pleaded issues concerning Mr
Du’s purchase
obligation under the share translation issue because the contingency envisaged
by clause III was not enlivened.
Accordingly, Mr Du’s challenges to
the Han Translation were irrelevant and otherwise
– What were the terms in English?
Du’s submissions significantly overreach in a number of respects. The two
translations in evidence are not entirely different.
As explained below, the
only material differences do not concern Mr Du’s purchase obligation.
Contrary to Mr Du’s submissions,
the Shi Translation confirms the
reliability of the relevant parts of the Han Translation. Therefore, the Court
has before it a reliable
English translation of the relevant parts of the share
transfer agreement.
there were material differences between the translations to be resolved, the
Court would need to resolve which translation was
preferred. This would not
constitute writing the contract for the parties. It is a question of fact to be
resolved just like any
other conflict of evidence such as a material difference
between witnesses about what one said to the other in making an oral
is necessary to set out the Han Translation in full to properly understand Mr
Du’s challenges to its
reliability.
Transfer Agreement
Party A: Changmin WANG
Party B: Zhigang
The Parties have, through friendly consultation, agreed as follows on the
transfer of shares in AFD-Foods PTY TDL:
B shall purchase 50% shares from Party A for THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-NINE
THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED AUSTRALIAN DOLLARS. Party B
shall pay to Party A a
purchase fee of FIFTY THOUSAND AUSTRALIAN DOLLARS. The two amounts add up to
THREE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-NINE
THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED AUSTRALIAN DOLLARS.
deadline for payment shall be 11 July 2020, that is one and a half months from
the date that the Parties executed this Agreement.
B promises that if the loan remains unsuccessful by the deadline for payment, it
will transfer 50% of its shares to Party A
for THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-NINE
THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED AUSTRALIAN DOLLARS with
THOUSAND AUSTRALIAN DOLLARS.
A shall provide Party B with financial reports prior to 3 May 2020 in support of
the loan processing for Party B, with the required
accounting fees payable by
the company.
not covered by this Agreement shall continue to be addressed by the Parties
through peaceful and friendly negotiations at
the presence of a third party
Agreement shall be prepared in triplicate: one for each party and one for the
on this day of 27 May 2020.
only relevant inaccuracy in the Han Translation established in cross-examination
of Mr Han is literally and contextually immaterial.
Mr Han accepted that his
English translation of clause III included the words
(underlined and bolded above) but there were no characters in the Chinese
document corresponding to those words. However, he confirmed
that the character
for the word
was there, as were the characters for
In effect, his translation made express the obvious implication arising from
clause I given the prices were the same, that is
is no real contention or any material difference between the clauses concerning
Mr Du’s purchase obligation addressed
primarily by clauses I, II and IV.
Where there are different English words in the translations for the same Chinese
characters,
they are obvious synonyms (ie purchase/buy, due date/deadline,
negotiation/consultation, loan application/loan processing etc).
point was taken about there being ambiguity about the identity of the shares the
subject of the share transfer agreement. For Mr
Du’s purchase obligation,
the subject shares refer to Mr Wang’s 50% of the company’s issued
shares (ie the 600
fully paid shares in the company held in his name).
Du’s challenges focussed on clause III, submitting there were material
differences between the Han and Shi Translations.
On the basis that the Shi
Translation should be preferred, Mr Du identified a difficulty with the number
of Party B’s shares
to be transferred (50% of Party B’s shares) and
the purchase price ($50,000 of $389,500). He contended clause III was
inconsistent
with the parties’ common intention that the terms of their
reciprocal purchase obligations be the same, a question that is
ultimately not
regard to the text of the Han and Shi Translation, the identified differences
were limited and concern only some of the characters
and English words in
clause III. Neither difference is necessary to resolve because they
both concern the terms of Mr Wang’s
purchase obligation in
circumstances where Mr Du had not been able to get approval for a loan by the
payment date. Since Mr Du was
successful in getting loan approval (which he
formally admitted in his defence), Mr Wang’s (conditional) purchase
was never engaged.
the importance of the issue to the parties, there is utility in making a further
observation. Having regard to the object of
the transaction, read in context,
the first submitted difficulty does not arise. The
“his own 50% of shares”
in clause 3 of the Shi Translation
should be read as referring to 50% of the company’s shares owned by Party
B, not as 50%
of his shares (ie 300 shares). Read this way there is no
inconsistency between the Shi and Han Translations on this
THE CONSTRUCTION ISSUES
rights and liabilities of parties under a contract are to be determined
objectively, having regard to its text, context (as a
meaning of the words used in a contract is to be determined by reference to what
a reasonable person in the position of the parties
would have understood them to
mean, rather than by reference to the subjectively stated intentions of the
This inquiry
requires attention to the language used by the parties, the commercial
circumstances addressed by the contract, the
purpose of the transaction and the
objects it is intended to
Ordinarily,
it is possible to construe the terms of a contract by reference to the contract
alone. If the words in the contract are
unambiguous or susceptible of only one
meaning, the Court must give effect to them. A court is not justified in
disregarding unambiguous
language simply because the contract would have a more
commercial operation if an interpretation different to the language were
to the surrounding circumstances may be necessary to identify the commercial
purpose or objects of the contract or where
there is a constructional
choice. Any such recourse is objective and is limited to those
events, circumstances and external things
known to the parties or those that
assist in establishing the purpose or object of the transaction, including its
history, background
and context and the market in which the parties were
of surrounding circumstances (events, circumstances and things external to the
contract) cannot be adduced to subtract, add
to, vary or contradict the terms of
a contract, except in limited
circumstances.
admissible to contradict the language of the contract when it has a plain
parties’ subjective intentions and expectations are not
Evidence of the
parties’ statements and actions reflecting their actual intentions and
expectations are therefore
inadmissible.
of pre-contractual negotiations is generally inadmissible as an aid to
construction. It is admissible to the extent it establishes
background facts known to both parties and the subject matter of the contract
where relevant. But it cannot be used for
any other purpose including as
evidence of the parties’ subjective intentions or the meaning of
particular words of clauses
The rationale is
that such statements and actions reveal the terms of the contract which the
parties intended or hoped to make and
are superseded by, and merged in, the
contract itself.
can regard be had to subsequent conduct of or communications between the parties
after the contract is executed to construe the
parties enter into a written contract, the Court will generally hold them to the
obligations they have assumed under it. The
Court will adopt a commercial
approach so that everything that can be done is done to give effect to an
agreement that businesspersons
would assume would be
The Court will
take this approach unless relief is afforded by operation of statute or some
other legal or equitable principle appropriate
In this case, no such
defence or claim was ultimately pressed at trial, Mr Du having abandoned his
rectification case.
in the search for contractual intention, no narrow or pedantic approach is
warranted, particularly in the case of commercial
arrangements.
Parties’ Submissions
Du submits the share transfer agreement should be construed having regard to the
parties’ common assumption that by one or
the other transferring their
shares to the other one, there would be a clean break so that the purchaser
could run the business without
the other. This was because neither could work
with the other. Since it was intended that one or other would get the
the business, neither would be entitled to sue the other for default.
Mr Du contends the parties certainly did not contemplate that
there would be an
ability for Mr Wang to sue Mr Du if he did not purchase
Mr Wang’s shares.
Du submits an entitlement to sue him for damages
“does not make
because it could lead to Mr Wang suing as he did, making
“the shares and the business [become]
if Mr Du did not buy Mr Wang’s shares and make payment by the
deadline as provided in clause II, then it was up to
Mr Wang to buy Mr
Du’s shares.
“Mr Du had first go, Mr Wang
Du’s ‘simple reciprocity’ case as his counsel described
his pleaded defence, Mr Du also alleges he was not provided with the financial
reports for the company, a condition precedent to
the share transfer
By this plea, Mr
Du apparently put in issue the meaning of
“financial reports”
in clause IV of the share transfer agreement (and performance of this
obligation).
Wang disagrees, contending the share transfer agreement, properly construed,
provides that Mr Du was obliged to purchase Mr Wang’s
shares and pay the
purchase price of $389,500 by 11 July 2020 if he was successful in obtaining a
loan to fund the purchase price.
To support Mr Du’s loan application, Mr
Wang was to provide the company’s financial reports (and not provide Mr Du
access to all the business records). When Mr Du obtained a loan his
purchase obligation became unconditional and payment of the purchase
due by the deadline of 11 July 2020. This deadline was strict and time was of
the essence. Mr Wang’s contingent
purchase obligation is not relevant in
circumstances where Mr Du’s purchase obligation was
unconditional.
Analysis – What do the terms mean?
Genesis and Object
the emphasis Mr Du placed on surrounding circumstances in construing the share
transfer agreement, it is important to consider
first the commercial
circumstances addressed by the parties’ contract, the purpose of the
transaction and the objects it was
intended to secure.
object of the share transfer agreement was to resolve the deadlock between
disputing equal shareholders by one or other of the
parties becoming its sole
shareholder and ultimately controlling the company. The genesis of
the transaction and its context were
the continuing bitter disputes between the
parties that had arisen during the first week of operation of the business, a
that escalated to the point the parties were not talking and their
relationship had broken down irretrievably. Reasonable businesspersons
position of the parties would have appreciated that since they were no longer
able to work together co-operatively, their
continuing disputes would likely
impact adversely the business operations and its profitability if not resolved
expeditiously and
cooperatively.
background matters are uncontentious and were known to both parties.
mechanism chosen to resolve the deadlock was a simple share transfer by which
the parties intended Mr Wang would sell his shares
to Mr Du so Mr Du would have
ultimate control of the company and its business. This made commercial sense
since Mr Du had been working
in the business and Mr Wang had not.
Du needed finance to fund the purchase of Mr Wang’s shares. To facilitate
Mr Du obtaining finance, Mr Wang was to provide
a financial report for
the company that was to be prepared by the company’s external
accountant.
case Mr Du did not obtain finance by the specified date, the parties intended
that Mr Wang would instead purchase Mr Du’s
shares for the same price
as Mr Du was to purchase his. This term was intended to avoid the parties being
left in a position of deadlock
as equal shareholders if Mr Du was not able
to obtain finance.
businesspersons in the position of the parties would have appreciated that their
intended transaction was not a business
sale and required some but minimal
co-operation to complete it. Indeed, in clause V of the share transfer
agreement, the parties
expressly addressed the need for there to be friendly
consultation in settling any matters not addressed by the share transfer
businesspersons in the position of the parties would also have appreciated that
once Mr Du was the sole shareholder, he
would have ultimate control of the
company and its business including control over the continuing participation of
Mr Wang as director
and Mr Jun Wang as an employee.
Simple Reciprocity
Du’s contention that the parties intended by their transaction that one or
the other would own all the company’s shares
and indirectly the business,
so Mr Wang must purchase if Mr Du did not, should be rejected. Mr Du’s
case of ‘simple
reciprocity’ has no foundation in the text and
context (as a whole) of the share transfer agreement or the evidence.
fundamental difficulty with Mr Du’s ‘simple reciprocity’ case
is that it contradicts the plain language of the
share transfer agreement.
is no ambiguity arising about the nature of Mr Du’s purchase obligation.
Clauses III and IV clearly provide that Mr Du’s
purchase obligation is
conditional on him obtaining a loan before the specified deadline to fund
payment of the purchase of Mr Wang’s
shares and Mr Wang’s
purchase obligation is only engaged if Mr Du’s loan application is
unsuccessful by the deadline.
Accordingly, there is no warrant for reading the
deadline for payment in clause II as operating as a simple trigger for Mr Wang
to purchase Mr Du’s shares if he does not purchase
Mr Wang’s shares by 11 July 2020.
is no legitimate need to have recourse to extrinsic evidence to properly
construe the share transfer agreement. Most fundamentally,
it is for the Court
to determine what the parties intended their written contract to mean and it is
not for the parties to now say
what they intended, or from their perspective
what should be concluded to be commercially absurd or inconvenient. In any
Du did not establish any common assumption of a clean break.
is a second difficulty with Mr Du’s ‘simple reciprocity’ case.
It is inconsistent with the construction pleaded
in his defence:
If the Respondent
did not obtain loan finance
to purchase [Mr Wang’s] shares the
subjective intention of the parties was that the Applicant would purchase the
Respondent’s
shares for the same consideration, namely $339,500.00;
plea was mirrored in his withdrawn rectification
Default Clauses, No Remedy in Damages
Du submits the absence of any default clauses is important and supports his
‘simple reciprocity’ case. He submits
that it is usual
for commercial contracts to deal with default and if the parties intended they
would be entitled to claim damages
for either’s breach of contract, then
the share transfer agreement should have said
In the absence of any
default clauses, the share transfer agreement should be read as providing that
if Mr Du did not purchase Mr
Wang’s shares on 11 July 2020, then
“the only remedy is for Mr Wang to purchase [Mr Du’s
inconsistently, Mr Du submits
“the result should have been specific
performance of the Agreement and transfer of the shares for the
Du’s submissions are not persuasive. Whilst the contract is to be
construed in the context it was made, clear express words
are required to rebut
the presumption that a contracting party does not intend to abandon any remedies
for breach of contract arising
by operation of
The more valuable and
important the right, the clearer the language
absence of default clauses is a plainly inadequate foundation for inferring the
parties intended neither would have an ability
to sue for damages for breach of
is a flaw in the logic of Mr Du’s submissions. What true reciprocity can
there be in circumstances where Mr Wang breaches
his (conditional) purchase
obligation (because Mr Du has not purchased)? How can the remedy be that
Du must then purchase Mr Wang’s shares when Mr Wang’s purchase
obligation only arises when Mr Du does not purchase
Mr Wang shares? The
circularity is absurd.
Conditions Precedent
Du pleads the share transfer agreement was subject to two conditions precedent,
the first being the provision of a financial report
of the business and the
second, Mr Du getting loan finance. Contrary to his pleaded case, in closing
submissions, Mr Du submits
the share transfer agreement was not subject to
finance, despite accepting in his pleaded defence that Mr Wang’s purchase
was conditional on Mr Du obtaining finance by the
explained above,
transfer agreement clearly and expressly provides that Mr Du’s purchase
obligation was conditional on his obtaining
a loan. Using the words of his
pleaded defence, Mr Du’s purchase obligation was
“subject to
conditions precedent”
including as to
Du’s purchase obligation was not subject to any other condition precedent.
Mr Wang’s promise in clause IV to provide
Mr Du with the
company’s financial report was an unconditional obligation necessary to
support the processing of Mr Du’s
application for a loan to fund the
purchase of Mr Wang’s shares. In any event, it was performed and any
allegation of breach
must be rejected.
Du contends that clause IV of the share transfer agreement should be construed
as requiring Mr Wang to provide all the paper and
electronic records of the
business. Relying (impermissibly) on surrounding circumstances, Mr Du in closing
advances a new unpleaded
case that access to all the business records was
necessary to run the business and therefore the requirement for
“financial reports”
should be construed more broadly.
Du’s submissions lack merit and should be rejected for two reasons.
Mr Du’s preferred meaning is contrary to the text of clause IV that
expressly identifies the purpose of the
“financial reports”
to be provided as supporting Mr Du’s loan application. Clause IV
is not ambiguous or works any commercial inconvenience. Secondly,
inconsistent with his pleaded allegation that Mr Wang failed to provide
“a financial report of the Businesses as at 3 May 2020 and
as distinct
from all the company records.
Time of the Essence
Wang contends the stipulation of the deadline of 11 July 2020 for payment in
clause II of the share agreement made time of the
essence. Mr Du contends time
was not expressed to be of the essence but accepts the Court would impose a
reasonably short deadline
for performance.
Ultimately,
it is unnecessary to determine this issue because Mr Du did not make payment by
the stipulated deadline for payment or
at any time thereafter. However, for
completeness, the issue should be addressed briefly.
the following reasons Mr Wang’s construction is to be preferred.
the absence of express words, whether a time stipulation is essential is a
question of construction to be approached in the usual
way. In this case, the
stipulated time for payment in clause II was expressed as a
for payment, naturally indicating essentiality. By
implication, the stipulated deadline was also the time by which Mr Du was to
finance to fund his purchase obligation, failing which Mr Wang’s
purchase obligation crystallised. The contract was a commercial
one, made in
circumstances where objectively there was a pressing need to resolve the
deadlock between shareholders as soon as practicable
given the likely impact of
the parties’ disputes on business operations.
UNENFORCEABILITY
a contract to be enforceable, it must be sufficiently certain requiring its
terms to be both meaningful and complete.
the words the parties have used are so obscure or imprecise as to be incapable
of supporting any definite or precise meaning
that the Court is unable to
attribute any contractual intention, the contract is not void for
uncertainty.
Once satisfied
that the parties intended to contract, the Court is reluctant to find a contract
void for uncertainty, even if the
parties’ intention has been obscurely
expressed. As Barwick CJ explained in
Upper Hunter County District Council v
Australian Chilling & Freezing Co
contract of which there can be more than one possible meaning or which when
construed can produce in its application more than
one result is not therefore
void for uncertainty. As long as it is capable of a meaning, it will ultimately
bear that meaning which
the court, or in an appropriate case, an arbitrator,
decides is its proper construction: and the court or arbitrator will decide
application. The question becomes one of construction, of ascertaining the
intention of the parties, and of applying it...In
the search for that intention,
no narrow or pedantic approach is warranted, particularly in the case of
commercial arrangements.
Thus will uncertainty of meaning, as distinct from
absence of meaning or of intention, be resolved.
requisite intention for contractual certainty is a question of fact to be
assessed objectively.
the contract lacks essential terms or its essential terms are so lacking as to
be uncertain, it is void.
is not void if the agreement has been reached
“upon all the terms which
[the parties] regarded or the law requires as essential for the formation of
legally binding
determination of subsidiary matters can be filled out by the Court, ignored or
The Parties’ Submissions
Du’s primary and ultimate contention as to the uncertainty of the share
transfer agreement and its unenforceability is that
there is no reliable
translation of the document written in Chinese characters for the Court to
consider. For the reasons already
discussed, Mr Du’s contentions in
this regard should be
Du also contends the share transfer agreement is uncertain on grounds of both
its incompleteness and uncertainty of its meaning.
As for incompleteness, Mr Du
contends the contract does not operate to give either purchaser the value of the
business’ goodwill
and assets or control over the business operations. He
also contends it fails to include default clauses, any machinery for settlement,
any date for the provision of finance, any provision for the resignation of
directors, any indemnities or warranties dealing with
employees or other
liabilities and fails to address stamp duty and other tax consequences. Mr Du
further contends clause IV of the
share transfer agreement is poorly expressed
and uncertain because there is no definition of
accounting fees”
and therefore the share transfer agreement does not
say what should be provided.
Wang disagrees.
Incompleteness Generally
the heart of Mr Du’s pleaded contentions about incompleteness is his
submission that the parties intended to achieve a ‘clean
contends this object could not be achieved without the share transfer addressing
numerous essential terms including
Mr Wang’s resignation as a director and
warranties and indemnities to protect the value of the business’ goodwill
assets of the business. Yet none were included.
Du’s uncertainty defence on the ground of incompleteness should be
rejected. His case ignores the agreed mechanism for resolving
shareholders’ deadlock. The parties agreed on a simple share transfer, not
a business sale. There is nothing in the text
or context of their agreement that
indicates the parties intended the transaction to be the equivalent of a
business sale.
does the evidence support Mr Du’s case in this regard. He has not proven
any common assumption of a clean break or that
at the time of contracting the
parties regarded any of the matters now relied on as being essential to their
bargain. Indeed, the
evidence shows the omitted matters now complained of as
being essential and normal practice in Australian business sale transactions
were only contemplated by Mr Du later as the result of Mr Xiao’s
advice to him.
suggestion that warranties and indemnities were necessary to ensure Mr Du
received the value of the goodwill and assets of the
business in a share sale is
in the circumstances of this case misconceived. Mr Du was already a 50%
shareholder in the company operating
the business and he had been working in it
since they began operating in February 2020.
the terms of the parties’ contract are unambiguous as they are in this
case, the Court should give effect to the transaction
contemplated by the
parties’ contract. The Court should discern the parties’ contractual
intentions straightforwardly
by reference to what the parties bargained for
rather than by what lawyers might subsequently think is commercially
No Incompleteness
share transfer agreement included all of the terms the parties regarded were
essential or legally necessary. The shares the subject
of the transfer, the
parties, the price and the deadline were all expressly identified.
not covered such as arrangements for settlement were inessential and if contrary
to the parties’ express intention that
they would co-operate in addressing
such matters, were not agreed, they could have been addressed by each
unilaterally tendering
performance. That a share transfer form must be prepared
and signed to complete the transaction should be inferred as a term of Mr
Wang’s obligation to sell his shares to Mr Du (and vice versa if
Mr Wang’s (conditional) purchase obligation had been
triggered).
the transaction was not a business sale, none of the provisions commonly found
in business sale contracts (warranties, indemnities
etc) were necessary, let
alone essential. Unwise as it may perhaps have been, it was also not essential
that the share transfer
agreement address any tax consequences for the parties,
if there were any.
for default provisions and remedies, they are not essential when the
parties’ rights and obligations are governed by the
common law.
same should be said of the contention that the share transfer agreement did not
deal with the resignation of the selling shareholder
as a director. Such
provisions were not essential when any refusal could be dealt with in accordance
with the parties’ rights
and obligations under the company’s
constitution and company law. The share transfer agreement is not legally
uncertain because
a court might need to resolve a dispute about a
director’s refusal to resign if there was in fact one. In any event, Mr
evidence that he was prepared to resign if Mr Du bought his shares
should be accepted.
is not necessary to determine whether clause V is unenforceable. Any debate
it from the share
transfer agreement.
No Uncertainty of Meaning
Du’s submissions that the words used in clause IV of the share transfer
agreement are not defined, lack meaning and are uncertain
are without merit.
The meaning of
“financial reports”
is resolved by
construction, as already
The meaning of
is obvious as is
“required accounting
. The latter words mean the cost of the external accountant
preparing the financial reports.
UNCONDITIONALITY
next issue to resolve is whether Mr Du’s purchase obligation was
unconditional. Mr Wang submits it was.
Du disagrees. As mentioned, he pleads the share transfer agreement was subject
to two conditions precedent, the first being the
provision of a financial report
of the businesses and the second, Mr Du getting loan finance. Mr Du alleges in
his defence the first
condition was not
submissions, Mr Du contends neither of the two conditions precedent were
satisfied, arguing that Mr Wang was required
to provide access to all of
the records of the business, as well as a financial report of the business for
the purpose of obtaining
arms-length
Mr Wang correctly contends, Mr Du’s purchase obligation was unconditional.
The only condition precedent to Mr Du’s
purchase obligation under the
share transfer agreement was satisfied when he obtained loan
finance. Mr Du’s solicitor Mr
Xiao informed Mr Wang that
Mr Du had obtained finance by email sent on 9 July 2020 at 3:31
Mr Du’s sworn
evidence in the winding up proceedings confirmed that he received approval for a
loan on about 8 July
Du’s new contention that the loan finance was required to be arms-length
and therefore this condition precedent was not satisfied
is without merit. It
is contrary to his pleaded case. The share transfer agreement did not provide
that the loan finance be arms-length,
expressly or impliedly. The reference to
“loan processing”
is equivocal and does not mandate that the
loan Mr Du required to fund the purchase price of Mr Wang’s shares must be
arms-length.
It makes no commercial sense that this would be required.
to Mr Du’s pleaded case, the company’s financial report was provided
to Mr Du in accordance with Mr Wang’s
obligations under clause IV of the
share transfer agreement. The evidence shows that on 5 June 2020 Mr Wang
sent Mr Du by WeChat
messages the company’s financial report for the
year ended 30 April 2020 as prepared by the company’s accountant, which
Du acknowledged with
admitted he received it in
cross-examination.
REPUDIATION
Repudiation
is ascertained by an objective inquiry into the conduct of the defaulting party.
It is found in the conduct and words
of the defaulting party that would convey
to a reasonable person in the position of the other party the defaulting
inability or unwillingness to perform the contract or promise or
their intention not to perform it or to perform it in a manner substantially
inconsistent with their obligations under the contract and not in any other way.
The test is whether, viewed objectively, the conduct
of the defaulting party
conveys to a reasonable person in the situation of the other party, repudiation
or disavowal of the contract
as a whole or a fundamental obligation under
an intention not to be bound is
sufficient.
defaulting party’s subjective and uncommunicated intentions are
irrelevant.
Repudiation
is a serious matter and not to be found or inferred
It may comprise a
single act or an accumulation of conduct in circumstances where no individual
act on its own constitutes a repudiation.
A clear case would
involve an express refusal to perform the contract. However, repudiation may be
established if a refusal can be
implied from the defaulting party’s words
or conduct. The question is
“whether the acts or conduct...amount to an
intimation of an intention to abandon and altogether to refuse performance of
failure to perform a contractual obligation when performance is due may in some
circumstances demonstrate an unwillingness
or inability to perform the contract
at all (that is a deliberate breach of
Repudiation
by the defaulting party does not of itself discharge the
For an effective
termination, the innocent party must accept the repudiation and terminate the
Was Mr Du’s conduct repudiatory?
The Parties’ Submissions
Wang submits Mr Du repudiated his obligations under the share transfer
agreement. He relies on the July 2020 emails sent by Mr
Xiao as objectively
conveying Mr Du’s unwillingness to perform the contract and his purchase
obligation and intention to only
perform the contract in a substantially
inconsistent manner.
answer, Mr Du submits that these emails establish that neither party complied
with their obligations under the share transfer agreement
and both attempted to
impose new terms on the other. Mr Du complains that Mr Wang failed to nominate
solicitors to act as trust
account holders or to act for him at settlement.
Accordingly, Mr Du was never given an opportunity to attend a settlement to
money for shares.
the following reasons, a clear inference of repudiation should be drawn from Mr
Xiao’s July 2020 emails and Mr Du’s
failure to pay the purchase
price for Mr Wang’s shares by the stipulated deadline of 11 July
2020 or at all. The evidence does
not support Mr Du’s contention that
he was never given an opportunity to attend a settlement to exchange money for
Indeed, Mr Xiao ‘cancelled’ settlement in circumstances
where there was a clear refusal to proceed with the share transfer
transaction
on Mr Du’s part unless the new inconsistent conditions sought to be
imposed by Mr Du were first agreed by Mr Wang.
was not a case where the solicitors correspondence merely sought an indication
of Mr Wang’s attitude to the proposed settlement
supplementary terms because they were not covered by the share transfer
agreement. Instead, from Mr Xiao’s first
email sent on 9 July 2020 until
he cancelled settlement on 10 July 2020 and then again afterwards, he did not
resile from the position
that Mr Du would not perform the share transfer
agreement according to its terms unless Mr Wang agreed to new inconsistent
explain this conclusion, it is necessary to set out in some detail the content
of Mr Xiao’s July 2020 emails. Some of the
detail of Mr Wang’s
responding emails is also considered to put Mr Xiao’s subsequent emails in
Thursday 9 July 2020 at 3:31 pm, Mr Xiao sent Mr Wang an email (the
) stating as
you for your reply. Our client’s loan to purchase your shares has been
According to the Share Transfer Contract signed by you and Mr. Du on 27 May
2020, the payment date for the purchase of shares is 11
July 2020. But because
11 July 2020 is a Saturday,
the settlement of the business must be
completed before the transfer
(including delivering the full set of
company information, passwords, etc. to our client), and this work must be
completed in Port
Lincoln, so our client proposed the following settlement
client first pays you a 10% deposit tomorrow (10 July 2020), which is AUD
there are many issues not addressed in the contract signed by the two parties on
27 May 2020 (such as your withdrawal as the
guarantor of the leases, the
responsibilities of both parties before and after handover, etc.), our client
recommends that the price
remain unchanged and next week both parties will sign
a supplementary agreement that is fair and reasonable to everyone. Please let
know if you wish to do so.
the two parties sign the supplementary agreement next week, our client will pay
another 70% deposit. After the settlement procedures
are completed, our client
will pay the remaining 20% balance.
One thing to note in particular
is that if the two parties cannot sign the supplementary agreement next week,
the 10% deposit paid
by our client
immediately. Similarly, if both parties are unable to settle, the 70% deposit
already paid
returned immediately.
Regarding the above plan, please give us a reply before ten o’clock
tomorrow morning. At the same time, please also notify us
your bank account
details so that out client can transfer money to your account.
Our client retains all his rights.
Objectively
read, the First Xiao Email clearly evinces an intention on Mr Du’s part to
no longer be bound by the share transfer
agreement. Instead of proposing
arrangements whereby a duly signed share transfer form could simply be exchanged
for payment of the
purchase price, Mr Xiao on behalf of Mr Du proposed a
settlement method that was fundamentally inconsistent with the parties’
obligations under the share transfer agreement.
Mr Xiao insisted that the settlement of the business must be completed before
the transfer. The transaction contemplated by
the share transfer agreement was
not a business sale. All that was legally necessary to perform the contract was
payment of the
purchase price by Mr Du and the delivery by Mr Wang of a duly
signed share transfer form so that a new share certificate could be
an entry recorded in the company’s register of members.
by his solicitor pressing for a new
“supplementary agreement”
“fair and reasonable to everyone”
, with his client
“recommending”
only that the price remain unchanged, Mr Du
was disavowing the share transfer agreement. The new agreement was not
supplementary
to the parties’ existing contract. Different payment terms
were proposed (a 10% deposit, then 70% on signing and 20% at settlement)
were contingent first on entry into the new agreement and secondly on its
settlement. The deposit and instalment
“must be returned
immediately”
if the transaction did not settle. All of this was
proposed to occur after the deadline for payment specified in the share transfer
reasonable person in Mr Wang’s position would have readily inferred from
the First Xiao Email that Mr Du did not intend to
be bound by the share transfer
agreement and would only fulfil it in a manner substantially inconsistent with
his obligations under
it and in no other way.
Xiao’s request for Mr Wang’s bank details do not detract from this
conclusion. It is clear that Mr Du would not be
transferring any money to Mr
Wang’s bank account unless the new conditions in Mr Xiao’s letter
were agreed. Nor does
the language of ‘proposal’ suggest otherwise.
doubt about whether the First Xiao Email constituted a repudiation of Mr
Du’s obligations under the share transfer agreement
is dispelled by the
next three emails he sent Mr Wang in close succession. Each of these emails
aggressively pressed for completion
of the business handover as a precondition
to settlement of the share transfer. As a result, all three emails insist on
performance
in a manner that was substantially inconsistent with Mr Du’s
obligations under the share transfer agreement. As such, they
Du’s continuing intention to no longer be bound by the share transfer
agreement and are repudiatory of his contractual
obligations under it.
next email was sent at 11:27 pm on Thursday 9 July 2020 (the
Second Xiao
was sent after receipt of Mr Wang’s response to the First Xiao Email
earlier that same evening (the
by which Mr Wang
had proposed simple steps for settlement of the share transfer agreement on the
following Monday (instead of Saturday)
and once completed, landlords and banks
could be notified about the change of shareholders and handover could begin in
Port Lincoln.
steps proposed were essentially to deposit the purchase price into a
lawyer’s trust account designated by Mr Wang, execution
of the share
transfer form before the parties’ lawyers and then transfer of the
purchase price to Mr Wang’s bank account.
Mr Wang proposed consequential
matters to then follow
“based on the principle of mutual help, both
parties [doing] their best to complete the handover
Wang sought a response before 2:00 pm the next day, 10 July 2020.
post-completion matters proposed by Mr Wang were not covered by the share
transfer agreement.
Second Xiao Email expressly rejected Mr Wang’s settlement method,
describing it as
“totally inconsistent with the normal practice of
business transaction[s] in
Australia.”
Mr Du’s willingness to complete the share transfer transaction was
again expressly stated as being subject to Mr Wang’s
completion of a long
list of business handover matters that were asserted to be the normal approach
in Australia. Save for signing
the share transfer from, none of these matters
were necessary to transact a share transfer and none were matters covered by the
transfer agreement.
Second Xiao Email ended with an adversarial and self-serving flourish, advising
Mr Wang that if he did not respond by 12:00 pm
the following day, it would be
assumed Mr Wang would be unable to provide the necessary information before
settlement and he would
be in breach of contract.
Wang responded with a further email sent on Friday 10 July 2020 at 9:30 am (the
Second Wang Email
Mr Wang (among other things) emphasised that both parties must strictly abide by
the terms and time stipulated by their agreement
and strictly implement them.
He referred to the requirements for a
“normal share transaction
as stated in his earlier email and asked for a reply before
2:00 pm that day.
Xiao sent a third email at 11:08 am in response to the Second Wang Email (the
Third Xiao Email
Xiao repeated much of what he had said in his preceding emails, (incorrectly)
reiterating that it was Mr Wang’s obligation
at settlement to attend
to the handover of business matters he had outlined. This email gave notice that
in the absence of Mr Wang
failing to confirm by 12:00 pm today that he would
comply with his obligations at settlement, Mr Du would not settle the
transaction.
However, if Mr Wang was able to provide the information
requested, Mr Xiao proposed settlement take place at his office at 4:00
Saturday 11 July 2020.
reasonable person in Mr Wang’s position would have clearly understood that
Mr Du would not settle the share transfer transaction
unless the new and
inconsistent conditions he sought to impose on their existing agreement were
attended to first.
Wang responded by an email sent at 12:07 pm (the
He asked again
that the steps set out in his earlier email be followed, stating
always insisted on implementing in accordance with the signed agreement.
According to the second article of the agreement,
“The final payment date
is one and half months from the date when both parties signed the agreement,
that is, 11 July 2020”,
we have not violated any terms in the
agreement...
Xiao’s fourth email was sent at 12:36 pm (the
Fourth Xiao
once again reiterated the substance of Mr Xiao’s previous emails,
essentially insisting that it was Mr Wang’s obligation
to provide the
business information that he had been requesting at a handover before
settlement, a request that was (in Mr Xiao’s
view) fair and
reasonable. The email
have failed to confirm by 12pm today that you will provide the information
requested tomorrow at settlement,
we have cancelled the event –
settlement will not proceed tomorrow as proposed.
This email will be produced to court in the event out client issues
proceedings against you for breach of contract.
Xiao’s view about what was fair and reasonable was not relevant. The
information requested was not required for settlement
of the share transfer, nor
a matter covered by the share transfer agreement.
Wang sent a fourth email at 2:22 pm (the
Fourth Wang
Among other
things, he insisted on implementing the agreement signed by the parties,
requiring full payment of the purchase price
on the following day, 11 July
Xiao did not respond. As foreshadowed in Mr Xiao’s emails, Mr Du did
not pay the purchase price for Mr Wang’s shares
on 11 July 2020.
the deadline for payment under the share transfer agreement passed,
Mr Du’s anticipatory breaches and repudiation of his
obligation became an actual breach.
Wang sent a fifth email on Sunday 12 July 2020 at 8:00 am (the
Mr Wang asked for
confirmation to his proposal and reply before
10:00 am 14 July 2020, stating
failed to receive your full payment on the final payment date (11/07/2020)
stipulated in the share transfer agreement, according
to the agreement signed
with the equal negotiation and consent of both parties and witnessed by a third
party, we will under the
same conditions and methods, purchase all your Mr. Zhi
Gang Du’s shares in AFD Foods Pty Ltd...
14 July 2020 at 11:15 am, Mr Xiao sent Mr Wang a further email (the
essentially reiterated Mr Du’s position that Mr Wang was in breach of
contract by failing to confirm his ability
to complete settlement by delivering
the information and handover demanded at settlement at the time (unilaterally
and unreasonably)
proposed by Mr Xiao. Mr Wang was offered an opportunity
to rectify his breach of contract and it was proposed that settlement take
on 22 July 2020 at 11:00 am at Mr Xiao’s office. Mr Xiao again
insisted that all the handover matters referred to in
the First Xiao Email must
be completed at the time of settlement.
reasonable person in Mr Wang’s position would have clearly understood from
all of Mr Xiao’s emails that Mr Du was
disavowing the share transfer
agreement and would only fulfil his obligations under it in a substantially
inconsistent manner and
not in any other way.
ELECTION AND
TERMINATION
a party to a contract repudiates the contract or a fundamental obligation under
it, the innocent party has the right to elect to
accept the repudiation and
bring the contract to an end or affirm the contract and continue contractual
performance. Essential to
an election is the concept of a choice between the
exercise of inconsistent rights. The innocent party is not obliged to make an
immediate election and, depending on the circumstances, may keep their options
open so long as delay does not cause prejudice to
a repudiation is accepted, both parties are discharged from the obligation to
perform their future contractual duties, but accrued
rights and liabilities are
not affected.
the repudiation is not accepted, the contract remains on foot and the
requirement of readiness and willingness to perform continues
through to the
time of performance. Where the repudiation precedes the time for performance and
the repudiation is not accepted,
there is no breach by the promisor and the
promisee cannot claim
compensation.
The position
changes when the time for performance passes.
is necessary for an election to terminate to be made in clear and unequivocal
terms and communicated to the promisor.
No particular form of
words or conduct is required, but a reasonable person in the position of the
promisor must be left in no doubt
that the contract has been
terminated.
election to terminate can be inferred from what the promisee has said and done
is a question of fact depending on the
circumstances of the case. It is an
objective inquiry.
the conduct of a promisee entitled to terminate a contract is inconsistent with
an intention to perform their obligations under
the contract and is otherwise
repudiatory, it may, depending on the circumstances, constitute an election to
terminate. For example,
instituting proceedings alleging termination and
claiming damages based on termination of the contract has been found to
an election to
conduct that is at the same time both consistent and inconsistent with an
election to terminate is necessarily
by the promisee or their not being ready, willing and able to perform their
obligations under the contract are generally not
impediments to their election
to terminate the performance of the contract for breach or repudiation by the
This is because an
election to terminate the contract concerns the promisee seeking to be
discharged from future performance as
opposed to their ability to provide the
agreed return for the promisor’s
performance.
some cases, readiness or willingness to perform is excused when it is clearly
pointless or
inappropriate.
promisee can lose their right to elect to terminate a contract if they choose to
continue contractual performance, that is affirm
the contact. In
ASL Developments Ltd
confronted with a choice between the exercise of alternative and inconsistent
rights is not bound to elect at once. He may
keep the question open, so long as
he does not affirm the contract or continuance of the estate and so long as the
delay does not
cause prejudice to the other side. An election takes place when
the conduct of the party is such that it would be justifiable only
election had been made one way or the other (
Tropical Traders Ltd v
). So, words or conduct which do not constitute the exercise of a
right conferred by or under a contract and merely involve a recognition
contract may not amount to an election to affirm the contract.
recently, the High Court in
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited v Delor Vue
Apartments CTS 39788
explained an election to affirm a contract kept extant the set of contractual
rights that were necessarily and immediately inconsistent
with those that would
arise upon termination of the contract. An election to affirm would
result in the loss of the inconsistent
rights arising upon termination of the
contract (such as loss of bargain damages), the election only applying
nature of the sets of rights is such that “neither one may be enjoyed
without the extinction of the other.”
Did Mr Wang terminate the contract?
The Parties’ Submissions
Wang’s pleaded case is that he elected to terminate the share transfer
agreement by reason of his email exchanges with Mr
Xiao between 9 and 14 July
2020 and the commencement of this
proceeding.
submissions, Mr Wang also relied on an extract of his solicitor’s
letter of 20 July 2020 stating that Mr Wang was
no longer willing to sell his
shares to Mr Du as evidencing his election to terminate the share transfer
the bare denial in his defence, Mr Du put Mr Wang to proof of his pleaded case
in the alternative to his primary case that on his
preferred construction of the
share transfer agreement, Mr Du did not breach his purchase obligation.
the following reasons, it should be concluded that prior to the specified
deadline for performance (being 11 July 2020) Mr Wang
did not elect to terminate
the share transfer agreement. Contrary to Mr Wang’s pleaded case, he
insisted the parties perform
their contract and settlement proceed but kept his
options open, by making no election either way. His erroneous assertion as to
the operation of the share transfer agreement should Mr Du continue to
refuse to perform his obligations under the share transfer
agreement does not
alter this conclusion. This assertion was merely an expression of Mr
Wang’s (erroneous) view about what
the contract would require if Mr Du did
not pay the purchase price on 11 July 2020. Objectively viewed, none of his
emails sent
before 11 July 2020 evince a clear and unequivocal election to
immediately terminate the parties’ contract.
a different conclusion follows from the Fifth Wang Email sent on 12 July
2020 read in context of the earlier email communications
with Mr Xiao. By
sending this email, Mr Wang made and communicated a binding election to
terminate the share transfer agreement.
He followed through on what was
implicit in his first three emails and expressly stated in the Fourth Wang Email
that any delay
or failure to strictly implement the share transfer agreement
“break the agreement”
and he would then purchase Mr
Du’s shares on the same terms and
conditions.
That is, he
would not sell his shares and Mr Du’s purchase obligation was at an end.
response to the First Xiao Email, Mr Wang proposed steps to complete the
transaction contemplated by the parties’ contract,
his opening words
plainly recognising the parties’
you for your email. The two parties signed the agreement based on the principle
of honesty and mutual trust,
and we shall complete it
accordance with the transaction principles we agreed on
. Our required
steps are...
closing, Mr Wang
confirm whether there are any objections to the above steps and reply before
14:00 tomorrow (10/07/2020).
If our lawyer does not receive the full
payment before 11/07/20
we will purchase all your shares in
accordance with the agreement signed by both parties
Objectively
viewed, Mr Wang’s closing statement merely expressed his (erroneous)
interpretation of the parties’ contract.
reasonable person in Mr Du’s position would have understood from the
First Wang Email that Mr Wang was not immediately ending
their contract. Nor was
he affirming it by exercising a right conferred by it. Mr Wang was keeping his
options open.
Wang’s Second, Third and Fourth Emails, all sent on 10 July 2020,
reiterated his insistence on the parties implementing the
share transfer
transaction strictly in accordance with their agreement, once again not making
any election to terminate or affirm
the share transfer agreement.
the due date of 11 July 2020, Mr Du’s repeated anticipatory breaches of
the share transfer agreement became an actual breach.
By reason of Mr Du’s
continuing repudiation of his obligations under the share transfer agreement,
Mr Wang was entitled to
terminate at that time, which he did by sending the
failed to receive your full payment on the final payment date (11/07/2020)
stipulated in the share transfer agreement, according
to the agreement signed
with the equal negotiation and consent of both parties and witnessed by a third
party, we will under the
same conditions and methods, purchase all your Mr Zhi
Gang Du’s shares in AFD Foods...
Wang’s words communicated a clear and unequivocal election to terminate
the share transfer agreement, despite him choosing
an inconsistent set of rights
that did not in fact exist because of his erroneous construction of the share
transfer agreement. In
the words of Mason J in
Sargent v ASL Developments
words are only justifiable as an election to terminate the share transfer
Mr Wang validly terminated the share transfer agreement on 11 July 2020, it is
not necessary to consider whether Mr Wang’s
subsequent conduct constituted
an election to terminate the parties’ contract. Plainly, Mr Wang could
only terminate once
despite his pleading relying on a number of alleged
elections to terminate.
completeness, two matters should be noted. First, that Mr Wang’s conduct
in instituting this proceeding and seeking specific
performance of a contractual
obligation based on an erroneous construction of the parties’ contract is
inconsistent with an
intention to be bound by the parties’ contract and
would constitute an effective election to terminate if the share transfer
agreement was still on foot. Secondly, whilst alleging Mr Wang was in breach of
contract (for different reasons), Mr Xiao apparently
did not engage with Mr
Wang’s purchase obligation. Instead, Mr Xiao on Mr Du’s behalf sent
Mr Wang on 20 July 2020 a
further email proposing settlement take place on
22 July 2020 on the same conditions as previously demanded. This communication
has no contractual effect since it followed Mr Wang’s termination of the
parties’ contract on 12 July 2020.
Obligations to Perform
Wang must prove readiness and willingness to perform his concurrent obligations
under the share transfer agreement as an element
of his cause of action of
damages for breach of contract. Absent proof of readiness and willingness,
Mr Wang has no cause of
was made in Mr Du’s closing submissions of Mr Wang’s alleged failure
to be ready, willing and able to perform his
concurrent obligations under the
share transfer agreement. Mr Du submitted Mr Wang was not ready, willing
and able to perform his
obligations because he failed to nominate bank details
or a solicitor to attend a settlement, no place for settlement having been
Wang’s evidence that he was ready to settle but
“they [Mr Xiao
and Mr Du] didn’t follow the spirit of the agreement”
When proper regard
is had to Mr Xiao’s emails, it is apparent Mr Wang should be absolved from
the consequences of him not
nominating a bank account or a solicitor to attend
settlement.
Such nominations
would have been pointless, particularly when Mr Xiao cancelled settlement
because Mr Wang would still not agree
to the settlement method proposed by Mr
Xiao multiple times and a new supplementary agreement that were both
fundamentally inconsistent
with the parties’ obligations under the share
transfer agreement. It was not the case that Mr Xiao on Mr Du’s behalf
ever approached settlement as only requiring a simple transfer, unlike
assessing damages for breach of contract the ‘ruling principle’ is
that the award should put the promisee, so far
as money can do it, in the same
situation as if the contract had been performed as
Incontrovertibly,
the purpose of the award of damages is compensatory.
The Commonwealth v Amann Aviation Pty Ltd,
Mason CJ and Dawson J
explained the purpose of an award of damages for breach of contract as:
...protect[ing] a
plaintiff’s expectation of receiving the defendant’s performance.
That expectation arises out of or
is created by the contract. Hence,
damages for breach of contract are often described as “expectation
damages”. The
onus of proving damages sustained lies on a
plaintiff and the amount of damages awarded will be commensurate with the
plaintiff’s
expectation, objectively determined, rather than subjectively
ascertained. That is to say, a plaintiff must prove, on the balance
probabilities, that his or her expectation of a certain outcome, as a result of
performance of the contract, had a likelihood
of attainment rather than being
mere expectation.
Honours later
...‘expectation
damages’, ‘damages for loss of profits’, ‘reliance
damages’ and ‘damages
for wasted expenditure’ are simply
manifestations of the central principle enunciated in
Robinson v Harman
rather than discrete and truly alternative measures of damages which a party not
in breach may elect to claim.
Clark v Macourt
, Gageler J agreed and
expectation interest is no less, but no more, than the interest protected by
seeking “to give [a] promisee the value of
the expectancy which the
promise created”. In other words, it is the interest of the injured party
“in having the benefit
of [the contractual] bargain by being put in as
good a position as he [or she] would have been in had the contract been
(citations omitted)”
corollary of the ‘ruling principle’ in
is that an award
of damages for breach of contract should not put the injured party in a superior
position than they would have been
had the contract been
Therefore, if
performance of a contract would not have resulted in a loss, no damages are
And, where a
promisee claims damages for a loss caused by a breach of contract, any benefit
received by the promisee must be taken
into account in determining the extent of
their loss.
are qualifications to the ‘ruling principle’. One is that the law
does not compensate an injured party for the non-fulfilment
of an expectation
that could not reasonably be supposed to have been within the contemplation of
the other parties when they made
their contract as the probable result of
Another is that
damages which are too remote are not recoverable.
Bellgrove v Eldridge,
the Court explained that whilst the application of the ‘ruling
principle’ depends on the commercial context of the case,
it is always
applied with a view to assuring the promisee is compensated for the monetary
value of faithful performance by the promisor
of the bargain. For example, where
the circumstances of a case do not involve the transfer of a marketable
commodity, the ‘ruling
principle’ is not
for the time for assessing damages, in
Clark v Macourt
to be paid in accordance with the ruling principle is assessed at the date of
breach of contract, not as a matter of discretion,
but as an integral aspect of
the principle, which is concerned to give the purchaser the economic value of
the performance of the
contract at the time that performance was promised. In
this way, the measure of damages captures for the purchaser the benefit of
bargain and so compensates the purchaser for the loss of that benefit (citation
rule that damages are assessed at the time of breach is not absolute. The Court
will depart from it to avoid
of actual (as distinct from anticipatory) breach of contract entitles an
applicant to at least nominal damages, whether or not
the contract has been
terminated.
substantial damages in contract, the applicant must prove the breach was the
cause of the damage.
there is evidence that a promisee has lost something of value, difficulty in
assessing its value is not a bar to recovery.
Where precise evidence is not
available the Court must do the best it
“[d]ifficulty of proof does not dispense with the necessity of
nominal damages will be awarded where it is impossible to assess what damages
should be recovered either because no or no sufficient
or reliable evidence was
called. In other cases where the evidence is incomplete but sufficient to
assess an award of damages, the
Court may award some damages that are not
nominal but are less that the applicant seeks.
loss is not an element of a cause of action in contract, an applicant seeking
substantial damages bears the burden of proving
on the balance of probabilities
that a breach of contract has caused their loss, that it was not too remote and
the amount of the
legal onus may shift in certain circumstances. For example, where an applicant
seeks reliance damages for wasted expenditure
reasonably incurred, once the
expenditure and its reasonableness are proved, the respondent has the onus of
establishing that the
expenditure could not have been recouped even if the
contract had been fully
Where a defence
of mitigation is pleaded, the respondent bears the onus of proof. In this case,
no defence of mitigation was pleaded
or advanced at trial. The absence of such
a defence does not relieve Mr Wang from proving causation.
is well established that the legal concept of causation differs from
philosophical and scientific notions of causation and whether
a particular loss
was caused by a particular breach of contract is determined by applying common
damages are generally assessed at the date of breach, post-breach events may be
relevant to prove losses or damage flowing
from a breach or steps that were or
should have been taken to mitigate a loss where
Self-evidently
what happens post-breach does not necessarily flow from the breach.
The Parties’ Submissions
Wang identifies the loss he has suffered by reason of Mr Du’s breach of
contract as the unpaid purchase price of
He seeks the full
measure of the purchase price without deduction as the economic value of
performance of the contract at the time
when performance was promised at 11 July
2020. Mr Wang contends it was for Mr Du to advance a case that the measure of
damages claimed
should reflect a deduction of some value for his shares, plead
any defence of mitigation and put evidence of value before the
supplementary closing submissions, Mr Wang submits the Court can infer his
shares were worthless since the breakdown in the relationship
of the parties
that occurred because Mr Du repudiated his contractual obligations, and
insolvency practitioners were appointed soon
shares in question related to ownership in a 2-person company operating a
butcher and abattoir in Port Lincoln. That business
collapsed irretrievably when
the relationship between the two men broke down – as occurs inevitably
when any small proprietary
limited company or quasi-partnership collapses. Not
long after, the company slipped into administration. The shares in question
not comparable to membership in a publicly listed company or some other liquid
asset of identifiable value in the eyes of third
Du’s primary defence was that the share transfer agreement, properly
construed, did not provide either party with any entitlement
to a remedy for
damages in case of breach. Essentially, Mr Wang’s claim of a liquidated
sum is contrary to the parties’
reciprocal agreement.
Mr Du put Mr Wang to proof of his case. He submits Mr Wang has not proved he
suffered any loss and if any loss was suffered
(which is denied), then it was as
a result of Mr Wang’s failure to purchase Mr Du’s shares when he had
The Seminal Question
Wang does not sue for a contract debt or bring a claim in damages in lieu of
specific performance. He seeks common law damages
for the loss of the economic
value of what he would have received if Mr Du had performed their contract on
11 July 2020. He contends
his expectation loss is measured by the purchase
price he was not paid and does not identify his loss in any other way.
circumstances where Mr Wang did not transfer his shares to Mr Du, the economic
value of the performance of the contract at the
time when performance was
promised is not simply assessed by reference to the amount Mr Wang was not paid.
The value of Mr Wang’s
shares that were not transferred at the date of
breach (being 11 July 2020) must be accounted for.
Wang’s claimed loss therefore assumes the shares he did not transfer to Mr
Du of which he retained ownership were worthless
at the date of breach. This
must follow because the application of the ‘ruling principle’ in
Robinson v Harman
calls for a comparison between the position Mr Wang was in as a result of
Mr Du’s breach of contract and the position he would
reasonably have
expected to be in had there been no breach and the contract
is no contention about the position Mr Wang would have been in if the contract
had been performed. Since Mr Wang identifies
his loss as non-payment of the
purchase price, it follows that the seminal question to be resolved in this case
is what was the actual
value of Mr Wang’s shares at the date of
breach? Were his shares worthless at the date of breach as he ultimately
Onus of Proof
justify an award of substantial damages, Mr Wang must satisfy the Court as to
both the loss he suffered by reason of Mr Du’s
breach and as to its
to Mr Wang’s submissions, it was necessary for him (and not Mr Du) to
prove his shares were worthless at the date of
breach to prove his claim for
expectation damages. Any question of mitigation is a separate question to
whether Mr Wang has suffered
a loss or not, acknowledging that it is causation
and not mitigation that is in issue.
question of alternative times of assessment arises from the case Mr Wang pleaded
and advanced at trial. Mr Wang claims his loss
crystallised at the time of
Mr Du’s breach and repudiation of his purchase obligation on 11 July 2020.
The date of breach for
all practical purposes coincided with the date of
termination
(12 July 2020). Therefore, Mr Wang’s loss is to be
assessed at 11 July 2020.
Causation, Reasonable Foreseeability
and Remoteness
the reasons already explained, the application of the ‘ruling
principle’ in this case does not require analysis of
whether Mr Du’s
breach caused the business to collapse or the company’s insolvency. Mr
Du’s breach led incontrovertibly
Mr Wang not being paid the
purchase price. If Mr Du had performed his contractual promise under the share
transfer agreement, Mr Wang
would have been paid the purchase price. No
questions of reasonable foreseeability or remoteness arise.
well as being irrelevant, it is not correct to contend as Mr Wang does that
Mr Du’s breach caused the disputes between the
parties. Their
disputes pre-existed the making of the share transfer agreement and its purpose
was to resolve the deadlock between
disputing equal shareholders by one or other
of the parties becoming its sole shareholder and ultimately controlling the
Mr Wang’s evidence in his first Supreme Court affidavit that
their dispute was irretrievable from the first week of operation
What was the value of Mr Wang’s shares at
Difficulty of the Question
is a difficult question to resolve because neither party properly addressed it
in evidence or submissions.
party led any valuation evidence to prove the value of Mr Wang’s
shares at the date of breach on 11 July 2020 (or any
other date) thereby
establishing whether Mr Wang suffered a loss or profit as a result of
Mr Du’s breach of contract since
he still retained his shares. There
was no considered analysis or argument about the impact of Mr Du’s breach
on the financial
position of the business at the relevant time, assuming it were
accepted that the value of the business of the company is a reasonable
starting point for valuing Mr Wang’s shares.
lacuna in the evidence is explained by the approach the parties took to the
question of damages.
Wang did not address the question of the actual value of his shares at the date
of breach because he (wrongly) contends it was
for Mr Du to establish that some
reduction should be made from the unpaid purchase price reflecting the value of
his shares. In further
submissions, he contends Mr Du’s breach caused
the dispute that led to the company’s later insolvency and both their
shares being worthless without any substantive analysis or reference to the
Du did not address this question because his (unsuccessful) primary case was
that, properly construed, the share transfer agreement
excluded any right to
common law damages for breach. Mr Du’s contention that Mr Wang caused the
loss of both parties’
initial purchase contributions focussed on Mr
Wang’s alleged failure to take up the opportunity to buy Mr Du’s
under his preferred (but erroneous) construction of the share transfer
agreement. Otherwise, he put Mr Wang to proof of his case,
submitting Mr
Wang caused his own loss if he suffered any, which he denied.
the difficulties arising from the parties’ approach to this question,
there is sufficient evidence to draw inferences
and in turn the value of Mr Wang’s shares at the time of breach.
Evidence Relevant to Value
is no serious dispute that all the company’s shares were essentially
worthless by the time of trial, following the collapse
of the company’s
business in late November 2020 and the company’s
insolvency. Nor is there any dispute that this case
does not involve
the sale of a marketable commodity or any issue of mitigation (since none was
pleaded). However, it is too simplistic
an approach to conclude that
Mr Wang’s shares were worthless or their value was completely destroyed by
Mr Wang’s breach
of contract at the date of breach because the business
subsequently ceased to trade and the company became insolvent.
correct approach requires consideration of the actual value of Mr Wang’s
shares at 11 July 2020. In the absence of any direct
valuation evidence, it is
necessary to adopt a broad-brush approach to assessing damages and for the Court
to do the best it can
on the evidence there is.
the extent that the value of the business might be said to be a proxy for the
value of the company and its shares, there was reliable
evidence about the value
of the company’s business at the outset of trading in February 2020 and
less reliable evidence of
its profitability, assets and liabilities
thereafter. The evidence shows the business was of substantial value in
February 2020 when
it commenced trading under the company’s ownership and
apparently traded profitably until the public and extraordinary eruption
disputes between the parties in early September
company’s informal balance sheets until the date of breach show its net
assets were negligible
). As would be
expected for the first few months of trading, total business assets were almost
entirely offset by the parties’
initial purchase contributions recorded in
its accounts as unsecured loans. It should be assumed this position would
continue until
substantial trading profits were earned.
value of the business on usual valuation principles would be derived from its
long-term profitability. In the case of an established
business, albeit newly
acquired, it might reasonably be expected that it would continue to trade
profitably, assuming no adverse
changes to its operation.
accounting records show the business was trading at a modest profit at the date
of breach despite the parties’ continuing
disputes having begun in the
first week of trading in February 2020 and Mr Du’s breach of his
obligation under the share transfer
agreement on 11 July 2020. The risk of
their disputes erupting as they did in early September 2020 and disrupting the
business operations
was high. There could reasonably be little confidence of the
continuing profitability of a newly acquired business with minimal net
assets in the circumstances of the escalating disputes between deadlocked
shareholders when their agreed mechanism for resolving
their deadlock had
is this risk that must be considered in valuing Mr Wang’s shares at the
date of breach. Contrary to Mr Wang’s submission,
it is not the case that
Mr Du’s breach caused the breakdown of parties’ relationship. It had
already broken down irretrievably
before the share transfer agreement was
negotiated and signed.
the value of a company’s shares, and specifically a non-controlling
interest in a proprietary company, is not the same
as the value of its business
or the company as a whole. On usual valuation principles, a substantial
discount to the value of the
company as a whole would apply to a non-controlling
shareholding in any event despite the company operating a valuable and
summary, the circumstances at 11 July 2020 were as follows:
capital of the company was nominal and held equally by the parties
the net tangible
assets of the company were negligible
goodwill was the company’s most significant asset
the significant
loan accounts in the parties’ names represented their funding of the
purchase price of the business, offsetting
most of the value of the
company’s assets
the business had
no substantial trading history under the company’s ownership
there was an
unresolved pre-existing dispute between the parties that was acrimonious and
parties’ chosen mechanism for resolving their deadlock, the share transfer
agreement, had failed and added to their disputes
conclusions follow. First, given the history of their dispute, it was unlikely
that the parties would resolve their disputes.
Secondly, the likelihood of Mr
Wang selling his 50% shareholding in the company to a third party was
negligible. Thirdly, the likely
result of winding up the company on 11 July 2020
would have been the same as the result of the DOCA in 2021.
regard to these matters, the value of the company as at 11 July 2020 was
negligible as was the value of its shares. If it
had been concluded that the
business had a modest value despite the parties’ disputes, the value of a
non-controlling shareholding
would still have been negligible. In the
latter case, any value would be completely discounted by the inherent risk of
the parties’
escalating disputes disrupting or destroying the long-term
profitability of the business.
concluded that Mr Wang’s shares were actually worthless at the date of
breach, on a comparison between the position he
was in as a result of Mr
Du’s breach of contract and the position he would reasonably have expected
to be in had there been
no breach and the contract performed, Mr Wang is
entitled to damages of $389,500.00 as at 11 July
Pre-judgment Interest
Wang claims interest on his damages of $389,500 from 12 July 2020 to judgment at
7%, relying on r 182.3 of the
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
Du submits simple not compound interest should be calculated on any judgment sum
awarded in Mr Wang’s favour and the applicable
interest rate should be 5%
until 3 July 2023, and 7% thereafter. Mr Du does not otherwise challenge Mr
Wang’s claim for pre-judgment
District Court Act 1991
(SA), Mr Wang, as the party in
whose favour a monetary judgment is to be granted, is entitled to an award of
interest for the whole
or part of the amount for which judgment will be given,
unless good cause is shown to the contrary. Interest is payable at a rate,
for a period as determined by the Court. For a liquidated claim, the period
should run from the date the liability to pay the
confers a broad discretion on the Court in fixing pre-judgment interest that
must be exercised on a principled
bearing in mind that
the function of the award of interest is to compensate a successful applicant
for the loss or detriment suffered
by being kept out of their money during the
relevant period.
Interest is
not awarded on the basis of the use the respondent has had of the money or as
punishment.
follows that in awarding damages the Court must bear in mind that the object of
the award is to restore an applicant to the situation,
so far as money can, in
which the applicant would have been but for the respondent’s wrongful
established approach is to deal with interest in a fairly broad brush fashion,
due regard should be given to the manifestation
and duration of the loss or
detriment in question in any case. The conduct of the parties at trial may be a
relevant consideration.
For what period should interest run?
is no real issue as from when interest should run. It should run from 11 July
2020, the payment deadline for Mr Du’s
purchase of Mr Wang’s
r 182.2 of the UCR, unless the Court otherwise orders, a judgment takes effect
at the end of the hearing where judgment was
pronounced orally in Court.
Therefore, pre-judgment interest should run to 23 October 2025 and thereafter, a
claim for post-judgment
interest arises under
District Court Act
What is an appropriate interest rate?
the appropriate rate is a matter for the Court to determine in each case, as a
guide, UCR r 182.3 provides the Court may calculate
the interest payable at the
rate of 5% per annum until 3 July 2023 when the rate was increased to 7% per
In this case it is
appropriate to follow the guide and adopt an interest rate of 5% per annum until
3 July 2023 and 7% per annum
thereafter to the date of judgment.
What interest should be awarded?
5% simple interest from 11 July 2020 to 3 July 2023 and 7% thereafter to the
date of judgment on a judgment sum of $389,500.00
results in an award of
pre-judgment interest of $120,969.10.
parties should be heard as to costs, including costs reserved following Mr
Du’s abandonment of parts of his defence and
Statement of Claim –
Revision 2 (FDN 70) (
); Defence – Revision 3 (FDN
); Cross Claim (FDN 47) (
Cross Claim
); and Defence
Defence to Cross Claim
Written Submissions of the
Applicant (FDN 86) (
Applicant’s Written Opening
) [5]; Written
Submissions of the Applicant (FDN 96) (
Applicant’s Written Closing
[37]; and Written Submissions of the Applicant (FDN 99) (
Applicant’s
Further Submissions
Claim [4.2].
Ibid [7.2].
Ibid [10] and prayer for
relief [1],[3] and [4]. Mr Wang’s Claim sought in the alternative orders
for specific performance
of Mr Du’s purchase obligation under the share
transfer agreement (prayer for relief [2]).
Cross Claim [3].
Cross Claim prayer for
relief [1].
T8.5-.10; T8.25-.29;
T124.6-.11.
Defence [3];
T12.28-.31.
Defence [3], [4] and [7]
were abandoned.
T48.24-.29. See also
T125.8-.11.
made on 21 February 2024 (FDN 95).
Defence [2.1].
Ibid [2.2.4.1].
Written Submissions of the
Respondent (FDN 97) (
Respondent’s Written Closing
Ibid [21] and [27.13].
Respondent’s Written
Closing [27.11] and [48].
Dare v Pulham
148 CLR 658
Banque Commerciale SA (in Liq) v Akhil Holdings Ltd
(1990) 169 CLR 279
at 286-287;
Berry v CCL Securities Pty Ltd
[2020] HCA 27
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
(SA) r 71 [Effect of
Pleadings].
T335.22-.28.
Claim [4] and Defence [4].
Defence [2.2.4.1].
Respondent’s Written
Closing [48].
Ibid [27.11].
Cross Claim [11].
Equuscorp Pty Ltd v
Glengallan Investments Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 55
(2004) 218 CLR 471
Defence [2.1], [2.2.1],
[2.2.3] and [2.2.5].
Mr Du’s counsel
intimated that he thought it should be deleted but needed to consider it.
T124.26-.30.
Defence [2.2];
Construction Pty Ltd v State Rail Authority of New South Wales
Mount Bruce Mining Pty Ltd v Wright
Prospecting Pty Ltd
[2015] HCA 37
(2015) 256 CLR 104
Mount Bruce
Ecosse Property Holdings Pty Ltd v Gee Dee
Nominees Pty Ltd
[2017] HCA 17
Simic v NSW Land and
Housing Corporation
[2016] HCA 47
(2016) 260 CLR 85
Ibid [103].
Applicant’s Written
Closing [51]-[58].
Revised Tender Book Index
agreed by counsel: email from Ms Carroll of Bridges Lawyers dated 8 March
2024: MFI A6.
Exhibit A1.25.156 (.25
referring to tab 25 and .156 to page 156).
Proposed document 112 at
page 1262: Index to Joint Tender Book filed on 13 February 2024 (FDN 87).
Opening Address of the
Respondent (FDN 88) [42].
T6.16-7.21.
Respondent’s
Objection to Tender Book documents (FDN 89).
T335.22-.31.
Additional Submission of
the Respondent (FDN 100) (
Respondent’s Further Submissions)
and [1.16].
8 October 2025, T4.29-33;
Ibid T6.8-.11;
Attorney-General (Cth)
[2021] FCA 161
Supreme Court of South
Australia action no CIV-20-004234. A substantial number of exhibits referred to
in the content of the affidavits
are not included.
Exhibit A1.53 and
Exhibit A1.71 and
Exhibit A1.64.
Exhibit A1.82.
T299.8-.33.
Respondent’s Written
Closing [46.4] and [48].
] below and following.
Exhibit A1.83.
T198.21-.33.
Exhibit A2.
Exhibit A1.53.257 at
Exhibit A1.118 and
T140.23-.25.
T199.16-.32
T273.26-275.7.
T261.27-262.8.
T277.8-280.38.
T292.18-294.32.
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298.
Respondent’s Written
Closing [54].
J D Heydon,
(LexisNexis Butterworth, 8
ed, 2010) at [1215].
Mr Wang alleged the parties
were equal shareholders in the company which Mr Du admitted and no point was
taken about Mr Wang’s
shares being held non-beneficially. Claim [2]
and Defence [1].
Exhibit A1.29.166.
Exhibit A1.26.157.
Exhibit A1.77.953.
Exhibit A2 [39]-[40].
Exhibit A1.118.1282.
Exhibit A1.118 and A1.119.
Exhibit A1.118 and
Exhibit A1.64.531 at
Exhibit A5.
Claim (FDN 1).
Exhibit A1.53.259-.260 at
Exhibit A1.64.532-.535 at
[90]-[117].
Exhibit A1.77.949.
Exhibit A1.78.1012.
Exhibit A1.77.949.
Exhibit A1.77.956-.957.
Exhibit A1.77.959.
Exhibit A1.77.952.
Exhibit A1.79.1046.
A1.83.1099-.1127.
Respondent’s
Written Closing [62].
T345.16-.19.
Respondent’s
Written Closing [79.2].
Ibid [62]-[72].
Applicant’s
Written Closing [43].
Exhibit A1.25.156
(emphasis added).
T27.33-28.8.
Mount Bruce Mining
at [46], citing
Electricity Generation Corporation v Woodside Energy Ltd
[2014] HCA 7
(2014) 251 CLR 640
at [35] and
REALESTATE.com.au v
[2022] HCA 39
REALESTATE.com.au
) at [43] citing
Toll (FGCT) Pty Ltd v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
(2004) 219 CLR 165 at [40].
McCann v Switzerland
Insurance Australia Ltd
[2000] HCA 65
(2000) 203 CLR 579
per Gleeson CJ;
Pacific Carriers Ltd v BNP Paribas
[2004] HCA 35
(2004) 218 CLR 451
at 462 at [22];
at 656-657 at [35];
Mount Bruce Mining
Jireh International
Pty Ltd v Western Export Inc
[2011] NSWCA 137
Western Export
Services v Jireh International Pty Ltd
[2011] HCA 45.
REALESTATE.com.au
at [44] citing
at [36] and also
The Interpretation of Contracts
, 7th ed (2020) at 145-153 at
[3.87]-[3.100].
Gissing v Gissing
[1970] UKHL 3
[1971] AC 886
Ashington Piggeries
Ltd v Christopher Hill Ltd
[1972] AC 441
Essential Beauty
Franchising (WA) Pty Ltd & Ors v Pilton Holding Pty Ltd & Ors
Agricultural and
Rural Finance Pty Ltd v Gardiner
(2008) 238 CLR 570 at [35].
Custom Credit
Corporation Ltd v Cenepro Pty Ltd
[1991] NSWCA 68.
Upper Hunter County
District Council v Australian Chilling & Freezing Co
(1968) 118 CLR 419
Respondent’s
Written Closing [29.6].
Ibid [29.8],
Respondent’s
Written Opening [105]; Respondent’s Further Submissions [2.15].
Defence [2.2.4.1].
Defence [2.2.5]
(emphasis added).
Cross Claim [3].
Respondent’s
Written Closing [29.3], [29.5] and [33]-[34].
Respondent’s
Written Opening [102]-[107]; Respondent’s Further Submissions [2.3].
Respondent’s
Written Closing [27.18]; Respondent’s Further Submissions [2.10.6].
Concut Pty Ltd v
[2000] HCA 64
(2000) 176 ALR 693
Stocznia Gdanska SA v Latvian
Shipping Co
[1998] UKHL 9
[1998] 1 WLR 574
Stocznia Gdanska SA
Modern Engineering (Bristol) Ltd v Gilbert-Ash (Northern) Ltd
Stocznia Gdanska SA
op cit at 585.
Defence [2.2.4];
Respondent’s Written Closing [35].
Defence [2.2.4].
Defence [2.2.4.1].
G. Scammell &
Nephew Ltd v Ouston
[1941] AC 251
[1968] HCA 8
(1968) 118 CLR 429
Crown Melbourne Ltd v
Cosmopolitan Hotel (Vic) Pty Ltd
[2016] HCA 26
(2016) 260 CLR 1
Godecke v Kirwan
[1973] HCA 38
(1973) 129 CLR 629
RTS Flexible Systems
Ltd v Molkerei Alois Müller GmbH & Co KG (UK Production)
[2010] UKSC 14
Crown Melbourne Ltd v Cosmopolitan Hotel (Vic) Pty
[2016] HCA 26
(2016) 260 CLR 1
Respondent’s
Written Closing [39.8].
T286.23-.34.
Defence [2.2.4].
Respondent’s
Written Closing [45]-[53].
Exhibit A1.118.1282.
Exhibit A1.64.530
Exhibit A1.31.179.
T284.14-.285.7.
Laurinda Pty Ltd v
Capalaba Park Shopping Centre Pty Ltd
[1989] HCA 23
(1989) 166 CLR 623
at 647-648 per Brennan J
and at 658 per
Deane and Dawson JJ.
Shevill v Builders
Licensing Board
[1982] HCA 47
(1982) 149 CLR 620
Ross T Smyth & Co Ltd v TD Bailey Son & Co
3 All ER 60
Freeth v Burr
[1874] UKLawRpCP 4
(1874) LR 9 CP 208
Associated Newspapers
Ltd v Bancks
[1951] HCA 24
(1951) 83 CLR 322.
Automatic Fire
Sprinklers Pty Ltd v Watson
[1946] HCA 25
(1946) 72 CLR 435.
Heyman v Darwins
[1942] AC 356
Peter Turnbull & Co Pty Ltd v Mundus
Trading Co (Australasia) Pty Ltd
[1954] HCA 25
(1954) 90 CLR 235.
Exhibit A1.119.1294
(emphasis added).
Exhibit A1.119.1287.
Exhibit A1.119.
Exhibit A1.119.1295.
A1.119.1286-.1287.
Exhibit A1.119.1296.
A1.119.1288-.1289.
Exhibit A1.119.1297.
Exhibit A1.119.1290.
Ibid (emphasis
Exhibit A1.119.1298.
A1.119.1298-.1299.
Exhibit A1.119.1299.
Exhibit A1.119.1291.
Sargent v ASL
Developments Ltd
[1974] HCA 40
(1974) 131 CLR 634
McDonald v Dennys
Lascelles Ltd
[1933] HCA 25
(1933) 48 CLR 457
Huppert v Stock
Options of Australia Pty Ltd
[1965] HCA 30
(1965) 112 CLR 414
at 423, 431.
Immer (No 145) Pty
Ltd v Uniting Church in Australia Property Trust (NSW)
[1993] HCA 27
(1993) 182 CLR 26
Mannai Investment Co
Ltd v Eagle Star Life Assurance Co Ltd
[1997] UKHL 19
[1997] AC 749
Perri v Coolangatta
Investments Pty Ltd
(1982) 149 CLR 537.
Vargas Pena
Apezteguia y Cia SAIC v Peter Cremer GmbH
[1987] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 394 at
J W Carter,
Carter’s Breach of Contract
(J W Carter Publishing, 3
ed, 2024) at [10-15] and [10-51].
Ibid at [10-17].
Foran v Wight
[1989] HCA 51
1989) 168 CLR 385
Peter Turnbull & Co Pty Ltd v Mundus
Trading Co (Australasia) Pty Ltd
[1954] HCA 25
(1954) 90 CLR 235.
[1974] HCA 40
(1974) 131 CLR 634
656. Citation omitted.
[2022] HCA 38
Ibid at [50] citing
Sargent v ASL Developments Ltd
op cit at 641.
Exhibit A1.119.1298.
Exhibit A1.119.1295
emphasis added).
Ibid (emphasis
Exhibit A1.119.1299.
Op cit at 656.
Foran v Wight
[1989] HCA 51
(1989) 168 CLR 385
at 401, 417, and 430-431.
T185.19-.21;
T186.3-.18.
Peter Turnbull &
Co Pty Ltd v Mundus Trading Co (Australasia) Pty Ltd
[1954] HCA 25
(1954) 90 CLR 235
Robinson v Harman
[1848] EngR 135
(1848) 154 ER 363
Wenham v Ella
[1972] HCA 43
(1972) 127 CLR 454
Wenham v Ella
Tabcorp Holdings Ltd v Bowen Investments
(2009) 236 CLR 272
Tabcorp Holdings
Clark v Macourt
[2013] HCA 56
(2013) 253 CLR 1
, [26], [60] and [106].
[1991] HCA 54
(1991) 174 CLR 64
The Commonwealth v Amann Aviation Pty Ltd
Ibid at 82.
Op cit at [61].
The Commonwealth v
Amann Aviation Pty Ltd
op cit at 82 citing
L Albert & Son v Armstrong
(1949) 178 F. 2d 182 at 189; and also 136, 155 and 163.
Ibid at 84 and 89.
European Bank Ltd v
[2010] HCA 6
(2010) 240 CLR 432
[12]-[13], referring to
Hadley v Baxendale
(1854) 1546 ER 145 at 151.
[1954] HCA 36
(1954) 90 CLR 613
Clark v Macourt
cit at [107] citing with approval
Bellgrove v Eldridge
Tabcorp Holdings
op cit at [13].
Op cit at [109] citing
Johnson v Perez
[1988] HCA 64
(1988) 166 CLR 351
at 355-356.
Johnson v Perez
op cit at 355-356, 367 and 386-387.
Luna Park (NSW) Ltd v
Tramways Advertising Pty Ltd
[1938] HCA 66
(1938) 61 CLR 286
Chappel v Hart
(1998) 195 CLR 232
Biggin & Co Ltd v
Permantite Ltd
[1951] 1 KB 422
at 438 approved by
The Commonwealth v
Amann Aviation Pty Ltd
op cit at 83.
Aerial Advertising Co
v Batchelor’s Peas Ltd
[1938] 2 All ER 788
The Commonwealth v
Amann Aviation Pty Ltd
at 80, 99 and 118;
op cit at 11.
The Commonwealth v
Amann Aviation Pty Ltd
op cit at 86-89 and 126-127.
March v E & MH
Stramere Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 12
(1991) 171 CLR 506
at 509, 515, 522 and 524-525;
(1998) 195 CLR 232
at 242, 255, 268-269 and 281-282.
Wenham v Ella
cit at 473-474.
Applicant’s
Written Closing [108]-[110]; Applicant’s Further Submissions [8]-[10].
Ibid [7], [11] and
Respondent’s
Further Submissions [2].
The Commonwealth v
Amann Aviation Pty Ltd
op cit at 99.
Exhibit A1.77.952.
Exhibit A1.29.166.
Exhibit A1.77.953.
Claim, Part 4, Prayer
for Relief [4]; Applicant’s Written Closing [112].
District Court Act
Duke Group Ltd (in
liq) v Pilmer
[1999] SASC 97
(1999) 73 SASR 64
MBP (SA) Pty Ltd Pty
Ltd v Gogic
(1991) 171 CLR 657 at 663.
Fire & All Risks
Insurance Co Ltd v Callinan
[1978] HCA 31
(1978) 140 CLR 427
Uniform Civil (No 9)
Amending Rules 2023.
Applicant’s
Written Closing [113]; T326.15-T327.27.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (836 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter