URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCRP/1995/74.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:09:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Clowser v WorkCover (Fargo Earthmovers) (No.3) [1995] SAWCRP 74 (3 February 1995)
[1995] SAWCRP 74
Review Officer
Player-Brown
Catchwords:
Lump sum compensation for
non-economic loss — loss of ability to engage in sexual intercourse
— credibility of worker
— medical evidence — significant loss
— decision awarding nil% set aside and award of 80% of 70% of prescribed
sum substituted — supplementary benefit applicable by virtue of previous
award for neck disability.
RE: CLOWSER AND WORKCOVER CORPORATION (FARGO EARTHMOVERS PTY
(1995) 7 WRCP Determination 95-0074
See previous,
Clowser and WorkCover
[1992] SAWCRP 631 (Review
Officer Russell);
Clowser and WorkCover (No.2)
[1993] SAWCRP 4 (Review
Officer Russell); and see further,
WorkCover v. Clowser
(1995) 7 WCATR
[1995] SAWCAT 106 (Thompson
Determination No. 95-0074
Workers’ Compensation Review
CLOWSER AND WORKCOVER CORPORATION (FARGO EARTHMOVERS PTY
(05179966/02/05)
Determination of Review
Officer made on 3rd February, 1995
(Hearings 2nd August, 7th
September and 10th November, 1994, and 10th January, 1995)
Review Officer Player-Brown
This is the determination of an application for review lodged on 23rd
May, 1994 by Nick Clowser as worker under a contract of service
Earthmovers Pty Ltd, as employer. The application seeks review of a decision of
the Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
Corporation ("the Corporation")
dated 13th May, 1994 to determine the worker's entitlement to lump sum
compensation pursuant to Section
43 of the Act, in respect to loss of capacity
to engage in sexual intercourse, at nil.
When the matter was called on
for hearing the worker appeared, gave sworn evidence, and was represented by
counsel of Palios Meegan
& Nicholson, latterly Mr Michael Saies. The
Corporation was variously represented by its officers and at the final hearing
Mr Paul Martin, Corporation Advocate.
The sworn evidence of the
worker in providing a background history of his claim for compensation and the
disabling effect of the injuries
he has suffered was largely unchallenged by the
Corporation and essentially accorded with the histories and examination results
in the medical reports of the various medical practitioners to whom
the worker had been referred.
The worker has been involved in heavy
manual work for most of his working life, operating machinery within the
earthmoving industry,
and as at the date of injury, 23rd January, 1991, was
employed as a plant operator for the employer.
There is no dispute that
the worker suffered compensable disabilities to his lower back and neck on 23rd
January, 1991 when he "hit
pot hole while driving scraper". The worker
described driving a scraper in a quarry over a rough track when the machine
in a gutter and he did his "neck and back" in. It was the worker's
evidence that the jolt lifted him from his seat before landing
him heavily on to
his "backside".
Despite the pain to his lower back and neck the worker,
believing he would "come good", continued at work before consulting Dr Cameron
on 29th January, 1991.
Dr Cameron diagnosed:
"Facet joint strain associated with musculo ligamentous strain of the lumbar
spine; musculo ligamentous strain of the cervical and
lower thoracic spines; and
left sacro iliac strain."
The treatment regime commenced by Dr Cameron,
involving rest, anti-inflammatory drugs and physiotherapy, resulted in some
improvement in the worker's symptoms with him suffering "less discomfort
in all regions, reduction in muscle spasm and tenderness,
and increase in the
range of movement".
In light of that improvement the worker returned to
alternate duties, commencing on 11th February, 1991 for four hours per day and
increasing to six hours per day for around a six month period before his
employment was terminated. Since that time the worker has
not worked apart from
performing some supervisory duties for around two weeks, around two years ago.
It was the worker's evidence
that his condition has remained stable for the last
two years with daily fluctuations in his level of pain dependent upon his level
of activity. Generally the worker stated he has learned to live with having a
"crook neck, shoulder and back".
The worker currently takes Digesic and
Panadene Forte to assist in relieving his pain and associated lack of sleep.
Currently living
alone, the worker stated that his general level of activity and
inability to undertake household tasks has been affected by his disability
pain in his neck and back limiting his ability to sit or stand for extended
periods. He is unable to drive for more than an
hour, lift any weight over four
kgs or stoop.
Prior to sustaining his injuries the worker had
maintained a relatively active social life, playing a "bit of golf", eight ball,
and squash three times per week but he stated that he was no longer able
to undertake those activities. The worker gave evidence
of a relationship with
a woman he described as a 'good mate'. Whilst not living together on a
continuing basis, the worker stated
that they would stay over at each others
houses and were together for three or four days per week, engaging in sexual
intercourse
on five to seven occasions per week, with each encounter involving
intercourse on two to three occasions.
The worker described an active and
varied sex life encompasing a range of positions and locations about the house
which he described
as being mutually satisfying and enhancing their relationship
and friendship. Since sustaining his injuries it was the worker's
evidence that
he had attempted sexual intercourse on around ten occasions, two being
moderately successful and resulting in ejaculation,
but with his erection being
lost before intercourse on the other occasions as a result of the pain in his
back and neck and consequent
psychological effect flowing from his concern at
his inability to perform sexually.
The worker stated he had attempted a
number of positions that were "no good" and after around four months after his
injury that their
sexual relationship deteriorated. The worker, from around
eight to nine months after the injury seeing his partner on a social basis
Two or three other sexual relationships attempted by the worker were
described by him as a "bit of a disaster" as a result of similar
difficulties.
Essentially then, the worker had last attempted sexual intercourse
around eighteen months to two years ago and had last successfully
performed the
act around three years ago.
There is substantial concurrence in the
opinions expressed in the medical reports before me from Dr Cameron, Mr Hoare,
Mr Cohen and Mr Bauze that the worker suffers a permanent disability
to his cervical and lumbar spines as a result of an aggravation
of pre-existing
degenerative conditions caused by the immediate jarring of his spine on 23rd
January, 1991. In his report of 7th
October, 1993 Mr Brian Cohen opines at page
"It would be consistent with the incident that the suffered a soft tissue
injury to a joint or joints of his cervical and thoracic
spine. It is quite
probably these joints have been the site of pre-existing degenerative changes.
There is no nerve involvement
clinically in regards to his injuries
He has also suffered an injury to his lower lumbar spine. He has evidence of
a pars defect at L5, which is in all probability of
development origin. There
is also a spondylolisthesis present. It is not known how long this has been
present, and to the effect
on the spondylolisthesis this incident has had. It
is probably however that the injury has been to his lumbo sacral invertebral
disc, which has demonstrated degenerative changes as can be expected. It is
probable that the injury is to the disc, and is responsible
for his continuing
By its re-determination dated 7th March, 1994 the Corporation
assessed the permanent disability to the worker's neck and cervical
spine at 15%
and the impairment of his lower back and spine at 30%.
It is those
levels of disability the associated restriction in movement, pain and consequent
psychological effect caused by the worker's
inability to perform sexually that
results in the worker suffering a loss of capacity to engage in sexual
intercourse.
In light of the decision of the Full Supreme Court in
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Corporation v Luigi
(unreported judgement delivered 22nd July, 1994;
; [1994] SASC 4676) the decision of the Corporation dated 13th May, 1994
cannot be sustained in so far as it determined that any loss
of capacity to
engage in sexual intercourse had already been compensated within the
determinations relating to lump sum compensation
for the worker's permanent
disabilities to his neck and lower back.
In applying the approach in
(supra) his honour Judge Cawthorne in his decision in
The Corporation (Semaphore Nursing Home) v Holland
(WCAT A63/1994;
[1994] SAWCAT 63)
listed the following principles to be considered in assessing
any loss of capacity to engage in sexual intercourse.
". The proper meaning to be attributed to the disability is the permanent
loss of the power or ability to take part in sexual act,
whether due to physical
or mental causes or a combination of both.
. Diminished frequency of copulation does not of itself canote incapacity
because it may be due to a variety of reasons unconnected
with the compensable
disability.
. The loss or diminution of pleasure in the sexual act or discomfort in
performing it do not of themselves connote incapacity although
this may produce
incapacity. Pleasure and pain affect libido and loss of libido may result in
loss of capacity.
. The compensation awarded under this head is not compensation for pain and
discomfort or reduced pleasure or for diminished desire
or frequency arising
from causes other than incapacity. The compensation is for the loss of the
power or ability to perform the
. The capacity to engage in sexual intercourse which is the subject of
compensation under the schedule is not a power or ability to
perform the act on
a particular occasion, but the faculty of engaging in sexual intercourse. There
may be a partial loss of a faculty
if limitations are suffered as to the
occasion on which or the manner in which it can be exercised.
. If a worker is obliged, by experienced or apprehended pain, to desist from
sexual intercourse on a significant number of occasions
on which he or she would
otherwise have engaged in sexual intercourse he or she has suffered a partial
loss of incapacity. The partial
loss of capacity may be permanent
notwithstanding that it is intermittent.
. If a person is obliged to abandon the use of positions which he or she
customarily adopted, there is a partial loss of capacity.
That would not be so
if the abandoned positions were rarely used prior to the disability and there
remained the capacity to engage
in the act in all the positions customarily used
by that person."
In having regard to those principles I find that the
worker has suffered a permanent loss of the power or ability to take part in
sexual act, that it is due both to the physical effects of his injuries,
restricting his movement and causing pain, in conjunction
with the worker's
concern as to his inability to perform and feelings that he "wasn't really a
As stated by Mr Cohen in his report of 7th October, 1993 at page
"He has had thus a significant reduction in his capacity for sexual
intercourse, consistent with the result of his injuries."
Dr Peter Black,
Consultant Physician in psychological medicine at page 6 of his report dated
19th October, 1993 also concludes:
"It is clear that there have been considerable sexual difficulties in this
man's life which flowed directly from the injury situation
described."
Aside from the compensable disability, there is no evidence
before me that the frequency of copulation would have otherwise diminished,
given the long standing nature of the relationship with his partner. It was the
worker's evidence that following his partner's move
to Kingston that he had
previously been considering moving there permanently to join her.
find that, the worker's discomfort on initiating sexual intercourse and the
consequent diminution of pleasure resulting from his
inability to sustain an
erection results in a loss of capacity and ability to perform the act.
I find that, despite the worker's attempts to pursue a sexual
relationship following his injury and attempting a range of different
his capacity is severely limited having reduced the frequency of sexual
intercourse with his partner from five to seven
times per week to around eight
to ten times in total and mostly unsuccessfully since the date of injury.
I find that the pain the worker has experienced on attempting sexual
intercourse largely contributed to the demise of the sexual relationship
his partner and has now caused him to desist from sexual intercourse on a
significant number of occasions.
Accordingly, I find that the worker
has a significant loss of the capacity to engage in sexual intercourse and
having regard to the
aforementioned factors, the vicissitudes of life and an
albeit slight remaining capacity based on his ability to complete the act
couple of occasions. Therefore, I determine that the assessment ought be set at
80% of 70% of the prescribed sum for
DETERMINATION
Pursuant to Section 96 of the Act, I
set aside the decision of the Corporation dated 13th May, 1994 and determine
that the worker
has an entitlement to lump sum compensation pursuant to Section
43 of the Act in respect to his loss of capacity to engage in sexual
intercourse
set at 80% of 70% of the prescribed sum for 1991.
In light of that
assessment and having regard to the prior determination of the Corporation dated
7th March, 1994 in respect to the
determination of the worker's entitlement to
lump sum compensation in respect to impairment of his neck and cervical spine
back and lumbar spine the worker is entitled to a supplementary
benefit equivalent to 1.5 times the amount by which that amount exceeds
of the prescribed sum pursuant to Section 43(7a) of the Act.
was represented by legal counsel in respect to these proceedings and so is
entitled to relevant costs in accordance with
Any appeal against
this determination must be lodged with the Workers' Compensation Appeal Tribunal
within one month of the receipt
of this determination. Enquiries about appeals
may be directed to the Registrar of the Tribunal, Riverside Centre, North
Adelaide (Phone: 207.0999) and forms for appeal are available from the
same address.
M Player-Brown
REVIEW OFFICER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (54.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter