URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAHPT/2019/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Medical Board of Australia v Ian Lewis [2019] SAHPT 14 (21 May 2019)
Medical Board of Australia v Lewis
[2019] SAHPT
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL OF SOUTH
MEDICAL BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
Health Practitioners
2892 of 2018
HEARING DATE:
13 December
DECISION OF SA HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL:
Constituted
by: Deputy President G R A Clark
Prof M O’Keefe
DELIVERED ON:
13 December 2018
REASONS FOR
DECISION PUBLISHED ON:
21 May 2019
CATCHWORDS:
Complainant alleges the respondent behaved in a way that constitutes
“professional misconduct” – Respondent failed
to discharge his
responsibilities concerning the introduction of the new protocol in 2014 –
When respondent became aware of
the error in the protocol, the respondent failed
to take appropriate action to address the issue of incorrect dosage of patients
– Engaged in conduct that was substantially below the standard reasonably
expected of a registered health practitioner level
of his training and
experience – Respondent admits unsatisfactory professional performance.
The conduct set out in the complaint constitutes professional
misconduct – The respondent is reprimanded – The respondent
pay a $10,000 fine to the complainant – The respondent is to pay the
complainant’s costs of and incidental to these
proceedings in the agreed
sum of $25,000 – Schedule 2, ss 193, 195, 196 Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (South
Australia) Act 2010
Medical Board
of Australia v Fox
[2016] VCAT 1392
Commonwealth & Anor and
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
[2015] HCA 46
(2015) 258 CLR 482
Frozen Foods Pty Ltd v ACCC
[1996] FCA 1134
(1996) 71 FCR 285
Medical Board of
Australia v Myers
[2014] WASAT 137
Medical Board of Australia v Lang
(2017) SAHPT 5
Craig v Medical Board of South Australia
[2001] SASC
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant: Mr D
Respondent: Mr G
Solicitors:
Complainant: Australian Government
Respondent: Wallmans Lawyers
O’Leary appeared for the Medical Board of Australia. Mr Black represented
Associate Professor Lewis.
Complainant (Medical Board of Australia) alleged, by complaint dated 28 June
2018 that Ian Lewis, the Respondent has: –
... behaved in a way that constitutes
“professional misconduct” within the meaning of cl 5 of Schedule 2
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (South Australia) Act
quote from the complaint:
Introduction of revised RAH protocol – July
or about the period between 12 July 2014 to 19 July 2014 the Respondent failed
to discharge his responsibilities concerning the
introduction of the new
protocol in 2014 and thereby engaged in conduct that was substantially below the
standard reasonably expected
of a registered health practitioner level of
training and experience.
Response to under-dosing incident
the period following from on or about 27 January 2015 when the Respondent became
aware of the error in the protocol, the Respondent
failed to take appropriate
action to address the issue of incorrect dosing of patients at the Royal
Adelaide Hospital in contravention
of cl 4.2.1, 6.2.1, 6.2.2, 6.2.3, 6.2.4 and
6.26 of the Code and thereby engaged in conduct that was substantially below the
reasonably expected of a registered health practitioner level of an
equivalent level of training and experience.
Professor Lewis through his counsel, Mr Black, admitted unprofessional conduct
in relation to ground 1 and professional
misconduct in relation to ground
would be helpful to refer to the document entitled ‘Response to
Complaint’ and quote: –
Respondent admits the facts in paragraph 10 and otherwise pleads that the
admitted conduct amounts to unsatisfactory professional
performance as defined
in the National Law in that his practice as a medical practitioner, in relation
to the admitted conduct, was
below the standard reasonably expected of a medical
practitioner who was a specialist haematologist, Lead Clinician in AML at the
Royal Adelaide Hospital (RAH) and Clinical Director of
Haematology.
respect to Ground 2 the Respondent stated at paragraph 34
34. As to the allegations in paragraph 34 the
Respondent:-
34.1 Acknowledges that the conduct admitted in paragraphs 26-32 contravened
clauses 4.2.1, 6.2.1, 6.2.3, 6.2.4 and 6.2.6 of the Code.
34.2 Acknowledges that his admitted conduct was of a lesser standard than might
reasonably be expected of a specialist haematologist,
AML Lead Clinician at the
RAH and Clinical Director of Haematology such as to amount to unprofessional
qualifications and experience of Associate Professor Ian David Lewis are set out
in the Statement of Agreed Facts.
Mr Black also provided a 15 page curriculum vitae of Associate Professor
disciplinary process by SA Health in relation
to the conduct, the subject of
these proceedings, and suspended from duties. On 2 February 2018 Associate
Professor Lewis resigned
his employment with SA Health.
Tribunal has had regard to paragraphs 7 to 14 of the Statement of Agreed Facts.
It would be helpful, however, to quote paragraphs
15 to 17 of that document.
15.1 Ought to have managed and documented a process of
consensus amongst relevant specialist medical practitioners at the RAH in
to the agreed consolidation chemotherapy regiment of treatment for
patients with AML;
15.2 Admits that it was his responsibility to ensure that any changes to the
revised RAH Protocol were accurately transcribed and
recorded; and
15.3 Ought to have presented the revised RAH Protocol to the relevant specialist
medical practitioners and other allied health staff
at the RAH before it was
finalised and approved for distribution and use.
Lewis did not:-
16.1 Seek or obtain consensus among the relevant
specialists on the revised RAH Protocol;
16.2 Ensure changes to and arising from the revised RAH Protocol were accurately
transcribed and recorded;
16.3 Present the revised RAH Protocol to the relevant specialist medical
practitioners and other allied health staff at the RAH prior
to it being
distributed for use.
Lewis’ conduct as detailed in paragraphs 7-13 and 16 above amounts to
unprofessional conduct as defined in the National
Law in that the conduct was of
a lesser standard than might reasonably be expected of Professor Lewis by the
public and/or his professional
medical practitioners prescribed chemotherapy in accordance with the revised RAH
Protocol and the patients incorrectly received
daily rather twice-daily
administration of chemotherapy on days 1, 3 and 5. Again it would be helpful to
quote from the Statement
of Agreed Facts at paragraph 11.6:
The final draft of the revised RAH Protocol contained an
error in that the cytarabine dose for patients 56 years and over was recorded
once daily on days one, three and five instead of 1
twice daily on days one, three and five thereby failing to
indicate that the relevant cytarabine consolidation dose for patients
age group was to be given twice daily on days one, three and
incorrect dosage was used by medical practitioners at RAH and FMC from July 2014
to January 2015 for 10 patients with AML.
Mr O’ Leary said:
It was also critical that in that position Professor
Lewis ensured that the protocol accurately transcribed what was the revision
that he was seeking the protocol to indicate and then, once that had been done,
once the process had been properly documented and
the revisions properly
transcribed, it then ought to have been presented to his peers and the relevant
specialist medical practitioners
before it was then distributed; that way the
relevant practitioners would have known the significance of the changes,
accepting that
Professor Lewis accepted that the changes were significant.
... Now, the complainant alleges, and Professor Lewis accepts, that in the
processes that led to the revisions of the protocol, that
distribution and then led to the erroneous prescription of medicines gave rise
to, or his conduct in relation to those
revisions and the distribution of the
revised protocol was such to amount to unprofessional conduct as defined in the
National Law
in that his conduct was of a lesser standard than might reasonably
be expected by someone in Professor Lewis’s position at
2 is about Associate Professor Lewis’s response to the disclosure once the
error of the protocol had been identified
and bought to his attention. The error
was identified by another specialist Haematologist at the RAH on 19 January
2015. That Haematologist
corrected the error and revised the RAH Protocol
distributed on 20 January 2015. Associate Professor Lewis was on leave at that
aware that five patients at RAH had been affected by the
error in the protocol
and he did not take action to determine the stage of treatment for those
patients. Associate Professor Lewis
took no action to identify or notify
clinicians responsible for treatment of those patients.
Professor Lewis took no action to identify and notify patient’s clinicians
at any other hospital affected by the error.
was no process put in place to identify with accuracy and precision of treatment
regimes and to notify the affected patients
until 18 February 2015. That action
was taken following a request from his Director to formulate a remedial
treatment plan for patients
affected in accordance with the Protocol. Moreover,
there was no appropriate action taken by Associate Professor Lewis to
communicate
with line management in relation to the error and remedial
Professor Lewis took no appropriate action to ascertain his obligations to lodge
an incident report with the South Australian
Safety Learning Incident Management
System and moreover the report was not submitted in a timely manner.
a letter dated 5 May 2017 Associate Professor Lewis identified his own conduct
... ‘inadequate, suboptimal and not befitting the
requirements of my role as the AML Lead Clinician and Clinical Director of
Haematology’.
Professor Lewis further detailed the action that he should have taken in the
Statement of Agreed Facts at paragraphs 26.2.1
stated at p 10 of transcript and we quote: –
The critical aspects, clearly identified at 2.1,
determine how many patients were affected, what stage in their treatment they
at, whether any other hospitals were affected and whether any other
patients had received an inaccurate dose.
He didn’t ensure or he didn’t notify the clinicians responsible for
the treatment of affected patients at all. There
was no formulation of a
remedial treatment plan. There was no effective communication and there was no
incident report lodged. The
statement of agreed facts indicates that Professor
Lewis has not, at all, changed the view that he expressed in May 2017. He
to those views.
It’s the failures that are identified in paragraphs 18 to 26 that give
rise to the agreement that Professor Lewis engaged in
conduct, that is
professional misconduct, in that it was unprofessional conduct amounting to
conduct that was substantially below
the standard reasonably expected of a
registered health practitioner of Professor Lewis’s level of training or
experience;
namely, his role as a specialist haematologist and the AML lead
clinician at the RAH his role as clinical
Complainant has stated and the Respondent accepts and admits his conduct set out
as paragraph 17 and paragraph 29 in the Statement
of Agreed Facts.
Submissions as to Outcome
acknowledging the role of the Tribunal to determine penalty and outcome the
parties have reached a position and have provided
the Tribunal with Minutes of
Tribunal has also been referred to the following authorities:
Medical Board
of Australia v Fox
[2016] VCAT 1392
Commonwealth
& Anor and Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
[2015] HCA 46
Foods Pty Ltd v ACCC
[1996] FCA 1134
(1996) 71 FCR 285
Medical Board
of Australia v Myers
[2014] WASAT 137.
Tribunal has also had regard to
Medical Board of Australia v Lang &
to the outcome being within permissible range and reflecting a carefully
considered position of the parties, the Tribunal
may be favourably disposed
towards accepting the agreed position of the parties.
Medical Board of Australia v Fox
the Tribunal said and quote from page
We agree with the parties that there is a now a
well-established line of authority in support of the proposition that, where a
body and Respondent have reached a negotiated settlement and the
penalty proposed is broadly speaking within the permissible range
having regard
to all the circumstances, a court or tribunal should not depart from the agreed
sanction without a clear or exceptional
reason for doing so.
Nonetheless, it is also now established that an agreement between the parties in
such a case is a highly relevant matter for VCAT,
will largely govern the manner
in which the proceedings is conducted, and is an extremely important matter for
VCAGT to take into
account in forming its own view on relevant matters. This is
particularly the case where it is clear from the face of the agreement
does not represent an arbitrary outcome, but reflects a carefully and
extensively negotiated outcome that has proper regard
to all relevant facts and
circumstances.
We have followed this approach in this proceeding. (footnotes
there is a need we consider to also have regard to the remarks of Doyle CJ in
Craig v Medical Board of South
and we quote:
The purpose of disciplinary proceedings is to protect
the public, not to punish a practitioner in the sense in which punishment is
administered pursuant to the criminal law. A disciplinary tribunal protects the
public by making orders which will prevent persons
who are unfit to practise
from practising, or by making orders which will secure the maintenance of proper
professional standards.
A disciplinary tribunal will also consider the
protection of the public, and the relevant profession, by making orders which
assure the public that appropriate standards are being maintained within
the relevant profession.
While there is a fundamental difference between an order made by a professional
disciplinary tribunal for the protection of the public,
and a punishment imposed
by a court administering the criminal law, disciplinary orders made by
professional bodies may nevertheless
have elements in common with criminal
...the protection of the public or the public interest may justify an order
intended to bring home to the practitioner the seriousness
practitioner’s departure from professional standards, and intended to
deter the practitioner from any further departure.
An order might also be made in professional disciplinary proceedings to
emphasise to other members of the profession, or to reassure
the public, that a
certain type of conduct is not acceptable professional conduct. In the latter
case the order is made in part to
protect the profession, by demonstrating that
the profession does not allow certain conduct. This, in the end, is also in the
The public may be protected by preventing a person from practising a profession,
by limiting the right of practice, or by making
it clear that certain conduct is
not acceptable. These are merely illustrations of the sort of order that may be
Tribunal accepts that Associate Professor Lewis is contrite and has had time to
reflect on the standard of his conduct. Associate
Professor Lewis concedes that
he should have taken time to ensure proper procedures were followed, peer group
review of the revised
protocol and moreover proper procedures were put in place
once the error was established. We also have a number of professional and
references that speak highly of Associate Professor Lewis’s commitment to
the profession, professional organisations
and community work.
is the Tribunal’s considered position after reviewing the material
submitted in the Book of
the submissions of Mr
Black and Mr O’Leary, the submitted testimonials and the relevant
authorities that the Tribunal can endorse
the following Minutes of Order
submitted by the parties:
The Tribunal orders that:
1. The respondent is reprimanded.
2. The respondent to pay a fine of $10,000 to the complainant.
respondent to pay the complainant’s costs of and incidental to these
proceedings agreed in the amount of $25,000.
amounts payable by the respondent to the complainant in accordance with orders 2
and 3 are to be paid in 10 consecutive monthly
instalments with the first
instalment payable within 30 days of these orders.
-DISCLAIMER - Every effort has been made to comply with suppression
orders or statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this
judgment. The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to
ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or
provision. Further enquiries may be directed to the Registrar of the Health
Practitioners Tribunal.
Tr p 2 [45].
Ex C1 - Book of Documents p7 at
Ex C1 - Book of Documents at p
Ex C1 – Book of Documents
p 10 – Response to complaint, para [34].
Ex C1 – Book of Documents
p 11 at par 1-3 – Statement of Agreed Facts.
Ex C1 - Book Documents - p 15
Tr p 10 [35].
Tr p 10 [40] –
(2017) SAHPT 5.
[2016] VCAT 1392
[2001] SASC 169.
Craig v Medical Board of
South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
Exhibit C1.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (177 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter