URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAOmbFOI/2023/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:02:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Environment and Water, Department for 2023/04489 [2023] SAOmbFOI 9 (14 December 2023)
Determination
External review - section 39
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Mr Rex Patrick
Department for Environment and Water
Ombudsman reference:
Agency reference:
Determination:
The determination of the agency is
the effect of which
that documents 5
and 6 are not exempt
the remainder of
the documents are exempt
Date of Ombudsman’s determination:
14 December 2023
Issues considered:
Inter-governmental relations
Internal working documents
professional privilege
Parliamentary privilege
Exemption clauses relied upon:
5, 9, 10 and 17(c)
Legislation considered:
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Application for access
application under the
Freedom of Information Act 1991
) the applicant requested access from the agency to:
1) Any briefs prepared (or being prepared) for the CEO in relation to
potential options/responses to a likely failure (see the Murray
Darling Basin
Commissioners November 2022 report) to meet the ‘supply’,
‘efficiency’ or ‘constraints’
measures of the Murray
Darling Basin Plan by the statutory time limit (2024).
2) Any ministerial briefs prepared (or being prepared) for Minister Close in
relation to potential options/responses to a likely failure
to meet the
‘supply’, ‘efficiency’ or ‘constraints’
measures of the Murray Darling Basin Plan
by the statutory time limit
ease of reference, procedural steps relating to the application and the external
review are set out in Appendix 1.
external review is within the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman as a relevant review
authority under section 39 of the FOI Act.
Provisional
determination
provided my tentative view about the agency’s determination to the
parties, by my provisional determination dated 3 November
2023. I informed the
parties that subject to my receipt and consideration of submissions from the
parties I proposed to confirm
the agency’s determination.
the applicant and the agency provided submissions in response. I have considered
these submissions in this determination and
address them below.
my initial viewing of the submissions, I was persuaded to alter my view in my
provisional determination; namely to release documents
5 and 6 which I
previously determined were exempt. In light of this, I provided the agency a
further opportunity to provide submissions
in response, noting that the
secondary submissions were repetitive of prior submissions received.
The parties’ submissions on clause 17(c)
do not propose to repeat the entire substance of the applicant’s
submissions, other than to refer to points I consider relevant
and conducive to
this review.
understand that the applicant does not contest that the documents were prepared
for the purpose of the proceedings of Parliament.
In summary, the applicant
contends that the category of parliamentary privilege claimed by the agency is
the ‘freedom of speech’
privilege and that the documents do not
attract that privilege ‘because it falls outside the established context
court or place out of Parliament’. This was in reference to the
construction of Article 9 of
Bill of Rights 1688
concept of parliamentary privilege has been developed from the fifteenth century
in England and has multiple sources including
custom, statutes and resolutions
of the House of Commons in England. South Australia inherited its privilege from
the UK House of
Bill of Rights 1688
(UK) states that ‘freedom of speech and
debates or proceedings in Parliament ought not be impeached or questioned in any
or place out of Parliament’.
expression of the term any ‘place out of Parliament’ is an
expression that was intended to operate more widely than
Parliamentary
Privileges Act 1987
Article 9 is not an exhaustive statement of privilege and was a reassertion of
the long claimed privileges of Parliament. The intention
behind the privilege is
to allow Parliament to proceed with the business of carrying out its functions
independently.
caselaw in South Australia is clear regarding the State’s position on the
privilege and the operation of Article 9; namely
that ‘... statements in
the House cannot be questioned in any form at
I therefore do not
agree with the applicant’s submissions on the privilege regarding the
construction of Article 9.
my view, the crux of the issue is whether the documents were even in fact ever
presented to Parliament to be able to satisfy the
proceedings of Parliament
discussed in my provisional determination, I am satisfied that documents 1, 2,
11 and 12 were presented to Parliament as evidenced
by Hansard. I therefore
limit my consideration of the applicant’s submissions on clause 17(c) to
documents 3, 5 and 6.
applicant has provided me with a copy of the transcript of proceedings on 30
January 2023. As suggested by the applicant, I cannot
identify that aspects of
the Murray Darling Basin Plan that are included in documents 3, 5 and 6 were
also discussed in the transcript
of the Committee Meeting. It must be
established as to whether there is sufficient proximity connecting the documents
to a proceeding
of Parliament, beyond the mere preparation of a document for the
intended purpose of use when not actually used. This ‘will
depend on the
circumstances of [the documents] creation and use. It is not enough that
documents merely relate to
proceedings’.
I will further
address this below when considering the agency’s submissions on this
relation to documents 1 -3, 5 and 6 the agency confirms that it ‘has not
specifically investigated what matters were discussed
at the Committee
appearance’. Whether the documents were prepared for the purpose of these
appearances is not disputed.
agency contends that it is only necessary to establish that the briefing notes
were prepared for use in Parliament rather than
whether they were actually
referred to in the course of parliamentary proceedings or had any nexus to those
proceedings.
In making this
submission, the agency has relied upon case law from New South Wales, which
considers House notes prepared for use
in Parliament, though not presented.
establish the connection between the documents and the proceedings of
Parliament, it must be demonstrated that ‘the documents
could involve
questioning or impeachment of the proceedings of
Parliament’.
submits that a parliamentary briefing note is prepared on the premise that as
Budget and Estimates Committee hearing can
be wide-ranging, comprehensive
briefing notes are required to cover a range of topics potentially raised at the
meetings. While I
can understand the agency’s position in this regard,
this would mean that any document labelled as a parliamentary briefing
would be privileged and in the context of FOI, I am not convinced that would be
correct. The Office of the Australian Information
Commissioner provides some
guidance on this; that ‘disclosure of briefings to assist ministers in
parliament – namely,
question time briefs or possible parliamentary
questions – would not ordinarily be expected to breach a privilege of
Parliament’.
I pointed out in a previous determination, ‘[h]ad the intention of
Parliament been to exempt any document prepared in anticipation
of possible
discussion during a Parliamentary sitting, clause 17(3) could have been drafted
in similar terms to clause
Noting, that
clause 1(1)(a) relates to documents specifically prepared for submissions to
Department of Treasury and Finance v Waters
states it is
arguable, in relation to the operation of the privilege in South Australia, that
‘particular proceedings must
be able to be identified’ to determine
whether that the privilege would be infringed. I am not satisfied, based on the
evidence before me in this matter, that the specific subject matter of
documents 3, 5 and 6 were raised in Parliament.
it is unclear as to whether information has been raised in Parliament, it is
difficult for me to be able to conclude that disclosure
of that information
would infringe the privilege of Parliament. I do not accept that discussion of
the Murray-Darling Basin Plan
more broadly is enough to establish that nexus
between these documents and the proceedings of Parliament.
the agency has been unable to confirm whether the documents were used in the
proceedings of Parliament, and balancing this against
the evidence provided by
the applicant, it seems that documents 3,5 and 6 were not raised in Parliament.
agency submits that it is not necessary to demonstrate that the information in
the documents was raised in Parliament, and has
referred to a previous
determination where I considered that:
preparation by a witness to give evidence before Parliament is so closely and
directly connected to the business of Parliament that
documents created in the
course of such preparation are protected by Parliamentary
is the agency’s view that I should follow this above reasoning in the
circumstances of this external review. However, I consider
that the previous
matter can be distinguished from the circumstances of this current external
review insofar as the previous matter
I concluded that the proximity between the
information in the documents and the conduct of the relevant Estimates Committee
was sufficient to attract parliamentary privilege. In this instance, I
am not satisfied that such a proximity exists.
is my view that documents 3, 5 and 6 are not exempt by virtue of clause 17(c). I
note that in my provisional determination I considered
that document 3 is exempt
by virtue of clause 10, so I only determine to vary the agency’s
determination in relation to documents
The parties’ submissions on clause
move to consider only the applicant’s submissions in relation to clause 5,
including supporting documentation, as the agency
did not provide further
submissions on this.
communique of 24 February 2023 outlines the subject matters discussed in respect
of delivering the Basin Plan. However, the communique
suggests that several of
those matters were ‘noted’ as opposed to discussed, which would
suggest that that these topics
were not debated at length.
example, the communique states that Ministers noted NSW and Victoria sought two
more years to deliver some projects. This does
not mean that those states’
positions on those projects were disclosed at length, if at all. Nor does it
mean that SA’s
position on those topics was also detailed to the level
outlined in the documents.
may be aspects of the documents that were discussed in more detail, however.
The communique states that Ministers ‘discussed
that the Commonwealth has
released a Strategic Water Purchase Framework for the remaining 49 gigalitres
(GL) of bridging the gap.’
This would suggest to me that it is likely more
detail was provided about this topic than the other matters that were merely
or acknowledged.
Irrespective
of the above, I still need to be satisfied as to the public interest test. The
applicant has not provided any submissions
in response to that, and I maintain
my view as outlined in my provisional determination.
relation to the remainder of the applicant’s submissions, I do not propose
to engage with them, other than to say I do not
find them persuasive and
maintain my view in my provisional determination.
agency has also claimed that documents 5 and 6 are exempt pursuant to clause
my viewing of the documents, I am not satisfied that the information would
constitute any opinion, advice, recommendation, consultation
or deliberation in
the course of or for the purpose of the decision-making functions of the
Government, Minister or an agency.
information contained is statistical and factual, which, by virtue of clause
9(2), would mean that the documents are not exempt.
I have considered the
agency’s submissions on this and do not find them
persuasive.
is my view that documents 5 and 6 are not exempt under clause 9.
Relevant law
person has a legally enforceable right to be given access to an agency’s
documents in accordance with the FOI
FOI Act provides that upon receipt of an access application, an agency may make
a determination to refuse access where the documents
are ‘exempt’.
Schedule 1 lists various exemption clauses which may be claimed by an agency as
a basis for refusing access.
following clauses of Schedule 1 of the FOI Act are relevant to my external
5—Documents affecting inter-governmental or local governmental
(1) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter—
(a) the disclosure of which—
(i) could reasonably be expected to cause damage to intergovernmental
relations; or
(ii) would divulge information from a confidential intergovernmental
communication; and
(b) the disclosure of which would, on balance, be contrary to the public
9—Internal working documents
(1) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter—
(a) that relates to—
(i) any opinion, advice or recommendation that has been obtained, prepared or
recorded; or
(ii) any consultation or deliberation that has taken place, in the course of,
or for the purpose of, the decision-making functions
of the Government, a
Minister or an agency; and
(b) the disclosure of which would, on balance, be contrary to the public
10—Documents subject to legal professional privilege
(1) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter that would be
privileged from production in legal proceedings on the ground
professional privilege.
17—Documents subject to contempt etc
A document is an exempt document if it contains matter the public disclosure
of which would, but for any immunity of the Crown—
(a) constitute contempt of court; or
(b) contravene any order or direction of a person or body having power to
receive evidence on oath; or
(c) infringe the privilege of Parliament.
section 48, the onus is on the agency to justify its determination ‘in any
proceedings’. This includes the external
review process.
39(11) provides that the Ombudsman may confirm, vary or reverse the
agency’s determination in an external review, based
on the circumstances
existing at the time of review.
Documents in
14(2) of the FOI Act requires agencies to deal with applications within 30 days
after they are received. Section 19(2)(b)
provides that if an agency fails to
determine an application within 30 days after receiving it, it is to be taken to
have determined
the application by refusing access to the documents sought.
However, section 19(2a) of the FOI Act provides that ‘nothing prevents
agency from making a determination to give access to a document on an
application after the period within which it was required
to deal with the
application (and such a determination is to be taken to have been made under
this Act)’.
my view, section 19(2a) only has operation when an agency fails to determine an
application within 30 days after it is received
and has no operation once an
applicant has sought an internal review. It should also be noted that section
19(2a) only permits agencies
to make belated determinations ‘to give
access to a document’ and cannot be utilised to refuse access. I have
treated the agency’s purported determination on internal review
as further submissions from the agency.
agency identified 12 documents within the scope of the application.
Issues in this review
regard to the agency’s submissions and the exemption clauses provided in
Schedule 1 of the FOI Act, it is for me to determine
whether to confirm, vary or
reverse the agency’s determination in regard to the documents in issue in
this external review.
Consideration
Clause 17(c)
agency submits that documents 1 – 3, 5, 6, 11 and 12 are exempt pursuant
to clause 17(c) as they are briefing notes prepared
specifically for use in
Parliament, the disclosure of which would infringe the privilege of Parliament.
agency provided the following submissions:
Clause 17 – Parliamentary privilege
is the department’s submission that documents created or prepared for the
purpose of use in proceedings in Parliament, or
in preparation for proceedings,
attract parliamentary privilege and are exempt documents under clause 17 of
Schedule 1 to the FOI
Act. The following submissions briefly set out the
relevant legal principles, followed by an identification of the relationship
the particular documents caught by the applicant’s application to
the proceedings of Parliament.
considering what is meant by the ‘proceedings of Parliament’, it is
clear that it encompasses the asking and answering
of questions in Parliament or
before a committee of the Parliament: see e.g.
Cornwall v Rowan
[2004] SASC 384
, [384]-[397] (Bleby, Besanko and Sulan JJ).
makes no difference that relevant words are written rather than spoken, and the
privilege protects the preparation and collation
of written documents with the
purpose of using them in proceedings (even if ultimately they are not): see
Holding v Jennings
[1979] VicRp 29
[1979] VR 289
Rowley v O'Chee
1 Qd R 207, 220-222. The privilege extends to the preparation of a document for
purposes of the transacting of business of
a house of Parliament (or a
committee).
privilege protects against demands for documents under coercive process, not
only against courts examining Parliamentary speech
and drawing inferences. See
Re OPEL Networks Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2010] NSWSC 142
(2010) 77 NSWLR 128
, [118]-[120]
(Austin J);
Sportsbet Pty Ltd v Harness Racing Victoria (No 4)
, [20]-[22] (Mansfield J). This proposition has been accepted in the
context of FOI: See e.g.
Tebutt v Minister for Lands and Water
[2015] NSWCATAD 95
, [68]-[72];
McKay v Transport for
NSWCATAD 212
, [58]-[62].
considering whether the privilege attracts to a particular document, what is
critical is the purpose for which the relevant document
was prepared, but it may
also be helpful to analyse a document having regard to a potential distinction
between ‘primary’
and ‘incidental’ documents.
‘Primary’ documents are such things as a parliamentary speech; an
answer to a
parliamentary question; a submission to a parliamentary committee or
a brief to a minister on a matter that might be raised in a
parliamentary
session. ‘Incidental’ documents may include documents used to
prepare a primary document. For example,
the correspondence that passes
between the Minister and the department for the purpose of answering a
parliamentary question is incidental
to the preparation of a primary
department submits that a Parliamentary Briefing Note (PBN) has a clear purpose
connected with the proceedings of Parliament,
being for the purpose of briefing
the Minister (or someone else) in preparation for parliamentary sittings (which
may include hearings
of a parliamentary committee).
to the particular documents in this case:
1-3, and 5-6 were briefing notes for the Chief Executive’s use for an
appearance before the Budget and Finance Committee
on 30 January 2023.
provided by a Senior Cabinet and Parliamentary Officer in the Office of the
Chief Executive of DEW to the Chief Executive
of DEW by email on 27 January
The process for preparation of such PBNs involves the Chief Executive or
Office of the Chief Executive requesting that PBNs be prepared
for the purpose
of an upcoming appearance. Usually, the process involves relevant Divisions
identifying a list of matters for PBNs,
being matters likely to be raised in
Parliament. That list is then reviewed within the Office of the Chief Executive,
and additional
PBNs sometimes requested. Relevant Divisions within the
Department will then prepare the PBNs, which are then finalised and provided
11-12 were prepared for the Minister’s use in Parliament sittings in
June/July 2023.
Document 11 was
provided by a Senior Cabinet and Parliamentary Officer in the Office of the
Chief Executive of DEW to an email address
for the Office of the Deputy Premier
on 24 June 2023.
Document 12 was
provided by a Senior Cabinet and Parliamentary Officer in the Office of the
Chief Executive of DEW to an email address
for the Office of the Deputy Premier
on 26 June 2023.
These were updated versions of previous PBNs that had been provided to the
Minister for use in Parliament. They were updated and provided
in accordance
with the Department’s usual practice of preparing (and then updating) PBNs
for the Minister in relation to matters
that may arise for consideration and
debate. Generally, there is a practice that updates are made to PBNs and
provided to the Minister’s
office in preparation for the following week of
Parliamentary sittings. Divisions within the Department will review the last
of PBNs and determine those that need updating, those that are no longer
relevant, and if any new PBNs are required. Updated PBNs
are provided with
changes tracked so that the Minister and her advisors can efficiently review the
PBNs and focus on the updates.
Clause 9 – internal working documents
addition to clause 17, the PBNs are also exempt by reason of clause 9, being
advice prepared and recorded in the course of and
for the purpose of the
decision-making functions of the Minister and the Department, disclosure of
which would be contrary to the
public interest: see eg the discussion of Justice
McIntosh v Department of Premier and Cabinet
, [51]-[70]; [89], [93]. See also
Re Peters and DPC (No
(1983) 5 ALN N306
Re Fewster and Department of Prime Minister
and Cabinet
, [54]-[56];
Re Reith and Minister of State for Aboriginal
McKinnon v Secretary, Department of
(2006) 228 CLR 423
, [125] (Callinan and Heydon JJ);
and Weekly Times Pty Ltd v Department of Premier and Cabinet
[2013] VCAT
, [27]-[28], [32]-[36], [78].
release of Parliamentary briefings would be contrary to the public interest goes
to the fundamental basis as to why Parliamentary
privilege attaches to
briefings, as recognised in
Re OPEL Networks Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2010] NSWSC 142
It seems to me necessarily true, and not dependent upon the evidence of the
particular case, that if briefings and draft briefings
to Parliamentarians for
Question Time and other Parliamentary debate are amenable to subpoenas and other
orders for production, the
Commonwealth officers whose task it is to prepare
those documents will be impeded in their preparation, by the knowledge that the
documents may be used in legal proceedings and for investigatory purposes that
might well affect the quality of information available
to Parliament. To take a
step that would have that consequence would, I think, derogate from the force of
the Bill of Rights and
run contrary to the historical justification for that
legislation ...
‘proceedings of Parliament’ are protected by the privilege. Case law
in South Australia suggests that the meaning
of ‘proceedings in
Parliament’ is broad.
accept that ‘investigating, deliberating and legislation’ are
central roles of the Parliament. I also accept that on
a broad interpretation,
the ‘proceedings of Parliament’ would include a parliamentary
briefing note where the subject
matter of that note has been explored in, or
presented to Parliament.
have searched Hansard which suggests that the subject matter of the briefing
notes relating to documents 1, 2, 11 and 12 were presented
to Parliament. It was
unclear from Hansard, however, that the subject matter of documents 3, 5 and 6,
were also discussed.
also note that while evidence suggests that the matters contained in some of the
documents have been referenced through the public
comment of individual members
of Parliament, as the privilege attaches to the Parliament collectively, it
cannot be waived by an
have considered the agency’s submissions and do not accept the
agency’s interpretation of
Holding v Jennings
[1979] VicRp 29
[1979] VR 289
that ‘proceedings of Parliament’ include unspoken documents even if
ultimately not used in proceedings. My understanding
of the privilege and the
principles arising from this particular case, is that it can protect unspoken
documents, but only in the
event that those documents are still tendered/tabled
in Parliament. It would not include documents that have merely been prepared
and not utilised in a proceeding of Parliament.
accept that a parliamentary briefing note could be prepared with the expectation
that it is protected by parliamentary privilege,
however, the mere preparation
of a document does not mean that it is automatically covered by the
the content of which
is not presented before Parliament.
Irrespective
of the agency’s submissions in relation to
Holding v Jennings
agency has confirmed that documents 1 – 3, 5 and 6 were provided by a
Senior Cabinet and Parliamentary Officer in the
Office of the Chief Executive of
DEW to the Chief Executive of DEW by email on 27 January 2023 for use in the
next Budget and Finance
Committee meeting. Documents 11 and 12 were prepared for
the Minister’s use in Parliament sittings that occurred in June/July
and was provided by a Senior Cabinet and Parliamentary Officer in the Office of
the Chief Executive of DEW to an email address
for the Office of the Deputy
Premier on 24 and 26 June 2023.
am satisfied that disclosure of documents 1, 2, 11 and 12 would
‘infringe’ upon the privilege of the Parliament, as
evidence to suggest that the subject matter of the documents were subject to
‘proceedings’ in Parliament. I
am not satisfied that documents 3, 5
and 6 are exempt under clause 17(c) for reasons I identified
agency has also stated that documents 1, 2, 11 and 12 are exempt by virtue of
clause 9, however, I do not propose to further consider
any other exemption that
may apply as it is my view that the documents are exempt by virtue of clause
agency submits that documents 8 and 9 are exempt pursuant to clause 5(1).
is necessary to examine whether either of the conditions in subclause 5(1)(a)(i)
or (ii) are met, which relate to damage to inter-governmental
relations and
confidentiality of inter-governmental communications
respectively.
is clear documents 8 and 9 contain information about the States’ positions
in negotiations with respect to water management.
It is foreseeable that
disclosure of this information could reasonably damage inter-governmental
relations by weakening positions
and bargaining powers for certain states, while
unfairly providing an advantage to other states that become aware of such
information.
am therefore satisfied that documents 8 and 9 are captured by clause 5(1)(a).
now turn to consider whether this information would, on balance, be contrary to
the public interest pursuant to the requirement
in clause 5(1)(b).
agency concluded that disclosure of documents 8 and 9 would be contrary to the
public interest given:
the potential
damage and prejudice to inter-governmental relations and negotiations
it could hinder
the frank and fearless discussion/advice, or cause departmental staff to
withhold information.
agency considered that factors in favour of disclosure included:
the matter being
of community interest
to promote the
objects of the Act.
agree with the agency’s view that disclosure would be contrary to the
public interest. The community is still able to access
information about the
subject matter of the documents, such as through public comment, media updates
and other publicly available
information provided by the agency. To provide
finer details in relation to inter-governmental strategies, positions and
powers could limit and hinder the intended purpose of negotiations
between governments, namely, to achieve satisfactory outcomes
respective communities.
my view documents 8 and 9 are exempt pursuant to clause 5(1). The agency has
claimed that these documents are also exempt by virtue
of clauses 1(1)(e),
9(1)(a)(i), 9(1)(a)(ii), 10(1) and 16(1)(a)(iv), but I do not propose to examine
those clauses given my views
agency submits that documents 1, 3 and 8 are exempt pursuant to clause 10(1). I
only propose to discuss document 3 as I consider
that documents 1 and 8 are
exempt by virtue of other clauses in the Act as identified above.
professional privilege exists to protect confidential communications between a
client and lawyer. It has been established that
it attaches to communications
made with the dominant purpose of giving advice or for use in actual or
anticipated litigation.
privilege can attach to communications received from salaried lawyers employed
by government but only if they are made independently,
in a professional
capacity, are confidential, and arise from the relationship between lawyer and
am satisfied that document 3 is exempt by virtue of clause 10(1). Disclosure of
this document would relay information about a client’s
anticipated legal
proceedings.
agency submits that document 7 is exempt by virtue of clause 9(1). For a
document to be exempt pursuant to clause 9(1), both elements
under clause
9(1)(a) and 9(1)(b) need to be established.
scope of clause 9(1)(a) is wide, particularly given the words ‘that
relates to’. The ‘opinion, advice or recommendation’,
‘consultation or deliberation’ must nevertheless have been obtained,
prepared or recorded in the course of, or for
the purpose of, the
decision-making functions of the Government, a Minister or an agency.
my analysis of the document, I am satisfied that document 7 contains opinion,
advice and recommendations from the agency and was
information obtained by the
agency in course of, or for the purposes of its decision-making functions.
now turn to consider whether this information would, on balance, be contrary to
the public interest by virtue of clause 9(1)(b).
coming to the conclusion that disclosure would be contrary to the public
interest, the agency identified the following factors
as favouring
non-disclosure:
disclosure may prejudice the agency’s decision making process
disclosure may
prejudice inter-governmental negotiations
disclosure may
cause further procedural delays in reaching agreements.
agency considered factors in favour of disclosure included:
that the matter
may be of community interest
to promote the
objects of the Act
community insight into government decision-making.
balance, I agree with the conclusion of the agency, that the factors favouring
non-disclosure outweigh factors in favour of disclosure.
In particular,
revealing governmental strategies that could weaken a state’s position and
ability to negotiate effectively
for the community it represents.
do not propose to further consider any other exemption that may apply as it is
my view that the document is exempt by virtue of
clause 9(1).
Determination
light of my views above, I vary the agency’s determination; namely that
documents 5 and 6 are to be released in full and
that the remainder of the
documents are exempt by virtue of clauses identified above.
Wayne Lines
SA OMBUDSMAN
December 2023
12 June 2023
The agency received the FOI application dated 12 June 2023.
13 July 2023
The agency failed to determine the application within the 30 day period
required by the FOI Act,
deemed to have refused access to the
1 August 2023
The agency received the internal review application dated 1 August
15 August 2023
The agency failed to determine the application within the statutory time
frame, and is taken to have confirmed the original
determination.
24 September 2023
The agency conducted a belated internal review.
16 August 2023
The Ombudsman received the applicant’s request for external review
dated 16 August 2023.
15 September 2023
The Ombudsman advised the agency of the external review and requested
submissions and documentation.
3 November 2023
The Ombudsman issued his provisional determination and invited submissions
from the parties.
12 November 2023
The applicant provided submissions in response to the provisional
determination.
14 November 2023
The agency provided submissions in response to the provisional
determination.
27 November 2023
The Ombudsman provided the agency with a further opportunity to provide
submissions given the proposal to alter his view in his provisional
determination.
4 December 2023
The agency provided secondary submissions in response.
Constitution
Act 1934 s38
O'Chee v Rowley
(1997) 150 ALR 199
President of the Legislative
Council v Kosmas
[2008] SAIRC 41
Rowan v Cornwall (No
[2002] SASC 160
Department of Treasury and
Finance v Waters
[2023] SACAT 6
(21 March 2023) at [50] citing Hall J in The
President of the Legislative Council of Western Australia v Corruption and Crime
[2021] WASC 223
(13 July 2021).
Zonnevylle v Minister
for Education and Early Childhood Learning
[2023] NSWCATAD 135
(6 June 2023).
Department of Treasury and
Finance v Waters
[2023] SACAT 6
(21 March 2023) at [50] citing Hall J in The
President of the Legislative Council of Western Australia v Corruption and Crime
[2021] WASC 223
(13 July 2021).
5: Exemptions | OAIC
(accessed 23 November 2023) at [5.194]. .
Treasury and Finance,
Department for
2022/01526 [2022] SAOmbFOI (11 July 2022).
Health and Wellbeing,
Department for 2019/10219
SAOmbFOI 13
Freedom of Information Act
section 12.
Broadcasting Corporation v Chatterton
(1986) 46 SASR 1
per Pryor J citing
comments by Ayelsworth JA in the Ontario Court of Appeal case of
Ltd v Hudsons Bay Oil & Gas Ltd
(1972) 23 DLR (3d) 292
[2000] SASC 83
(2000) 76 SASR 450
at pp461, 470 per Doyle CJ.
Hamsher v Swift
(1992) 33 FCR 545.
Department of Treasury
and Finance v Waters
[2023] SACAT 6
(21 March 2023) [53-55].
Esso v The Commissioner
of Taxation
[1999] HCA 67
, per Gleeson CJ, Gaudron and Gummow JJ at [35] and
Waterford v The
Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(1987) 163 CLR 54
, per Mason and Wilson JJ at 61-62.
Freedom of Information Act
Freedom of Information Act
Freedom of Information Act
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.12 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter