URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SADC/2025/119.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:55:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SOLID TIMES PTY LTD, ONE DIRECTION REAL ESTATE PTY LTD v WANG [2025] SADC 119 (10 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
SOLID TIMES PTY LTD, ONE DIRECTION REAL ESTATE PTY LTD v
[2025] SADC 119
Judgment of his Honour Judge
10 October 2025
EQUITY - TRUSTS AND TRUSTEES - IMPLIED TRUSTS - CONSTRUCTIVE
EQUITY - TRUSTS AND TRUSTEES - IMPLIED TRUSTS - CONSTRUCTIVE TRUSTS -
UNCONSCIONABLE CONDUCT
The second applicant, One Direction Real Estate Pty Ltd (One Direction),
seeks a declaration that the property owned by the respondent,
Mr Feng Wang, at
77 MacKinnon Parade, North Adelaide (the Property), is held on constructive
trust for himself and One Direction
and that the terms of that trust include
that the Property be sold and the net proceeds of sale be divided equally
between One Direction
and Mr Wang or in such other manner as determined by the
Solid Times Pty Ltd, One Direction and Mr Wang entered into a joint venture
which is recorded in an agreement dated 4 May 2018 and
an addendum to that
agreement (collectively, the JVA) pursuant to which the Property was to be
acquired, renovated and sold. Under
the JVA, Mr Wang was nominated as the
purchaser of the Property. The JVA provided that Solid Times would hold a 50%
interest in the
joint venture assets and One Direction and Mr Wang would each
hold a 25% interest in those assets. The JVA further provided that
the JVA would
terminate when the Property was sold and that on termination the net proceeds
would be distributed in accordance with
the parties’ respective interests.
The JVA did not contain provisions which compelled Mr Wang to sell the
The Property was purchased pursuant to the JVA on 30 November 2018 and Mr
Wang became the legal owner of the Property. Each of the
joint venture partners
contributed to the payment of the deposit and purchase price in accordance with
their respective interests.
A mortgage was taken out with RAMS/Westpac with Mr
Wang as the mortgagor. Up to about January 2022, each of the joint venture
contributed to the mortgage and other outgoings associated with the
Property in accordance with their respective interests. The renovation
the Property commenced in about December 2019 and were completed in May 2022.
The cost of the renovation works were paid
for by the joint venture partners
according to their respective interests in the joint venture.
The relationship between Solid Times and One Direction on the one hand and Mr
Wang on the other hand deteriorated such that in January
2022, One Direction and
Solid Times lodged caveats over the Property. They did so because: (1) Mr Wang
failed to provide financial
documents and information about the joint venture
expenses when requested to do so and (2) of the behaviour of Mr Wang when the
was listed for sale in November 2021. Further, in 2020, Mr Wang caused
the mortgage with RAMS to be paid out and a new mortgage entered
into with ANZ
without the knowledge or consent of Solid Times and One Direction. Mr Wang, has
since 2022, used the Property for his
personal and business purposes on
occasions. Mr Wang has not complied with Court orders in relation to the
appointment of an agent
to sell the Property.
On 19 May 2024, Mr Wang entered into a Deed of Release with Solid Times
pursuant to which Mr Wang agreed to pay the sum of $740,000
to Solid Times
in full and final settlement of the Dispute (which was defined as the dispute
relating to the Property, the right
title and interest over the Property and the
joint venture agreement). Solid Times and Mr Wang agreed to release each other
all claims in relation to the Property. Solid Times agreed to withdraw its
caveat over the Property and agreed to its claim in these
proceedings being
dismissed. Mr Wang paid $740,000 to Solid Times.
Mr Wang has not agreed to the sale of the Property and the distribution of
the net proceeds of sale according to the JVA.
(1) One Direction is entitled to a declaration that Mr Wang holds the
Property on a constructive trust for the sale of the Property,
with the net
proceeds to be applied first, to the discharge of any mortgage over the Property
then to refund the contributions made
by Mr Wang (which will include the
contributions made by Solid Times) and One Direction with the surplus to be
distributed as to
25% to One Direction and 75% to Mr Wang.
(2) The assets of the joint venture include the land. The joint venture has
failed because, inter alia, Mr Wang asserts that he is
entitled to the legal and
beneficial ownership of the Property, that the mortgage account is his personal
account and that One Direction
is not entitled to a share of the surplus on the
sale of the Property.
(3) The claim for constructive trust is based on a joint venture that has
failed. The basis of such a claim is that equity will not
permit a party to
retain the benefit of property where it would be unconscionable for them to do
so: Muschinski v Dodds (1985) 160
CLR 585 applied. The joint endeavour
constructive trust may extend to a commercial joint venture when the joint
venture agreement
does not make provision for the circumstances that have
occurred: John Nelson Developments Pty Ltd v Focus National Developments
[2010] NSWSC 392
, Makaritis v Makaritis (No 2)
[2022] NSWSC 1690
(4) The breakdown of the joint endeavour must occur without attributable
fault of the applicant. That requirement is part of the question
whether it is
unconscionable for the other party to retain the benefits of the joint
endeavour: Austin v Hornby
[2005] NSWSC 1059
, Makaritis v Makaritis (No 2)
[2022] NSWSC 1690
applied. There has been no such fault on the part of One
Direction. The breakdown of the joint venture was caused by the conduct
Mr Wang. Defences of lack of clean hands or illegality fail because, inter
alia, any alleged conduct of One Direction (in acting
as agent for the vendor
when the Property was purchased) does not relate to the equity sued for.
(5) The terms of the constructive trust require the repayment of
contributions and then the distribution of the surplus. These terms
accord with
the type of order made in Baumgartner v Baumgartner
[1987] HCA 59
(1987) 164 CLR 137
Woods v McKinlay (No 2)
[2021] NSWSC 1510.
The unconscionability which equity
seeks to address is the denial of the interest of the person who is not the
legal owner but it
does so by taking into account the contribution made by the
(6) The terms of the constructive trust may provide for a number of different
ways in which the surplus on the sale of the Property
may be distributed
including that the surplus be distributed equally or that the surplus be
distributed according to ratios set out
in the JVA or that it be distributed
according to the ratios of the respective contributions of the parties.
(7) Although equity favours the notion of practical equality, there may be
circumstances where an adjustment is required to avoid
an injustice: Baumgartner
v Baumgartner
[1987] HCA 59
(1987) 164 CLR 137
and Woods v McKinlay (No 2)
[2021] NSWSC 1510
applied. In the circumstances of the present case, there would be an injustice
if the surplus was distributed equally between One
Direction and Mr Wang. One
Direction did not contribute to the acquisition or the extinguishment of the
interest of Solid Times which
occurred as a result of the settlement between Mr
Wang and Solid Times and the payment made by Mr Wang to Solid Times. The
unconscionability
of Mr Wang that provides the basis for the imposition of the
constructive trust, is the denial of the 25% beneficial interest of
Direction that is provided for in the JVA. Further, the actual intention, as
expressed in the JVA, was that One Direction would
hold a 25% beneficial
interest in the Property. One Direction has done nothing, nor contributed any
further money, that would provide
any basis for the increase of that proportion.
In these circumstances, there is to be a term of the constructive trust that One
receives 25% of the surplus on the sale of the Property after the
repayment of contributions.
Land Agents and Business Agents (Sale and Conveyancing) Act 1984 (SA) s
Uniform Civil Rules 2020 (UCR)
referred to.
3 Apples Childcare Centre Pty Ltd v MMC Pacific International Pty Ltd
[2023] VSC 21
Austin v Hornby
[2011] NSWSC 1059
Competition and Consumer Commission v Baxter Healthcare Pty Ltd
Baumgartner v Baumgartner
[1987] HCA 59
(1987) 164 CLR 137
Booth v Cerreto
[2023] NSWSC 1574
Cherry v Steele Park
[2017] NSWCA 295
(2017) 96 NSWLR 548
Commissioner of Taxation v The Trustee for the Michel Hayes Family Trust
[2019] FCAFC 226
(2019) 273 FCR 567
Davey v Herbst, Herbst and Bray (No 2)
Dering v Earl of Winchelsea
(1787) 1 Cox 318;
Electricity
Generation Corporation v Woodside Energy Ltd
[2014] HCA 7
(2014) 251 CLR 640
Pastoral Company Pty Ltd v First Chicago Australia Pty Ltd
[1978] HCA 42
(1978) 139 CLR
Woods v McKinlay (No 2)
[2021] NSWSC 1510
West v Mead
Victoria v Tatts Group Ltd
[2016] HCA 5
(2016) 90 ALJR 392
Shipping Corp v Joseph Rank Ltd
[1957] 1 QB 267
Simic v New South Wales
Land and Housing Corporation
[2016] HCA 47
(2016) 260 CLR 85
Shepherd v Doolan
[2005] NSWSC 42
Robertson v Adams
[1922] ArgusLawRp 98
(1922) 31 CLR 250
Hancock Prospecting Pty Ltd; Rinehart v Rinehart
[2019] HCA 13
(2019) 267 CLR 514
Deputy Commissioner of Taxation (WA)
(1987) 72 ALR 365
Manufacturing Pty Ltd v Bluescope Steel (AIS) Pty Ltd
[2013] NSWCA 27
(2013) 85 NSWLR 1
NSW Trustee and Guardian v Togias
[2022] NSWCA 225
Muschinski v
[1985] HCA 78
(1985) 160 CLR 583
Mount Bruce Mining Pty Ltd v Wright Prospecting
[2015] HCA 37
(2015) 256 CLR 104
Moody v Cox and Hatt
[1917] 2 Ch 71
Makaritis v Makaritis (No 2)
[2022] NSWSC 1690
John S Chappel Pty Ltd
v D K Pett Pty Ltd
(1971) 1 SASR 188
John Nelson Developments Pty Ltd v
Focus National Developments Pty Ltd
[2010] NSWSC 150
In re Mahmoud and
[1921] 2 KB 716
Harry Goudias Pty Ltd v Akakios
Hansen v Noble
[2021] NSWSC 138
Grubisa v Zhou
Franklins Pty Ltd v Metcash Trading Pty Ltd
[2009] NSWCA 407
(2009) 76 NSWLR
Fitzgerald v FJ Leonhardt Pty Ltd
[1997] HCA 17
(1997) 189 CLR 215
Vision Australia Ltd
[2024] HCA 50
SOLID TIMES PTY LTD, ONE DIRECTION REAL ESTATE PTY LTD v
[2025] SADC 119
Civil jurisdiction
Introduction
proceedings involve a dispute between the second applicant, One Direction
Real Estate Pty Ltd (One Direction or the applicant)
and the respondent Mr Feng
Wang (Mr Wang or the respondent) concerning a property at
77 Mackinnon
Parade, North Adelaide (the Property). The proceedings previously also included
a claim by the first applicant, Solid
Times Pty Ltd (Solid Times) against Mr
Wang. Solid Times and Mr Wang have settled that claim.
Property is held in the sole name of Mr Wang. One Direction claims that it,
Solid Times and Mr Wang, entered into a joint venture
for the acquisition,
renovation and sale of the Property. It is not disputed that the parties entered
into a joint venture agreement
which is recorded in an agreement dated 4 May
2018 and an addendum to that agreement (collectively, the JVA). The JVA
provided that
Solid Times will hold a 50% interest in the joint venture assets
and One Direction and Mr Wang will each hold a 25% interest in those
assets. One
Direction claims that the joint venture has failed and that it is entitled to a
declaration that Mr Wang holds the Property
as a constructive trustee and
that the terms of that trust include that the Property be sold, and that the net
proceedings of sale:
(a) be distributed equally between One Direction and Mr
Wang; or (b) be distributed by reference to the same proportions as their
contributions; or (c) be distributed 25% to One Direction and 75% to Mr Wang.
One Direction contends that the Court could alternatively
make orders in a two
stage process where first the contributions made by One Direction and Mr Wang
are returned and then the surplus
is distributed in the manner specified.
Wang’s position is unclear but he does not accept that One Direction has
any interest in the Property. In his defence dated
12 December 2012 (FDN 95), he
pleads that One Direction is entitled to the return of a sum of money that was
paid at settlement for
the purchase of the Property. He pleads that One
Direction is not entitled to the return of the money that was paid to Solid
for the renovation and extension as those monies were paid for
“profit making purposes” that involved Solid Times and
not Mr Wang.
In his written closing submissions, Mr Wang submitted that One Direction is
not entitled to the return of the purchase
money or the monies that were paid to
Solid Times for the renovation and extensions but is entitled to return of the
monies paid
in respect of mortgage repayments. However, he then submits that
these payments were to support the renovation process and not ownership.
denies that he holds the Property as a constructive trustee but says that any
entitlement of One Direction to share in the
net proceeds of sale should be
determined according to these principles.
following issues arise for determination in these proceedings:
(1) The proper construction of the JVA and in particular whether that agreement
included the purchase of the Property;
(2) Has the joint venture failed such that One Direction is entitled to a
declaration that Mr Wang holds the Property as a constructive
(3) Is there any conduct of One Direction that disentitles it to the remedy of a
constructive trust?
(4) Are there any defects in the work that was undertaken on the Property which
either would require rectification or affect the
sale of the Property?
(5) What are the terms of the constructive trust (if the Court determines that
such a trust should be declared) and in particular
what are the terms concerning
the repayment of expenses and the distributions of the net proceeds of sale?
(6) What expenses were paid by One Direction, Solid Times and Mr Wang and
in particular, should the taking out of the mortgage in
the name of Mr Wang be
considered to be a contribution that he has made to the acquisition of the
Property? Has the Property been
exclusively used by Mr Wang since 2022 and what
adjustments should be made for that use?
witnesses gave evidence on behalf of One Direction. The primary witness was Mr
Yun Liu, who is a director of that company.
Mr Liu is commonly known by the
English name, Zac. Mr Liu gave evidence about the entry into of the JVA, the
payment of expenses
related to the joint venture, including mortgage payments,
the renovation of the Property, the use of the Property, listing the Property
for sale and attempts to sell the Property, the breakdown of the relationship
with Mr Wang including the failure of Mr Wang to provide
relevant financial
documents and the lodging of a caveat over the Property.
Liu was a credible and reliable witness and I accept his evidence. Much of his
evidence was supported by documentation and was
not the subject of dispute.
There was nothing in his cross-examination that caused me to doubt his evidence.
There was some dispute
parties. I accept the evidence of Mr Liu on this topic and that Mr Wang
to provide financial documentation concerning the joint venture.
Trevor Dunsford, a valuer, gave evidence about the current value of the
Property. This is not a case where orders are sought based
on the value of the
Property. One Direction seeks orders relating to the sale of the Property and a
division of the proceeds of sale.
The value of the Property is therefore not
material to those orders, except perhaps as an indication of the value when the
is framing its orders. Mr Dunsford conducted a residential kerbside
valuation. There was some cross-examination about the expertise
of Mr Dunsford
and his knowledge of the North Adelaide area but it was not suggested that his
appraisal was wrong. In these circumstances,
I accept the evidence of Mr
Frank Carbone, a private investigator, gave evidence about the current use of
the Property. I accept that Mr Carbone made certain
observations but consider
that this evidence provides little assistance to the Court in determining the
issues between the parties.
Wang did not call any witnesses other than himself. Mr Wang gave evidence about
his personal background, the circumstances surrounding
the entry into of the
joint venture, the payment of expenses relating to the joint venture, the
renovation of the Property, the discharge
of the mortgage with RAMS (which is a
division of Westpac) and its replacement with ANZ, the condition of the
Property, the listing
of the Property for sale and attempts to sell the
Property, his response to requests for financial documents relating to the joint
venture and his current use of the Property.
Wang’s evidence was not satisfactory. His evidence about his response to
requests for financial information from Solid Times
and One Direction was
evasive and sometimes non-responsive. His evidence about the payment of his
share of the deposit and balance
of the purchase price was also evasive. He was
not prepared to admit that these amounts represented his 25% interest in the
through the joint venture. His evidence that he had purchased the
Property in May 2018 did not have any rational foundation. His
evidence that he
did not know the identity of a Mr Wen G Wang, a person who made a payment to
RAMS under the mortgage was not believable.
His evidence that he did not know
the source of the $83,981.74 that was used, along with the new loan from ANZ, to
discharge the
RAMS mortgage was not believable. Mr Wang has not complied with
the Court order made on 30 November 2022 (exhibit A31) relating to
production of documents. In all of these circumstances, I have doubts about the
credibility of the evidence of Mr Wang. I do
not go as far, as the respondent
contends, that his evidence should only by accepted when corroborated. However,
when his evidence
conflicts with the evidence of Mr Liu, I prefer the evidence
Notwithstanding
the evidence of the witnesses that has been described above, it is the
documentary evidence that is critical to the
determination of this
Factual background
Purchase of the Property and entry into of the joint venture and the
make the findings of fact set out below which are the subject of either
documentary or unchallenged evidence and are not in dispute.
to about 30 November 2018 a Mr Paul Mellor (deceased) and later his executors
(the vendors), were the owners of the Property.
On about 15 September 2017, the
vendors entered into a contract for the sale of the Property to Xuan Tian
and/or nominee. Mr Tian
was a director of Solid Times (and was commonly referred
to as Tony). The other director of Solid Times was Mr Yang Shao (commonly
known as Brady). Mr Liu was the selling agent for the Property on behalf of the
there was a joint venture between Mr Tian, Mr Shao and Mr Liu in relation
to the purchase of the Property, although that
agreement was not reduced to
writing. Mr Tian was unable to borrow sufficient funds to complete the
purchase of the Property. He
may have been able to source the necessary funds
from overseas but that would have taken some time and the funds were not able to
be obtained in a timely manner so he arranged for Mr Wang to become involved in
the joint venture. At that time, Mr Liu did not know
4 May 2018, Mr Wang, Mr Liu and Solid Times entered into and signed the JVA
(exhibit A3). It is not clear on the evidence as to
how that document was
prepared. In 2022, there was an addendum to the JVA whereby Mr Liu’s
interest was replaced by One Direction
(exhibit A4). Mr Liu is and was the sole
director and shareholder of One Direction (exhibit A2). I will set out the terms
JVA later in these reasons. For present purposes, the JVA recorded that
Mr Wang had acquired an estate in fee simple in the Property.
That was plainly
incorrect as at
4 May 2018, Mr Wang had not acquired such an interest.
Wang was nominated as the purchaser under the contract with the vendors. It is
not clear when Mr Wang was nominated as the purchaser.
Mr Liu gave evidence
that it was the difficulty facing the original joint venture partners in
borrowing funds that led to the involvement
of Mr Wang in the joint venture.
Mr Liu said that he did not have any role in the nomination of Mr Wang as
the purchaser and said
that there was no discussion about why the Property was
not purchased in the name of all three joint venture partners rather than
sole name of Mr Wang. A valuation that was prepared for the purposes of
assessing security (exhibit R55) establishes that
by 16 April 2018 it was
contemplated that Mr Wang would be the purchaser of the Property. The JVA
assumes that Mr Wang would be the
purchaser of the Property. It is clear
that at least by
27 September 2018, Mr Wang was to be the purchaser of the
Property as on that date RAMS sent a letter to Mr Wang unconditionally approving
a loan of $825,000 for the purchase of the Property (exhibit A10).
30 November 2018, settlement of the Property occurred and Mr Wang became
the registered proprietor. The purchase price was $1,100,000.
A deposit of
$30,000 was paid. Mr Liu and Mr Wang each contributed $7,500 towards that
deposit (being 25% each of the amount of the
deposit). Solid Times paid $15,000
(being 50% of the deposit). After the receipt of the loan funds from RAMS in the
sum of $824,000,
the balance of the purchase price was $315,939.23 (settlement
statement dated 16 November 2018, exhibit A9). Mr Liu gave evidence,
Mr Liu and Mr Wang each contributed the sum of $78,988.50 to the balance of
the purchase price and Solid Times contributed $157,977.23.
Those sums are
confirmed by the settlement statement. Again, by those payments, Mr Liu and
Mr Wang each paid 25% of the balance and
Solid Times paid 50%.
Payments of amounts due under the mortgage and rates and taxes
and other incidental expenses
Wang advised Mr Liu that the total monthly payments that were due under the
mortgage with RAMS were $4,600. Mr Liu said that he
was not provided with any
documentation which showed that amount but that he and Solid Times were advised
of that sum by Mr Wang
in a WeChat message. Mr Liu gave evidence to this effect
which I accept. Mr Wang did not dispute this evidence. The evidence accords
the payments that were made by Solid Times and One Direction.
Liu gave evidence that One Direction paid $1,150 per month in respect of the
mortgage into the bank account of Mr Wang and Solid
Times paid the sum of $2,300
per month. Mr Wang agreed that these payments were made. These sums represented
25% and 50% respectively
of the $4,600 which they had been advised were the
amounts due each month under the mortgage. Mr Wang agreed that these amounts
paid each month by One Direction and Solid Times and said that they were
paid by agreement. In fact, the amount due under the mortgage
was $3,469.74 per
month. Mr Wang said that he paid some of the expenses such as insurance for the
Property from this account.
Direction and Solid Times continued making those payments until January 2022. I
accept the evidence of Mr Liu that the reason
why One Direction and Solid Times
did not make payments after January 2022 was that they had requested financial
documents from Mr
Wang including in relation to the amount of the monthly
mortgage repayments but those documents were not provided. In total, One
Direction paid the sum of $42,550 in mortgage repayments, which included the
mortgage payments to both RAMS and then ANZ, when ANZ
replaced RAMS as the
Direction also made payments of land tax, water rates and council rates up to
January 2022. Examples of such payments are set
out in exhibits A50 and A51. Mr
Wang gave evidence in chief that he paid “on his own” the bundle of
invoices from SA
Water (exhibit R61), emergency service levies (exhibit R69),
City of Adelaide council rates (exhibit R70), land tax from Revenue
SA (exhibit
R71), insurance premiums (exhibit R 72) and gas accounts from Energy Australia
(exhibit R77). In cross-examination, Mr
Wang said that he was not in a position
to say whether the accounts of SA Water, the emergency service levy, council
rates, land
tax and insurance were paid out of the mortgage account to which
Solid Times and One Direction contributed an amount in excess of
the monthly
mortgage payments. Mr Wang did not produce any documentary evidence to show that
the accounts were not paid out of the
mortgage account.
find that the payment of these amounts were from the mortgage account as they
related to expenses of the joint venture. The amounts
paid by Solid Times and
One Direction into the mortgage accounts were in excess of their proportion of
the amount due solely for
the mortgage. There is no reason why Mr Wang would
make these payments personally. Mr Wang agreed in cross-examination that it was
normal for him to use this account to pay some of the
Discharge of RAMS/ Westpac mortgage and replacement
with an ANZ mortgage
September 2020, Mr Wang discharged his mortgage with RAMS/Westpac (exhibit A21)
and took out a new mortgage with ANZ. I accept
the evidence of Mr Liu that
he was not advised of that change and did not know that ANZ had become the
mortgagee or that the RAMS
mortgage had been discharged. Mr Liu said that
Mr Wang advised him that the bank account details for the payment of the
had changed but he did not say, nor did Mr Liu enquire, why that change
had occurred. Mr Wang agreed that he gave Mr Liu a new account
number but said
that he could not recall whether he advised him that the loan with RAMS had been
discharged and a new loan with ANZ
had been taken out. I accept the evidence of
Mr Liu. If Mr Liu had been advised of the change of mortgagee without his
it would be expected that would be a matter that he would recall and
would have led him to make further enquiries.
documentary evidence establishes that the amount borrowed under the new ANZ
mortgage was less than the balance outstanding on
the RAMS mortgage when it was
discharged. The documentary evidence establishes that there was an additional
payment made by Mr Wang
in the sum of $83,981.74 to discharge the RAMS mortgage
that was additional to the amount borrowed under the ANZ mortgage. Although
evidence is not clear as to how that payment was made, I am satisfied that it
was made either by Mr Wang or for his benefit and
that he should receive the
benefit of that payment.
Renovation and Extension Works
Mr Wang’s purchase of the Property, renovations and an extension to the
existing house on the Property were carried
out. Development Plan Consent was
granted by the City of Adelaide on 8 November 2018 (exhibit A14) and
subsequently development approval
was granted on 3 March 2020 (exhibit A15).
Solid Times undertook those works as the builder. Mr Wang entered into a
contract with
Solid Times to undertake that building work (exhibit R56). In that
contract, the costs were estimated to be $600,000 but ultimately
exceeded that
amount. The contract provided that the works were to commence on 1 December 2019
and be completed on 31 August 2020.
Mr Wang gave evidence that the works
commenced on 1 December 2019 but were not completed until about May 2022 when
the City of Adelaide
issued a compliance letter. Solid Times rendered invoices
to One Direction (exhibits A33 to A48, excluding A15 and A16) in amounts
represented 25% of the amount charged for that work. That percentage is evident
from the invoices. In total, One Direction
paid the sum of $238,826.41 to
Solid Times for the building work. Mr Wang also paid the sum of $222,776.41
for that work. These matters
were not in dispute and are largely confirmed by
documentary evidence.
compliance letter was ultimately issued by the City of Adelaide in May 2022
(exhibit A18). Based on this document and the evidence
of Mr Liu, I find that
the building works were completed by no later than May 2022.
Listing of the Property for sale in 2019 and 2021
Property was listed for sale in 2019 and 2021. In 2019, One Direction was
the agent for that listing. This listing was prior
to the building works being
carried out. On this occasion, the Property was on the market only for a short
time. Mr Liu gave evidence
that all of the parties, including Mr Wang, agreed to
withdraw the Property from the market after a few weeks. Mr Wang said that
was Mr Liu who decided to take the Property off the market. Nothing turns on
that point.
Property was placed on the market again in November 2021. Mr Liu said at that
time, all of the members of the joint venture,
including Mr Wang, agreed to
attempt to sell the Property. At that time, the building work had almost been
completed. Mr Liu gave
evidence that Mr Wang engaged, without his knowledge, Mr
Manna Chan of Ray White, Norwood, to act as the agent on the sale of the
Property. Mr Wang gave evidence that it was Brady (Mr Shao) from Solid Times who
arranged for Ray White to be engaged, but that he
agreed to that appointment.
The Property was withdrawn from the market after a couple of weeks because of
concerns raised by the
City of Adelaide about a heritage listing and some issues
with the facade of the building. These concerns were raised following an
inspection by a council officer on 18 November 2021 and formalised in a letter
to Solid Times dated 6 December 2021 (exhibit A16).
On 30 November 2021 (exhibit
A 24), Mr Liu drafted an email for Mr Wang to send to Mr Chan. Mr Wang agreed
that Mr Liu drafted that
email and Mr Wang sent it. That email was sent but the
Property remained on the market. Mr Liu rang the agent and then discussed
issue with Mr Wang. Mr Wang refused to answer any questions about the matter.
Ultimately, Mr Wang was directed at a meeting with
Mr Liu and representatives of
Solid Times, to remove the listing of the Property.
prefer the evidence of Mr Liu in relation to the marketing of the Property in
November 2021. I find that Mr Wang arranged for the
appointment of Mr Chan,
without the knowledge of Mr Liu and further that Mr Wang did not immediately
take the Property off the market
when instructed to do so by the other joint
venturers. I make these findings first, because I prefer Mr Liu’s evidence
evidence of Mr Wang and have doubts about the credibility and reliability
of Mr Wang’s evidence. Secondly, Mr Liu’s evidence
consistent with the admitted evidence about the drafting of the
Deterioration of the relationship between One Direction
and Mr Wang, the lodging of the caveats and requests for financial
information
relationship between Solid Times and One Direction on the one hand and Mr Wang
on the other hand deteriorated such that on 11
January 2022 and
2022 respectively (exhibits A25 and A26), One Direction and Solid Times lodged
caveats over the Property. Mr Liu gave evidence
that there were two reasons why
the caveat was lodged by One Direction. They were (1) the failure of Mr Wang to
provide financial
documents; and (2) the behaviour of Mr Wang when the Property
was listed for sale in November 2021. I have already dealt with the
relation to the listing. Mr Liu gave evidence that in January 2022, the project
was about to be completed but that because
Mr Wang refused to provide the
financial documents, they could not calculate the expenses of the project.
relation to the requests for financial documentation, Mr Liu gave evidence that
on multiple occasions during the construction
stage, he had requested, by
telephone, WeChat groups and in person, that Mr Wang provide the monthly
mortgage statements and loan
details. Mr Liu said that Mr Wang did not respond
to those requests or provide the documents. The We Chat message dated
January 2022 (exhibit A67 and A67A) records Mr Tian sending a message that
The main point is that the statement is already with you, David
[Mr Wang]. All the expenses are handled on your side. There are some
we haven’t dealt with ourselves-for example the payments that you have
made directly. I also feel that it is most
convenient and complete when you
organise it
”. Mr Liu said that Mr Wang refused to reply. A further
WeChat message from Mr Xuan dated 11 February 2022 states that “you
the statement, just update the numbers directly.” Mr Wang said that he was
not sure that the message was sent to him.
The content of the message and its
timing suggests that it was sent to Mr Wang.
cross-examination, Mr Wang said that he was not sure whether he sent any
financial information (other than a RAMS loan document
in order to purchase the
Property), including any loan statement to One Direction. In answer to a
question whether the RAMS loan
was interest only or capital and interest, Mr
Wang was unable to provide an answer.
was a meeting of the joint venture partners on 7 March 2022. Mr Wang
attended by audio or video. Mr Liu attended by video and
Tony [Mr Tian] from
Solid Times was present. At that meeting, Mr Wang was asked to provide updated
loan documents and he responded
no comment. Subsequent to that meeting, Solid
Times and One Direction retained lawyers and in about April or May 2022 sent a
letter to Mr Wang. No response was received to that letter. In
cross-examination, Mr Wang agreed that there was a meeting. The following
answers were
during the course of that meeting you were asked to provide loan
remember this actually happened.
in response you said “no comment”.
you did not provide any financial documents.
think, you know, I needed something that what you are using is too
were asked at the meeting to provide an updated loan document to calculate the
expense of the project; do you agree or disagree.
cannot remember.
you said in response to that “no comment” Do you agree or
cannot remember.
Wang agreed that he had received requests for financial information from Solid
Times and One Direction. Mr Wang said that Solid
Times had all of the
information relating to the renovation and extension works. In an affidavit
sworn by Mr Wang in these proceedings
on 9 November 2022, Mr Wang said “My
mortgage of this property is my private information. I have never disclosed to
and second applicant. In addition, I have not agreed to disclose those
information to them.” Ultimately, after some prevarication,
Mr Wang said
that he remembered that he did not give Solid Times and One Direction details of
his mortgage.
find that One Direction made requests of Mr Wang for the provision of financial
information relating to the loan documents in late
2021 and in early 2022 but
did not receive that information. I have come to this conclusion for the
following reasons: (1) that was
the evidence of Mr Liu which I accept; (2)
Mr Wang accepted in evidence that requests had been made for the provision
of the financial
documents and he could not produce any document which recorded
or evidenced their production; (3) in his affidavit of 9 November
Mr Wang accepted that he did not provide the information; (4) in evidence,
Mr Wang said that he could not recall whether or
not he provided the financial
documentation to One Direction and Solid Times; and (5) Mr Wang has maintained
the position that he
is the owner of the Property and that the mortgage is his
Use of the Property
Liu gave evidence that he does not have keys or a password to the security
system so as to be able to access the Property. He
said that the locks were
changed in about January 2022. He said that he last accessed the Property in
said that security cameras that were installed
during the course of construction showed Mr Wang at the Property with a female
Wang in about June-August 2022. Mr Liu said that in discussions
in the WeChat
group at the commencement of construction, the joint venturers agreed that they
would prefer that no-one lived at the
Property during the construction period or
after construction and before the Property was sold. Mr Liu said that he agreed
Wang did not need permission to enter the Property.
Carbone gave evidence that he attended outside the Property on 22 -25 and 28
November 2024. He was not able to enter the Property.
He said that he observed
furniture at the Property which looked as though a business was being run from
the Property but was not
consistent with someone living at the Property. He did
not observe anyone at the Property.
Wang gave evidence that the Property has always been vacant. He said that since
May 2022, he comes to the Property to undertake
some maintenance work and some
finishing work. He said that he also arranged the furniture and was responsible
for it. He agreed
that he was in the Property in the way depicted in the video
but says that only showed that he was inside the Property and that he
right to enter the Property because he had spent a lot of money purchasing it.
In cross-examination, he agreed that he had
a key to the Property and that he
used the Property. When asked how frequently he went to the Property, he said
“when I went
there or when property need some work, I would go there. You
know, actually visit there when necessary.” He said that the Property
furnished but he did not live there or conduct a business from the premises.
When a video was put to Mr Wang showing him present
at the Property with
some young women he replied “ I’m the owner and occupier of this
property, so is there a reason
I can’t go there”? He said that he
had held parties to promote the Property for sale. An ASIC extract (exhibit A
for We Wines Pty Ltd (Mr Wang’s company) records that Mr Wang, as
the officeholder of the company, resided at the Property.
make the following findings concerning use of the Property since the completion
of the renovation work in about May 2022. Mr Wang
has had the use of the
Property since that time although he does not live there. He uses the Property
for socialising from time to
time. He conducts some business activities there.
One Direction does not use the Property.
have come to these finding for the following reasons: (1) Mr Wang has accepted
that he uses the Property from time to time; (2)
the video evidence shows him
doing so; (3) Mr Liu does not have access to the Property and resides in
Queensland; (4) Mr Wang views
himself as the owner of the Property and therefore
is able to do what he likes with the Property; (5) Mr Wang described in the ASIC
extract for We Wines Pty Ltd that he lived at the Property; (6)
Mr Carbone’s observations are consistent with the Property
for business purposes.
Settlement between Mr Wang and Solid
19 May 2024 (exhibit A5), Mr Wang entered into a Deed of Release with Solid
Times pursuant to which Mr Wang agreed to pay the
sum of $740,000 to Solid Times
in full and final settlement of the Dispute (which was defined as the dispute
relating to the Property,
the right title and interest over the Property and the
joint venture agreement). The parties agreed to release each other from all
claims in relation to the Property. Solid Times agreed to withdraw its caveat
over the Property and to its claim in these proceedings
being dismissed. I
accept the evidence of Mr Wang that the $740,000 has been paid to Solid
effect of the Deed of Release is that Solid Times has relinquished its claim
that it has an interest in the Property in equity.
What the Deed does not do is
specify how any equitable interest that Solid Times held should be dealt with or
how the payments that
it had made under the JVA should be
Value of the Property
Dunsford performed a kerbside appraisal of the Property. This is not a case
which required a determination of the precise value
of the Property. What was
important was ascertaining whether there was likely to be a surplus on the sale
of the Property as that
might have relevance to the exercise of the
Court’s discretion when determining what orders should be made. Mr
Dunsford assessed
the value of the Property in the sum of $4,050,000 (exhibit
A7). He said that he had undertaken all the normal checks and investigations
that he would perform when conducting a more comprehensive valuation. Mr
Dunsford said that he relied on photographs and was able
to make a reasonably
confident assumption as to the quality of the finishes and building work.
cross-examination, Mr Wang accepted the sum of $4,050,000 as an amount for which
the Property might be sold.
the circumstances of this case, it is not necessary to determine the precise
value of the Property. I am satisfied that the sale
of the Property will render
a surplus after the payment of the purchase price, the costs of the renovation
and the payment of the
mortgage and other costs associated with the holding of
the Property. I consider that it is likely that the sale price for the Property
will be around $4,000,000.
Condition of the Property
Wang gave evidence about the condition of the Property. He said that there were
some cracks in the walls and some scratches and
stains and some water damage. He
said that the biggest issue was water leaking. On about 5 May 2022, a statement
of compliance was
sent to the City of Adelaide. In that statement, Solid Times
stated that it had performed the building work in accordance with the
contractual documents. Mr Wang certified that the building work was consistent
with the development approval. The Council sent an
email in which it stated that
all on-going non-compliance had been made good. The Council had on 18 November
2021 carried an inspection
and by letter dated 6 December 2021 raised heritage
issues and some other issues of a minor nature (exhibit A16). Mr Wang
a contract to sell the Property (with no counterparty) in November 2024
in which the purchase price was specified as $4,050,000.
As there was no
counterparty to that contract, that document has no legal status. Presumably,
Mr Wang signed the document to demonstrate
that he was willing to sell the
Property for that sum. He gave evidence that he would sell for that amount.
There was no evidence
find that any defects were relatively minor and the condition of the Property
did not in any way render it incapable of being sold
or that the sale price will
not yield a surplus. I make these findings for the following reasons: (1) the
defects described by Mr
Wang were relatively minor. The photographs tendered by
Mr Wang (exhibit R74) support that conclusion; (2) Mr Wang believed that
the Property could sell for $4,050,000 and had signed a contract (without a
counterparty) to that effect; (3) Mr Wang had provided
the certificate in May
2022 that the building work had been completed; (4) the Council had approved the
works at about that time
following an inspection by the Council in November
2021; (5) there was no evidence as to the cost of any rectification work or that
the defects would affect the price that might be obtained upon the sale of the
Wang submits that One Direction is liable for any defects in the building work.
There is no basis in law or fact for that submission.
The building contract was,
on my finding, part of the joint venture.
Court orders
30 November 2022, the Court made an order that Mr Wang
all documents relating to accounts and receipts of the expenditure of the joint
venture, all documents relating to monies
borrowed by him in respect of the
joint venture and all documents relating to the re-financing of the loan and the
current loan statement
in respect of amounts owed and secured by the Property.
In response to that order, on 28 December 2022, Mr Wang provided 4 emails
solicitors of Solid Times and One Direction (exhibit A90). Mr Wang exercised his
privilege against self-incrimination during
cross-examination in these
proceedings in refusing to answer questions about his compliance with that
examination of that material produced by Mr Wang on 28 December 2022
demonstrates that Mr Wang had not provided any loan statement
of ANZ (the
current mortgagee) or all documents relating to the payment of loan amounts or
the re-financing.
parties attended a mediation on 13 June 2023 (see exhibits A81 and A82). The
Heads of Agreement entered into at the mediation
(exhibit A81) provided that by
30 June 2023 the parties appoint an independent agent. The parties were unable
to agree on the appointment
of an agent and on 9 November 2023, the Court
ordered that Mr Andrew Fox of Fox Real Estate be appointed as the agent. Mr Wang
in cross-examination that he did not sign the agreement to appoint Mr Fox
as the agent until the Court ordered him to do so on 6
February 2024. It is also
clear from the communications between Mr Fox and Mr Wang (exhibit A84) that, at
the very least, Mr Wang
was uncooperative in the sale process. Mr Wang
threatened Mr Fox with legal proceedings (exhibit A86).
discussed previously, the JVA was dated 4 May 2018. An addendum to the JVA had
the effect of replacing Mr Liu as one of the joint
venturers with
One Direction. In the Recitals, the JVA referred to Mr Wang having acquired
an estate in fee simple in the land at
77 Mackinnon Avenue, North Adelaide
(which was defined in the agreement as the land) at an unspecified time prior to
the entry into
of the JVA. That was not correct. I accept One Direction’s
submission that although recitals are part of the agreement, they
operative terms
and a mistake or
misdescription in the recitals does not provide a ground to set aside an
In any event, there was
no plea or contention by Mr Wang that the agreement should be set aside on this
ground. The JVA also defines
the commencement date as 15 September 2017 (being
the date when the contract was entered into to purchase the Property) and
that the joint venture commences on that date. That date obviously
pre-dates the involvement of Mr Wang and the entry into of the
However, the commencement date is not material to the rights and obligations of
the parties under the JVA. There is no evidence
to support a finding, as Mr Wang
contends, that, what he describes as the “backdating, constituted a
deliberate attempt by
Mr Liu to obtain an advantage”.
project is referred to in the Recitals and in the Definitions of the JVA in
virtually identical terms.
following are the critical terms of the
Definitions
“acquisition finance” means the borrowings undertaken by the
first party [Mr Wang] for the acquisition of the land.
“commencement date” means the 15
day of September
‘the joint venture” means the joint venture between the parties
established pursuant to clause 2 hereof [clause 2 referred
to the joint venture
to carrying on the project].
“joint venture assets” at any time means the land and all
property of every kind and nature whatsoever owned or acquired
by or on behalf
of the parties for the purpose of the joint venture and owned by the parties at
“the project’ means doing the extension and renovation works on
the existing house of the land and the sale of the land
and all of the
activities implementing or related to the affairs of the joint venture.
Joint Venture
[2.1] The parties hereby formally agree to engage in an unincorporated joint
venture for the purposes of carrying out of the project.
[2.2] The respective interests of the parties are as follows:
[One Direction]
Solid Times
[2.3] The parties confirm, with respect to the joint venture assets, that
they beneficially own those as tenants in common in accordance
respective interests.
[2.4] Each party hereby commits its interest to the joint venture and agrees
to do all things necessary to enable the project to be
carried out.
Term and Termination
[3.1]The joint venture shall commence on the commencement date [which was
defined as 15 September 2017] and terminate on the date
that the land or the
balance remaining is sold.
[3.2] On the termination of the joint venture the net proceeds thereof shall
be divided between the parties in the ration [sic] as
set out in cluse [sic] 2.2
[4.5(a)] The parties shall contribute all moneys required to meet the
expenses of the project (including, and without limiting the
generality of the
foregoing, the acquisition finance) equally and promptly when the same fall due.
Determination of the claim of One Direction
The proper construction of the Joint Venture Agreement and whether it
includes the purchase of the land
Wang has contended that the JVA is limited to the extension and renovation of
the Property and does not include the land itself.
He makes that contention
based on the fact that he is the sole owner of the Property, that the JVA
records (wrongly) that he had,
at the date of the JVA, acquired the Property and
that the JVA does not make any reference to the joint venturers acquiring the
The effect of that contention is that the terms of the JVA are
task of construing a commercial agreement is to be undertaken by determining
what a reasonable business person would have understood
by the words of that
The analysis is an
objective one.
That task requires
consideration of the language used by the parties, the circumstances addressed
by the contract and the commercial
purposes or objects to be secured by the
In the usual case, that
task can be undertaken by reference to matters internal to the contract. In
Mount Bruce Mining Pty Ltd v Wright Prospecting Pty Ltd,
Nettle and Gordon JJ
In determining
the meaning of the terms of a commercial contract, it is necessary to ask what a
reasonable businessperson would have
understood those terms to mean. That
enquiry will require consideration of the language used by the parties in the
contract, the
circumstances addressed by the contract and the commercial purpose
or objects to be secured by the contract.
Ordinarily, this process of construction is possible by reference to the
contract alone. Indeed, if an expression in a contract is
unambiguous or
susceptible of only one meaning, evidence of surrounding circumstances (events,
circumstances and things external
to the contract) cannot be adduced to
contradict its plain meaning.
However, sometimes, recourse to events, circumstances and things external to
the contract is necessary. It may be necessary in identifying
the commercial
purpose or objects of the contract where that task is facilitated by an
understanding "of the genesis of the transaction,
the background, the context
[and] the market in which the parties are operating". It may be necessary in
determining the proper construction
where there is a constructional choice. The
question whether events, circumstances and things external to the contract may
be resorted
to, in order to identify the existence of a constructional choice,
does not arise in these appeals.
Each of the events, circumstances and things external to the contract to
which recourse may be had is objective. What may be referred
to are events,
circumstances and things external to the contract which are known to the parties
or which assist in identifying the
purpose or object of the transaction, which
may include its history, background and context and the market in which the
parties were
operating. What is inadmissible is evidence of the parties'
statements and actions reflecting their actual intentions and expectations.
Other principles are relevant in the construction of commercial contracts.
Unless a contrary intention is indicated in the contract,
a court is entitled to
approach the task of giving a commercial contract an interpretation on the
assumption "that the parties ...
intended to produce a commercial result. Put
another way, a commercial contract should be construed so as to avoid it "making
nonsense or working commercial inconvenience.
(citation omitted)
where a term of a contract is capable of more than one meaning , the Court will
also look to the surrounding circumstances.
Rinehart v Hancock
Prospecting Pty Ltd; Rinehart v
Gageler, Nettle and Gordon JJ held:
As the Full Court concluded:
"[c]ontext will almost always tell one more about the objectively intended reach
of such phrases than
textual comparison of words of a general relational
character". There may be cases which have to be resolved largely, if not
by reference to the language of the arbitral clause in question. But
this is not such a case. The background to and the purposes
of the Deeds, as
reflected in their terms, point clearly to arbitral clauses of wide coverage
with respect to what was to be the
subject of confidential processes of dispute
resolution.
It is well established that a commercial contract should be construed by
reference to the language used by the parties, the surrounding
circumstances,
and the purposes and objects to be secured by the contract. It could not have
been understood by the parties to these
Deeds that any challenge to the efficacy
of the Deeds was to be determined in the public spotlight. Especially is this so
with respect
to the Hope Downs
(citations omitted)
authority suggests that the Court can look to the surrounding circumstances to
determine whether the terms of the contract
are susceptible to more than one
meaning. Thus, in
Mount Bruce Mining Pty Ltd v Wright Prospecting Pty
the Court said that
what Mason J in
Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd v State Rail Authority of New
South Wales
did not say was how the ambiguity in the construction of a term
in a contract might be identified. Leeming JA in
Cherry v Steele
(and cited with
approval by Steward J in the
Commissioner of Taxation v The Trustee for the
Micheal Hayes Family Trust
(Hayes Family
the statements of Mason J were directed as to how the ambiguity might be
resolved, rather than how it was identified. Leeming
Cherry v Steele
observed that the
approach taken by the High Court in
Tatts Group
Simic v New
South Wales Land and Housing
Corporation
suggested that
ambiguity was a conclusion rather than a pre-condition of the admissibility of
surrounding circumstances. In other
words, evidence of surrounding circumstances
could be admitted to determine if there was any ambiguity. More recently in
Elisha v Vision Australia
Gageler CJ, Gordon,
Edelman, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ held that the meaning of the contract is to
be determined by what a reasonable
person would have understood the terms to
mean. This requires consideration of the common intention of the parties by
reference to
the object and text of the provisions as well as the surrounding
circumstances. The common intention is to be understood as referring
reasonable person would have understood by the language in which the parties
have expressed their agreement.
the present case, the terms of the JVA and its commercial purpose unequivocally
establish that the joint venture included the
purchase of the land and was not
limited to the extension and renovation of the existing dwelling. The clauses of
the JVA that mandate
that conclusion are: (1) the definition of joint venture
assets to include any land or property owned or acquired for the purposes
joint venture. The Property is such land. The joint venture cannot be carried
out without the use of the land; (2) the respective
interests of the parties are
the specified percentages. That can only mean the percentage of the Property as
developed: (3) the parties
confirmed in the JVA that with respect to the joint
venture assets, they beneficially held those interests as tenants in common in
accordance with their respective interests. That clause therefore provides that
One Direction holds a 25% interest in the Property;
(4) on termination of the
joint venture, the net proceeds were to be divided between the parties according
to their respective interests.
The joint venture was terminated on the sale of
the Property. The parties were therefore entitled to a percentage of the
of the sale of the land, as developed. There could be no entitlement to
any proceeds if the land was excluded; (5) the parties were
required to
contribute all moneys to meet the expenses of the project including the
acquisition finance which was defined as the
borrowings undertaken by Mr Wang
for the acquisition of the land. It would make no commercial sense if the
parties were required
to meet the acquisition costs of the land but received no
interest in the land.
purpose of the joint venture would wholly fail if the land itself was not part
of the joint venture. In such an event, Solid
Times and One Direction would have
no interest in the joint venture that would be capable of realisation. There
would be no commercial
reason why, in those circumstances, Solid Times and
One Direction would contribute to the costs of the acquisition, renovation
extension of the existing house on the Property.
if the JVA was susceptible to more than one meaning, there is nothing in the
surrounding circumstances that points to a different
construction nor did
Mr Wang identify or make any submissions about such matters.
the reasons that have been identified, I find that the land was part of the
joint venture and JVA.
Has the Joint Venture Agreement failed
such that One Direction is entitled to a declaration that Mr Wang holds the
Property as a constructive
Direction has sought a declaration that Mr Wang holds the Property as a
constructive trustee for One Direction and Mr Wang equally
or in such other
proportions as the Court determines. The claim for the constructive trust is
based on the failure of the joint venture.
One Direction claims that the object
of the joint venture was to acquire the Property, renovate and extend the
existing house on
the Property and then sell the Property and distribute the
proceeds to the joint venture parties. One Direction contends that the
venture has failed because Mr Wang has failed to comply with requests and
court orders to provide financial information and
documentation about the joint
venture, has used the Property, and has asserted that he is entitled to the
legal and beneficial ownership
of the Property. One Direction submits that
because the terms of the JVA did not provide for these circumstances, the
relating to the imposition of a constructive trust arise.
Courts have shown a willingness to impose a constructive trust requiring the
legal owner of the land to hold land on trust for
another in circumstances where
the other person has made contributions to the acquisition, maintenance or
renovation of property
pursuant to a joint endeavour or relationship which has
failed in circumstances where blame cannot be attached to either party.
the High Court
found that the parties held their respective legal interests in common upon
trust for each other, to repay each his
or her respective contributions to the
venture. Deane J (Mason J agreeing), held that it was appropriate to impose a
constructive
trust in the circumstances of that case to give effect to the
general equitable principle which restores to a party contributions
which he or
she made to a joint endeavour which fails when the contributions have been made
in circumstances in which it was intended
that the other party should enjoy
them. Deane J held that where there are contractual provisions which deal with
the consequences
of the failure of a joint venture or endeavour, they will
ordinarily apply. Deane J went on to say where there are not applicable
contractual provisions or the applicable provisions were not framed to meet the
contingency of the premature failure of the joint
venture, other rules
(including the imposition of a constructive trust) may
underlying basis of the constructive trust is founded on unconscionable conduct.
As Deane J held in
Muschinski v
of the traditional doctrines of equity, it operates on legal entitlement to
prevent a person from asserting or exercising
a legal right in circumstances
where the particular assertion or exercise of it would constitute unconscionable
conduct ... the principle
operates in a case where the substratum of a joint
relationship or endeavour is removed without attributable blame and where the
benefit of the money or other property contributed by one party on that basis
and for the purpose of the relationship or endeavour
would otherwise be enjoyed
by the other party in circumstances in which it was not specifically intended or
specifically provided
that that other party should so enjoy it. The content of
the principle is that in such a case equity would not permit that other
assert or retain the benefit of the relevant property to the extent that it
would be unconscionable for him so to do.
Muschinski v Dodds
held that the collapse of the joint venture with the consequent preclusion of
the attainment of the commercial objectives
permitted the imposition of the
constructive trust.
cases have applied the statement of principle set out in
Mushinski v
Baumgartner v
Baumgartner
, Mason CJ,
Wilson and Deane JJ held that following the breakdown of the relationship
between the parties, the assertion by one party
that the funds were his property
beneficially to the exclusion of any interest of the other party, amounted to
unconscionable conduct
which attracts the intervention of equity and the
imposition of a constructive trust at the suit of the respondent.
asserted unconscionability in this case is similar to the unconscionability that
was found in
John Nelson Developments Pty Ltd v Focus National Developments
(John Nelson). In that case, Ward J held:
There is no
dispute that Focus/Mr Adamo have made substantial contributions to a joint
venture, the consideration for which has wholly
failed. They anticipated (and
bargained for) a benefit in terms of a share of the proceeds of sale of the land
which was to be developed
(and potentially in any profit from construction
costs). The sale of the property in 2007 made such a benefit wholly
unobtainable.
It seems to me unconscionable for JND to seek to retain the whole
of the contributions made by Focus to the project in circumstances
otherwise retains the whole of the proceeds of sale of the land.
doctrine of a joint endeavour constructive trust is not limited to cases
involving a personal relationship and may extend to
a commercial joint
It will apply to an
enterprise where there is no express or implied agreement that governs the
Ward J held that a
joint venture failed because the joint venture agreement, did not, on its proper
construction, make provision
for the circumstances that had happened in that
case. Parker J in
Makaritis v Makaritis (No
(Makaritis No 2) made a
similar statement when he held that the whole point of the failed joint
endeavour doctrine was that it covered
a situation which the parties have not
addressed namely the failure of the endeavour which would leave one party with
an unexpected
Apples Childcare Centre Pty Ltd v MMC Pacific International Pty
Osborne J held
that because the basis of the imposition of the constructive trust was the
failure of the joint venture without attributable
fault on the part of the party
advancing the claim, it would be unconscionable for the recipient party to
retain the benefit of the
contributions because that could not have been
intended. Osborne J went on to hold that it was the retention of the benefit in
circumstances
which were not intended or provided
That is what has occurred
in the present case.
Shepherd v Doolan,
Court referred to the following statement from Campbell J in
West v Mead
as to what an applicant
must establish for the Court to make an order imposing a constructive
... a plaintiff needs to establish there is indeed a joint
endeavour between the parties, in which expenditure is shared for the common
benefit. It is also necessary to identify what the scope of that joint endeavour
is. ... Further, for any couple, the scope of the
joint endeavour they are
engaged in might change from time to time. If, within the scope of a joint
endeavour ...an asset is acquired,
as a result of contributions both parties
have made, and for a purpose of the ongoing joint endeavour of the parties, this
rise to the presumption that the beneficial interest ought be shared
equally. That presumption can be displaced if one party is able
to show that the
contributions, both financial and non-financial, to that asset should be
regarded as unequal.
the matters that One Direction must establish
(1) The formation of a joint endeavour between the parties;
(2) The acquisition of property pursuant to that joint endeavour; and
(3) The premature termination (or failure) of the joint endeavour leaving one
party with a legal interest which that party was not
intended to enjoy
beneficially in those circumstances.
the present case, there is no doubt that a joint endeavour was formed between
Solid Times, One Direction and Mr Wang as evidenced
by the terms of the JVA.
There has been the acquisition of property. I have found that the joint venture
included the Property and
the Property was part of the joint venture assets. The
first two matters have been established.
Direction must also establish that there has been a failure of the joint venture
which has left Mr Wang with the sole legal interest
in the Property which he was
not intended to enjoy beneficially.
has been a premature termination or failure of the joint venture. The joint
venture requires the purchase of the Property,
the renovation and extension
works, the sale of the Property and the distribution to the parties according to
the respective interests
specified in the JVA. There has been a purchase of the
Property and an undertaking of renovation and extension work but there has
no sale of the Property or distribution of the proceeds of sale.
are a number of matters relied upon by One Direction in support of its
contention that the joint venture has failed. They are:
(1) The continued failure of Mr Wang to respond to requests for financial
documents and his position that he was not obliged to provide
that documentation
because he was the owner of the Property;
(2) Mr Wang’s lack of co-operation in providing financial records relating
to the joint venture;
(3) Mr Wang’s discharge of the RAMS mortgage and taking out a new mortgage
with ANZ without the knowledge or consent of Solid
Times or One Direction;
(4) Mr Wang’s lack of co-operation in relation to the listing of the
Property for sale including with Mr Fox;
(5) The fact that the Property has not been sold and there is no mechanism,
without a Court order, that will require Mr Wang to sell
the Property and
distribute funds according to the terms of the JVA;
(6) Mr Wang’s failure to comply with the Court orders made on
November 2022 concerning the provision of documents;
(7) Mr Wang’s use of the Property;
(8) Mr Wang’s assertions that he is entitled to the legal and beneficial
ownership of the Property and that the mortgage account
is his personal
(9) Mr Wang’s position that One Direction is not entitled to repayment of
all of its contributions and is not entitled to any
share of the surplus on the
sale of the Property.
taken individually, not all of these matters would be sufficient to form a
conclusion that the joint venture had failed. Taken
collectively, I am satisfied
that a finding should be made to that effect. The joint venture reached a
certain point (the renovation
and extension of the existing house on the
Property have been completed) but has not continued past that stage. Mr Wang has
an intention not to proceed with the sale of the Property and the
distribution of the surplus according to the terms of the JVA.
Mr Wang has
asserted that he is the sole legal and beneficial owner of the Property, which
is inconsistent with the continued operation
of the Property. The joint venture
has failed because it, and the terms of the JVA, cannot be carried out. This
failure has continued
over a number of years. Without the intervention of the
Court, Mr Wang will continue to retain and use the Property as if he were
sole beneficial owner. It was not intended that Mr Wang would enjoy the
Property beneficially.
therefore find that the joint endeavour has failed.
Are there any
reasons as to why a constructive trust should not be imposed?
breakdown of the joint endeavour must occur without attributable fault on either
side. The relevant fault must be the fault of
Makaritis v
Makaritis (No 2),
observed that there were few cases, if any, where relief has been refused
because the breakdown in the relationship was the
fault of the
As Parker J held in
Makartitis (No 2)
, once the relationship has broken down, it is hard to
justify allowing the other party to retain any windfall no matter how badly
applicant may have behaved unless that behaviour in some way makes the recovery
of the applicant’s contribution unconscionable.
reached a similar
conclusion when she held that the question whether a joint endeavour has come to
an end as a result of attributable
blame is treated
as part of the question whether it is unconscionable
for the other party in those circumstances to retain the benefits of the joint
was no evidence that there was any conduct on the part of One Direction
that led to the breakdown of the joint venture. It
was the actions and conduct
of Mr Wang that led to the breakdown. There was no conduct on the part of One
Direction that would make
unconscionable the recovery of its contribution and
share of the surplus, on the sale of the Property.
Wang has contended that One Direction should be denied any form of equitable
relief, including a declaration that he holds the
Property on a constructive
trust, because One Direction does not come to the Court with clean hands. He
contends that the lack of
clean hands arises from the circumstances in which the
Property was acquired from the previous owner (the vendor). It is not disputed
that Mr Liu acted as the agent of the vendor when that Property was acquired by
Mr Wang. The contract was originally between the
vendor and Solid Times
and/or nominee. Mr Wang was nominated as the purchaser. It is also not disputed
that by the time of settlement
Mr Liu had an interest in the JVA and was
entitled to 25% of the net sale proceeds under the JVA. At the time that the
contract was
entered into, Mr Liu had an interest in the Property by way of the
informal joint venture agreement. At that time, it was not intended
that Mr Tian
or Solid Times would be the sole beneficial owner of the Property.
these circumstances, Mr Liu and later One Direction had an interest in the
Property. Mr Wang contends that Mr Liu contravened
s 24G of the
Land Agents
and Business Agents (Sale and Conveyancing) Act 1984
(SA) and therefore does
not come to the Court with clean hands. Section 24G provides:
agent who is authorised by a person (the "vendor") to sell land or a business
must not obtain, or be in any way concerned in obtaining,
a beneficial interest
in the land or business.
Maximum penalty:
in the case of an
—$100 000 or imprisonment for 2 years;
in any other case—$50 000 or imprisonment for 1 year.
(8) The court by which a person is convicted of an offence against this
section may order the person to pay to the
profit that the person has made, or is, in the opinion of the court, likely to
make, from a dealing with the land or business
to which the offence relates.
(9) If an agent obtains a beneficial interest in land or a business that the
agent is authorised to sell, the agent must not demand,
receive or retain
commission or expenses in respect of the sale or purchase of the land or
business unless—
(a) the Commissioner has approved the agent obtaining the benefit under
subsection (5); and
(b) the Commissioner has, when giving that approval, also approved the
receipt of the commission or expenses.
Maximum penalty:
in the case of an
in any other case—$10 000.
Maximum penalty:
(a) in the case of an
—$100 000 or imprisonment for 2 years;
(b) in any other case—$50 000 or imprisonment for 1 year.
clean hands defence is based on the premise that a person who comes to equity
must come with clean hands. There are a number
of reasons why Mr Wang is
unable to make out this defence.
the defence has not been pleaded. The obligation is on the part of a respondent
to plead a specific defence. Under UCR 67.2(a),
a respondent must set out the
affirmative facts relied upon to establish their defence. Mr Wang has not done
so in the present case.
Further, under UCR 67.2(c), a party must give fair
notice of the party’s case to the opposing party so as to avoid the
party being taken by surprise at or in preparation for trial. Mr Wang
has not complied with that requirement.
there is no evidence that One Direction has come to the Court with a lack of
clean hands. Even if it is accepted that One
Direction or Mr Liu has contravened
Land Agents and Business Agents (Sale and Conveyancing) Act
not mean that he has come to equity with a lack of clean hands. There was no
evidence concerning what knowledge the vendor
of the Property had about Mr Liu
or One Direction’s interest in the Property. The vendor was not called to
give evidence and
Mr Liu was not cross-examined on this topic.
to establish a defence of unclean hands, the impropriety on the part of the
applicant must display an immediate and necessary
relationship to the equity
that is the
applicant’s misconduct must be directly related to the respondent’s
wrongful actions. In this case, the equity
sued for is a constructive trust. The
applicant’s earlier conduct does not relate to the joint venture and its
breakdown or
the imposition of a constructive trust. The earlier conduct on the
part of the applicant does not in any way relate to Mr Wang.
Wang also appears to contend that the contravention of the
Land Agents and
Business Agents (Sale and Conveyancing) Act
rendered the joint venture void
or Mr Liu’s or One Direction’s interest in the joint venture
do not consider that the defence of illegality is made out. I have come to this
conclusion for four reasons. First, Mr Wang has
not pleaded any defence of
illegality. A party seeking to rely on this defence is required to
“clearly, specifically, and with
detailed particulars” plead the
defence of illegality.
Mr Wang has not done so.
Land Agents and Business Agents (Sale and Conveyancing) Act
conduct unlawful. It does not render, expressly or by implication, any contract
connected with that conduct unlawful. The
courts do not generally hold a statute
intends to interfere with the rights and remedies conferred by
Sangster J in
S Chappel Pty Ltd v DK Pett Pty Ltd
held that the court
should be very slow to reach this conclusion. This is especially so when a loss
would be caused to an innocent
person, the vendors of the
Yango Pastoral
Company Pty Ltd v First Chicago Australia Pty
Mason J (as he then
was) held that where Parliament has provided a penalty, that is the measure of
the deterrent which it intends
to operate in respect of non-compliance with the
Act and it is not for the court to hold that further consequences should
it does not follow that because the contract renders it an offence for one party
to enter into a contract, that the contract
unenforceable.
The vendors of
the Property have not engaged in any conduct that would justify a finding that
the contract was unenforceable.
even if the court concluded that a contractual provision was unenforceable, the
court would not grant relief to Mr Wang
because that provision was
unenforceable.
One Direction
does not seek any relief in respect of the contract whereby the Property was
purchased from the vendors.
have already addressed the contention of Mr Wang about the defects which he
alleges exist in the Property. I have found that any
defects are minor and will
not prevent the sale of the Property. Accordingly, they do not affect the order
for the imposition of
a constructive trust or the terms of that trust.
follows that One Direction is entitled to a declaration that Mr Wang holds the
Property on constructive trust for himself and
One Direction (Solid Times’
interest having been extinguished by reason of the Deed of Settlement). The
imposition of the constructive
trust is not unfair or disproportionate as it is
necessary for One Direction to recover its contributions and share in the
on the sale of the Property.
Terms of the Constructive
next issue that arises are the terms of the constructive trust. Three matters
require determination. First, as One Direction
raised in its opening, should the
terms of the constructive trust include a two-step process whereby contributions
are repaid and
the surplus then distributed or alternatively a one-step process
where the net proceeds of sale are simply distributed between the
Secondly, do the terms include the distribution of any surplus beyond the
contributions that have been made by One Direction
or as Mr Wang contends, is he
intitled to the entire surplus. Thirdly, should the surplus be distributed
equally between One Direction
and Mr Wang or in some other way.
to the first matter, I consider
that the terms of
the constructive trust require the repayment of contributions and then the
distribution of the surplus. Such an
order accords with the type of order made
Baumgartner v
Baumgartner
order made by Parker J in
Woods v McKinlay (No
The unconscionability
which equity seeks to address is the denial of the interest of the person who is
not the legal owner but it
does so by taking into account the contributions made
by the parties.
to the second and third matters, there are a number of different ways that the
surplus on the sale of the Property could be distributed.
First, as Mr Wang
contends, the contributions made by the respective parties could be repaid
(either wholly or in part) and he receive
the entire surplus. Secondly, as One
Direction contends, the contributions could be repaid and the surplus
distributed equally between
Mr Wang and One Direction (on the basis that equity
favours equality). Thirdly, the contributions could be repaid and the surplus
distributed equally according to the ratios set out in the JVA (i.e. One
Direction receive 25%). A subsidiary question that arises
if that approach is
followed, is how the interest of Solid Times should be accounted for. Fourthly,
the contributions could be repaid
and the surplus distributed according to the
ratios of the respective contributions of the parties. For example, if one party
contributed
60% of the expenses, they would be entitled to 60% of the surplus.
Mushinski v Dodds
, the order that was made was that a constructive trust
was declared which provided for the sale of the property in question, the
repayment of the parties’ respective contributions (and of any outstanding
debt) and the division of any residue in equal
Mason CJ, Wilson and
Deane JJ held:
Equity favours equality and, in circumstances where
the parties have lived together for years and have pooled their resources and
their efforts to create a joint home, there is much to be said for the view that
they should share the beneficial ownership equally
as tenants in common, subject
to adjustment to avoid any injustice which would result if account were not
taken of the disparity
between the worth of their individual contributions
either financially or in kind.
may be some cases where an adjustment is required to avoid an injustice. Thus,
Baumgartner v
Baumgartner
The court should, where possible, strive to give effect to the
notion of practical equality, rather than pursue complicated factual
which will result in relatively insignificant differences in contributions and
consequential beneficial interest. We do
not think, however, that the difference
in the present case can be regarded as relatively insignificant.
Woods v McKinlay (No 2),
Parker J referred to a decision in
where Campbell J noted
Baumgartner
approach reflected the principle that it was
generally just for the parties’ share of jointly acquired assets to
reflect the
contributions made to the purchase price rather than for the
property to be divided into equal shares which would reflect the principle
equity is equality. In
NSW Trustee and Guardian v
the Court also
rejected an equal division of the proceeds where the parties’
contributions to the joint endeavour had not been
de facto cases, such as
Mushinski v Dodds
Baumgartner v
Baumgartner
, there may be a powerful reason why equity would favour
equality. In cases of a common intention constructive trust, the quantum
beneficial interest in the property will be that which the parties agreed upon
or intended.
That inquiry is
based on their actual intention, not their presumed
If the actual
intention cannot be ascertained, it was held that the starting point is then the
maxim equity favours equality but
that principle can and should be displaced
where the parties have made unequal
contributions.
the present case, I reject the first means of distribution, proposed by
Mr Wang, that some contributions be returned to One Direction
One Direction not participate in the surplus. Such a distribution of the
proceeds of the joint venture, ignores that the
money was contributed by Solid
Times and One Direction as part of a joint venture. There was no intention
on the part of One Direction
that its entitlement would be limited to a
return of its contributions. Such a distribution would render an injustice to
One Direction
and a windfall to Mr Wang. One Direction would bear a substantial
portion of the risk with no prospect of any advantage. Mr Wang
would benefit
from the arrangement which would make no commercial sense from the perspective
of One Direction. No principle of equity
would favour such a distribution.
second means of distribution, propounded by One Direction, was that the
contributions be repaid and that the surplus be distributed
equally between the
parties. That proposal was based on the principle to which reference has been
made that equity favours equality.
In the circumstances of the present case, I
consider that such a distribution would be unjust. It would provide a benefit to
Direction of one half of the interest that had been held by
Solid Times (Solid Times previously holding a 50% interest in the
of the joint venture including the proceeds of sale). One Direction did
not in any way acquire or contribute to the acquisition of
the interest of
Solid Times (or the extinguishment of that interest). Mr Wang paid $740,000
to settle the claim made by Solid Times.
The Deed of Settlement did not
specify what happens to the interest of Solid Times once settlement was
affected but it can be presumed
that Mr Wang was acquiring any interest that had
been held by Solid Times. Certainly, there was no intention on the part of Mr
and Solid Times that the interest of One Direction would increase as a
result of the settlement. In these circumstances, I consider
that the correct
approach is to treat the payment of the $740,000 as a payment between Solid
Times and Mr Wang pursuant to which
Mr Wang acquired the interest of Solid Times
under the JVA (to be repaid its contributions and share in the surplus) and not
as a contribution to the joint venture by Mr Wang.
the basis of imposition of a constructive trust is the unconscionability of Mr
Wang, as the legal owner of the Property,
asserting an entitlement to the whole
of the beneficial interest in the Property, while denying the entitlement of One
The unconscionability involves the denial of the 25% interest that
One Direction held under the JVA and the denial of the repayment
contributions made by One Direction. There is no unconscionability in denying
that One Direction was entitled to a 50% interest
in the Property.
further, the parties had an actual intention, expressed in the JVA, as to how
the funds obtained upon the sale of the Property
should be distributed. The
actual intention was that One Direction would receive 25% of the net proceeds.
One Direction has done nothing, nor contributed any
further money, that would provide any basis for the increase of that proportion.
Mr Wang provided the money to Solid Times in settlement of the claim by that
third possible means of distribution of the net proceeds upon the sale of the
Property, is that One Direction receive 25% of
the net proceeds, being the
proportion that is set out in the JVA as its entitlement. Such a distribution
accords with the proportion
that is set out in the JVA. It accords with the
common intention of the parties as expressed in that agreement. There is nothing
in conscience, that justifies One Direction receiving an additional proportion
based on the settlement between Mr Wang and Solid
Times. I consider that the
terms of the constructive trust should reflect that One Direction receive 25% of
the net proceeds of sale.
way of completeness, a fourth possible means of distribution of the net proceeds
of sale is that the proceeds be divided to reflect
the contributions made by the
parties. That is, the surplus be distributed according to the same ratio as the
contributions made
by the parties. In the present case, on the available
evidence, Solid Times has contributed 43.77% of the contributions, One Direction
21.88% and Mr Wang 34.35%.
distribution of the surplus according to the ratio of contributions by the joint
venture partners was the approach taken by Campbell
also considered, but rejected, by Kunc J in
as a possible means
of distribution. Kunc J rejected the approach,
, because (a)
the parties had not turned their mind as to how the proceeds should be
distributed; and (b) the respondents in that
case had not fulfilled their side
of the bargain and it would be unjust for the respondent to be entitled to a
greater share of the
surplus because of the accident of their contributions
exceeding the contributions of the applicant.
do not consider that a division based on the proportion of contributions should
be made in the present case. Such a division ignores
the terms of the JVA. It
further ignores the circumstances in which One Direction and Solid Times ceased
making mortgage payments
in January 2022, namely the failure of Mr Wang to
provide them with financial documentation and co-operate in the sale of the
Mr Wang also had the exclusive use of the Property since January 2022.
In accordance with the reasoning of Kunc J in
it is an accident
that the contributions of Mr Wang have exceeded the contributions of
One Direction and that occurred because of
the breaches of the JVA by Mr
Wang. Further, the additional contributions made by Mr Wang occurred after the
completion of the renovation
and extension work and there is no suggestion that
it was anything beyond the passage of time subsequent to the completion of the
work that has led to the increased value.
Timing of the
constructive trust
Muschiniski v Dodds
, Deane J imposed a constructive trust at
He recognised that,
although remedial in nature, the constructive trust reflected rights and
obligations which were in existence
when the circumstances which gave rise to
them occurred.
Makaritis v Makaritis (No
followed that
approach and ordered that a declaration be made on final judgment but said that
the agreed breakdown date of the joint
venture remained relevant in determining
the quantum of the parties’ entitlements under the trust.
consider that approach to accord with the principles of the constructive trust
and do justice between the parties. There is no
reason why the trust should be
imposed at some earlier point of time.
Contributions to be repaid
is not disputed that each of Solid Times, One Direction and Mr Wang have made
contributions to the acquisition of the Property,
the renovations and extension
of the existing house on the Property, mortgage repayments, payments of rates
and taxes and other incidental
holding costs. It is also not disputed that both
Solid Times and One Direction ceased making payments in about January 2022 when
their requests for information from Mr Wang were not met.
Court takes a broad brush approach when determining the extent of the
contributions made by the parties. The documentary evidence
establishes that the
contributions listed below have been made by the parties. However, I do not
propose to make a formal finding
as to the contributions made by the parties and
will give Mr Wang the opportunity to provide evidence as to further payments
by him up to the date that final orders are made and any incidental
Times has paid the sum of $15,000 towards the deposit for the purchase of the
Property and the sum of $157,977 to the balance
of the purchase price.
One Direction has paid the sum of $7,500 towards the deposit for the
purchase of the Property and the sum
of $78,988.50 to the balance of the
purchase price. Mr Wang has paid the sum of $7,500 towards the deposit for
the purchase of the
Property and the sum of $78,988.50 to the balance of the
purchase price.
payments of the deposit and purchase price are not in dispute and confirmed by
the settlement statement (exhibit A9) and the
evidence of Mr Liu.
Mr Wang’s contention that Solid Times and Mr Liu did not contribute
financially to the purchase of the
Property in November 2018 should therefore be
Times has paid mortgage repayments of $48,300 to RAMS (exhibit A62) and $36,800
(exhibit A28) to ANZ which payments were made
up to January 2022. It appears
that Solid Times’ share of rates and taxes and some other expenses were
paid out of these monies
that were paid into the RAMS and ANZ mortgage accounts.
One Direction has paid mortgage repayments of $24,150 to RAMS (exhibit A62)
$18,400 (exhibit A28) to ANZ which payments were made up to January 2022. It
appears that One Direction’s share of rates
and taxes and some other
expenses were paid out of these monies that were paid into the RAMS and ANZ
mortgage accounts. Mr Wang,
in his written submissions, accepts this payment was
made. Mr Wang has paid the mortgage repayments of $27,000 to RAMS (exhibit A62)
and $161,122.54 (exhibit A28) to ANZ which payments were made up to December
2024. It appears that Mr Wang’s share of rates
and taxes and some other
expenses were paid out of these monies that were paid into the RAMS and ANZ
mortgage accounts.
I do not understand there to be any dispute about these payments and they are
supported by the documentary evidence.
Wang has paid (or the sum was paid for his benefit) the sum of $83,981.76 upon
the discharge of the RAMS mortgage and the taking
out of the ANZ mortgage.
Although there is some doubt about the source of these funds, there is no
dispute that the payment was made
and Mr Wang is entitled to take that payment
into account.
Times has paid incidental expenses in the sum of $3627.50 (exhibit A50 and A62)
to the RAMS account and the sum of $1312.10
to the ANZ account (exhibit A51 and
A28). One Direction has paid incidental expenses in the sum of $1813.50 (exhibit
A50 and A62)
to the RAMS account and the sum of $656.05 to the ANZ account
(exhibit A51 and A28). It is not clear what incidental expenses may
paid by Mr Wang.
Times’ share of the cost of the building works was in the sum of
$477,652.82 (Solid Times carried out the building works).
I am prepared to find
that the value of that work was in that sum. Under the terms of the JVA,
expenses were to be paid in the ratio
of 50% by Solid Times, 25% by One
Direction and 25% by Mr Wang. This sum accords with that ratio. Further, Mr Wang
gave evidence
that the cost of the building work exceeded the budgeted amount.
Again, this sum broadly accords with this figure. One Direction
paid the sum of
$238,826.41 (exhibits A33-A49) for the building works. Mr Wang accepted this
payment was made but submitted that
it should be treated as a separate matter
between Solid Times and One Direction. There is no basis for that submission.
The payment
was made pursuant to the JVA and for the purposes of the joint
venture. There is no logical reason why it could be characterised
as anything
else. Mr Wang paid the sum of $222,776.41 for the building works (exhibit
R73). Mr Wang admitted that he did not pay
the last invoice. Mr Wang in his
written submission accepts this was the amount that he paid for the building
Direction has calculated the total of the contributions and subject to
adjustment, are as follows:
$740,669.65 (or
43.77% of the total contributions) by Solid Times;
$370,334.46 (or
21.88% of the total contributions) by One Direction;
$581,329.19 (or
34.35% of the total contributions) in the case of Mr Wang.
are two contentious matters regarding the extent of the contributions that have
been made by the parties. First, Mr Wang submits
that he should be given the
benefit of the contribution to the purchase price of the Property represented by
the mortgage. The sum
of $824,000 was paid towards the purchase price by RAMS as
the mortgagee. Mr Wang contends that as the mortgage was in his sole name,
contribution should be allocated to him. I reject that submission. I have found
the Property was an asset of the joint venture.
The acquisition of the Property
was also for the purposes of the joint venture. The joint venture partners
equally contributed to
the mortgage repayments until January 2022 when Mr Wang
failed to provide the requested financial documentation. Mr Wang holds the
Property on trust for himself and One Direction and Solid Times (until the
Settlement Agreement between Mr Wang and Solid Times).
Put in another way,
Mr Wang was not solely responsible for the mortgage under the JVA. He would
not have been responsible for any
shortfall if the mortgage was unable to be
repaid on the sale of the Property. Such a finding accords with the decision in
Booth v Cerreto
credit was only given to the respondent in whose name the mortgage was held for
the payment of interest on the mortgage (in
the case of an interest only
mortgage) and not the mortgage amount itself.
second question that arises in relation to the determination of the re-payment
of the contributions is how to take into account
the contributions that have
been made by Solid Times given the settlement agreement that was entered into
between Solid Times and
Mr Wang. The settlement agreement does not provide
for any assignment of the interest of Solid Times to Mr Wang. It does not
what is to happen to the interest of Solid Times. I consider that the
contributions made by Solid Times should be taken into account
and repaid to
Mr Wang prior to the distribution of the surplus to Mr Wang and One
Direction. I have come to this conclusion for two
reasons. First, Mr Wang has
paid the sum of $740,000 for the extinguishment of the claim that Solid Times
has as a consequence of
the failure of the joint venture. The claim of Solid
Times had two components, the repayment of the contributions made by it and
entitlement to receive 50% of the surplus. Mr Wang did not make that payment for
the benefit of One Direction. He made the payment
for his own benefit and
therefore the benefit of that payment should be taken into account when
determining the terms of the constructive
trust. One Direction should not be
entitled to a windfall in the sense of either lesser reductions for
contributions or an increase
in the percentage of the surplus to which it was
entitled, because of the settlement between Mr Wang and Solid Times.
Secondly, the
basis for the imposition of the constructive trust is the
unconscionability in denying One Direction’s interest that it had
of the joint venture. That interest was to be re-paid its contributions and have
a 25% interest in the surplus after the
contributions of all of the parties
should be re-paid.
precise amount of the
repayments will need to be
determined at the date of sale as Mr Wang will or may incur further expenses in
the period up to settlement
including further payment of mortgage and rates and
the reasons that have been expressed, the appropriate order is that there will
be a declaration that Mr Wang holds the Property
by way of a constructive trust
for the benefit of himself and One Direction and that it be a term of the trust
that the Property
be sold, with the net proceeds to be applied first, to the
discharge of any mortgage over the Property (provided that the funds obtained
from the mortgage have been used for the purposes of the joint venture), then to
refund the contributions made by Mr Wang (which
will include the contributions
made by Solid Times) and One Direction with the surplus to be distributed as to
25% to One Direction
and 75% to Mr Wang.
direct that the applicant brings in minutes of order that reflect these reasons
and to include orders that are proposed about the
sale process. I will hear the
parties on the precise amount of the contributions that have been made. I will
also hear the parties
as to costs.
Franklins Pty Ltd v Metcash
Trading Pty Ltd
[2009] NSWCA 407
(2009) 76 NSWLR 603
[2009] NSWCA 407.
Davey v Herbst, Herbst and
Bray (No 2)
[2012] ACTCA 19
Electricity Generation
Corporation v Woodside Energy Ltd
[2014] HCA 7
(2014) 251 CLR 640
[2014] HCA 7
Summarised in
Grubisa v Zhou
[2025] NSWSC 942
Onesteel Manufacturing Pty
Ltd v Bluescope Steel (AIS) Pty Ltd
[2013] NSWCA 27
(2013) 85 NSWLR 1
[2013] NSWCA
Mount Bruce Mining Pty Ltd
v Wright Prospecting Pty Ltd
[2015] HCA 37
(2015) 256 CLR 104
, [47]-[51].
[2015] HCA 37
(2015) 256 CLR 104
(2019) 267 CLR 514
Ibid, [26].
Ibid, [44].
[2015] HCA 37
(2015) 256 CLR 104
[110]-[111].
[2017] NSWCA 295
(2017) 96 NSWLR 548
[2017] NSWSC 295.
[2019] FCAFC 226
(2019) 273 FCR 567
[2019] FCACFC 226.
[2017] NSWCA 295
(2017) 96 NSWLR 548
[2017] NSWSC 295.
(2016) 90 ALJR 392
(2016) 260 CLR 85
[2024] HCA 50
[1985] HCA 78
(1985) 160 CLR 583
[1985] HCA 78.
Ibid, 618-619.
[1985] HCA 78
(1985) 160 CLR 583
[1985] HCA 78.
[1987] HCA 59
(1987) 164 CLR 137.
John Nelson Developments
Pty Ltd v Focus National Developments Pty
[2010] NSWSC 150
Liquor National Wholesale Pty Ltd v The Redrock Pty Ltd
Muschinski v Dodds
(1985) 160 CLR 585, 611.
[2010] NSWSC 150.
[2022] NSWSC 1690.
Ibid, [163]; See also
Woods v McKinlay (No 2)
[2021] NSWSC 1510
, [244]-[250].
[2023] VSC 21
Ibid, [254].
[2005] NSWSC 42
[2003] NSWSC 161
Woods v McKinlay (No 2)
[2021] NSWSC 1510
Austin v Hornby
[2011] NSWSC 1059
, [172]-[176].
[2022] NSWSC 1690.
Ibid, [168].
[2005] NSWSC 1059
Moody v Cox and Hatt
[1917] 2 Ch 71
R v Deputy Commissioner of Taxation (WA)
Dering v Earl of Winchelsea
(1787) 1 Cox 318, 319;
Harry Goudias Pty Ltd v
(2007) 87 SASR 93
[2007] SASC 81.
St John Shipping Corp v
Joseph Rank Ltd
[1957] 1 QB 267
; John S Chappel Pty Ltd v D K Pett
(1971) 1 SASR 188
Fitzgerald v FJ Leonhardt Pty Ltd
[1997] HCA 17
(1997) 189 CLR 215
Fitzgerald v FJ
Leonhardt Pty Ltd
[1997] HCA 17
(1997) 189 CLR 215
[1978] HCA 42
(1978) 139 CLR 410
Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission v Baxter Healthcare Pty Ltd
(2007) 232 CLR 1
[2007] HCA 38
In re Mahmoud and Ispahani
[1921] 2 KB 716
Robertson v Adams
[1922] ArgusLawRp 98
(1922) 31 CLR 250
[1987] HCA 59
(1987) 164 CLR 137.
[2021] NSWSC 1510
and see [13].
Woods v McKinlay (No 2)
[2021] NSWSC 1510
[1987] HCA 59
(1987) 164 CLR 137
[2021] NSWSC 1510
[2003] NSWSC 161
[2022] NSWCA 225.
Hansen v Noble
[2021] NSWSC 138
Shepherd v Doolan
[2005] NSWSC 42
[2023] NSWSC 1574
[1985] HCA 78
(1985) 160 CLR 583
Makaritis v Makaritis
[2023] NSWSC 409
[2023] NSWSC 1574
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (581 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter