URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASC/2025/168.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:05:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v WILMOTT (No 6) [2025] SASC 168 (7 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Criminal: Application)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
R v WILMOTT (No 6)
Criminal Trial by Judge Alone
[2025] SASC 168
Reasons for Rulings of the
Honourable Justice McDonald
7 October 2025
EVIDENCE - GENERAL PRINCIPLES - VOIR DIRE - OTHER MATTERS
EVIDENCE - ADMISSIBILITY - EXCLUSIONS: IMPROPERLY OBTAINED
CRIMINAL LAW - EVIDENCE - MISCELLANEOUS MATTERS - STATUTORY PROVISIONS
RELATING TO EVIDENCE OF CHILDREN
The accused is charged with the offence of manslaughter and in the
alternative with the offences of criminal neglect, failing to provide
failing to provide accommodation, and two counts of aggravated assault causing
harm. The prosecution alleges that the accused
was physically, mentally and
emotionally abusive toward her adopted daughter (‘the deceased’),
and that this conduct
was a substantial cause of her death.
The prosecution seeks to admit into evidence a prescribed interview with OW
pursuant to
Evidence Act 1929
(SA). OW is the younger
brother of the deceased and an adopted son of the accused. It follows that the
prosecution must establish
that the interview was recorded in accordance with
, Div 3 of the
Summary Offences Act 1953
On 14 March 2025, the accused filed an interlocutory application seeking the
exclusion of the entirety of OW’s evidence. Numerous
grounds were
submitted in support of that application and a voir dire hearing was sought. The
prosecution opposed both the application
seeking the exclusion of OW’s
evidence, and the application for a voir dire. Upon hearing submissions, this
Court granted the
application for a voir dire hearing.
The voir dire hearing centred on, but was not limited to, the following
particulars:
impugned interview was not recorded in compliance with the relevant provisions
Summary Offences Act 1953
(SA) and is thus inadmissible;
engaged in unlawful conduct in collaboration with the Department for Child
Protection, and OW was unlawfully removed from the
accused’s care as a
consequence;
removal of OW from the care of the accused, by the Department for Child
Protection pursuant to
Children and Young People (Safety) Act
(SA) was unlawful and for an improper purpose;
ongoing guardianship order and the exclusion of a relationship between OW and
the accused was unlawful and/or an abuse of process
of the Court;
conduct of SAPOL and OW’s psychologist undermined and circumvented the
application of
Evidence Act 1929
(SA) in relation to
OW’s rights under that section, nor was OW provided with independent
advice in that respect.
1. The application to admit the prescribed interview with OW is granted.
2. The application to exclude OW's evidence is refused.
Children and Young People (Safety) Act 2017
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Evidence Act 1929
Police Act 1998
Summary Offences Act 1953
, referred to.
Hughes v Police
[2009] SASC 57
(2009) 103 SASR 337
Police v Henwood
[2005] SASC 209
Police v Hodder
[2016] SASC 70
South Australia v
[2020] SASCFC 128
Lindsay v The King; Rankine v The King; Woods v The King
142 SASR 175
distinguished.
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v Brady
[2016] VSC 334
(2016) 346 FLR 1
Strickland (a pseudonym) v Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
[2018] HCA 53
(2018) 266 CLR 325
, discussed.
R v WILMOTT (No 6)
[2025] SASC 168
Criminal: Ruling re OW
McDONALD J.
Gaye Wilmott has been charged with the offence of
manslaughter
and in the alternative
with the offences of criminal
failing to provide
failing to provide
accommodation,
and two counts of
aggravated assault causing harm.
The alleged victim of each of these offences was Jasmine Da-Eun,
Ms Wilmott’s 15-year-old adopted daughter. Each of the charged
offences arise out of allegations regarding Ms Wilmott’s conduct
towards Jasmine, up until Jasmine’s death by suicide.
The Information
particularises that the offences took place between 1 May 2013 and 7 October
2018, the former being the date on
which Jasmine’s adopted father left the
is the prosecution case that, over that time, Ms Wilmott physically,
mentally and emotionally abused Jasmine to a level that amounted
to criminal
conduct. The prosecution relies on both acts and omissions in circumstances in
which Ms Wilmott owed Jasmine a duty
of care. The acts and omissions
relied upon include physical violence and assault, verbal abuse, social
isolation, sustained humiliation
and the deprivation of food, liberty and
suitable accommodation. It is said that these acts and omissions amounted to a
on the part of Ms Wilmott to provide the standard of care required
from a reasonably competent carer. It is the prosecution case
Ms Wilmott’s conduct towards Jasmine was a substantial cause of
Jasmine’s death.
the time of her death, Jasmine lived with Ms Wilmott, AP (Ms Wilmott’s
partner), AW (Jasmine’s older brother), OW
(Jasmine’s younger
brother), and EP and KP (AP’s daughters). Like Jasmine, AW and OW had
been adopted from Korea as
infants by Ms Wilmott and her husband at that time,
had been home at the time that Jasmine hanged herself in her wardrobe. OW found
the suicide note that Jasmine had pushed out
under her bedroom door, which
caused him to go into her bedroom, where he found Jasmine unconscious. OW cut
Jasmine down and called
for an ambulance.
has participated in three interviews with the police. The most recent took
place on 8 April 2022. The prosecution have made
an application for this
interview to be admitted pursuant to
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence Act
’). Ms Wilmott opposes the admission of
the interview on the basis that it does not satisfy the preconditions for
admissibility.
In the alternative, it is submitted that, even if admissible,
the interview should be excluded in the exercise of the discretion.
Ms Wilmott,
however, goes further than that and has filed an interlocutory application
seeking the exclusion of the entirety of
the evidence of
The following grounds are
relied upon in support of that application:
the evidence of [OW] was obtained as a consequence of unlawful conduct by the
South Australia Police (SAPOL) in conjunction with
the Department for Child
Protection (DCP).
on the day of the accused’s arrest in October 2020, [OW] (aged 12) was
compulsorily removed from the care of the accused,
and made subject to
Guardianship order. The conduct of SAPOL in that removal and subsequent role of
DCP in relation to compulsory
care was an abuse of process of the court. This
resulted in ongoing psychological treatment and other influences that ultimately
led to a change in statements
proposal to lead the third statement of [OW] instead of the earlier two
statements, after a long period of compulsory care by
DCP, and having had
ongoing counselling by a psychologist is contrary to the provisions of the
Evidence Act 1929
(SA), and/ or unfair and/ or ought to be excluded in
the exercise of discretion
the removal of [OW] from the care of the accused pursuant to
Children and Young People (Safety) Act 2017
(SA) was unlawful and for an
improper purpose.
the ongoing application of the guardianship order and the exclusion of a
relationship between [OW] and his mother, and subsequently,
a denial of a
relationship between [AW] and his mother was unlawful and/or an abuse of process
of the Court.
conduct of the SAPOL in conjunction with DCP and of the psychologist in relation
to the obtaining of the subject interview (08/04/22)
with [OW] was in in breach
of the provisions of
Summary offences Act
Regulations and SAPOL General Orders.
7.1 Alternatively, it was
unfair and an abuse of process and /or ought to be excluded in the exercise of
discretion.
conversations between [OW], SAPOL, staff of DCP and the psychologist that were
interviews for the purposes of the
Summary Offences Act
) were not recorded in accordance with the provisions of that Act, and /
or alternatively, such recordings have not been disclosed.
conduct of SAPOL and the psychologist undermined and circumvented the
application of
Evidence Act 1929
(SA) in relation to
[OW’s] rights under that section, nor was [OW] provided with independent
advice in that respect.
engagement of the psychologist as the support person resulted in the subject
interview that was tainted and/ or unfair to be admitted
against the
previous statement of [OW] to SAPOL in 2018 and the content and the
circumstances and conduct of SAPOL and DCP in relation to
two previous
interviews between [OW] and SAPOL in 2020 and 2021, has the result that it is
improper and unfair to seek to lead the
2022 interview as the evidence in
evidence ought to be excluded in the exercise of the discretion. The accused
will submit that where:
12.1 [OW] at aged 10 suffered the trauma of
finding his sister on 04/10/18 in the bedroom,
12.2 was forcibly and unlawfully removed from his mother’s care in
October 2020 at aged 12, damaging and destroying his relationship
12.3 was compulsorily placed under the guardianship of the Minister until the
12.4 where requests by [OW] to return to live with his mother were
12.5 where only supervised access was initially permitted, and ceased from
15/09/21 and upon the accused’s arrest for manslaughter
in April 2023, a
condition of her bail precluded contact with her remaining child, [AW],
12.6 the subject interview was given after ongoing psychotherapy and liaison
with police, and absent independent advice, and in the
presence of
Evidence Act
12.7 where his DCP placement and [OW’s] behaviour had become
problematic in the lead up to the interview of [OW] in April 2022,
12.8 where after the giving of the 2022 interview, [OW] expressed his
unwillingness or uncertainty about giving evidence against his
mother, and
12.9 where the conduct of the authorities whose obligations included the
fostering of [OW’s] interests, removed any attachment
to or connection
with his mother,
the calling of [OW] to give evidence against his mother against that
background, will likely result in further irremediable trauma
oppressive, contrary to the public interest, an abuse of process and productive
of an unfair trial
support of this application, Ms Wilmott sought a voir dire hearing. The
prosecution opposed both the applications for the exclusion
of the evidence of
OW, and the application for a voir dire. Having heard submissions from the
parties, I determined to grant the
application for a voir dire hearing.
The evidence on the voir dire
considering the respective applications made by the Director of Public
Prosecutions (‘the Director’) and Ms Wilmott,
it is convenient to
set out a summary of the evidence that was given on the voir dire. As some of
the arguments were nuanced and
heavily dependent upon the factual matrix of this
case, it is necessary to traverse the evidence in some detail.
prosecution
called Detective Senior Sergeant Graham
Tomkins, Detective Brevet Sergeant Benjamin Ward, Catherine Wood, Detective
Brevet Sergeant
Elaine McGilchrist, Brevet Sergeant Vanessa Kelly, and Detective
Inspector Erin Vanderwoude
evidence on the voir dire. The following account of the events surrounding the
arrest of Ms Wilmott, and the three interviews
conducted with OW, is a composite
of the evidence of these witnesses.
The establishment of
Operation Veritas
Brevet Sergeant (‘DBS’) Benjamin Ward is the case officer in charge
of Operation Veritas. It was his evidence
that Operation Veritas officially
commenced on 24 June 2020,
set up to investigate the circumstances of Jasmine’s death.
Ward told the Court that Jasmine’s suicide was initially investigated by
Detectives from the Southern Districts Criminal
Investigation Branch. DBS Ward
described this as a “small investigation” producing a limited number
of witness statements.
It resulted in a finding that Jasmine’s cause of
death was suicide.
2019, there was a coronial request for a review of the file, and as the Major
Crime Investigation Branch did not take the matter
on, it was sent to the Public
Protection Branch. At that time, DBS Ward was based in the Special Crimes
Investigation Section, which
was one of the sections within that branch. He
explained that a team was set up to carry out the review. The team was
of Detective Sergeant (‘DS’) Erin Vanderwoude, DBS Luke
McPhee, DBS Emma Woodhouse, DBS Donna Spark, DBS Zoe Gooch and
McGilchrist. The team was under the management of Detective Senior Sergeant
(‘DSS’) Graham Tomkins.
2020, DS Vanderwoude was stationed at the Human Source Branch of SAPOL.
She was specifically seconded to the Public Protection
Branch to take on the
role of supervising the Veritas investigation team. DS Vanderwoude was
responsible for the daily running of
the investigation. Above her was
DSS Tomkins, the investigation manager who had general oversight of the
task force. He was also
responsible for briefing the Assistant Commissioner
(‘AC’), Peter Harvey, about the status of the investigation as it
progressed.
His daily involvement
was, however, limited as he was also responsible for running two other sections
of the department over that
period of time.
Vanderwoude’s first task was to review the coronial file and identify
lines of enquiry for further investigation. Based
on that review,
DS Vanderwoude established that there were a number of areas in which the
investigation had been lacking, and required
further exploration.
investigation team was structured such that each detective had a specific area
to investigate. This was referred to as a “silo
Relevantly, DBS Ward was responsible for obtaining statements from the
friends and family of Ms Wilmott, DBS McGilchrist
was responsible for
schooling and education and DBS McPhee was responsible for liaising with
the Department for Child Protection
(‘the DCP’).
the course of the investigation, there were weekly meetings during which the
Veritas investigators provided updates on
the progress of the case. The outcome
of these meetings was reported through DSS Tomkins, up through the ranks, to AC
The progression from a coronial inquiry to a
criminal investigation
the first eight weeks of the investigation, various inquiries were carried out,
resulting in the formation of a suspicion
that Ms Wilmott had engaged in
criminal conduct, namely assault and withholding food from Jasmine. As a
consequence, on 27 August
2020, DS Vanderwoude made the decision
to upgrade the status of the investigation from a coronial inquiry to a criminal
investigation.
It was only upon a review of the statements and other material
that had been obtained by the investigators by that date, that
Vanderwoude formed the view that there was sufficient evidence to
establish a reasonable cause to suspect that a criminal offence
had taken place.
The practical consequence was that the powers available to the police changed
from a Coronial Direction, to the
ability to use general search
Early inquiries into the welfare of OW
an early stage of the investigation concerns were raised by AC Harvey with
DSS Tomkins about the welfare of OW. These concerns
were based upon the
circumstances of the removal of SM (a previous foster child) from the Wilmott
of Jasmine’s suicide in 2018. In
particular, Jasmine’s weight and physical appearance at the time of her
death. This
resulted in police surveillance being undertaken and inquiries made
with OW’s school about his welfare. The purpose of the
surveillance was
to make observations of OW in order to determine whether there were any obvious
signs of neglect. A request was
first made for surveillance to be undertaken on
OW on 25 June 2020. The surveillance took place between 25 June 2020 and 29
No particular
concerns were raised about OW’s welfare as a consequence of the
observations made during that period of time.
DBS McGilchrist
was the Veritas task force member who was given the role of making the initial
enquiries with Blackwood Primary School,
the school that OW was attending at
that time. DBS McGilchrist first made contact with the principal of
Blackwood Primary School,
Ms Kris Robson, on 22 July 2020.
Ms Robson confirmed that OW had started at Blackwood Primary School at the
beginning of 2019 and
remained a student at the school. Ms Robson told
DBS McGilchrist that although the school did not have any concerns about
Ms Wilmott,
earlier in the year they had some concerns about OW. These
concerns arose out of two incidents that occurred towards the end of
previous term.
first incident involved OW repeatedly holding his breath until the point of
blacking out. Ms Robson told DBS McGilchrist that
OW had become quite upset at
the time and said that he held his breath because he wanted to see what would
second incident involved OW removing blades from pencil sharpeners and handing
them out to other students, including one who
had previous self-harming issues.
Ms Robson suggested that an explanation for this behaviour may have been a
misconceived attempt
by OW to try and make friends with other children in his
Robson advised DBS McGilchrist that, as a result of these incidents, the school
had a meeting with Ms Wilmott about their concerns,
and recommended that OW have
some sessions with the school psychologist. Ms Wilmott had indicated that she
would obtain a referral
from OW’s general practitioner, so that he could
see the school psychologist. At the time of the telephone call, Ms Robson
of the belief that they had not yet received the
issues were raised about OW’s weight, food or school
attendance.
a result of speaking with the principal, DBS McGilchrist was also put in
touch with Angela Auricht, OW’s teacher.
23 July 2020, DBS McGilchrist had a telephone conversation with Ms Auricht.
Ms Auricht had been present on the occasion OW held
his breath until he
passed out and when he had handed out the pencil sharpener blades.
Ms Auricht provided further details about
what had occurred on these
occasions. Ms Auricht told DBS McGilchrist that after OW had handed out
the pencil sharpener blades,
she had spoken to him about his reasons for doing
so. When asked specifically about why he handed the blade to the student who
trauma in her background, he said that he knew that she had been
self-harming and he wanted to give her a blade to cut herself.
the time that police went to the school to take Ms Robson’s statement, OW
was engaging with a psychologist and a welfare
worker at the school.
Concerns about OW leading up to the arrest of Ms
was DSS Tomkins’ evidence that during the course of the
investigation, the police received no further information that raised
particular concerns about the welfare of OW. In his view, the information that
came from the school about the occasion on which
OW had held his breath until he
passed out, was “not a massive
at that point.
DSS Tomkins told the Court that in considering the welfare of OW, he also
factored in the information that the police
were receiving over the course of
the investigation about the male children in the household being treated better
than Jasmine.
In addition to that, the police had spoken to the school and
requested that they keep an eye out for OW, and report back if they
anything out of the ordinary.
DSS Tomkins’ perspective, the position changed, however, as the
investigation moved toward the arrest phase. He
moved towards the arrest phase of the operation, my concerns were heightened
because we were going to arrest his mother and,
given the information I had at
that stage, I wasn’t sure - I couldn’t be confident of his safety at
going to oppose bail on Ms Wilmott and I was concerned
that she would be going back into the house and [OW] would be there. We spoke
[OW] a couple of times at that point, I think from statements from the victim
management team, so she would have been well aware
they would have been speaking
to her children, [AW] and [OW]. So I had to consider that, was it prudent for me
to let Ms Wilmott
return home and have [OW] present at the house that day. So we
decided to have a strategy meeting with the Department of Corrections
child protection, and that was discussed at a meeting between myself and the
team and a strategy meeting was held with DCP
as to what their thoughts and what
their intentions would be as to any intervention they might take.
was DSS Tomkins’ evidence that he was concerned about Ms Wilmott’s
reaction to being charged, arrested and bailed.
couldn’t, in all consciousness, not avert my mind to [OW] being in that
house and I had no idea how that - the reaction
and the fallout of the arrest
was going to be and I wasn’t confident to leave that matter
unaddressed.
DSS Tomkins
elaborated on why he was concerned about OW at the time of the
that the nature of the arrest at that point in time, young Jasmine having been
deceased for two years and there was nothing
to suggest that [OW] was in any
danger, at the point of arrest it was going to be become very apparent that [OW]
was present at the
time that Jasmine was found, a lot of stuff that would be
quite damning could fall on young [OW’s] shoulders, so we were concerned
that in the short term at least, him being present presented an issue for his
safety at the time.
cross-examination, DSS Tomkins further explained why his concern for OW was
heightened by the prospect of Ms Wilmott’s arrest.
arrest changes everything.
of the seriousness, it’s different to if we are out investigating a matter
to then arresting the person for it.
have, I have to be mindful of the safety and harm that could fall as a result of
our actions and that was where I said to - where
we discussed it with the teams
that we have to consider [OW’s] wellbeing at the point of arrest, we have
Tomkins shared his concerns with the other investigators, in particular, the
need to consider OW’s safety in the short
members of the investigation team also gave evidence about their concerns
becoming heightened as they moved towards the arrest
of Ms Wilmott. It was
DBS Ward’s evidence, like that of DSS Tomkins’, that the
move towards the arrest phase raised
issues about the welfare of OW, and the
need to take steps to ensure his safety once Ms Wilmott had been
particular, DBS Ward was concerned that, whilst there were many family members
living in the Wilmott household, they worked long
hours or were often not
As a result, DBS Ward
formed the view that there was no “real presence in the children’s
This also gave
rise to concerns as to who would care for OW, given that Ms Wilmott was to be
arrested on some “very serious
Vanderwoude also gave evidence about concerns for the safety of OW in the lead
up to the arrest. She said that because of the
behaviour that they were going
to allege had occurred, OW was likely to be at risk within the
When asked to explain
what that risk was, DS Vanderwoude
Primarily that
he was a witness to the allegations that were we putting forward in relation to
what had occurred within the home to
Jasmine. Also believed that the allegations
were of a sufficient seriousness that it posed a risk to his welfare and his
safety should he remain in Ms Wilmott’s custody post her
Planning for the arrest of Ms Wilmott and the interview of
decision was made to arrest Ms Wilmott on 29 October 2020, and to interview
OW on that same day.
to the interview, DBS Ward researched his obligations for interviewing OW, given
that OW was a vulnerable
As a consequence, DBS
Ward became aware that it was necessary for the interview to be conducted by a
prescribed interviewer, that
OW was entitled to have a companion present, and
that the interview was to be recorded on video. When asked about his
understanding
of what constituted an interview under the
Summary Offences Act
Summary Offences Act
’), DBS Ward said that he
understood “That any conversation had with [OW] would be
He went on to
qualify this by saying that it was any conversation about “the content of
the investigation”,
opposed to a conversation about welfare or where OW was “going to
the evidence is not clear about when or by whom the decision was first made, on
21 October 2020, a briefing was conducted
to commence planning for a
prescribed interview with OW. Present at that meeting were DBS Ward,
DBS McGilchrist, BS Vanessa Kelly
and Sergeant Karin Dayman. BS Kelly
and Sergeant Dayman were from the victim management team. BS Kelly was to
conduct the prescribed
interview and Sergeant Dayman was her supervisor.
it transpired, BS Kelly ended up conducting all three prescribed interviews
the meeting on 21 October 2020, a plan was formulated to interview OW on the day
of Ms Wilmott’s arrest at the victim
management suites, or if he
preferred, at his school. There were also discussions surrounding a possible
support person and strategies
to assist OW in feeling more
comfortable.
psychologist and a pastoral care worker were identified as possible options to
fill the role of a support person. Eliminated
as suitable for this role was AP,
as he was a potential witness who had not yet been spoken to.
the meeting, the members of the victim management team requested that
information be obtained about things like: OW’s favourite
hobbies and food to assist in rapport building.
resulted in a further approach to OW’s school and a meeting with staff
from the DCP.
DBS McGilchrist
again had responsibility for contacting the school. The purpose of the contact
was to obtain information about OW’s
caregivers, what other supports there
were in the Wilmott household and who was conveying him to and from school, all
of which were
relevant to ensuring that appropriate measures were in place at
the time of Ms Wilmott’s arrest.
that reason, DBS McGilchrist again made contact with the principal of Blackwood
Primary School. Ms Robson identified potential
support persons, namely the
school counsellor or the school psychologist and suggested suitable spaces at
the school for conducting
the interview. In addition, she provided the
information that DBS McGilchrist requested about OW’s favourite subjects,
allergies and how he travelled to and from
her evidence, BS Kelly did not make reference to the meeting that took place on
21 October 2020. Her memory was that she was officially
requested to interview
OW on 23 October 2020, however, she had been generally aware of the
investigation because of its nature and
the number of resources involved.
Brevet Sergeant Kelly explained the
made aware that the investigation was underway, which is really common practice,
we’re all in the same office, and so
it’s not uncommon to hear about
jobs, know what’s going on amongst your team members and just this was -
this involved
a lot of members, police, and so we are often given the heads-up
when there’s a big job going on.
Kelly first commenced making notes in this matter on 28 October 2020, when she
attended the briefing that took place that day
in preparation for
Ms Wilmott’s arrest.
will come to that briefing in due course.
The involvement of
the Department for Child Protection
Wood gave evidence on behalf of the DCP. Ms Wood has worked for the DCP
for 27 years, most recently as a supervisor of
one of the assessment and
protective intervention teams. That role involves supervising a team of social
workers who are responsible
for child protection investigations, working with
families to address child protection concerns, working with children who have
removed from their parents’ care and working towards addressing
concerns to enable a child to return home. Ms Wood was working
role at the time that Ms Wilmott was arrested and OW was removed from her
care. Ms Wood explained the DCP’s role,
and their involvement in OW being
removed from Ms Wilmott’s custody.
was Ms Wood’s evidence that, in 2020, she was working at the St
Mary’s DCP office when her manager, Julie Powell,
made her aware that
an intake had been received on or around 25 September 2020 in relation
From the DCP’s
perspective, the intake raised concerns about the emotional and psychological
wellbeing of OW.
At the time
that Ms Wood was made aware of this intake, it remained open, and therefore
still under investigation.
evidence is unclear as to who made the report that resulted in this intake. At
first, it appeared that DBS McGilchrist had made
the report. That proved to be
incorrect. DS Vanderwoude was cross-examined on the topic. It was her evidence
that, given the passage
of time, she cannot now recollect whether SAPOL made the
notification. She said it could have been reported by SAPOL, given that
are mandatory notifiers. She
officers are obliged, when they believe - or they receive information that they
believe a child is at risk, we’re obliged
to submit a CARL notification.
So if they were speaking to the neighbour and the neighbour provided them with
that information, we
are obliged to submit it. So it’s not out of the
realms that we could have submitted that intake, I just don’t recall
way it came.
evidence was that, at this time, police had received information from
Ms Wilmott’s neighbours about hearing her yell inappropriately
albeit they had declined to provide statements.
Vanderwoude said that had she received that information as part of the
investigation, she personally would have felt that she
was mandated to report
am prepared to draw the inference that it was a member of SAPOL who made the
report that resulted in the DCP intake. For current
purposes, it does not
matter who that was.
am not, however, prepared to draw the inference that there was any malevolent
intent behind the making of the report, given that
police officers are mandatory
reporters and would have been in breach of their duties to not make such a
notification once in possession
of the information from Ms Wilmott’s
neighbours.
their initial conversation, Ms Powell advised Ms Wood that she had also had
some discussions with SAPOL about OW on 19 October
2020. The DCP case file
records that on that date DBS Ward had telephoned Ms Powell and left a
message for her to return his call.
When she returned the call, DBS Ward
told her about the plan to arrest Ms Wilmott and to interview OW that same
day. The purpose
of DBS Ward calling Ms Powell was to make
arrangements for the care of OW on Ms Wilmott’s
strategy meeting on 27 October 2020
strategy meeting involving members of SAPOL and the DCP took place on 27 October
vary as to who was responsible for arranging the strategy meeting.
was DSS Tomkins’ evidence that, as a result of concerns about OW, there
was a decision made between him and the investigating
detectives, DS Vanderwoude
and DBS Ward, about the need for a strategy meeting to be held with the DCP, to
advise them of SAPOL’s
intended actions and for them to consider
OW’s welfare.
Wood’s evidence was that her manager, Ms Powell, wished for her to convene
a strategy discussion in relation to the concerns
When Ms Litster asked
Ms Wood if she was responsible for calling the strategy meeting, Ms Wood
responded with “My recollection
is, yes, I made contact with the attendees
and requested their
attendance”.
my view, the likely explanation for these differences in recollections is that
there were a number of moving pieces for both SAPOL
and the DCP at that time.
From the perspective of both organisations, it was necessary that information
was shared, and the means
by which to do this was a strategy meeting. It was of
no moment both then and now, as to the precise genesis of the idea.
Wood explained that strategy meetings are commonly convened in a variety of
circumstances. She
They can occur
in lots of different examples. So if we have an intake, as I explained before,
that’s been assessed as requiring
a 24-hour response or an urgent
response, in all of those matters we need to convene a strategy discussion. So
they usually occur
with Child Protection Services and SAPOL, but they can - we
can include other agencies that may have had a role with the family and
pivotal information to share. We can also convene them in matters which have
been assessed as requiring a 10-day response. So
they’re the two
categories, generally, that require a DCP intervention, a response. If the - if
an intake has been assessed
as requiring a 10-day response but covers certain
areas, say, for example, a situation where there are possible sexual abuse
allegations
or there’s been some other criminal element to it or
there’s injuries to a child, so they’re basically where
been either - there could possibly be a role for either Child
Protection Services or SAPOL as well in the investigation. So the idea
purpose of these meetings is to share information that we have on the family and
the background information and then create
a plan, I guess, for moving forward,
as to who will undertake the investigation, what that may look like, what may
need to occur
if a child needs to have a medical assessment, like a forensic
medical or a forensic interview, making arrangements for those things
So they’re quite a usual process in our work.
the participants at strategy meetings may vary depending on the situation,
members of SAPOL, Child Protection Services (‘CPS’)
and the DCP are
always in attendance.
meeting between members of the Veritas task force and the DCP took place on
27 October 2020. It was DBS Ward’s evidence
that the purpose of
the meeting was to advise the DCP of what the police had learned through their
investigation and in doing so,
to alert them to the need to put a safety plan in
place for OW. DBS Ward was very clear in his evidence that the police were
seeking the removal of OW, but wanted another agency, DCP, to ensure that OW
was cared for.
DSS Tomkins
gave similar evidence about the reason that the police sought the involvement of
the DCP in relation to OW. He
The role of
DCP is effectively the role of his care, safety, welfare, child protection, as
is ours. We are child protection officers
under the Act. We all have a duty of
care to make sure all kids don’t suffer harm and are protected. The role
in this particular
case and the reasons for a strategy meeting was we believed
that the DCP would need to be involved at that stage to offer ongoing
and protection to [OW] that the police wouldn’t be able to provide after
we left the house.
Wood made contact with the attendees in advance of the meeting to request that
they be present. Those in attendance at the meeting
were: Catherine Wood -
Supervisor DCP; Julie Powell – Manager DCP; Geneveive Bowyer –
Senior Practitioner DCP (Case worker
allocated to OW); Marion Brown – DCP
Adoption Services (in attendance because Jasmine and OW had been adopted); Kayla
– DCP Adoption Services (in attendance because Jasmine and OW had
been adopted); Rachel McCulloch – Manager CARN (Supervisor
of Marion Brown
and Kayla Curtis); Senior Sergeant Erin Vanderwoude – SAPOL; Brevet
Sergeant Elaine McGilchrist – SAPOL;
and Brevet Sergeant Ben Ward –
SAPOL. Ms Bowyer took minutes, which were subsequently converted into the DCP
case note of
the strategy
case note records that
the following was
The background
and history of the Wilmott family, including the details of SM’s removal
after a serious care concern was substantiated
Concerns from
all parties regarding the care that OW was being afforded by Ms Wilmott and
his previous experiences in her care.
SAPOL’s investigation had commenced as a coronial investigation, however,
had changed to a criminal investigation, with
SAPOL planning to charge
Ms Wilmott with criminal neglect.
planned on arresting Ms Wilmott on Thursday,
29 October 2020.
Concerns about
the impact that the arrest would have on OW’s safety.
DCP adoption
services advised that the South Korean government were aware of Jasmine’s
death, had raised concerns for OW and
were expecting an update on the situation.
SAPOL provided
some of the details of the allegations that formed the basis of the case against
Ms Wilmott, and discussed the difficulty
in proving the offence.
The DCP advised
that “further consideration will need to be given for a
to determine if the DCP have grounds to do this if [OW] does not disclose,
discussed difficulty of proving psychological
harm. DCP significantly concerned
regarding [OW]’s safety in Jenni’s care given the charges being
placed on Jenni in
relation to Jasmine’s death and the serious care
concern that led to [SM] being removed from Jenni’s care in 2016”.
The DCP were to consult with the Crown regarding evidence.
options available for OW. SAPOL advised that if OW was placed with family, that
could be reflected in Ms Wilmott’s
bail conditions so that she could
have no contact with him.
The plan for
29 October 2020, was for SAPOL to attend OW’s school and
interview OW, preferably at the Wakefield Police Station,
however, the interview
may need to take place at the school if that was OW’s preference. A
pastoral care worker was to be
the support person for OW. Ms Wilmott was
to be arrested at the same time that OW was being interviewed.
SAPOL was to be
in close contact with the DCP on 29 October 2020, to provide updates
of proceedings in relation to Ms Wilmott’s
arrest and interviews with
the family members and OW.
Significantly,
there is no evidence to suggest that during the strategy meeting the police
recommended to the DCP that OW be removed
from Ms Wilmott’s care. To the
contrary, Ms Wood was very clear in her evidence that the responsibility
for determining what
was to happen with OW was that of the DCP. Speaking of
SAPOL, she said:
They don’t have the ability to recommend, that decision sits with DCP. So
even if they had a view, which I don’t recall
them stating, a view one way
or another, that decision doesn’t sit with them.
the end of the strategy meeting, no decision had been made about what was to
happen with OW when Ms Wilmott was arrested. Ms
Wood explained the
the time we were very clear that we weren’t in a position to make that
decision, about whether we had sufficient
evidence to remove [OW] and that the
outcome of the strategy discussion was that we were seeking further - we would
do some further
consultation and seek some further information.
of SAPOL also gave evidence about what occurred at the strategy meeting.
told the Court that the information provided to the DCP at the meeting included
allegations of Ms Wilmott assaulting Jasmine
and depriving her of food. In
addition, the police told the DCP that they had evidence from neighbours who
described OW as being
present and involved in assaults against/towards
Jasmine. The police also provided information about Jasmine’s weight at
time of her death, and the circumstances in which SM came to be removed from
the Wilmott household, which held some similarities
to the allegations made
police also provided the DCP with information specific to OW. DBS Ward
specifically to [OW], there were statements provided from the teachers of [OW],
the concerns to his behaviour at school and their
view of Jenni’s lack of
care to him and the lack of psychological support.
Ward said that the police provided the DCP with information about the particular
occasion on which OW had held his breath until
he passed out and that when the
school asked Ms Wilmott to collect him, she said, “he’s fine,
he can catch a bus”
and did not appear to be overly concerned.
was DBS Ward’s evidence that an important focus of that meeting was to
provide information about what the police knew of
the family dynamic in the
household. He summarised the nature and purpose of the information in the
following exchange:
we tried, as best as we could, to provide the family dynamics of the Wilmott
household and what we understood of it. I had personally
taken the statements of
[KP] and [EP], which was Ms Wilmott’s boyfriend’s children. So I had
got a picture from them
as to what the dynamics of the household were like and
it was my understanding that [AP] worked long hours and would quite often
the house before the children even woke and when he came home, quite often, the
children would be asleep. So, then from our
records and statements we understood
that the children would go - sorry, that [OW] and Jasmine were going into
respite care on the
weekends, so we didn’t feel like [AP] had a real
presence in that house. We knew of an uncle that lived at the rear of the
premises but we didn’t really feel like that person, either, was a real
presence in the children’s life.
remember if that was Neil or Dennis Rayner.
was Neil or Dennis related to.
of Ms Wilmott, I think it was Neil. So, in the absence of - sorry, and one other
person in the household was [AW], ... but
it was also our understanding - and I
had personally spoken to [AW] several times - that he very much wasn’t
present in the
house a lot, that he was quite often at his girlfriend’s
house. So, because the police had no objections to bail, we knew that
on would be getting bailed back to that house, we had concerns as to who was
going to look after [OW], given what we were
which were very serious charges.
communicated that information and those concerns to DCP.
police provided the DCP with the details of when they proposed to arrest
Ms Wilmott. When asked whether arrangements were made
by the DCP at the
strategy meeting for the day of the arrest, DBS Ward
had that meeting with them and by no means did they say what they were going to
do at that meeting, our role was to go down
there and provide them information
and then they would then make a decision as to what they were going to do with
[OW], either in
the immediate future or long-term future, we walked away from
that meeting. I understand then that there was correspondence from
Erin Vanderwoude asking some more questions, which Erin then answered relative
to our investigation etc. And then, at
some point, I’m pretty sure we were
clear by the time we did go to the arrest that the DCP would get involved and
remove [OW]
on that day.
set out previously, it was DSS Tomkins’ evidence that as the investigation
progressed towards the arrest phase, concern
and it was for that reason that the strategy meeting was arranged with the DCP
to discuss their
thoughts and intentions in relation to any possible
intervention.
Tomkins gave evidence about his understanding of the role that the DCP played in
relation to OW. He
The role of
DCP is effectively the role of his care, safety, welfare, child protection, as
is ours. We are child protection officers
under the Act. We all have a duty of
care to make sure all kids don’t suffer harm and are protected. The role
in this particular
case and the reasons for a strategy meeting was we believed
that the DCP would need to be involved at that stage to offer ongoing
and protection to [OW] that the police wouldn’t be able to provide after
we left the house.
Tomkins was cross-examined about whether police recommended the removal of OW to
the DCP and he was emphatic in his response,
that it “Definitely
wasn’t a recommendation,
briefing on 28 October 2020
28 October 2020, there was another SAPOL briefing in preparation for the
planned arrest of Ms Wilmott the following day. The
briefing was conducted
by DBS Ward and was to ensure that everyone knew their roles and expected
outcomes. Everyone who was to be
part of the tactical operation the next day
attended the briefing.
part of her preparation for the interview of OW, BS Kelly was present at
the briefing. When asked whether there was a plan to
interview OW the following
day, BS Kelly responded, “Yes, we can never be sure but we always go
prepared if that’s the
Communications
between SAPOL and the DCP leading up to the arrest
7.41am on 28 October 2020, DS Vanderwoude sent an email to Ms Powell
and Ms Wood in which she said that she was:
... happy to facilitate
any provision of evidence (statements etc) that you will require for any removal
if that is the way you decide to go tomorrow
will probably just need to decide what statements etc best suit the purpose ...
(Emphasis added)
4.51pm, Ms Bowyer responded, advising that the DCP had consulted with the Crown
that afternoon in relation to the potential removal
of OW. Ms Bowyer
advised that at that point in time they were struggling for evidence and
requested that SAPOL provide them with
further information, including specific
examples of Ms Wilmott’s treatment of Jasmine, and any specific
examples of the manner
in which Ms Wilmott had started treating OW in a
similar manner to Jasmine.
DS Vanderwoude
replied to that email at 7.40am the following morning. In the response, she
provided details of evidence obtained
by SAPOL implicating Ms Wilmott in
the mistreatment of Jasmine and OW, and her alleged criminal offending.
information included details of the following:
Occasions on
which Ms Wilmott had demonstrated a lack of care in relation to a failure
to provide OW with psychological support when
he had demonstrated extreme
behaviours at school.
Assaults by
Ms Wilmott on Jasmine.
A particular
assault of Jasmine by Ms Wilmott, which involved her kicking and punching
Jasmine and cutting her hair.
Observations
made by a neighbour of OW being forced to assault Jasmine.
An intake in
which concerns were raised about the manner in which Ms Wilmott
speaks/yells at OW.
An intake in
which it was reported that OW was sent to school with inadequate food.
to the email were a selection of statements said to demonstrate
Ms Wilmott’s mistreatment of Jasmine as observed by
friends, family
and respite carers.
the lead up to the arrest, there was also further surveillance of
Ms Wilmott. The purpose of this surveillance was to gain intelligence
decisions about when it was best to safely arrest
Ms Wilmott. The plan was
to attend at Ms Wilmott’s house at a time when she was likely to be
the only person present. This
would avoid the need for OW to witness his
mother’s arrest.
Unfortunately,
matters did not go to plan, as OW was home from school that day because he was
sick. Consequently, he was present
when the police attended to arrest
Ms Wilmott.
29 October 2020, police first became aware that OW was not at school when
DBS McGilchrist and BS Kelly turned up at Blackwood
Primary School at
receiving that information, at 9.20am, DBS McGilchrist contacted
DS Vanderwoude and advised her of the situation. DS Vanderwoude
DBS McGilchrist that they would go ahead with the plan to arrest
Ms Wilmott and would ask for her to arrange for someone to
come and be with
OW. DS Vanderwoude requested that DBS McGilchrist make contact with
the DCP and clarify whether they proposed to
9.30am, DBS McGilchrist contacted Ms Wood and received confirmation that
the DCP were intending to remove OW from Ms Willmott’s
custody that
day. DBS McGilchrist advised Ms Wood that there would need to be a
change of location for the prescribed interview
because OW was home from school
as he was unwell.
Ms Wood had no memory of this conversation, she did not dispute that it
took place. She reiterated however, that no final
decision was to be made about
the removal of OW until they arrived at the Wilmott house. Ms Wood
would be fair to say that we, at that point in time, would have had an idea
that final decision can’t
be made and wasn’t made until such a time as we were actually present in
the home and Gen had
undertaken an assessment and then that final decision was
made. So even if we’ve done a whole pile of background reading and
information and sourced other information, we can’t make a final decision
until we are physically there doing the investigation.
was Ms Wood’s evidence that no final assessment could be made of the
information received until present at the house. She
have still got there and said ‘Actually, no, none of this information is
correct and we’re not going to follow
through with the removal’, at
which point, if I changed - after the assessment was done, if I had changed my
mind, we would
have informed police of that and the reasons for that.
9.32am, DBS McGilchrist called DS Vanderwoude back and advised that
the DCP were intending to remove OW. There was also some
discussion about
postponing the prescribed interview, subject to assessing how unwell OW was.
10.57am, DBS McGilchrist and BS Kelly attended at Ms Wilmott’s
was at the house, she
made contact with Ms Wood to advise her of the situation.
11.22am, BS Kelly called Sergeant Dayman to discuss whether, if the
interview was to occur, she should conduct it at OW’s
the Victim Management suites. The advice that she received was to adopt
whatever course OW was more comfortable
11.34am, Ms Wood and Ms Bowyer arrived at Ms Wilmott’s home address
and received a briefing from the police who were in
attendance.
They then left the premises prior
to the police embarking on the prescribed interview.
the decision made to carry out a
removal of OW?
is apparent from this brief chronology of events, there was some conflict
between the evidence of the various witnesses about
when the DCP made the
decision to remove OW from the Wilmott household.
reasons that will become apparent, when I come to consider
Ms Wilmott’s application to exclude OW’s evidence, the
circumstances in which this decision was made, in particular by whom and when,
are central to Mrs Shaw KC’s argument. It is,
therefore, necessary to
consider the evidence on this topic in some detail.
was no suggestion by any witness that it was anyone other than the DCP who was
to make the decision about whether OW was to
be removed. It was very clear
across the evidence of all of the witnesses that, whilst SAPOL played a role in
providing information
and assistance, that was the extent of their involvement.
In particular, it was apparent to me, from the evidence of Ms Wood, that
experienced in her role and takes the making of decisions, such as these, very
seriously. I gained the impression from Ms
Wood that even if SAPOL had
attempted to transgress into the role of the DCP and influence the decision,
they would have been met
with fierce resistance. There is, however, no evidence
to suggest that SAPOL made any such attempt.
evidence about when the decision to remove OW was made is not so clear. Read
literally, the evidence of some of the SAPOL witnesses
is inconsistent with that
of Ms Wood.
considering that evidence, and the apparent inconsistencies, it is helpful to
consider the regime in place for the removal
of a child under
Children and Young People (Safety) Act 2017
(SA) (‘CYPS Act’)
and how that took effect in this case.
41 of the CYPS Act relevantly provides:
41—Removal of child
or young person
(1) Subject to this section, if a child protection officer believes on
reasonable grounds that—
(a) a child or young person has suffered, or there is a significant possibility
that a child or young person will suffer, serious
(b) it is necessary to remove the child or young person from that situation in
order to protect them from suffering serious harm
or further serious harm;
(c) there is no reasonably practicable alternative to removing the child or
young person in the circumstances,
the child protection officer may remove the child or young person from any
premises, place, vehicle or vessel using such force (including
breaking into the
premises, place, vehicle or vessel) as is reasonably necessary for the
(4) A child protection officer who is an employee of the Department may only
remove a child or young person from the custody of a
parent or guardian of the
child or young person with the Chief Executive’s prior approval.
(5) Subsections (3) and (4) do not apply if the child protection officer
believes on reasonable grounds that the delay involved in
seeking prior approval
would significantly increase the risk of serious harm, or further serious harm,
being caused to the child
or young person.
146 provides the Minister or the Chief Executive with the power to delegate any
function or power under the CYPS Act to a
specified person or body.
147 identifies those who fall into the category of “child protection
officers”. It includes “an employee
of the Department authorised by
the Chief Executive by instrument in writing as a child protection
officer” and “police
follows that s 41 is to be utilised in circumstances in which a child is at
imminent risk of suffering serious harm. There are
two roles involved in making
this assessment, namely, the Chief Executive or the Chief Executive’s
delegate who approves the
decision, and the child protection officer who makes
the decision or forms the intent to remove.
Wood was the delegate who approved the decision of Ms Bowyer, who was the child
protection officer.
received a copy of a delegation made pursuant to s 146 of the CYPS Act
which includes supervisors of a child protection/guardianship
amongst those delegated
the power under s 41(4). Ms Wood, therefore, falls within that delegation.
The evidence of Ms Wood
I have said, the effect of Ms Wood’s evidence was that, whilst the plan
was in place to remove OW, no final decision was
to be made until all available
relevant information had been received. Ms Wood went on to further
elaborate about what needed to
occur before the DCP could make a decision to
effect a s 41 removal. She explained that any disclosures made by OW
during the prescribed
interview would be a relevant consideration. However, the
question to be determined on all of the available evidence, was whether
was sufficient information to suggest that OW was at risk of serious harm if he
remained in Ms Wilmott’s care.
Wood went on to explain that if she was satisfied that a child has been abused
or neglected, or is at significant risk of abuse
or neglect, the child may need
to be removed from their parents’ care in order to mitigate that
relation to the assessment that was conducted before any such determination is
made, Ms Wood further explained that the DCP will
consider whether they can
manage the risk with the child remaining in the home or whether the risk is
significant enough that the
child needs to be
Ms Wood concluded
that, in this particular case, the DCP found no factors that would mitigate the
risk and that the only option
the DCP had was to invoke a removal under
s 41 of the CYPS Act.
to the timing of the decision to remove OW, in her evidence in chief,
Ms Wood explained that it was only once they were present
in the Willmott
information and she made her final assessment
that OW should be
cross-examination, Ms Wood was asked about whether the decision to remove OW had
in fact been made at, or by the time of, the
strategy meeting. It was her
evidence that, at that time, no decision had to be made, as the DCP needed to
undertake their own assessment
of whether the grounds for a s 41 removal could
be established.
explained that it was necessary for the DCP to undertake their own
investigation:
the intake alone is just information that suggests that there is a risk to the
child. We still need to conduct our own investigation
and be satisfied, as the
delegate I need to be satisfied that the child is considered to have been - to
have either been abused or
neglected or to be at significant risk of abuse or
neglect and that that - and that child needed to be removed from their
care in order to mitigate that.
with that approach, on 28 October, the DCP sought legal advice from the Crown.
At 4.51pm, Ms Bowyer sent DS Vanderwoude
an email referring to a
“potential removal” of OW, requesting additional information,
further reflecting that by that
time, no decision had been made.
cross-examination Ms Wood was asked whether at about 9.30am on 29 October the
DCP confirmed to DBS McGilchrist that it was intended
to remove OW that day.
She responded:
think it would be fair to say that we, at that point in time, would have had an
idea about what way we were proceeding, but, again,
that final decision
can’t be made and wasn’t made until such a time as we were actually
present in the home and Gen had
undertaken an assessment and then that final
decision was made. So even if we’ve done a whole pile of background
reading and
information and sourced other information, we can’t make a
final decision until we are physically there doing the investigation.
asked whether she disputed that she had told the police that they were still
intending to remove OW that day, Ms Wood again
attempted to explain the
I’m saying that there is a possibility that I had said that that was our
intention and that that was the view that we had.
However, we still would - I
could have still got there and said ‘Actually, no, none of this
information is correct and we’re
not going to follow through with the
removal’, at which point, if I changed - after the assessment was done, if
I had changed
my mind, we would have informed police of that and the reasons for
Wood was also asked about whether at 11.05am, she advised DBS McGilchrist that
she planned on having members from the DCP attend
at the home address and carry
out the removal process. She repeated, yet again, that whilst that may have
been their intention,
it was still necessary to make the assessment and arrive
at a final decision once they were present at the house.
basis of the removal of OW is set out in the affidavit relied upon in the
guardianship proceedings in the Youth Court. It relevantly
department was concerned regarding the care [OW] has been afforded by Ms
Wilmott, Ms Wilmott has been arrested and charged with
criminal neglect and two
counts of aggravated assault in relation to the death of Jasmine. [OW] has
witnessed and experienced Ms
Wilmott’s manipulative, controlling,
neglectful and abusive care towards her children and is at significant risk of
emotional and psychological harm in the care of Ms Wilmott. [OW]
is showing some indicators of emotional harm, such as recently purposely
his breath until he passed out and providing blades of sharpness to classmates.
[OW’s] ongoing experiences of being
cared for by Ms Wilmott place him at
risk of continued emotional harm. At the time, [OW] does not have any
relationship with [MW].
The department require the proposed order to make
assessments of [MW’s] willingness and/or capacity to provide care for
And there is a significant child protection history relating to Ms
Wilmott’s care of children. These notifications, in conjunction
information from SAPOL’s ongoing investigation, display a serious pattern
of Ms Wilmott’s abuse and neglect towards
children in her care.
was Ms Wood’s evidence that although the affidavit was drafted subsequent
to the removal of OW, it accurately reflected
the basis of her decision on 29
October 2020.
The evidence of DBS Ward
was DBS Ward’s evidence that the purpose behind making contact with the
DCP was to formulate a safety plan for OW for after
Ms Wilmott’s
DBS ward explained that
although he had never previously been involved in the removal of a child, he was
aware that under s 41 of
the CYPS Act, a police officer has the power to
remove a child if there is imminent danger to that child. However, he said
weren’t the circumstances to do that and it wasn’t the
case that we were wanting a removal, for example, we just wanted
another agency
to look after the welfare of [OW] once the arrest had been
cross-examination, when DBS Ward was pressed on the topic of SAPOL’s
involvement in the removal of OW, he remained firm
and said “And, again,
I’ll reiterate, SAPOL did not advocate for a removal. It was our
responsibility to report to the
When it was
suggested to him that the purpose of the meeting with the DCP on 27 October 2020
was to arrange to obtain a statement
from OW in the absence of Ms Wilmott, DBS
Ward refuted the suggestion. He
I would doubt
it, because it wasn’t a motivation, it wasn’t the reason. Our whole
purpose of that meeting was the safety
concerns, no strategy, nothing to do with
how we’re going to get [OW] to talk or anything like that. It was safety,
we had that responsibility.
Ward was also asked whether the issue about OW’s welfare was really about
concerns that he would not “disclose”
whilst he remained in the care
of Ms Wilmott. DBS Ward denied that this was the case and explained that whilst
that may have been
discussed as an outcome that could occur, it was not the
motivation for having OW
When asked directly
of the arrest, DBS Ward replied
“I don’t recall doing that,
I’m not saying that we didn’t do that but at the end of the day DCP
are responsible
Ward was cross-examined about a passage in a statement that he had prepared
shortly before giving evidence,
in which he had said “From discussions with [AP’s] daughters, it was
obvious he couldn’t be relied upon to be present
within the household to
ensure the safety of [OW]. Therefore, the investigators advised the DCP of our
obligations under the
Children and Young People (Safety) Act 2017
recommended the removal of [OW] on the day of the accused’s
Whilst DBS Ward
accepted that he had used those words, he suggested it was a poor choice of
words, that did not accurately reflect
the situation. He explained “That
is what I have written, in reflection that is probably a bad choice of words
because I don’t
recall recommending to the DCP that we remove the
evidence of DS Vanderwoude
was DS Vanderwoude’s evidence that prior to her attending Ms
Wilmott’s house to effect her arrest, she understood
that the DCP were to
carry out a removal.
cross-examination, she clarified that it was her understanding that at some
point on 29 October 2020 it was likely that OW would
evidence of DBS McGilchrist
McGilchrist was one of the Operation Veritas team members who attended at the
strategy meeting with the DCP. She made some “dot
point” notes
during the course of the meeting. She explained that her notes did not reflect
the entirety of the discussion.
One of the dot point notes made by DBS
McGilchrist was “need to make an assessment as to whether they can remove
Written next to
that was “DCP”, meaning that comment could be attributed to the DCP.
was the recollection of DBS McGilchrist that during the meeting there was
reference to an application to remove OW. She
consideration for an application to apply for removal. That is also by DCP.
Ultimately any application to remove a child
under s.41 of the Child and Young
Person (Safety) Act, there’s obviously certain strict criteria s to when a
child protection
officer can remove a child. So obviously that is done by DCP
and they have to establish whether it meets a criteria and they make
application decisions in relation to that.
McGilchrist was asked what the DCP said about that with reference to her notes.
She responded:
have a dot point consider application to apply for removal as I didn’t
think [OW] would feel safe to disclose while still
in the care of Jenni. Again,
that’s a dot point, that’s not to say that the entirety of what DCP
actual note made by DBS McGilchrist
application to Crown for removal as they don’t think [OW] would feel safe
to disclose whilst still in the care of Jenni.
cross-examined about who she meant by “they”, DBS McGilchrist said
that whilst it was five years ago and she could
not say with certainty who made
the statement, the use of the word “they” would tend to suggest that
it was someone from
the DCP or the adoption
That view was
reinforced by DBS McGilchrist’s understanding that it was only the
DCP who could make an application to the
Crown for the removal of
was DBS McGilchrist’s evidence that at 9.20am on 29 October 2020, she
telephoned DS Vanderwoude and in that conversation
DS Vanderwoude asked her to
clarify with the DCP “whether they were going to remove
As a consequence,
at 9.30am, she contacted Ms Wood “and they confirmed they were still
intending to remove [OW] from Jenni
Wilmott’s custody that
At 9.32am, DBS
McGilchrist contacted DS Vanderwoude “and advised DCP were still intending
to do the removal of
attending at Ms Wilmott’s home address, at 11.05am, DBS McGilchrist again
made contact with Ms Wood to advise her that
OW was at home. She said
“[o]nce I confirmed that Catherine advised she was going to send members
to attend the home address
to carry out the removal process in relation to
2.16pm, at the conclusion of the interview with OW, DBS McGilchrist contacted
the DCP. Her note of the conversation reads “agreed
to bring [AP] in to
speak to him first to explain what is going to occur and to see if he is willing
to explain that Jenni has been
arrested, explain removal process to [OW] with
police and DCP”.
cross-examination, DBS McGilchrist agreed that it was her understanding that the
DCP would speak with AP first to explain what
was happening.
Findings about the circumstances in which the decision was made
to remove OW from Ms Wilmott’s care
reject any suggestion that the investigators in the Veritas task force attempted
to, or did in fact, influence the DCP staff in
their decision to remove OW from
Ms Wilmott’s care. There is no support in the evidence for that
contention. The evidence
was consistent across all of the witnesses, that
whilst SAPOL had a role in assisting the DCP and providing information to them,
that was the extent of their role.
was the DCP who were required to make the decision about whether to remove OW
from the Wilmott household.
my view, whilst superficially there may appear to be inconsistences about when
that decision was made, on a deeper analysis, it
is apparent that those
differences are illusory.
strategy meeting on 27 October 2020, came about as the result of a desire on the
part of SAPOL and the DCP to look out for the
care and wellbeing of OW. I
accept the evidence that, as the date of arrest approached, police concerns
Ms Wilmott to OW increased. There is a degree of
artificiality in approaching the situation faced by the police on the basis of
the suggestion that, historically, Ms Wilmott had treated the boys in her
household differently to the girls, and that there was
only limited evidence of
abusive behaviour by Ms Wilmott towards OW. The police were armed with
allegations (supported by witness
statements) of serious and prolonged
mistreatment of Jasmine by Ms Wilmott. No doubt being arrested and charged
would place significant
pressure on Ms Wilmott, in circumstances in which it
would be obvious that OW was potentially an important witness as to what had
taken place in the family home. It is unsurprising that, as a consequence,
police concerns about the risk posed to OW were heightened.
I would go so far
as to say that it would have been negligent for them to not have taken steps to
ensure OW’s safety.
accept the evidence that the strategy meeting was not a means by which the
police were attempting to effect a removal of OW to
further their investigation.
It was about ensuring that those best equipped to make the decision about OW had
the most current, relevant
information to do so.
the end of the strategy meeting, the DCP were left considering the most
appropriate, available options for OW, given his mother’s
imminent arrest.
fact that they sought legal advice from the Crown, and further information about
OW and Jasmine from the police, supports the
suggestion that genuine efforts
were being made to come to a decision about what was in OW’s best
accept the evidence of Ms Wood that, whilst plans were being put in place so
that the removal of OW could be carried out from some
time after the strategy
meeting, no final decision was to be made until they arrived at the Wilmott home
on 29 October 2020. Such
an approach accords with commonsense and the practical
reality of the situation that the DCP were confronted with.
DCP had been provided with information about previous allegations made about Ms
Wilmott, and the limited options available for
alternative carers within the
household. Despite whatever tentative views were arrived at between 27 October
and 29 October 2020,
no final decision could be made until their arrival at the
Wilmott household. The situation was at least potentially dynamic. The
may have changed their position and determined not to arrest Ms Wilmott that
day, or there may have been a relative, of whom
they had been unaware, who was
at the home and was an appropriate alternative carer for OW. Either of these
events, or any other
number of exigencies, may have resulted in the DCP coming
to a different decision about the need to remove OW from the household.
that reason, it was not only sensible, but entirely appropriate, to make a final
determination once present with OW in the house.
also find that the decision made by the DCP was motivated solely by their belief
of what was in OW’s best interest. To make
it plain, I reject any
suggestion that the DCP were influenced in their decision making process by a
desire to assist the police
in obtaining evidence against Ms Wilmott. That
conclusion is supported by Ms Wood’s evidence, that right up until the
that she came to court to give evidence, she was unaware of whether or not
the police had in fact interviewed OW. Had assisting
the police been her
motivation, that was a matter she would have been acutely aware of.
The first interview with OW
first interview with OW commenced at 12.13pm on 29 October 2020. As
mentioned, each of the police officers in attendance at
Ms Wilmott’s home
that day had pre‑allocated roles. DBS Ward was responsible for
Ms Wilmott’s arrest and conducting
an interview with her. He
therefore played no role in OW’s interview, as he was occupied in dealing
with Ms Wilmott.
DBS McGilchrist
and BS Kelly were responsible for dealing with OW. BS Kelly gave
evidence about her state of mind when she arrived
at the Wilmott home to
interview OW. She
going there to meet him because I had been allocated the task to conduct a
vulnerable witness interview if he chose, so I went
there prepared if he chose
to conduct the interview. If he didn’t choose to conduct an interview,
victim management is still
or witness management is still required in
investigations like this and so I - that would have remained with me even if he
proceed with an interview.
they first arrived at the house, there were a number of other police in
attendance and OW was in the lounge room. At 11.45am,
BS Kelly had an initial
conversation with OW in the lounge room in the presence of DBS McGilchrist.
BS Kelly introduced herself to
OW, and commenced attempting to build
rapport with him to break down any uncomfortable
She described her
role at that point in the following
straightaway when I go to a house, such as an example like this investigation,
is to - my job is to - it’s called
victim management but it can be
witness, like a subject, whoever the person I’m dealing with, is to be
that point of contact
for them, to communicate with them, to build rapport with
them, to - he was just a child and so I was there to try and make him feel
comfortable as possible because there was a lot going on for a kid in the house
and my job is to try and make him feel as comfortable
as possible.
initial conversation was not recorded on video. Both DBS McGilchrist and
BS Kelly were asked about this. DBS McGilchrist said
normal practice to record conversations of this nature. She
you were to put a video straight on in front of a child, that’s going to
break down any trust, it’s more about
introducing yourself, what your role
is, you’re not discussing any of the criminal investigation itself, just
whether they’re
willing to partake in an interview and giving the options
so there was no requirement to put a video on at that stage.
explained that, in her view, she was not required to video record this
conversation, as it was about rapport building and
making OW feel comfortable.
She went on to
a big part of my job is victim/subject/witness welfare and if I’m trying
to look after a child in really stressful
circumstances, where I’m just
having general conversation, rapport building, trying to make him feel
comfortable, having a
big - having a camera in his face is doing the exact
did, however, make some handwritten notes of the
conversation.
She made these
notes when she returned to base after the
Relevantly, these
notes record the
front loungeroom where piano is, introduced myself, he showed me the piano,
inside the piano, played some tunes on piano.
Explained I’m police + explained Elaine’s police as well.
[OW] said “Is this what happens when someone dies” We are here
in relation to your sister.
I went on the explain to [OW] that I wanted to ask him some Q’s about
his family. W/S ok but didn’t want to talk about
Jasmine’s death
– didn’t want to go over that detail. I agreed + said I won’t
have him need to talk then
finding Jasmine.
I explained he can ask Q’s anytime + I’ll be transparent if 1)
allowed to answer 2) don’t know answer 3) I will
[OW] happy with this.
Option given for [OW] to have P.C in I/V. He asked for his mum –
advised if can’t be mum – suggested Brenton (chaplain
– [OW] declined to have anyone else. Was happy to proceed w/o any support
I gave [OW] option of doing I/V at VMT suites – lunch on way, comfy
– we can do I/V @ home – he preferred home.
recounting the detail of that conversation, BS Kelly emphasised that OW
made it very clear that he did not want to go over Jasmine’s
death in any
detail and she agreed that she would not require him to do so.
explained to OW that he could have a person present during the interview
“to support him, be of emotional help, to
check in with
OW asked for his
mother to be present, however, it was explained to him that she would not be
suitable. As an alternative, it was
suggested that “Brenton”, the
school chaplain, could be present. OW said that he did not want Brenton and was
to proceed without a support
was BS Kelly’s evidence that OW agreed to participate in the
interview and said that if he had not agreed, she would not
have proceeded. She
explained that, in her role, the focus was on OW. She said “I am not part
of the investigative team, so
my whole role is victim focussed, witness focussed
and protecting their welfare,
basically”.
gave evidence that the initial conversations with OW were important because she
had been trained that there was no utility
in attempting to force someone to
participate in an interview when they did not want to. She
there was a big focus on there is no point in pushing someone to be part of a
prescribed interview because it doesn’t give
the best reliable account of
what’s happened and so we wouldn’t dream of trying to push someone
into an interview if
they’re not ready, because it doesn’t achieve
OW was given the option of attending the victim management suites, however, he
declined and said that he would be happy
to speak with the police at
An assessment was made
that OW was not too sick to be interviewed.
the formal interview commenced at 12.13pm the video camera was turned on.
was turned off at the conclusion of the interview at 2.16pm.
the course of the interview, OW appeared to be in good spirits, engaged and
chatty. In cross-examination, BS Kelly explained
that the focus of the
interview was “To find out from [OW] what family life was like, what his -
what he’s experienced
growing up in his family, what his relationships
were like, what took place in that
household”.
purpose, BS Kelly had prepared a very extensive interview plan. BS Kelly did
not accept the suggestion made by Mrs Shaw
KC that she had deliberately avoided
telling OW that she wanted to speak to him about his mother. The following
topics were discussed:
dynamic and OW’s relationship with AW and Jasmine.
receiving gifts on her birthday.
arrangements at Gleneagles Circuit, Greenwith, including Jasmine sleeping in the
Jasmine not
bringing friends home.
Family meal
times and the provision of food in the household.
The lunches that
Jasmine was provided to take to school.
children’s attendance at various schools.
The school drop
off routine.
undertaken by the children around the house, in particular, the requirement for
Jasmine to undertake a lot of the chores.
An occasion on
which OW ran away from home after breaking a television.
having dinner together the night before Jasmine committed suicide.
The morning
before Jasmine committed suicide.
The relationship
between Jasmine and Ms Wilmott.
telling OW that Jasmine had been diagnosed with autism and his belief that
Jasmine did not have autism.
Jasmine taking
food out of the fridge because she was hungry.
Jasmine staying
in her room by herself a lot. She would request that books or food be brought
Sleeping with
Jasmine in a tent in the backyard at Larkdale Crescent, O’Halloran
SM living with
them for a period of time, although OW had limited memory of her because of his
belief that he was the favourite child.
telling OW that Jasmine stole food.
Disagreements
between Jasmine and SM.
have watched this and the subsequent two interviews conducted with OW. He is
clearly very bright. I have no doubt that given
the subjects that were
discussed in this interview, against the backdrop of his mother’s arrest,
OW was well aware that the
interview was focussed on Ms Wilmott, and the
circumstances of Jasmine’s death.
Ms Wilmott’s home address, potentially for the purpose of
the time that they arrived at the house, AP was present.
arrival, and after assessing the current situation, the decision was made by
Ms Bowyer to remove OW pursuant to s 41 of the CYPS
have said, Ms Bowyer was, for the purpose of the Act, the child protection
officer who formed the view that OW needed
to be removed. Ms Bowyer
conveyed that decision to Ms Wood as the person with the delegated
authority to conduct the removal of
and Ms Wood asked AP to explain what was happening to OW, as they thought
the information would be better received coming
from someone OW knew.
After AP explained what was happening to OW, OW had a shower and packed some
belongings, and was driven away.
After the s 41 removal, OW was placed in
the care of a maternal uncle.
gave evidence that consideration was given to other placements for OW. AP was
excluded as a suitable carer on the basis
that SAPOL told DCP that he was
present in the household during the time that concerns were raised about Jasmine
and OW, and he had
done nothing to ensure the protection of either of the
Ms Wilmott’s
brother, who was staying in a granny flat at the back of the house, was also
deemed unsuitable on the basis that
he was a potential witness, who had yet to
be interviewed.
the perspective of DCP, the next step was to complete an application to the
Youth Court, seeking a three-month care and protection
order in relation to OW.
That application first came before the Court on 5 November
in that application was some additional information that came from OW on the day
of his removal from Ms Wilmott’s
custody. It was reported by
Ms Wood and Ms Bowyer that, whilst they were driving to OW’s
uncle’s house, they asked OW
if he understood what was happening and why
the DCP were worried. He responded that “DCP did not want what mum did to
to happen to
5 November 2020, an interim order was made in the Youth Court placing OW under
the guardianship of the Chief Executive of the
Department for Child Protection.
There has been no challenge to that order or the sufficiency of the information
and/or evidence
upon which it was based.
matter next came before the Youth Court on 26 November 2020, followed
by a number of subsequent hearings, leading up to 15 July
2021, when a
care and protection order was made placing OW under the guardianship of the
Chief Executive of the Department for Child
Protection, until he attained 18
years of age.
The second interview with OW
police conducted a second interview with OW on 3 March 2021.
his evidence, DBS Ward explained the circumstances that resulted in the
police reinterviewing OW. He
occasion that [OW] was interviewed, obviously
had absolutely no idea of
what had occurred that day. Her life had been upended. It’s quite common
that a child won’t
disclose anything on a first occasion. There was no
opportunity for rapport build between Vanessa Kelly and [OW] and also
preference to go to the school is not ideal for interviewing
children because of the distractions, the child is aware that everyone
watching them go in a room, teachers being involved. So my understanding is that
from the interview there was very little
information gained from [OW], so
therefore it was always going to be our plan to interview her a second time when
the circumstances
were correct.
explained the circumstances that led up to the second
Kelly and I were in constant communications with each other as we did want to
speak to [OW] again. However we didn’t
want to put any pressure on her or
cause her any stress and we felt that if there was a separation of time between
[OW] and Ms Wilmott,
that then maybe [OW] might be more open to talking
something that we had planned but I was getting communications from the DCP and
Child Protection Services that they were eager to
interview [OW] themselves, and
so not wanting to hold up their processes and understanding the importance of
their processes, we
then arranged a meeting with [OW] to see if it would be
appropriate to interview her a second time.
described making arrangements through OW’s caregiver to interview him at
9.00am on 25 February 2021, at the Sturt
Police Station. He said that
although he would have preferred to wait longer before reinterviewing OW, he
felt a pressure to press
ahead because he was aware that the DCP and CPS also
wanted to interview OW, but were waiting for the police interviews to take place
he was asked why he would have preferred to wait longer before conducting the
second interview, DBS Ward
my experience having investigated numerous child criminal investigations, where
the children are victims, is that if there
is that separation from the child and
the alleged perpetrator and that influence is removed, that you are going to
probably have
a better chance of a child being more open and frank in a
prescribed interview rather than being protective or - and just withholding
information or not talking at all.
Ward went on to
it would have been, would have been Vanessa Kelly’s and my preference that
[OW] had already received some counselling or
was in a safe environment within
her house where she was - that an adequate amount of time had been of separation
between herself
and Ms Wilmott, we had no set date. We were just going to
continue to be in correspondence with the DCP and CPS and also the caregivers
[OW] and see whether they would tell us ‘Look I think [OW] is probably in
a better position now to have her second interview’.
That would have been
the preferred circumstances but I also had to be mindful of the fact that
another organisation wanted to also
speak to her and I didn’t want to hold
24 February 2021, the day before the interview, DBS Ward was made aware
that OW was unwell, “potentially due to the stress
of tomorrow’s
interview”.
DBS Ward did not initially recall being made aware of this information, his
memory was refreshed in cross-examination,
when taken to an email exchange
between himself and a case worker from the DCP. In that exchange, the case
worker went on to express
a concern that as a consequence of OW’s stress,
“he may be unwilling to
was BS Kelly’s evidence that as a consequence of receiving this
information the interview was cancelled and replaced with
“consult” to help ease OW’s
When asked why she
did not just cancel the arrangements for the interview and reschedule, she
already had anxiety about it, so it would be in his best interest for me to meet
him and - in person to perhaps, if he’s
got any questions he wants to ask
me, I’m there to help with that.
following day, OW, in the company of a case worker from the DCP, met up with
BS Kelly and DBS Ward. In the end, no interview
took place that day.
DBS Ward explained why. He
arrived with - I think she arrived with a DCP worker and as soon as [OW] walked
through the doors of the Sturt Police Station,
Vanessa and I turned to each
other and said ‘We’re not interviewing today’. She was
obviously stressed, you could
see she was uncomfortable and so it is not in our
best interests to further traumatise or stress a child out. So Vanessa had a
conversation with [OW] for about 10 minutes after which Vanessa came
out, that was the end of the meeting, [OW] left the police station
and Vanessa
and I got into the car and I asked what had occurred and she said ‘I
don’t think [OW] is getting any trauma
counselling or anything like that
and I think we need to organise that’. So we returned to Adelaide and
Vanessa phoned an organisation
called Act For Kids and organised some
counselling for [OW].
Kelly’s evidence about these events was consistent with that of DBS Ward.
She said that prior to the interview being abandoned,
OW requested to speak
privately with BS Kelly. That request was facilitated.
said she spoke privately with OW in a separate room at the police station.
During that conversation, general matters were
discussed, including his current
living situation, the intention to conduct an addendum interview with him, and
general matters relating
to his welfare. She
talked to me about his current living situation. Again, this is a young, a young
boy who has been through a lot and my job
is to maintain rapport and hear how
he’s going to determine if he needs anything and in that conversation I
discussed that
I can - would he be open to counselling.
asked whether he would be open to counselling, OW agreed that he
her return to Adelaide, BS Kelly contacted ‘Act for Kids’ to place a
referral for someone to reach out to OW in regards
to counselling.
Willet was the psychologist who was allocated to OW and provided him with
ongoing counselling. I will come back to her involvement
in the context of the
third interview.
conversation that took place on 25 February 2021 was not video recorded. When
asked why not, BS Kelly
not - it’s not a prescribed requirement to but when it’s a
conversation around the victim, anxieties, welfare,
any questions that I can
the end of this conversation, it was decided that DBS Ward would continue
liaising with the DCP and OW’s foster parents
to arrange another time to
conduct a further interview.
cross-examination, Mrs Shaw KC asked BS Kelly about whether, during the course
of this conversation, she provided OW with the
option of not participating in
another interview. BS Kelly
have appreciated I don’t have those exact notes written down. I am very
consistent with the subjects that I interview
and they are very – it is
really important that I make them aware that they are not obliged and it is
important for me to say
that, not just because they do have a choice but because
there is absolutely no benefit in me trying to conduct an interview with
who doesn’t want to.
challenged about the fact that she had no specific recollection of whether she
told OW he was not obliged to participate, BS
Kelly remained firm about her
usual practices. She
Those exact
words, no, but we went to the consult knowing he had anxiety around the
interview so I can only presume I conducted my
regular consistent conversations
with subjects around ‘what’s his anxiety’ and anything that
came from that, like
would he like me to answer any questions about what it is
that he’s anxious about.
Kelly also remained firm in her evidence that had OW said that he did not want
to participate in a further interview, she would
not have made arrangements for
the second interview.
second interview was rescheduled for 21 March 2021. Due to DCP commitments, the
interview was brought forward and took place
on 3 March 2021.
10.10am, BS Kelly met with OW and Ms Bowyer at the Victim Management
The presence of Ms Bowyer during the second
digress to say something about the presence of Ms Bowyer during this interview.
Ms Bowyer had obviously played a central role
in the s 41 removal of OW.
It would appear that she also had some ongoing involvement with OW in the time
between the two interviews,
although to what extent is not clear. During the
cross-examination of BS Kelly, she was asked about her knowledge of
Ms Bowyer’s
previous involvement in the case. She responded that she
did not know. The following exchange then took
she was someone who was involved in your investigation, for example, during the
29 October 2020, would that be someone you would
think was appropriate to be
present during the interview.
he knows her. If she – and this is an if because I don’t know if she
was officially allocated, I don’t know
DCP workings, but the consistency
is important, so if he has been her contact since the removal, her – if
the communications with [OW] about where to from here and
what’s happening for him, then, to me, that’s a trusted, consistent
source for someone to sit with him. But essentially it’s not my decision
– like, if, on a police point of view, you know,
she’s not the
accused and, you know, there’s no – like, when he requested his mum,
we can’t have that. So
if he wanted her to be there, I’m going to
say yes to that because that’s his choice.
to be clear, you’ve got no record at any stage he said he wanted her to be
there or you have.
– yeah – yes, so Genevieve conveyed him in.
during, like, the pre-conversation before the videorecorded interview I will
always ask if he wants a prescribed companion present,
support person, and in
this case prescribed companion was requested at 1010 and Genevieve was his
support person.
appreciate you aren’t aware of the role of DCP in the original
investigation and their provision of information to SAPOL in
the original
investigation but can I ask you, as a matter of your training, is it the case
that if the prescribed companion has been
involved in the investigation, for
example, might be a potential witness, you would not ordinarily have that person
as a prescribed
necessarily. A prescribed companion is a support person, they are not allowed to
talk in the interview unless it’s to do
with welfare, such as ‘[OW],
would you like a break now?’, it’s simply a person with them as
– for support,
not to participate or turn to to ask questions or
references or anything of that matter.
apologise for asking this again, but I’m just clarifying, are you saying
the fact that they may have been involved in the
investigation or may be a
potential witness doesn’t matter, bearing in mind the nature of what
they’re doing.
not saying it doesn’t matter, that question is so incredibly broad, like,
there is so much that goes into consideration
to determine if someone would be
appropriate and Ben Ward, who had carriage of it, if she wasn’t
appropriate, he would have
said ‘She’s not appropriate’.
is that really a decision you left for Mr Ward, bearing in mind he had the
carriage of the investigation.
that a decision that you really had left at the feet of Mr Ward, bearing in mind
his role in the carriage of the investigation.
trust that Ben would have told me that she’s not appropriate to be a
support person if that was the case.
Shaw KC then asked BS Kelly a series of more general questions about the
approach she adopted in determining whether someone
is an appropriate prescribed
companion. Given the emphasis placed on this issue in
Mrs Shaw KC’s submissions, I set out this
cross-examination in
I just ask you a general question then in terms of your practice and your
training, ignoring this case for a minute, is it the
case that, as part of your
training – tell me one way or the other – that if a prescribed
companion is a potential witness
to the police investigation, you would –
if it was your decision, you would not have them as a prescribed companion.
a witness, there can be many, many witnesses in a case, not necessarily to the
direct allegations that are being brought forward.
So there could be a witness
to ‘I worked with this person’ and they’re a witness in the
case. So I can’t
say a clear black and white answer to that because
witnesses can hold many different roles in cases.
also in relation to whether the person may have been involved in the
investigation with police, that is, an investigator in the
sense of, for
example, providing the police with information towards the investigation, would
you regard that person as an appropriate
person to be a prescribed
for example, she was an - like, provide - had information on an intake, you
know, about the family and all of that, I don’t
see a problem with her
being a support because she’s not talking in the interview, she’s
not having conversation with
[OW] in the interview and she’s not aiding or
there anything in terms of what you understand to be the requirements that
you’re obliged to follow that you use as your
benchmark in that
who can be a support person?
have to try and think back to my training. The training taught us what their
role is and, for example, the importance of their role
and not – I’m
repeating this, but, you know, not saying anything, not aiding in answering
questions. That’s taught
in the training. I believe it’s a police
risk assessment and – are the ones that make the decision as to who
as to whether that support person is okay to be present.
conversation to build rapport that was not recorded
on video. When asked what
was discussed, BS Kelly replied, “His counselling, again just based
around rapport, just having lovely
human interaction about how it’s going,
how he is”.
cross-examination, BS Kelly further elaborated on the topics that were
discussed, which included OW’s current situation
and living arrangements,
and her intention to conduct a further interview. When asked whether she could
provide any additional details
interview, BS Kelly
have appreciated I don’t have those exact notes written down. I am very
consistent with the subjects that I interview
and they are very - it is really
important that I make them aware that they are not obliged and it is important
for me to say that,
not just because they do have a choice but because there is
absolutely no benefit in me trying to conduct an interview with someone
doesn’t want to.
that conversation, there was no discussion about Ms Wilmott or any matters that
were to be the subject of the interview.
Kelly explained that this was a deliberate decision on her part. She said
“it’s very clear in our training that we
do not engage in any
conversation about the event that we are going to be interviewing about and if
– you can’t control
what a witness says, if a witness were to bring
that up, I would be doing verbatim notes straightaway on that
conversation”.
formal interview commenced at 10.28am. The interview was recorded.
BS Kelly, DBS Ward and Ms Bowyer were present throughout
interview. It is clear from viewing the interview that, on this occasion, OW
was nervous and a little hesitant in speaking with
the police.
asked to describe OW’s demeanour during the second interview,
BS Kelly provided the following
first few interviews [OW] was shy. He was reserved. He didn’t sort of
speak freely, like we can get some witnesses coming
in and happy to talk about
the day at school, what they ate for lunch and we have some toys and things in
our room and they might
go and play with that. [OW] was reserved but definitely
we had rapport going because it wasn’t the first time I’d met
topics discussed during this interview were similar to those that had been
canvassed in the first interview. They included:
eating dinner together.
Occasions on
which Jasmine would eat separately in her bedroom.
undertaking household chores.
provided to the children for dinner.
Restriction on
access to food in the fridge.
OW preparing
food for Jasmine.
The alarm in
Jasmine’s bedroom at Lilford Way. The alarm was for Jasmine’s
The restriction
of Jasmine’s movements; limited opportunities to leave her bedroom.
On the day of
Jasmine’s death, her room was alarmed. OW had to deactivate the alarm to
go into the bedroom.
provided by Ms Wilmott about an occasion on which Jasmine took pills into her
Occasions on
which Ms Wilmott would take OW and AW out and leave Jasmine in her bedroom.
An occasion on
which the family attended a Korean restaurant and Jasmine came along as
hoarding of food in her room.
The events of
the morning of Jasmine’s death.
remaining in her bedroom, with the alarm turned on, throughout the school
OW denied that
he had ever been instructed to punish Jasmine.
Jasmine having
no access to technology.
Jasmine being
locked in her room at the Gleneagles house.
the conclusion of the interview, the group moved into a separate, more
comfortable lounge space. At this time, BS Kelly noticed
a change in the
demeanour of OW. She said that he was in good spirits and appeared relieved
that the interview was over. She said
that it was the most talkative and
relaxed that she had ever seen
This informal
conversation was not recorded.
that time, the police had no plan to conduct any further interview with OW. It
was DBS Ward’s evidence that he and BS Kelly
shared the view that OW
was not going to make any further disclosure and, in all likelihood, would never
speak frankly with the police.
investigation was completed in October 2020. On 11 November 2020, the task
force was stood down and a copy of the brief was
provided to the DPP. Those who
had been involved in the investigation returned to their respective areas of
SAPOL. The brief, however,
remained with DBS Ward.
21 April 2021, the charges against Ms Wilmott were withdrawn.
The third interview with OW
12 months later, on 8 March 2022, either DBS Ward or BS Kelly received
a telephone call from OW’s treating psychologist,
Miranda Willet, in which
she advised that she had just had a counselling session with OW, during which he
had divulged “a whole
information”.
Willet told the police that OW was prepared to speak with them however he had
some concerns.
meeting was arranged between Ms Willet, OW and the police on 22 March 2022, in
order to attempt to address these concerns. Present
at that meeting were OW, Ms
Willet, DBS Ward and BS Kelly. OW’s concerns primarily related to how AW
would react to OW speaking
with the police, and talking openly about what had
occurred in the Wilmott household. OW asked the police to go and speak with AW
to advise him that OW was proposing to speak with them, on the basis that he
wanted AW’s approval. OW wanted the police to
attempt to ensure that if
he spoke with them, he would still have a relationship with
the meeting, BS Kelly assured OW that the police were not going to make OW do
anything that he did not want to do. OW was
told “If he provided an
interview, that he can still opt out at any
meeting was not video recorded. BS Kelly made notes of the meeting. One of two
pages of her notes for this date was tendered.
These notes
22/3/22 [OW] – Meeting
Met [OW] + his psychologist Miranda - I/O Ben WARD
Purpose to answer questions [OW[ has in regard to if he were to provide
statement (i/v) to police.
* Main concern in what brother [AW] will think of him.
Asked police talk [AW] + tell him [OW] will prove stmnt + ask if he
approves. [OW] wants us to tell [AW] + ensure he will still
have relationship
Further discussion around assuring [OW] police arent going
anything he doesnt want to. If provides I/V – he can opt out at any
[OW] wanted time to think about it + talk over Miranda.
the second page of BS Kelly’s notes was not tendered, it would appear from
cross-examination that she also noted “No
forcing, pull out, mum in
trouble for other
Kelly explained that she told OW that he was not solely responsible for the
allegations against his mother.
the meeting, DBS Ward made a note of what had taken place at the meeting in the
shield occurrence log. He recorded the
Meeting this date with Psychologist, Miranda WILLETT, and [OW] and VMT
member, Vanessa KELLY. Meeting arranged to discuss with [OW]
his concerns about
speaking to police and the repercussions the disclosures may have on his brother
[AW]. [OW] advised in very clear
terms that he was under no obligation to
provide police a statement and the decision was purely his.
Following meeting, I/O WARD received phone call from WILLETT advising [OW]
was happy to speak to police but would like police to speak
to [AW] first and
gain [AW’s] understanding.
that meeting, DBS Ward made contact with AW, as requested by OW, and
arranged for a meeting to take place on 25 March 2022.
day before the meeting, on 24 March 2022, the DCP advised that OW’s carer,
Patrick Dupont, had been in contact and had
raised some concerns about OW
providing a statement. As a consequence, DBS Ward telephoned Mr Dupont.
Details of that conversation
were recorded in the Police Incident Log by
The following
I reassured DUPONT that [OW] was not going to be
‘culpable’ for any admitted offending. [OW] has made admission to
Psychologist that he hit Jasmine at the direction of
WILMOTT, JENNI
this was done in the form of ‘punishment’, [OW] also stated he was
responsible for locking Jasmine in her room including
on the day of
Jasmine’s death. Jasmine passed away on 5 October 2018, at the time of
her death [OW] was less than 10yres and
3 months old as he was born on
12/07/2008. I advised DUPONT that any ‘offences’ [OW] committed
under the age of 10yrs
he could not be culpable for and it would not be in the
DPP’s or Public Interest to prosecute [OW] as any actions he committed
against Jasmine were likely to have been at Jenni’s instruction. Prior to
[OW’s] admissions, there had been no allegations/evidence
that [OW] had
committed any offences. Advised DUPONT that it was preferable to get a
statement from [OW] prior to the 8th of April
as I had been advised by DCP that
[MW] was travelling to Adelaide from Victoria to see [OW]. Explained I wanted
to retain the ‘integrity’
of the investigation and prevent any
suggestion that there was opportunity for [MW] and [OW] to collude etc.
Advised DUPONT that we had given [OW] the assurance that he was in control
and that if he was to provide a statement he wouldn’t
be compelled to give
evidence against Jenni given his relationship (son/mother) and his welfare was
of utmost importance and Police
wouldn’t do anything to jeopardise his
mental health.
Evidence Act 1929
provides provisions in
regards to circumstances such as these.
Spoke at length that [OW’s] evidence was not relied upon in determining
charges against Jenni. Advised the DPP have a list
of charges they’re
looking at laying against Jenni and “if” [OW] was to provide a
statement then additional charges
would be laid in respect of his evidence.
Stressed that a statement from [OW] was not going to get Jenni in trouble, that
her actions. ...
DUPONT has my contact details if he wishes to seek clarification or discuss
things in the future.
cross-examination, DBS Ward agreed that at the meeting on 22 March 2022, he had
given OW an assurance that if he gave a statement
he would stay in control, in
the terms that he explained to Mr Dupont.
meeting with AW went ahead as scheduled on 25 March 2022. It was DBS
Ward’s evidence that during the meeting with AW,
AW was upset and
disbelieved that OW would speak to the police. Whilst AW did not give OW his
approval to participate in an interview,
he said that he was not going to stand
in OW’s way or obstruct OW from speaking to the police.
reported the outcome of the meeting back to Ms Willet. On
5 April 2021, Ms Willet telephoned DBS Ward and advised him
OW was prepared to participate in an interview.
third interview took place on 8 April 2022. It was DBS Ward’s
evidence that there was again some urgency in conducting
the interview. On this
occasion, it was because there was a planned reunification of OW with MW, that
had been arranged for 22 April
2022. Based on DBS Ward’s experience,
he formed the view that it was best to reinterview OW before that reunification
so that it could not be suggested that OW’s account had been
contaminated by MW.
submissions, Mrs Shaw KC suggested that it was open to infer that the meeting
with MW was some sort of inducement that had
been held out to OW. Such a
suggestion is inconsistent with the evidence that the interview had to be
brought forward so that it
took place in advance of the meeting with MW. That
sequence of events would suggest that the meeting was not contingent upon OW
participating in an interview, but rather had been raised in advance of and
separate from the interview.
accept the submission made by Ms Litster that the approach adopted by DBS Ward
speaks to him doing his best to ensure that OW’s
account was truthful and
uncontaminated. He was aware that, by this time, MW had provided a statement
that implicated Ms Wilmott,
and wanted to avoid any suggestion that MW had
influenced the account provided by OW.
do not accept that a meeting with MW was held out as a form of inducement, nor
that it had any impact on what OW said at the interview.
third interview commenced at 2.19pm and was conducted in the Victim Management
suites. Present were BS Kelly, Ms Willet (as
the prescribed companion),
and OW. DS Vanderwoude viewed the interview from behind a mirror.
the formal interview was preceded by some general discussion between
BS Kelly and OW. These discussions broadly related to
During this
conversation, BS Kelly acknowledged that there were topics that it may be hard
for OW to talk about. Ms Willet was
present throughout most of this
conversation.
noted that during this conversation OW was “surprisingly
this interview, OW was far more forthcoming with the provision of information
than he had been in the first two interviews.
During the third interview, OW
discussed the following topics:
SM was treated
like Jasmine; Ms Wilmott would hit her a lot.
Ms Wilmott would
lock Jasmine in her room and sometimes would not allow her to eat.
The food that
Jasmine was given was basic, like Weetbix or carrots.
An occasion on
which Ms Wilmott conducted an inspection of Jasmine’s room and found food
that Jasmine was not meant to have
and, as a punishment, Ms Wilmott hit Jasmine
10 to 15 times.
Locating jars of
vomit in Jasmine’s room.
An occasion on
which Jasmine said “a bad word” and Ms Wilmott washed her mouth out
with soap and beat her with a rolling
Occasions on
which Ms Wilmott would hit Jasmine for not sweeping or mopping fast enough.
frequently striking Jasmine with a wooden spoon, once every two or three
Most days Ms
Wilmott would strike Jasmine with her hands.
Ms Wilmott would
make Jasmine hit herself.
An occasion on
which Ms Wilmott picked OW up from school and Jasmine was in the car wearing
only underpants. After driving for a
while, Ms Wilmott told Jasmine to hit
Ms Wilmott would
film Jasmine apologising to the therapist for not doing as she was told e.g.
hoarding food.
forcing Jasmine to do chores in her underwear.
Jasmine would
sometimes plead not to be hit.
Jasmine would
bruise as a result of being hit by Ms Wilmott. Ms Wilmott would tell
Jasmine to use ice to assist in the reduction
of the bruising.
An occasion on
which Jasmine got into trouble and Ms Wilmott cut off her hair.
Jasmine would be
provided with different food from the rest of the family for dinner.
Ms Wilmott would
tell OW to punish Jasmine. On some occasions, he would use his hands and on
other occasions he would wear boxing
Jasmine would be
locked in her bedroom (the laundry) at the Gleneagles address for days; she
would be in there for most of the days
in the school holidays. OW would let her
out at lunch time so that she could have something to eat and drink.
After school,
Jasmine would do chores and then she would be locked in her bedroom.
Wilmott’s behaviour to Jasmine was a bit better closer to the time that
Jasmine passed away.
Leading up to
the time of Jasmine’s death, OW had started letting her out of her
bedroom. Jasmine had started to knock on her
door and ask to be let out after
Ms Wilmott left.
On the day of
her death, Jasmine had knocked on her door and asked to be let out of her
bedroom. However, OW did not let her out.
circumstances of OW finding the suicide note and going into Jasmine’s
Ms Wilmott told
OW that Jasmine had an eating disorder and that was why they had to conduct room
Ms Wilmott told
OW that Jasmine had a growth disorder and was autistic.
When the family
moved in with AP, Ms Wilmott stopped being so physical with Jasmine. Ms Wilmott
was nicer to Jasmine when AP was
Ms Wilmott would
make comments about SM’s weight.
SM did some
chores but Jasmine did most of them.
An occasion on
which SM punched Jasmine and Ms Wilmott egged her on.
the end of the interview, Brevet Sergeant Kelly asked OW why he had not
previously mentioned some of the matters that came
up in the third interview.
I was still seeing mum all the time, and I didn’t want her to get angry at
me or- ... I was scared that I’d get
in trouble as well.
OW went on to further explain, “And, like, I was still really close to
mum and I felt I need to kind of protect her, I
asked why he was now speaking up, OW said that it was a consequence of no longer
seeing Ms Wilmott. He
it’s kind of separated me and helped me kind of realise the stuff we did,
you know, and, like, you know, I’m not seeing
her anymore, and it just
doesn’t, I don’t feel like I need to protect her anymore.
The presence of Ms Willet during the third interview
cross-examination, an issue was raised about the decision to permit
Ms Willet to undertake the role of the prescribed companion
third interview. Mrs Shaw KC asked BS Kelly about whether she saw any
particular issue with Ms Wilmott performing this
role, given that she was
OW’s treating psychologist. In particular, it was suggested that Ms
Willet was potentially a prosecution
witness. BS Kelly maintained that she had
no concerns about Ms Willet taking on this role and from her perspective,
if there was
an issue with Ms Willet being a potential witness, that was a
matter for DBS Ward as the investigating officer.
Kelly went on to explain that determining whether someone is a suitable
prescribed companion is a balancing exercise. She said
that in circumstances in
which the person has been a part of the
investigation:
... we weigh that up and sometimes the investigating officer will
put, you know, a line in the sand and say yes or no and in this
case we were
very comfortable with Miranda being his support person in this matter, she
wasn’t allowed to talk in the interview,
she wasn’t allowed to
prompt him in any way whatsoever, so I feel really comfortable with her being
the support person
Kelly did not agree with the suggestion made by Mrs Shaw KC that
Ms Willet’s presence put pressure on OW, given that she
had been his
therapist for the previous 12 months. BS Kelly explained that she had made
it very clear to OW throughout the entire
process that there was not any
pressure on him to answer her questions.
Ward was also cross-examined about the decision to permit Ms Willet to be
OW’s companion during the interview. He denied
that it was his suggestion
that Ms Willet be the companion, however, he believed that she was suitable
because, to his mind, she
was independent from the
investigation.
He said that
he believed that Ms Willet would not be a witness because she had been
OW’s psychologist and, therefore, her
conversations with OW would be
privileged. It was his evidence that he had retained that view until shortly
before the trial when
he heard that defence had issued a subpoena for Ms Willet
to give evidence.
the conclusion of the interview, BS Kelly reiterated to OW that he would
“not be forced to do anything he doesn’t
want to in regards to this
described him as in “good spirits, he was smiling” and looking
forward to seeing MW.
Kelly’s final contact with OW took place sometime after the third
interview. BS Kelly explained that in her role, it is
not uncommon to retain
ongoing contact with a witness or victim. On this occasion, BS Kelly met up
with OW and Ms Wilmott at his
that he had no need for her to have any further contact with him. The
conversation
was not video recorded.
The second arrest
2 December 2022, the police received information that the DPP were to reinstate
the charges.
26 April 2023, Ms Wilmott was rearrested.
Application to admit
the interview of OW conducted on 8 April 2022 (the third interview) pursuant to
Evidence Act 1929
I have said, the prosecution have made an application for the third prescribed
interview of OW to be admitted pursuant to
Evidence Act
is for the prosecution to establish that the interview with OW should be
admitted under
Evidence Act
Section 13BA
13BA—Admissibility of recorded evidence by certain
witnesses in certain criminal proceedings
(1) Subject to this section, the court may, in the trial of a charge of an
offence, or in a pre-trial special hearing conducted in
accordance with
, order that the evidence of a witness be admitted in the form of an audio
visual record.
(2) Subject to subsection (2a), an application for an order under subsection
(a) be made in writing by the party wishing to have the audio visual record of
the evidence admitted under this section; and
(b) be filed in the court; and
(c) within 14 days of being filed in the court—be served on the other
party to the proceedings (the
(d) otherwise be made in accordance with the rules of court.
(2a) An application for an order to admit an audio visual record of the
examination, cross-examination or re-examination of a witness
at a pre-trial
special hearing may be made orally at the pre-trial special hearing or in
accordance with any directions of the court.
(3) An audio visual record of the evidence of a witness may be admitted under
this section if the recording—
(a) has been made in a pre-trial special hearing conducted in accordance with
section 12AB
(b) has been made pursuant to
Division 3 of the
Summary Offences Act
(i) the court is satisfied as to the witness’s capacity to give sworn or
unsworn evidence at the time the recording was made;
(ii) the court is satisfied that the respondent has been given a reasonable
opportunity to view the recording; and
(iii) the witness is available, if required, for further examination,
cross-examination or re-examination during the course of the
trial or, if the
order for admission of the recording is being sought in a pre-trial special
hearing under section 12AB, during the
course of the pre-trial special hearing.
(4) The court’s discretion to exclude evidence is not affected by
subsection (3) and the court may—
(a) rule as inadmissible the whole or any part of the recording; or
(b) before admitting the recording, order that it be edited so as to exclude
evidence that is inadmissible for any reason.
(5) Despite subsection (3)(b)(iii), the witness cannot be further examined,
cross-examined or re-examined on the evidence admitted
under this section
without the permission of the court which may only be given, on application by a
party to the proceedings—
(a) if the court is satisfied that a party to the proceedings has, since the
making of the audio visual record, become aware of a
matter of which the party
could not reasonably have been aware at the time the record was made; or
(b) if the witness gives evidence in the trial or, if the order for admission of
the recording is being sought in a pre-trial special
hearing under section 12AB,
during the course of the pre-trial special hearing, apart from or in addition to
evidence admitted under
this section in the form of an audio visual record and
the court is satisfied that it is in the interests of justice that the witness
be further examined, cross-examined or re-examined; or
(c) if the court is satisfied that it is otherwise in the interests of justice
to permit the witness to be further examined, cross-examined
or re-examined.
(6) If a court admits evidence in the form of an audio visual record under
this section, the judge must—
(a) explain to the jury that the law allows the court to admit evidence in this
(b) warn the jury—
(i) not to draw from the admission of evidence in that form any inference
adverse to the defendant; and
(ii) not to allow the admission of evidence in that form to influence the weight
to be given to the evidence.
follows that, for the interview to be admissible, the prosecution must file the
requisite application and establish either, that
the recording was made in a
pre-trial special hearing conducted in accordance with s 12AB, or pursuant
, div 3 of the
Summary Offences Act
. Here, the prosecution
contend that the interview was conducted in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the
Summary Offences Act
addition, for the interview to be admissible, it must be established that the
witness had the capacity to give sworn or unsworn
evidence at the time the
recording was made, that the witness is available to give evidence and that
Ms Wilmott has been given a
reasonable opportunity to view the recording.
is no dispute that OW had the capacity to give evidence, is available to give
evidence and that Ms Wilmott has had sufficient
opportunity to view the video.
contest is centred on whether there has been compliance with the
Offences Act
, and in the event there has been non-compliance, the consequential
effect of that failure.
is Ms Wilmott’s contention that there has been a failure to comply with
Summary Offences Act
on the basis that not all of the “relevant”
conversations between the police and OW were recorded, that the prescribed
examiner contravened the
Summary Offences Regulations 2016
Summary Offences Regulations
’) by using leading questions during
the course of the interview and by failing to ensure that there was an
appropriate prescribed
companion present at each of the three
interviews.
failure to record “relevant” conversations
Summary Offences Act
contains the sections of the Act that relate to
the recording of interviews. Division 3 of
applies to interviews
with certain categories of vulnerable witnesses.
Summary Offences Act
sets out the requirements for conducting such
an interview and relevantly reads:
74EB—Obligation to
record interviews with certain vulnerable witnesses
If a person to whom this Division applies is to be interviewed as a potential
witness in relation to the investigation of a serious
offence against the
person, the interview must be conducted as follows:
(a) an audio visual recording of the interview must be made in accordance with
the regulations;
(b) the interview must be conducted by a prescribed interviewer;
(c) the manner in which the interview is conducted must meet the prescribed
requirements to the prescribed extent.
definition of an “interview” is contained within the interpretation
section and reads:
74C—Interpretation
In this Part—
(a) a conversation; or
(b) part of a conversation; or
(c) a series of conversations,
but does not include an examination under the
Independent Commission
Against Corruption Act 2012
final section of the
Summary Offences Act
, with work to do on this application
which provides for the admissibility of a prescribed interview.
It relevantly reads:
74EC—Admissibility of evidence of
(1) In proceedings for a charge of a serious offence against the person,
evidence of an interview between a prescribed interviewer
and a person to whom
this Division applies is inadmissible unless—
(a) the prescribed interviewer complied with this Division in relation to the
conduct and recording of the interview; or
(b) the court is satisfied that the interests of justice require the admission
of the evidence despite the prescribed interviewer’s
non-compliance.
note, the starting point is that the prescribed interview is inadmissible unless
it was compliant with the requirements within
div 3, or it is established
that the interests of justice require the admission of the evidence.
interview conducted with OW on 8 April 2022 was recorded as required by
That much is uncontentious. Mrs Shaw KC’s argument about
non-compliance with the requirements to record, is based on the
definition of an interview under
, which includes “a
conversation” or “part of a conversation” or “a series
of conversations”.
It was Mrs Shaw KC’s submission that, as a
consequence of the extended definition, any conversation between BS Kelly
should have been recorded. Although Mrs Shaw KC cross-examined BS Kelly
the prosecution are
only proposing to lead the third interview, the only conversations that are
potentially relevant are those that
were proximate to that interview. Those are
the informal conversations that took place immediately before and after the
third interview
on 8 April 2022. In addition to this, Mrs Shaw KC submitted
that the conversation that took place on 22 March 2022 should also have
recorded, and given the subject matter discussed during that interview, the
failure to have done so impacts on the admissibility
of the third interview with
I understand, it is Mrs Shaw KC’s argument that because the police did not
record the informal conversations that took place
before and after the third
interview, as well as the conversation that took place on 22 March 2022, BS
Kelly has not complied with
the requirements that there be an audio visual
recording of “the interview.” In the event that is correct, the
will be inadmissible unless I am “satisfied that the interest of
justice require the admission of the evidence” despite
the non-compliance.
support of the argument Mrs Shaw KC relied on the decision of Kourakis CJ in
Lindsay v The King; Rankine v The King; Woods v The King
That was a challenge to a decision to admit the interview of a suspect under
, for which the same extended definition of interview applies.
, the issue under consideration was the admissibility of
conversations with Mr Rankine, that were covertly recorded by undercover
operatives whilst he was being held in the Adelaide City Watchhouse on unrelated
charges. At trial, Mr Rankine unsuccessfully sought
an order excluding evidence
of the conversations on the ground that the undercover police officers had
failed to comply with all
of the measures mandated by
Offences Act
for the recording of conversations between police officers and
Section 74D
Summary Offences Act
imposes the following obligations on police officers
engaging in interviews with suspects:
74D—Obligation to
record interviews with suspects
(1) An investigating officer who suspects, or has reasonable grounds to
suspect, a person (
the suspect
) of having committed an indictable
offence and who proposes to interview the suspect must ensure the following
requirements are complied
(a) if it is reasonably practicable to make an audio visual record of the
interview, an audio visual record of the interview must
(b) if it is not reasonably practicable to make an audio visual record of the
interview but it is reasonably practicable to make
an audio record of the
interview, an audio record of the interview must be made;
(c) if it is not reasonably practicable to make either an audio visual record or
audio record of the interview—
(i) a written record of the interview must be made at the time of the interview
or as soon as practicable after the interview; and
(ii) as soon as practicable after the interview, the record must be read aloud
to the suspect and an audio visual record made of
the reading; and
(iii) when the audio visual recording begins (but before the reading begins) the
suspect must be invited to interrupt the reading
at any time to point out errors
or omissions in the record; and
(iv) if the suspect in fact interrupts the reading to point out an error or
omission, the suspect must then be allowed a reasonable
opportunity to do so;
(v) at the end of the reading, but while the audio visual recording continues,
the suspect must again be invited to point out errors
or omissions in the record
and allowed a reasonable opportunity to do so; and
(vi) if the investigating officer agrees that there is an error or omission in
the record, the officer must amend the record to correct
the error or omission
and if the officer does not agree that there is an error or omission in the
record, the officer must nevertheless
make a note of the error or omission
asserted by the suspect in an addendum to the record of interview.
(2) If the suspicion, or a reasonable ground for suspicion, arises during the
course of an interview, the investigating officer’s
obligations under
subsection (1) arise at that point and apply to the interview from that
(3) In deciding whether it is reasonably practicable to make an audio visual
record or audio record of an interview, the following
matters must be
considered:
(a) the availability of recording equipment within the period for which it would
be lawful to detain the person being interviewed;
(b) mechanical failure of recording equipment;
(c) a refusal of the interviewee to allow an audio visual record or audio record
of the interview to be made;
(d) any other relevant matter.
(4) As soon as practicable after an audio visual record or audio record of an
interview is made under this Part, the investigating
officer must give the
suspect a written statement—
(a) if an audio visual record was made—of the right of the suspect or the
suspect’s legal adviser (or both) to view the
recording and to obtain from
the audio visual record an audio record; or
(b) if an audio record but no audio visual record was made—of the right of
the suspect to obtain a copy of the audio record.
(5) Arrangements must be made, at the request of a suspect, for the playing
of an audio visual record at a reasonable time and place
to be nominated by an
appropriate investigating officer.
(6) A suspect must be provided, on request and on payment of the fee fixed by
regulation, with—
(a) an audio record of the audio visual record of an interview with the suspect
under this Division; or
(b) a copy of an audio record of an interview with the suspect under this
is clear from the section,
creates a detailed regime designed to
achieve a just and transparent resolution of disputes about details of what
passed between
investigators and a person reasonably suspected of having
committed a crime. In
, Kourakis CJ made some observations about
the purpose of the enactment of this
following should be noted. First,
is calculated to redress the credibility
imbalance between police officers and suspects in the event that the latter is
It had been a matter of considerable public and judicial concern for
some time before the enactment of
that courts were often asked to
adjudicate on the guilt of defendants based on disputed confessions or
admissions alleged to have
been made to police in the absence of any objective
record or independent witness. Judicial and legal resources were unnecessarily
committed to resolving those contests. Over time electronic technologies
provided simple and cost-effective means to make audio-visual
records of police
interviews.
, Mr Rankine was suspected of having been involved in a number of
robberies (with co-offenders). One of those, was the robbery of
the V Hotel.
Prior to his arrest for that robbery, Mr Rankine was arrested for breaching bail
in relation to unrelated matters.
It would seem, from the observations made by
Kourakis CJ, that the arrest was a deliberate ploy employed by those
investigating
the robberies to further the investigation. A determination was
made to seek approval for an undercover operation to engage with
whilst he was in custody in an attempt to extract admissions. Although by this
stage the police reasonably suspected
Mr Rankine to have been involved in the
robbery of the V Hotel, they chose this covert route rather than run the risk of
refusing to speak with them in a controlled formal interview
situation. The goal was to obtain a confession from Mr Rankine that
part of the brief of evidence to be used against him at trial.
was granted for the undercover operation. The conduct authorised was engaging
Mr Rankine in conversations regarding the
series of armed robberies. No
direction was given or condition imposed requiring compliance with
to the authorisation, the undercover operative engaged in conversations with
Mr Rankine, resulting in the obtaining of admissions
made by him that the
prosecution successfully sought to lead at trial.
appeal, it was contended that there had been a breach of
on the basis
that, whilst no formal interview had been embarked upon, there had been
conversations which fell within the extended
definition. The Court of Appeal
determined that in the circumstances of that case, a distinction between a
formal interview and
an informal conversation designed to elicit admissions, was
illusory. Kourakis CJ observed that had the police formally interviewed
Rankine when he was in the police cells without first cautioning him, any
inculpatory statement that was made, would almost certainly
be excluded. The
course that was instead adopted was to effectively embark on an attempt to do
just that, although under the guise
of an informal conversation.
CJ discussed the impropriety in adopting such an approach. His Honour
strategy calculated to engage a person reasonably suspected of committing an
offence in conversation with a view to elicit
admissions without giving a
caution may undermine the important procedural protection afforded by the common
law, that an accused
is not bound to give his or her account of the allegations
in evidence in his or her trial, even if only open-ended questions are
That procedural protection may be undermined if the prosecution adduce evidence
of the answers given by a person, who is reasonably
suspected of committing an
offence, to questions asked in order to elicit admissions, without first giving
the usual caution. The
rule applies whether the police identify themselves as
such or whether they are pretending to be fellow prisoners, albeit the giving
a caution is likely to render the latter strategy impractical. Strategically
eliciting a suspected person’s account for
use against him or her in the
trial in which he or she would otherwise have the benefit of the right to
silence undermines that fundamental
procedural protection.
simply, the issue raised was that failing to administer a caution at an
appropriate time has the potential to result in forensic
unfairness by reason of
a denial of the common law procedural protection against self-incrimination.
CJ discussed the distinction without difference between a formal interview and
the situation contrived by the police in
An interrogation generally, but not always, proceeds by police officers
exercising their actual and apparent authority to confront
a suspect with
incriminatory evidence. I will refer to an interview of that kind as a formal
interview. An undercover operation uses
deception to gain trust. I will refer to
the questioning of a suspect about his or her offending by persons who are not
police officers,
or are pretending not to be police officers, as an informal
interview. The end point and purpose of both is the same; obtaining a
self-incriminatory account of the offences which the investigator reasonably
suspects the subject has committed.
was in that context that Kourakis CJ considered the extended definition of
interview and the inclusion in that definition of a
conversation. His Honour
the word conversation must be given its ordinary meaning. It is not a term of
art. The very extension of the word interview to
include a conversation
manifests an intention to go beyond formal police interviews. There is no
textual or contextual reason to
read down the meaning of interview and
conversation by reference to concepts of a “formal” police interview
or a police
interrogation. The definition plainly eschews any such narrow
is unsurprising that the informal conversations that took place in
were found to amount to interviews, given the circumstances in
which they occurred. The regime created by
is designed to protect
the rights of those suspected of serious crimes against self-incrimination. To
attempt to circumvent such
a protection by characterising the police engagement
with Mr Rankine as an informal conversation would undermine the intent of the
legislation.
was Mrs Shaw KC’s contention that it follows that the conversations that
took place between BS Kelly and OW before and after
the interview on 8 April
2022 are “interviews” and, therefore, a failure to record them is in
was submitted that if that is so, one of the preconditions for admissibility has
not been satisfied and, thereupon, the interview
is inadmissible, unless the
Court is satisfied that the interests of justice require the admission of the
are three fundamental problems with that submission. The first is that,
although the extended definition of an interview is
applicable to both
interviews with suspects and vulnerable witnesses, div 2 (suspects) sets
out a very different regime to div 3
(vulnerable witnesses). These regimes
reflect the policy considerations underpinning the respective provisions. The
functions of
the protections in place for a suspect are different to the
functions and principles of the protections for a vulnerable witness.
is not about protecting a right to silence, but rather is
designed to protect the integrity of the evidence of a vulnerable witness
early stage, avoiding the need for that witness to repeat their account of a
traumatic event.
second problem with Mrs Shaw KC’s submission is that whilst a
conversation may amount to an interview, it does not mean
conversation is an interview. To embark on an interview is to embark on a
process designed to obtain information, whether
that be by way of a formal
process or a more informal conversation comprising of open-ended questions.
Whether or not a conversation
will fall within the definition of an interview
will depend upon the facts and circumstances of each individual case.
point is illustrated by a comparison of the conversations in
the conversations that took place between BS Kelly and OW. In
the police set about deliberately engaging with Mr Rankine in order to
obtain evidence to use against him at trial. That is, evidence
that directly
related to the issues to be determined. The evidence about the nature of the
impugned conversation in this case could
not be more different.
third interview took place at OW’s instigation. From the police’s
perspective, the process of interviewing OW had
been completed. It was only
after Ms Wilmott contacted the police and told them that OW wished to speak
with them that the arrangements
were made for an interview to take place.
impugned conversation between BS Kelly and OW were for the purpose of reassuring
and ‘settling’ OW. They generally
related to OW’s welfare.
It was the evidence of BS Kelly that conversations of this nature with victims
or witnesses are common
place and it would be counterproductive to building
rapport to immediately turn on the camera.
third problem with this submission is that in the event of non-compliance by a
failure to record, it is the relevant interview
that is inadmissible. The
relevant interviews for the purposes of this argument are the informal
conversations that took place before
and after the formal interview and the
conversation on 22 March 2022. The prosecution, unsurprisingly, do not seek to
conversations given that nothing that was discussed is of any
relevance to the issues at trial. As I have said, the interview that
prosecution seeks to lead is the formal interview which was video recorded.
a situation could be envisaged in which the connection or overlap between an
informal or introductory conversation and a formal
interview may lead to the
exclusion of the latter, no such connection has been established in this case.
it was Mrs Shaw KC’s submission that the conversation that took place on
22 March 2022 was preplanned and there “is
the potential for the witness
to be reticent and the potential for incentives to be given to the witness to
speak to the police”,
that is the case with any conversation with any witness, whether or not they
fall into the category of a vulnerable witness. That
does not mean that it is
necessary to record the conversation or that the conversation amounts to an
interview for the purposes of
Summary Offences Act
there is no evidence that in any way supports the suggestion made from the bar
table that OW was reticent or was offered
any inducement. Such a suggestion is
entirely at odds with the evidence.
my view the prosecution have established that the interview that took place on 8
April 2022 complied with the requirement that
it be the subject of audio visual
The failure to arrange for an appropriate
prescribed companion
the first interview, after being told that his mother could not be present, OW
elected to not have a companion present. At the
second interview, the
prescribed companion was Ms Bowyer, and at the third interview it was Ms Willet.
I have already canvassed the
criticisms made of the decisions by SAPOL to permit
Ms Bowyer and Ms Willet to be OW’s prescribed companions, I will not
Summary Offences Regulations
A prescribed
interviewer who proposes to interview a vulnerable witness whom the interviewer
believes should be provided with emotional
or other support during the interview
must, if the witness wishes to be accompanied by a person who is a prescribed
companion, make
arrangements for the witness to be so accompanied during the
who may take on the role of a prescribed companion are set out in reg 21
21—Prescribed companions
(a) a parent, guardian, spouse, domestic partner or any other relative of the
(b) a friend or carer of the witness;
(c) any other person approved for the purposes of the interview with the witness
by the prescribed interviewer who is to conduct
the interview;
(d) a person of a class approved by the Commissioner for the purposes of this
regulation.
are a few observations to be made about these regulations. The first is that it
is for the witness to determine whether they
wish to be accompanied by a
prescribed companion in an interview. In the event that they do, the prescribed
interviewer must make
arrangements for the witness to be so accompanied.
category of people who may perform the role of a prescribed companion is broad,
no doubt deliberately so. The policy underpinning
these regulations is aimed at
supporting and putting a vulnerable witness at ease, it follows that the options
should be left open
to reflect the broad range of circumstances in which a
witness may find themselves.
the first interview, OW chose to not avail himself of the option of having a
prescribed companion present. At the outset of the
interview, on camera,
BS Kelly confirmed that OW did not wish to have anyone sit with him.
fact that this decision may have been impacted upon by the options available for
who was in a position to take on that role,
does not affect whether there has
been compliance with the
Summary Offences Regulations
. It would not be uncommon
for a child in OW’s circumstances to have limited options available to
them. That does not derogate
from OW having had the option of a prescribed
companion under the
Summary Offences Regulations
the second and third interviews, OW had a prescribed companion of his choice
present. Whilst Mrs Shaw KC has been critical of
the police for failing to
intervene and exclude OW’s choices as unsuitable, that does not mean that
there has been non-compliance
Summary Offences Regulations
further complaint made by Mrs Shaw KC was that a prescribed companion must be
approved “by the prescribed interviewer who
is to conduct the
interview”.
was BS Kelly. On the basis that it was BS Kelly’s evidence that she would
defer to the views of DBS Ward to determine
whether Ms Bowyer or Ms Willet
was inappropriate, it was suggested by Mrs Shaw KC that she had failed to comply
Summary Offences Regulations
. With respect, there is an artificiality
to that submission. DBS Ward and BS Kelly were both present at the interview,
as a team, albeit with different roles. I took BS Kelly’s
evidence to be no more than, had DBS Ward, with his extensive knowledge
investigation, seen an issue with the presence of Ms Bowyer or Ms Willet, he
would have raised it with her.
find that the use of a prescribed companion across the three interviews was
compliant with the
Summary Offences Regulations
leading questions
Summary Offences Regulations
23—Interviewing vulnerable witnesses
(7) For the purposes of section 74EB(c), the manner in which an interview
with a vulnerable witness is conducted will meet the prescribed
requirements
(a) so far as is practicable, any statement made by the vulnerable witness is
not elicited by the use of leading questions; and
in the language used in the Regulation is an acknowledgement that there will be
circumstances in which it will be necessary
to resort to the use of a leading
question. That must be so in circumstances in which s 13BA and the relevant
regulations, relate
to interviews with vulnerable witnesses who will commonly
lack sophistication and who will not infrequently have complex communications
needs. It would be an unfortunate outcome if the very legislative regime
crafted to facilitate those who are particularly vulnerable
giving evidence,
resulted in the exclusion of the entirety of that evidence in the event that
there was a leading question. Having
said that, the legislation clearly intends
to strike a pragmatic balance between facilitating a vulnerable witness giving
their account
and adherence to the strict rules of evidence.
Police general orders
support of her argument, Mrs Shaw KC also relied upon two police General Orders
that were tendered during the voir dire. These
were General Orders in relation
to interviewing suspects and vulnerable
In these General
Orders there is reference to leading questions. They relevantly
Regulation 23
of the SOR requires that any disclosure made by the vulnerable
witness during the police interview is not elicited by the use of
questions. A leading question is one which either suggests the required answer
or which is based on an assumption of facts
that have not yet been proved.
first observation to be made about this General Order is that it sets the bar
higher than the test set out in the
Summary Offences Regulations
, as there is no
reference to the qualifier of “so far as is practicable”.
second relates to the status of police General Orders.
police General Order is a direction issued by the Commissioner of Police under
Police Act 1998
(SA). That section authorises the
Commissioner to make binding general or specific orders for the control and
management of police.
Section 11(2)
provides that the orders may concern
the various duties to be performed, the manner in which, or the time and place
at which, they
are to be performed, and any other matter which the Commissioner
considers relevant to the control and management of police. These
orders have
no statutory or other legal force and, at most, can lead to disciplinary
measures and consequences.
Police v Henwood
Doyle CJ gave consideration to the status of police General Orders. In
particular, his Honour considered an order that related to
“Random Breath
Testing Operations”. His Honour
whether the Order is a statutory instrument as defined. It is not an
“instrument of a legislative character”.
It is an instrument of an
administrative character. Some of its provisions may be sourced to provisions of
the RTA, such as s 47DA,
but as a whole it is no more than an exercise of the
Commissioner’s powers of management and control of SA Police. It is a
series of detailed administrative instructions. Nor, for much the same reason,
can it be described as a code or standard, as a matter
of ordinary language.
Nor, as a matter of ordinary language or ordinary legal usage, is the Order a
regulation, rule, bylaw or statute.
I accept that these terms cover a wide range
of instruments, but in my experience they would not usually be applied to a
like the Order. It is, as I have already said, by and large a series of
administrative or management instruments given to police
officers as to the
performance of their functions. While a number of the instructions, not
surprisingly, reflect or can be related
to provisions in the RTA, other
provisions do not.
Hughes v Police
J was required to determine whether a Magistrate had correctly found that a
police officer had a defence to the offence of
driving in a manner dangerous to
the public as a consequence of the nature of his duties. One of the arguments
advanced was that
a police General Order bound a police officer, under threat of
disciplinary action, to drive in a manner that could be dangerous
to the public.
In that context, White J gave consideration to the force and effect of General
Orders. In determining that the relevant
General Order did not provide a
defence to the offence, White J
Although the General Orders are binding on members of the SA Police, they do not
have any wider status or authority. They are
not subordinate legislation to
Subordinate Legislation Act 1978
(SA) applies. The Commissioner
could not alter the standard by which driving is to be assessed as dangerous
which has been established
for the purposes of s 46 by binding decisions of the
Full Court of this State and of the High Court. ...
(Footnote omitted)
Police v Hodder
Parker J similarly expressed the view that a police General Order, whilst
providing information and administrative direction to police
servants, has no legislative
South Australia v
Peek J also
touched on the subject of the status of police General Orders. In that case, it
was the police who placed reliance on
the General Orders in support of their
actions. In that context, Peek J
habit or preference of the officer to use hand cuffs when arresting is certainly
not sufficient justification. And nor
is some internal SAPOL custom or
directive, oral or written. SAPOL can in no way change the laws of the land by
the issuing of an
internal “order”, “directive” or any
other communication referred to by whatever impressive name.
a breach of a police General Order may be a measure by which to evaluate the
conduct of a police officer, and may create a
potential disciplinary issue for
the officer in question, it does not affect whether the preconditions for the
admissibility of a
prescribed interview have been met. At most, it may be
relevant to the consideration of the exercise of a discretion to exclude
Brevet Sergeant Kelly
I deal with the impugned questions, I propose to first make some findings about
the evidence of BS Kelly.
the relevant time, BS Kelly was a member of the Victim Management Team at
the Public Protection Branch. A large part of her role
in that section was to
conduct prescribed interviews. BS Kelly is very experienced in this role
and has been conducting prescribed
interviews since 2015. In advance of
commencing in the role, BS Kelly undertook the training program –
Specialist Investigative
Interviewing of Vulnerable Witnesses, provided by
Deakin University. The course involved six months of online and over the phone
training on how to obtain a reliable account from a witness. BS Kelly
explained the practicalities of what the training
were - there was a lot of online training where we got to see examples of - we
learnt about leading questions, non-leading questions,
how children from about
five years up is what we’re trained in, how children respond to questions
and how best to - an example
is we just really learnt about how to obtain a
reliable account from, whether it be a child, an adult, even someone with a
we were trained in. We would do practice interviews, so with the
Deakin Uni facilitators we would do lots of practice interviews.
We would have
to read over transcripts of interviews and learn leading questions, forced
choice questions, specific questions and
just really getting a thorough
understanding of what it is you’re asking the child and how, again, just
repeatedly learning
how to get a really reliable account from them without
Kelly gave evidence over two days and was cross-examined by Mrs Shaw KC in
considerable detail. Overall, I found BS Kelly to
be a very impressive witness.
She came across as someone with a professional approach who took her role very
seriously. She clearly
had a victim/witness focus and consistently endeavoured
to adhere to the training that she had received. It was apparent that at
times throughout her dealings with OW, his welfare was paramount.
have no doubt that BS Kelly was an honest and reliable witness who did her best
to assist the court. I accept the submission made
by Ms Litster that BS Kelly
had done her best to inform herself about appropriate procedures and had
followed the teachings that
she had been advised were best practice.
cross-examination, BS Kelly was asked a number of questions about leading
questions, both in a general sense, and in relation
to specific questions that
she asked during the course of the interviews.
on occasions BS Kelly accepted that a question was less than ideal, generally it
was her view that the questions that she
asked were appropriate and compliant.
“I heard” questions
occasions, during the course of each of the three interviews, BS Kelly would
introduce a new topic, prefacing the question with
“I heard”. She
explained that this was a technique that she had been taught during her
training. She said that whilst
“best practice is to begin broad and open
... it doesn’t rule out using information received
elsewhere”.
that she has been taught that, in order to obtain information when interviewing
children, “we have to begin somewhere
and they train us that utilising
‘I heard’ and bringing in some of that information is required to
conduct an interview,
to try and elicit information. So that is the training
I’ve got and that was the practice I’m going
occasions, BS Kelly would introduce a topic using the “I heard”
technique, followed by the words “tell me about
explained that she made a deliberate choice to use those words in OW’s
interviews because it was an open
ended way to direct him to a topic. She
‘Tell me about that’ - me saying ‘Tell me about that, tell me
He can relay ‘I
don’t know about that’ or ‘I know this, this, this about
that’, so ‘Tell me about
that’, that’s me being open and
giving him an opportunity to relay what he wants.
Reference to Ms Wilmott in the questions
particular complaint was made about Ms Wilmott being referred to in some of the
questions asked by BS Kelly. The relevant questions
were asked midway through
the interview. On the first occasion, in the context of moving from the topic
of the food provided to
Jasmine, to punishment, the following exchange
Kelly: Yeah. Yeah. We um – Now, I heard that you told Miranda about how
you would have to punish Jasmine sometimes.
BS Kelly: Tell me, tell me about that.
OW: Um, so mum would tell me to punish her and, like, I just, just use my
were then a series of unobjectionable questions in which BS Kelly attempted to
elicit particular occasions upon which this
took place.
second reference to Ms Wilmott took place some time later in the interview in
the context of BS Kelly attempting to broach the
difficult subject of the day
that Jasmine
Kelly: Yeah. Of course. Yeah. Yep. Um so we did, we have touched on the day
that Jasmine died, all right, yeah, and you, you
always do really well, okay.
I’m not saying it’s easy, but you’ve done really well talking
me through some of
those things-
BS Kelly: So I just wanna let you know that ok. Now that you’re here
to talk and tell me a few more things about what happened,
I, I heard you told
Miranda a bit more detail of um what happened that day. Tell, tell me what you
talked to Miranda about.
OW: Um, so was it about, like, er knocking on the door
BS Kelly: Oh I, I can talk you-
BS Kelly: Through it if you like.
OW: Yeah, okay.
Kelly then asked OW a series of non-leading questions designed to give him an
opportunity to talk through the events leading up
to finding Jasmine.
should be noted that in relation to the two references to Ms Wilmott, the first
occurred in the course of a leading question,
the second did not. Regardless,
Mrs Shaw KC makes a complaint about both mentions of Ms Wilmott on the basis
that to make reference
to OW’s previous conversations with her, whilst she
was present in the interview, placed inappropriate pressure on OW to agree
what was put. In other words, OW was unlikely to challenge what was being
raised by BS Kelly and risk contradicting what Ms
Wilmott had apparently said.
cross-examination, Mrs Shaw KC raised this topic with BS Kelly and the
following exchange occurred:
can I just then ask you about p.23 line 25, you said ‘I heard that you
told Miranda about how you would have to punish Jasmine
sometimes’.
you’ve asked that question, there’s the assumption of fact in that,
that he had told Miranda about how he would have
to punish Jasmine
what I had heard, yes.
Miranda was sitting there at the time, Miranda Willet.
she was the prescribed companion.
didn’t strike you that, in the presence of her, who was the person to whom
the statement had been made, that that was inconsistent
with the role of a
prescribed companion.
if the answer was ‘No’, do you agree that that might well have meant
that Miranda Willet was a witness.
Willet was always - yes, she’s a witness.
terms of choosing the prescribed companion, isn’t it the case that you are
required to choose someone who is not part of
the investigation.
mentioned yesterday, we weigh that up and sometimes the investigating officer
will put, you know, a line in the sand and say
yes or no and in this case we
were very comfortable with Miranda being his support person in this matter, she
wasn’t allowed
to talk in the interview, she wasn’t allowed to
prompt him in any way whatsoever, so I feel really comfortable with her being
the support person.
didn’t occur to you if you put propositions based on what she said and he
was sitting there and she had been his therapist
for nearly 12 months, that
might put pressure on him to agree with you.
certainly - I wouldn’t say that puts pressure on him for anything, I feel
I made it very clear to him throughout this entire
process that there
isn’t any pressure to answer my questions.
criticism made by Mrs Shaw KC about the reference to Ms Wilmott has more force
in the context of a leading question, however,
I agree that as a general
proposition, it was unfortunate that BS Kelly made reference of OW’s
earlier conversations with Ms
Willet, particularly when she was present in the
interview room. To do so, created the potential for OW to feel obliged to
in a particular way. Having said that, I have watched and considered
the relevant portions of the interviews closely. There is
nothing about how OW
appears, the manner in which he responds, or the contents of his answers that in
anyway suggests that he was
influenced by the references to Ms Willet.
Did the questions contravene reg 23(7)(a) of the
Offences Regulations
is accepted by the prosecution that a number of the questions asked by
BS Kelly in the third interview of OW fall into the category
questions. The issue that arises for determination is whether this was in
contravention of the
Summary Offences Regulations
, which requires the prescribed
interviewer to avoid the use of leading questions “
so far as is
practicable
was Ms Litster’s submission that there has been no breach of the
regulation in that the leading questions utilised by BS
Kelly were a necessary
device to take OW to relevant topics. In the alternative, it was submitted that
insofar as there has been
any breach, the breach is trivial when considered in
the context of the entirety of the interview, and the interests of justice
the admission of the interview.
order to assess that submission, it is first necessary to identify the impugned
questions. Although Mrs Shaw KC was critical
of the questioning across all
three interviews, there was no suggestion that the answers from the first two
interviews tainted the
answers given by OW in the third interview. That must
logically be so, given that the third interview was instigated by OW, who
to change and elaborate on the account that he provided in the first two
interviews.
the course of submissions, the prosecution provided me with a table setting out
the questions from OW’s third interview
that were conceded to be leading
subsequently provided with a further version of this table which contained
additional questions about which Ms Wilmott complained,
as well as an additional
column setting out BS Kelly’s cross-examination on those questions. It is
convenient to adopt that
table for the purpose of identifying the impugned
questions (see Annexure 1). However, for ease of reference, I have omitted the
column containing the references to the cross-examination, and have added an
additional column with my observations about the question.
inclusion of the words “so far as is practicable” in
reg 23(7)(a) is an acknowledgement that, whilst the gold standard
conducting a prescribed interview involves the avoidance of the use of any
leading questions, practically speaking, that outcome
is difficult to achieve.
Any interview, but particularly one involving a vulnerable witness, is a dynamic
and quickly evolving situation
in which the interviewer, despite having the best
intentions, may fall into factual error or inadvertently lapse into a leading
On occasions, it will be necessary to make a judgment call about
whether, in order to canvas all relevant matters, it is necessary
to utilise a
question leading into a topic. In the event that choice is made, the
interviewer, at the very least, runs the risk
that the answer elicited by that
question will be excluded. As BS Kelly said in her
and it’s not that that’s not allowed. I have to make a decision in
the moment. Throughout interviews, I have to make
a decision - so, for example,
we say ‘Never introduce the offender’, for example, in an interview.
There are some very
rare occasions where police have had to introduce the
offender for a whole number of reasons. So it - we shouldn’t say black
white ‘Never introduce the offender’, because sometimes we have to,
for a myriad of reasons.
it is ultimately a matter for the Court to make an assessment as to whether
there has been a breach of the
Summary Offences Regulations
, in assessing the
practicality of adopting a form of question that differs from that used by BS
Kelly, I take into account that she
is a very experienced prescribed interviewer
who was doing her best to elicit an uncontaminated, detailed account whilst
in the wellbeing of OW.
my view, the interview did not contravene the
Summary Offences Regulations
that, as far as reasonably practicable, BS Kelly avoided the use of leading
questions. On the occasions that questions were leading,
it was necessary to
take OW to a relevant topic, and upon arriving at that topic, BS Kelly
immediately opened up the questioning
to enable OW to give his account.
is not to say that the interview is without fault. This, like most interviews,
was impacted upon by the ordinary frailties
of the interviewer’s memory
and occasional miscommunications. Those matters will be relevant to any
application for individual
questions and answers to be excluded. However, that
does not result in the interview being non-compliant with
s 13BA(3)(b)
Evidence Act
if I had found that the interview was non-compliant as a consequence of the use
of leading questions, I would still have admitted
the interview pursuant to
s 74EC(1)(b)
Summary Offences Act
. That is, on the basis that the
requirements to avoid leading questions is fundamentally connected to the
influence that the question
has on the answer elicited. Having considered the
impugned questions both individually and in the context of the overall
in my view, there can be no suggestion that they contaminated the
account provided by OW. The interview also contained a structure
that permitted
OW to disagree with aspects which were leading, and to also clarify points that
needed to be clarified. Over the
course of the interview, he demonstrated that
he was capable of doing so.
those circumstances, factoring in the seriousness of the alleged offending and
the public policy underpinning the legislation,
it would be in the interest of
justice to admit the interview even if there has been a breach.
Application to exclude the evidence of
the application filed by Ms Wilmott contains a number of grounds and particulars
as the basis for the exclusion of OW’s
evidence, the overarching complaint
is that the conduct of the police was such that it would be contrary to the
interests of justice
to permit the admission of the evidence. Put simply, it is
Mrs Shaw KC’s submission that “the ends do not justify the
means” and the police conduct should not be condoned by permitting the
prosecution to now rely on the evidence of OW.
Strickland (a
pseudonym) v Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
to Mrs Shaw KC’s argument is the High Court decision of
Strickland (a
pseudonym) v Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions
’). It is useful to consider the facts and
circumstances of that case before determining its application to the facts of
matter before this Court.
the appellants appealed a decision of the Court of
Appeal of the Supreme Court of Victoria, allowing appeals from orders of the
Judge permanently staying the prosecution of the appellants.
Fundamental
to the outcome in
was an accuseds’ right to silence and
their entitlement to decline to answer questions on the basis of the protection
self-incrimination.
the course of an investigation by the AFP, and after exercising their right to
decline to participate in an interview under caution
with officers of the AFP,
each appellant was subjected to a compulsory examination purportedly conducted
Australian Crime Commission Act 2020
(Cth) by the Australian
Crime Commission (‘ACC’). The ACC had referred the allegations that
were the basis of the charge
to the AFP, and offered to allow the AFP to utilise
the ACC’s coercive powers. The primary Judge found that the ACC acted
“as a facility for the AFP to cross-examine under oath whoever the AFP
wished, for the AFP’s own
prejudice occasioned to the appellants as a consequence of the approach adopted
by the AFP and ACC was summarised by
Each compulsory examination was conducted for the “purpose of achieving
forensic disadvantage to [the appellant], and advantage
to the prosecution, in
foreseen future legal proceedings”. To a varying degree in relation to
each appellant, each compulsory
examination achieved the result of occasioning
forensic disadvantage to the appellant in the proceedings which were
subsequently
commenced by the filing of the indictments by the CDPP.
The main forensic disadvantage to each appellant which the primary judge
found that the examination had the purpose of achieving lay
in the appellant
being “locked in” to a version of events on oath from which the
appellant could not credibly depart
at trial. The additional forensic advantage
to the prosecution which the primary judge found that the examination had the
of achieving lay in information obtained through the examination being
available to be used to assist AFP officers to assemble the
prosecution brief to
be provided to the CDPP. To the extent the information was so used, its use
carried the additional practical
consequence of occasioning forensic
disadvantage to each appellant by limiting the appellant’s ability to
cross-examine the
AFP officers who assembled the prosecution brief with a view
to casting doubt on the prosecution case.
(Footnotes omitted)
follows that the appellants had been denied the protection of the common law
right to refuse to answer questions. The primary
judge found that the ACC
examiner was aware that the appellants were regarded by the AFP as suspects, and
therefore as people who
may be charged, and that they had refused to answer
questions. In plain contravention of the ACC practice to not examine witnesses
likely to be charged, the examiner compelled them to answer questions relating
to the very matters that were to be the subject of
the charges.
Court held that whilst the forensic disadvantage suffered by the appellants as a
result of their unlawful compulsory examination,
would of itself not necessarily
result in a stay of proceedings, that disadvantage had to be considered in
conjunction with the ACC
examiner’s “unlawful, reckless disregard of
his statutory
responsibilities”.
combined effect was such that “the continued prosecution of the appellants
would bring the administration of justice into
disrepute”.
Court observed that although in previous decisions regarding unlawful ACC
examinations, the only circumstances that had resulted
in a permanent stay of
proceedings involved deliberate unlawful conduct on the part of investigative or
prosecutorial authorities
(or at least advertent reckless disregard of lawful
requirements), that was not a necessary prerequisite for the sanction of a stay.
Chief Justice Kiefel, Bell and Nettle JJ (the plurality)
although in previous cases regarding unlawful examination and dissemination of
examination product the courts’ concerns
regarding the administration of
justice falling into disrepute have focused on deliberate or advertent reckless
disregard of legal
requirements, nothing in previous authority suggests or
should be taken to imply that abjectly insouciant, wide-ranging disregard
requirements of the ACC Act of the kind that occurred in the present cases may
not also bring the administration of justice
into disrepute. As the majority of
this Court stated in
Moti v The Queen
, decided cases should not be read
as attempting to chart the boundaries of abuse of process. Nor should they be
read as attempting
to define exhaustively the circumstances that warrant
exercise of the power to stay criminal proceedings or as providing some
“exhaustive
dictionary of words” by one or more of which executive
action must be capable of description before proceedings may be stayed.
J aptly summarised the position in
Truong v The Queen
“relief is not confined to cases of deliberate and knowing misconduct,
although that may be sufficient to enliven the jurisdiction.
It extends to
serious cases where, whatever the initial motivation or purpose of the offending
party, and whether deliberate, reckless
or seriously negligent, the result is
one which the courts, exercising the judicial power, cannot tolerate or be part
No doubt, society and therefore the law ordinarily looks more askance on
instances of deliberate or advertent reckless disregard of
a duty or obligation
than upon the accidents of incompetence. As a rule, the former are conceived of
as entailing greater moral culpability
and for that reason their condonation is
conceived of as more likely to bring the administration of justice into
disrepute. But ultimately
it is a question of degree which substantially depends
upon the nature of the duty or obligation. If a duty or obligation is of no
than peripheral significance, condonation of its breach, even of an intentional
breach, may appear justified in the interests
of relatively more pressing
considerations of justice. The power to stay proceedings is not available to
cure venial irregularities.
But if, as here, the duty or obligation is of a kind
that goes to the very root of the administration of justice, condonation of
breach will bring the administration of justice into disrepute regardless of the
culprit’s mentality. Ultimately, these
appeals turn on that
distinction.
acknowledging that a permanent stay of proceedings in a criminal trial is an
extraordinary step and “should only ever
be granted where there is such a
fundamental defect in the process leading to trial that nothing by way of
reconstitution of the
prosecutorial team or trial directions or other such
arrangements can sufficiently relieve against the consequences of the defect
to afford those charged with a fair
the appeal was
allowed and a permanent stay was granted.
explaining the basis for arriving at that position, the plurality observed that
fundamental social concern to ensure that the
of a criminal
prosecution does not justify the adoption of any and every
securing a conviction and, therefore, a recognition that in rare and exceptional
cases where a defect in process is so profound
as to offend the integrity and
functions of the court as such, it is necessary that proceedings be stayed in
order to prevent the
administration of justice falling into disrepute.
(Emphasis in original)
in dissent on the outcome of the appeal, Gageler J made some apposite
observations on the purpose of the power of a Court
proceedings:
have emphasised from the outset, the power of a superior court to stay its own
proceedings as an abuse of process is a power
to protect the integrity of its
own processes. It is not a power to discipline or to punish those who might
bring those proceedings
or those who might stand behind them. Its focus is on
prevention of the court’s procedures being used in a manner that is
inconsistent
with the due administration of justice by the court. In a case
where use of the court’s procedures would be substantially unfair,
inconsistency lies in the administration of justice by the court being converted
into an instrument of that substantial unfairness.
In a case where use of the
court’s procedures would bring the administration of justice into
disrepute, the inconsistency lies
correspondingly in the tendency of the court,
in permitting that use of its procedures to occur, to erode public confidence in
court’s administration of justice in that and other cases.
The application of Strickland to the facts of the case
was Mrs Shaw KC’s submission that the transgressions of the police in this
case, in conjunction with the conduct of the
DCP, are such that to permit the
evidence of OW to be led, would bring the system of justice into disrepute. It
was however conceded
that unlike in
there is an
alternative remedy available to the Court, falling short of staying the
prosecution case in its entirety. That is to
deprive the police and prosecution
of the “poisoned fruit” and exclude the evidence of OW.
was Mrs Shaw KC’s submission that the conduct of the police in the
investigation of Ms Wilmott was similar to that engaged
in by the Federal Police
and the ACC in
. She submitted that the police had
deliberately conspired with the DCP, for the purpose of effecting the removal of
OW from his
mother to ensure that the maternal bond was broken, resulting in her
having no influence over OW.
Shaw KC set out a chronology of events in support of that submission. She
emphasised that the police had the power to remove
OW pursuant to s 41, and
the fact that they did not do so prior to the involvement of the DCP highlights
that they believed there
were insufficient legitimate concerns about OW’s
safety to warrant his removal from Ms Wilmott.
was contended that the arrest and removal were deliberately scheduled to
maximise the potential of obtaining an incriminating
account from OW, and that
the only real reason for OW’s removal was to destroy OW’s
relationship with his mother, to
facilitate the police investigation.
was Mrs Shaw KC’s submission that there was no lawful basis for the DCP to
have removed OW from Ms Wilmott’s care
and the information that they
purported to rely on was incorrect or lacking in substance. In addition, the
information, at its highest,
was capable of establishing a risk of harm, not
serious harm.
support of the application, Mrs Shaw KC relied upon the purported breaches of
Summary Offences Act
Evidence Act
that I have already dealt with,
together with what she referred to as the
complaints.
Shaw KC summarised her argument in the following
matter that does fall within the principles of Strickland that the police should
not be encouraged or further encouraged
to liaise with DCP, or any other entity,
knowing that they are performing a role in breach of their section and, indeed,
section, because they were all child protection officers, and be able
to come along and say ‘That was their decision, not ours’,
not at arm’s length, they worked hand in hand. SAPOL called police to come
down when the interview was finished,
SAPOL checked with DCP ‘Are you
going to remove today?’, and the answer was ‘Yes’.
Conclusion re: Interlocutory application to exclude the evidence of
order for this application to succeed it is necessary for me to make a finding
that SAPOL engaged in unlawful or improper conduct
in collaborating with the
DCP. Further, that it was as a consequence of this collusion that OW was
unlawfully removed from Ms Wilmott’s
reasons that I have already provided, I do not come to that view. To the
contrary, I find that, at all times, SAPOL and the
DCP behaved conscientiously,
within the parameters of their respective roles and with a focus on the best
interests and welfare of
those findings necessarily mean that this application must be dismissed, it is
appropriate to say something further about
some of the additional particulars
relied upon by Mrs Shaw KC.
That the removal of OW from the
care of the accused pursuant to
Children and Young People (Safety)
(SA) was unlawful and for an improper purpose
of the complaints made by Mrs Shaw KC related to the adequacy of the information
relied upon by the DCP to carry out the
removal. In particular, that the
DCP mistakenly believed that the allegations in relation to SM had been
substantiated and that
the arrest of Ms Wilmott was to be for the offence of
manslaughter, when it was in fact, at that stage, for the less serious offence
of criminal neglect.
was Mrs Shaw KC’s submission that, considered objectively, the information
in the possession of the DCP was insufficient
to form the basis for a
removal of OW.
for the argument that Mrs Shaw KC is correct about that contention, absent
collusion with or influence from SAPOL, that
would not be a basis upon which to
exclude the evidence. At worst, the DCP in making a judgment call, got it
wrong. It should be
noted however, that if they did so, it was in the context
of seeking legal advice from the Crown and in circumstances in which, when
matter came before the Youth Court, the Judge confirmed the decision based on
the same information.
That the ongoing application of the
guardianship order and the exclusion of a relationship between OW and his
mother, and subsequently,
a denial of a relationship between AW and his mother
was unlawful and/or an abuse of process of the Court
is no evidence to support the suggestion that SAPOL played any role in the
ongoing arrangements for the guardianship of OW.
There is also very limited
evidence about the role that the DCP played and the basis upon which they made
various decisions about
the care arrangements for OW.
is also important to note that the ultimate decisions about guardianship were
made by the Court in proceedings in which all parties,
including OW, were
legally represented.
The conduct of SAPOL and the psychologist
undermined and circumvented the application of
Evidence Act
(SA) in relation to OW’s rights under that section, nor was OW
provided with independent advice in that respect
Evidence Act
relevantly provides:
21—Competence
and compellability of witnesses
(1) A close relative of a person charged with an offence is competent and
compellable to give evidence for the defence and, subject
to this section, is
competent and compellable to give evidence for the prosecution.
(2) If a person is charged with an offence and a close relative of the
accused is required by law (whether by subpoena or other process)
evidence against the accused in any proceedings related to the charge (including
proceedings for the grant, variation or
revocation of bail, or an appeal at
which fresh evidence is to be taken), the prospective witness may apply to the
court for an exemption
from the requirement to give evidence against the accused
in the proceedings.
(3) If, on an application under subsection (2), the court considers
(a) if the prospective witness were to give evidence, or evidence of a
particular kind, against the accused, there would be a substantial
(i) serious harm to the relationship between the prospective witness and the
accused; or
(ii) serious harm of a material, emotional or psychological nature to the
prospective witness; and
(b) having regard to the nature and gravity of the alleged offence and the
importance to the proceedings of the evidence that the
prospective witness is in
a position to give, there is insufficient justification for exposing the
prospective witness to that risk,
the court may exempt the prospective witness (wholly or in part) from the
requirement to give evidence against the accused in the
proceedings before the
(4) A court may, on its own initiative, grant an exemption under subsection
(3) where no application has been made under subsection
(a) the prospective witness who is required by law to give evidence against the
accused is a young child or is cognitively impaired;
(b) the court is of the opinion that such an exemption should be granted.
is plain that the section relates to the right of a close relative of an accused
to be exempted from giving evidence. The point
at which that right may be
exercised is at trial.
section has no application to the provision of witness statements or the
participation of witnesses in interviews. That logically
must be so, because
otherwise, how could a Judge undertake the necessary balancing exercise, as
required under
, absent knowledge of the details of the evidence that a
witness may give.
was Mrs Shaw KC’s argument that because the account provided by OW was in
the form of a prescribed interview, that alters
the situation, in that the
interview may be presented as the evidence of the witness.
submission however, overlooks two relevant considerations: one that is
applicable to all cases in which there is a prescribed
interview, and the other
that arises on the facts of this case.
a prescribed interview to be admissible under
Evidence Act
witness must be available, if required, for further examination. It follows
that in the event that a family member wishes to
avail themselves of their
rights at trial, that option remains open. In the event that the
Judge provides them with an exemption from giving evidence, they
are no longer
“available” and the prescribed interview cannot be relied upon.
addition to this, during the course of the evidence I heard on numerous
occasions that the police had told OW that the decision
as to whether he was to
give evidence against Ms Wilmott was to remain his. I accept that OW was given
this advice and that advice
was genuine. I have also been told by Ms Litster
that checks have been made with OW and his position remains that he wishes to
evidence. Ms Litster has also told the Court that OW will be given an
opportunity to obtain independent legal advice before he gives
follows that the conduct of the police and prosecution have in no way undermined
OW’s right to request an exemption from
giving evidence. I also accept
the Director’s assurance that OW will have an opportunity to obtain legal
advice prior to trial
and should OW have a change of heart, and no longer wish
to give evidence, that decision will be respected.
refuse the application to exclude the evidence of OW.
Annexure 1: Leading
The question and answer
BS KELLY’s evidence (if any) about where that information
(‘I heard’) came from
Was the information in the first or second interviews
Was the information earlier in the third interview
Observations
Page 7, line 27
And when she went back to her room, um we’ve talked a lot about
Jasmine being alarmed in her room-
Cf second interview
Topic of alarm introduced
Q. I heard there was an alarm in jasmines room
There is no dispute about there being an alarm to Jasmine’s bedroom
Page 8, line 6
Q. Okay. And who told you to lock her in the bedroom.
Her evidence (T1391-1392) was that the question was aimed to cover off
‘who, what, where, when, why’ and that the way
the question was
phrased gave him the opportunity to equally say ‘it was just me’.
Not directly on point, but OW had already introduced the fact that the
accused would lock Jasmine in her bedroom.
Page 3, Lines 21-25:
Q. Yep yep. Okay. So tell me what you’d like to share about the way
mum treated Jasmine.
A. Um, it wasn’t that good.
A. Used to, like, hit her a lot and-
A. Er, would lock her in her room.
OW had already volunteered to a very open question that Ms Wilmott
would lock Jasmine in her bedroom. Considering OW’s age
at the time that
Jasmine was being locked in her bedroom, it is not unreasonable to suppose that
OW was undertaking this role at
someone’s request. The question did not
however lock OW into an answer in that it was open for him to respond that
had told him to lock the door.
Page 17, line 22
Q. No, that’s okay. So I heard sometimes Jasmine pleaded not to be
hit. Is, is that true.
Discussed at T1378. Disagrees with it being a leading question; explains
that ‘I heard’ was used to elicit more information.
This appears to be one of the occasions on which BS Kelly used the “I
heard” technique to take OW directly to a topic
that had come up in other
witness affidavits. By this time, OW had already spoken of Ms Wilmott hitting
Jasmine. Of note, the question
is immediately followed by an open question of
“Could you talk me through a time which that happened”.
Page 21, line 32
Q. Why do you think Jasmine hoarded food.
A. So she wouldn’t get hungry.
interview (29/10/2020):
OW says that
Jasmine would sometimes take food from the fridge. When asked why: “maybe
Mum said no to her so and she was just
hungry and she really wanted it or she
was kind of craving it” (Line 859).
Jenni told OW
that Jasmine would steal food (Page 51, Lines 1186-1189).
interview (3/3/2021):
“are you aware of any issues in the house around Jasmine and food”
Response is that
she would hoard food (Line 490).
At Page 4, Line 29 of the third interview, OW described Jasmine hoarding
food in her bedroom.
There is no dispute that Jasmine hoarded food.
Page 22, line 15
Let’s start with meal times, ‘cos I, you said she sometimes
didn’t eat meals with you, yeah.
Cf earlier interview no 2
Contrary to earlier answer
Line 37: Mhmm Well like I heard Jasmine didn’t always eat with the
family at dinner time
Line 38: Yeah sometimes she um, yeah I don’t really remember too
well. I do remember that we most the time ate dinner together.
remember anything else really
In the second interview, after the passage already identified at line 38,
OW went on to elaborate about the circumstances in which
Jasmine would not eat
dinner with the family. He said that Jasmine “might be reading a book,
she might be cleaning her room
up umm she might just like want some alone
time” (Line 44). OW subsequently returned to the topic “Um Jasmine
you know she she’d um you know maybe she would eat in her room if
she wanted some alone time or like maybe if um Mum was doing
like cleaning the
dishes or cleaning the table she might eat in her room” (Line 62).
Page 23, line 21-23
Yeah, and I, I understand that. Yeah, I understand that. Like I said,
I’m, I’m asking lots of questions and if you don’t
answer, that’s, that’s okay. What would Jasmine say about food.
Er, I don’t know. She didn’t say anything about, like, wanting
more, but I don’t know.
In my view, this is not a leading question.
Page 23, line 25
Q. Yeah. Yeah. We um – Now, I heard that you told Miranda about how
you would have to punish Jasmine sometimes.
T1365-66: Kelly is questioned by HH about what information (if any) was
provided by Willet:
Q. So you knew in a general sense he’d disclosed to her –
Q. - but not the details of what the disclosure was.
A. Yes, yeah.
This is a leading question which refers specifically to the information
having come from Ms Willet. The “I heard” form
of questioning could
have occurred without reference to Ms Willet. That question is immediately
followed by the very open question
of “Tell me, tell me about that”
and a series of open, non-leading questions in response to which OW recounts in
detail the manner in which he was required to punish Jasmine.
Page 31, line 6
Q. So I just wanna let you know that ok. Now that you’re here to talk
and tell me a few more things about what happened, I,
I heard you told Miranda a
bit more detail of um what happened that day. Tell, tell me what you talked to
Miranda about.
A. Um, so it was about, like, er, knocking on the door.
This question is referrable to the previous question which was “Yeah.
Of course. Yeah. Yep. Um so we did, we have touched
on the day that Jasmine
died, all right, yeah, and you, you always do really well, okay. I’m not
saying it’s easy, but
you’ve done really well talking me through
some of those things -”. The question that is the subject of the
is not a leading question. The issue that arises in relation to this
question is the reference to Ms Willet when she was present
during the interview
as the prescribed companion.
Page 44, line 3
Q. We, you sort of touched on [SM] just very briefly in previous
interviews. As you know, [SM] did come forward about-
T1386-7: Kelly does not recall whether OW already knew that SM had made
allegations.
T1388: Kelly was aware of the allegations (from SM) before the
interview: Line 1136. 2
interview only
mentioned insofar as she used to live with them; OW thought she was
“mean” and they didn’t really
OW introduces the subject of SM very briefly on Page 3, Lines 21-24:
Q. Okay. So I, I’ll just start with-, yeah, tell, tell me what
you’d like to share with me.
A. Um, that, the way we treated Jasmine and, like, how mum treated Jasmine.
A. And how we treated, like, [SM] as well.
In order to properly assess this question it is necessary to consider it in
the context of the question that follows. After being
interrupted by OW, BS
Kelly continued “You know, some things, and just wondering if you could
give us a, an outline of some
of the things of what happened when [SM] was
living with you”. OW went on to recount details of what would happen when
Wilmott would collect SM from OSCH.
Although the relevant question is leading, in that it introduces the notion
that OW knows that SM has “come forward”,
it then develops into a
broad, open-ended question that provided OW an opportunity to provide an account
of anything that he recalled
note, BS Kelly did not recall whether OW already knew that SM had made
allegations,
however she was aware of SM’s allegations before the third
Page 45, line 15
Q. Yeah. Okay. So I heard, you know, things did happen, your mum, you know,
did some things to [SM] and, and, between Jasmine and
[SM], could you tell me a
little bit about that.
A. Um, I don’t really remember much about [SM] and what mum did to
Kelly says the phrase “some things” is broad enough to not be
See directly above (Page 3, Lines 21-24), although not directly on the
subject matter introduced by Kelly.
At the outset of the third interview, in response to a question of
“Okay. So I, I’ll just start with, yeah, tell, tell
you’d like to share with me”, OW introduced the topic of Ms Wilmott
treating SM like she treated Jasmine. In
that context, this question is not
leading but is referring back to the earlier answer given.
Yeah. Yeah. So I, I’m sort of, ‘cos I wasn’t there for
that, I’m trying to understand, sort of, the tone of
voice, like, what, so you heard your mum tell [SM] to take a knife into
Jasmine’s room.
Yeah, but she told me that it was kind of off her own accord.
But you knew otherwise.
Not what OW told Kelly:
Page 45, Lines 22-29:
A. Er, yeah, um, I do remember, I think, mum told [SM] to bring a knife
down into Jasmine’s room before.
A. And then, er, we, like, we, mum talked to me about it before, she kind
of said, oh yeah, [SM] brought a knife down into Jasmine’s
room and I just
kind of thought to myself, you told her to-
It would seem that in this exchange, BS Kelly had not picked up on some of
the detail in an answer provided by OW at Page 45 of the
transcript.
In response to a very open question about what OW had seen Ms Wilmott do to
SM, OW responded “... I do remember, I think, mum
told [SM] to bring a
knife down into Jasmine’s room before”.
OW went on to further clarify “... mum talked to me about it before,
she kind of said, oh yeah, [SM] brought a knife down into
Jasmine’s room
I just kind of thought to myself, you told her to
Although in the first answer it appears that OW is recounting something he
saw or had heard, it becomes apparent by the end of the
second answer that he
made an assumption that Ms Wilmott had told SM to bring the knife into
Jasmine’s room.
That answer is followed immediately by the impugned question in which it
appears that BS Kelly has acted on the mistaken belief that
OW actually heard Ms
Wilmott tell SM to take the knife to Jasmine’s bedroom. That mistaken
belief then infects the remainder
of the questions on that topic in that it
becomes unclear as to whether OW is relying on memory or supposition
Page 47, line 1
Q. So your mum kept, sort of was intimating that [SM] was fat and piggy
farm, or something.
A. Yeah. Yeah. Er, yeah, I don’t really remember. I think she had,
like, the same amount of food as us.
T1393: Kelly was referring to information given by OW earlier in the (3rd)
interview when OW says that Jenni would say “we’ve
gotta get there
before, like, feeding time at the funny farm because they fatten her up”
(Page 44, Line 11).
See Kelly’s answer.
In this answer, BS Kelly was attempting to pick up on a topic that had been
raised by OW earlier in the third interview. Whilst she
has not repeated the
answer previously given by OW in a manner that is word perfect, she has captured
the gist of what OW had said
previously. In my view this may be a clumsy
question, it is not a leading question. It also does not impact on the response
by OW in that he replies in a non-committal fashion.
Page 47, line 16
Q. Yeah. Yeah. Um so I heard that [SM] and Jasmine sometimes hurt each
A. Yes, so this question is being more specific and in our training –
this is towards the back end of our interview and in our
training we are advised
that in order to elicit information and cover off on elements of offences, we
can put more specifically things
to the witness and I’ve made a decision,
on the back end as it’s closer, because I’ve started broad, broad,
I’ve done depth, specific, broad, broad, depth, specific and so I
made a choice to put that in there to elicit and give him
an opportunity to
relay what he wanted to in relation to that”.
This is a leading question. That topic had not arisen prior to this when
asked about this question, BS Kelly gave the following response:
A. Yes, so this question is being more specific and in our training - this
is towards the back end of the interview and in our training
we are advised that
in order to elicit information and cover off on elements of offences, we can put
more specifically things to
the witness and I’ve made a decision, on the
back end as it’s closer, because I’ve started broad, broad, broad,
I’ve gone depth, specific, broad, broad, depth, specific and so I made a
choice to put that in there to elicit and give him
an opportunity to relay what
he wanted to in relation to that.
It would appear from this answer that in order to direct OW’s
attention to a topic that had arisen in the affidavits of other
witnesses, and
to ensure that OW had the opportunity to comment, BS Kelly made a considered
decision to ask OW a direct question
leading him into the topic. It is
important that she immediately followed that question with a completely open
question of “Tell
me about that”.
Page 47-49, line 24-11
Did anyone tell [SM] what to do to Jasmine.
I don’t know.
My mum might just egged her on, I guess.
Yeah. Yeah. So your mum egged [SM] along.
Yeah. Okay. And what kind of things would she egg [SM] on
Um, maybe, I think she pushed her down the stairs once, [SM] to Jasmine
I think my mum was kind of, like, yeah, you should do that, and [SM] just
kind of like did it, I guess.
But I don’t remember exactly. This was at Gleneagles.
And how was Jasmine when she got pushed down the stairs.
Um, I’m not sure. I think she had, she had a blood nose, or something
And did you see that happen
Er, no. No.
I guess, and also, I don’t know how, but I just remember it, I guess.
I don’t know where from. Just, I do.
This question follows an answer from OW, that he remembers SM punching
Jasmine once.
It is arguable as to whether this is a leading question. Whilst it
introduces the suggestion that someone may have asked SM to punch
Jasmine, it
does not presuppose the answer. It does however lead to an exchange that
continues for about a page and a half, during
which OW appears to speculate
Page 49, line 27
So [SM], you know, has told, you know, people outside of the home about
things that happened anything else that you can share with
Whilst the question suggests that SM had provided the police with
information, it does not disclose what that information was.
Page 51-52, line 21-8
And what about, how [MW] treated Jasmine. Do you have any memory around
Yeah. Okay. Okay. And I hear you’re seeing him soon.
Tomorrow, actually.
Oh I’m excited, nervous as well.
It is not clear to me why this question has been included in the table, as
it is clearly not a leading question.
Yeah. Thanks for sharing that, [OW]. Is there, sort of, anything else you
wanna share around that.
It is not clear to me why this question has been included in the table, as
it is clearly not a leading question.
Criminal Law Consolidation
Ibid s 30 (Version
13.8.18-5.9.18 as at the date of the offence).
s 20(4)(b).
At the time of Ms
Wilmott’s arrest, Detective Inspector Vanderwoude held the rank of
Detective Sergeant. For that reason,
I will refer to her as Detective Sergeant
Vanderwoude during the course of this judgment, for ease of reference.
Based on VDP78 this would
appear to be when the administration of the task force commenced, with the task
force officially commencing
on 29 June 2020.
The principal later advised
DBS McGilchrist that she had subsequently found out that Ms Wilmott had signed
the form for the school
psychologist. T1240.
T1217-1219; VDP97.
T1083-1084.
T1078-1079.
T1221-1222.
T1153-1154.
T1139-1140.
T1081-1082.
It would appear that this
was incorrect in that the allegation involving SM was not substantiated.
T1081-1082.
VDP84 and VDP84a.
T1168-1169.
Although Ms Wood did not
recall this attendance, based on the other evidence, I find that she did attend
at Ms Wilmott’s home
address at about 11.34am. This finding does not
impact on Ms Wood’s creditability as it appeared to be a genuine
memory, no doubt as a product of the passage of time.
Children and Young
People (Safety) Act 2017
s 147(1)(b)
T1168-1169.
T1140-1142.
27 March 2025.
Affidavit of Benjamin
Philip Ward dated 27 March 2025 at [35].
T1228-1229.
OW now identifies as
T1338-1340.
T1340-1341.
Ms Willet may have left
for a period of time to move her car, T1307.
Record of interview at
Record of interview at
Record of interview at
T1023-1024.
Summary Offences
Regulations 2016
(SA) reg 21.
(2022) 142 SASR 175.
Lindsay v The King;
Rankine v The King; Woods v The King
(2022) 142 SASR 175
Lindsay v The King;
Rankine v The King; Woods v The King
(2022) 142 SASR 175
Lindsay v The King;
Rankine v The King; Woods v The King
(2022) 142 SASR 175
Lindsay v The King;
Rankine v The King; Woods v The King
(2022) 142 SASR 175
Summary Offences
Regulations 2016
(SA) reg 21(c).
Two orders were tendered
because the orders were updated over the relevant period. The relevant
reference, however, remained the
[2005] SASC 209
(2005) 92 SASR 15.
Police v Henwood
[2005] SASC 209
(2005) 92 SASR 15
[2009] SASC 57
(2009) 103 SASR 337.
Hughes v Police
[2009] SASC 57
(2009) 103 SASR 337
[2016] SASC 70.
Police v Hodder
[2016] SASC 70
[2020] SASCFC 128.
South Australia v
[2020] SASCFC 128
Record of Interview at
Record of Interview at
T1378-1379.
MFI VDP109.
T1348-1349.
[2018] HCA 53
(2018) 266 CLR 325.
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Cth) v Brady
[2016] VSC 334
(2016) 346 FLR 1
Strickland (a
pseudonym) v Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
[2018] HCA 53
(2018) 266 CLR 325
Strickland (a
pseudonym) v Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
[2018] HCA 53
(2018) 266 CLR 325
Strickland (a
pseudonym) v Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
[2018] HCA 53
(2018) 266 CLR 325
Strickland (a
pseudonym) v Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
[2018] HCA 53
(2018) 266 CLR 325
Strickland (a
pseudonym) v Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
[2018] HCA 53
(2018) 266 CLR 325
Strickland (a
pseudonym) v Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
[2018] HCA 53
(2018) 266 CLR 325
, Emphasis in original.
Strickland (a
pseudonym) v Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
[2018] HCA 53
(2018) 266 CLR 325
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (981 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter