URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAOmbFOI/2022/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:02:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Department for Child Protection 2022/01450 [2022] SAOmbFOI 1 (8 July 2022)
Determination
External review - section 39
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Ms Joyce Woody
Department for Child Protection
Ombudsman reference:
Agency reference:
Determination:
The determination of the agency is varied.
Date of Ombudsman’s determination:
8 July 2022
Issues considered:
Definition of personal affairs
Unreasonableness (personal affairs)
Effective performance of agency’s functions
Exemption clauses relied upon:
16(1)(a)(iv)
Legislation considered:
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Terms of the original application:
Department for Child Protection Practice Manual
Application for access
application under the
Freedom of Information Act 1991
) the applicant requested access from the agency
Department for Child Protection Practice
ease of reference, procedural steps relating to the application and the external
review are set out in Appendix 1.
external review is within the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman as a relevant review
authority under section 39 of the FOI Act.
Provisional
determination
provided my tentative view about the agency’s determination to the
parties, by my provisional determination dated 30 May 2022.
I informed the
parties that subject to my receipt and consideration of submissions from the
parties I proposed to reverse the agency’s
determination.
provisional view assessed the agency’s initial position that the redacted
information was not subject to review, and did
not consider whether the redacted
information might be exempt as the agency had not claimed exemption at that
stage. On 14 June 2022
the agency provided submissions acknowledging that the
redactions were subject to review and detailing the agency’s revised
position that the document is partially exempt.
provided my revised tentative view to the parties by my revised provisional
determination dated 22 June 2022. I informed the parties
that subject to receipt
and consideration of any further submissions from the parties I now proposed to
vary the agency’s determination.
email dated 24 June 2022 the applicant provided a response agreeing with the
terms of my revised provisional determination.
email dated 6 July 2022 the agency provided further submissions in support of
its previously revised position. The agency has largely
reiterated its position
as previously communicated to me with the addition of providing other examples
where information disclosure
has been limited and reference to real life
instances in which members of the public have been surprised to learn
information contained
in the document. I will address the former first.
agency has first referred to a joint decision of the agency and the Youth Court
of South Australia to limit access to CourtSA
for parents who are a party to
care and protection proceedings. The portal holds all documents which have been
filed in the proceedings.
consider that access to the document in issue can be distinguished from
information contained on CourtSA. The documents filed in
care and protection
proceedings are heavily detailed and specific to the parties, whereas the
document in issue is general such that
it is relied upon in every matter dealt
with by the agency. It is easier to see a connection between documents which
specifically
apply to a person and any care concerns about them and the
possibility for that person to alter their behaviour.
an example, where the document in issue might specify the various factors which
might indicate that a drug assessment is necessary,
documents held on CourtSA
would likely specify which factor is relevant to a particular person, and they
may take steps to hide or
eliminate that one factor. The list of factors in the
document in issue is intentionally long in order to detect any indicators of
drug use; I am not satisfied that a person could alter their behaviour such that
every single factor is undetectable whilst still
engaging in drug use.
agency has also referred to an instance in which the Public Service Association
was refused access to the psychological assessment
tool used to assess potential
employees as to their suitability to work in licenced children’s
residential care facilities.
I am not persuaded that this reference adds
anything further to the agency’s submissions as the decision to refuse
access appears
to have been made solely by the agency.
any event, I anticipate that I would have formed a different view as to
disclosure of the assessment tool.
agency has submitted that in its experience, many individuals who come into
to learn of some of the
information redacted in the document in issue. The agency therefore submits that
it is not open to me to
find that a reasonable person could speculate about the
contents of the document.
disagree with this submission. There is no evidence before me to indicate that
those individuals had given any consideration to
the contents of the document in
issue. I remain of the view that any reasonable person who actively turned their
mind to the contents
of the document in issue could largely speculate as to its
reviewing all of the agency’s submissions it is clear to me that the
agency has taken a highly risk-averse stance in dealing
with this matter. This
approach is understandable given the sensitive nature of the agency’s
functions and responsibilities,
as well as the potential severity of any outcome
eventuating from an improper exercise of those functions. However, my view is
the agency’s consideration of the specific document in issue may have
been disproportionately influenced by its broader knowledge
and actions within
the child protection system.
this point, the agency disputes my characterisation of the document in issue
being ‘general’ and highlevel’.
I remain of the view that this
is an appropriate characterisation, but consider that this submission might
indicate that the agency’s
assessment of the document has included a
consideration of matters known by the agency but not actually within the
document in issue.
addition to the reasons provided in my revised provisional determination and
repeated below, I have had consideration to the amount
of information of a
similar nature which is available to the public in other jurisdictions. In
particular, the New South Wales, Victoria
and Queensland equivalents of the
redacted information in the document is readily available online.
have also considered the unlikeliness that if the agency were somewhat
obstructed in its usual methodology, it would refuse to take
alternative steps
to fulfil its functions. As an example, if contact with a person could not be
made via telephone due to the person
refusing to answer calls, I would expect
that the agency would then adopt alternative methods of communication rather
than simply
accepting that contact could not be made.
Accordingly,
even if I were to accept that disclosure of the document might result in a
person altering their behaviour (for example
not answering phone calls), it
seems unlikely that this would truly prevent the agency from properly fulfilling
its functions.
summary, I am not persuaded by the agency’s further submissions to alter
my views. Accordingly, this determination is in
the same terms as my provisional
determination.
Relevant law
person has a legally enforceable right to be given access to an agency’s
documents in accordance with the FOI
FOI Act provides that upon receipt of an access application, an agency may make
a determination to refuse access where the documents
are ‘exempt’.
Schedule 1 lists various exemption clauses which may be claimed by an agency as
a basis for refusing access.
following clauses of Schedule 1 are relevant to my external review:
6—Documents affecting personal affairs
(1) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter the disclosure of
which would involve the unreasonable disclosure of information
concerning the
personal affairs of any person (living or dead).
16—Documents concerning operations of agencies
(1) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter the disclosure of
(a) could reasonably be expected—
(i) to prejudice the effectiveness of any method or procedure for the conduct
of tests, examinations or audits by an agency; or
(ii) to prejudice on the attainment of the objects of any test, examination
or audit conducted by an agency; or
(iii) to have a substantial adverse effect on the management or assessment by
an agency of the agency's personnel; or
(iv) to have a substantial adverse effect on the effective performance by an
agency of the agency's functions; or
(v) to have a substantial adverse effect on the conduct of industrial
relations by an agency; and
(b) would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest.
20(1)(b) of the FOI Act is also relevant to my external review:
20—Refusal of access
(1) An agency may refuse access to a document—
(b) if it is a document that is available for inspection at that or some
other agency (whether as part of a public register or otherwise)
in accordance
with Part 2, or in accordance with a legislative instrument other than this Act,
whether or not inspection of the document
is subject to a fee or charge;
section 48, the onus is on the agency to justify its determination ‘in any
proceedings’. This includes the external
review process.
39(11) provides that the Ombudsman may confirm, vary or reverse the
agency’s determination in an external review, based
on the circumstances
existing at the time of review.
Documents in
agency did not determine the applicant’s FOI application within the
statutory time frame and is deemed to have refused access
The agency purported to
issue a belated determination to the applicant.
19(2)(b) provides that if an agency fails to determine an application within 30
days after receiving it, it is to be taken
to have determined the application by
refusing access to the documents sought. However, section 19(2a) of the FOI Act
provides that
‘nothing prevents an agency from making a determination to
give access to a document on an application after the period within
which it was
required to deal with the application (and such a determination is to be taken
to have been made under this Act)’.
should be noted that section 19(2a) only permits agencies to make belated
determinations ‘to give access to a document’
and cannot be utilised
to refuse access. Noting that the agency belatedly ‘determined to
refuse’ the FOI application,
I do not consider the determination to be
valid for the purpose of section 19(2a).
internal review the agency varied its deemed refusal determination such that
access to the one document identified as falling
within scope was refused.
Issues in this review
regard to the agency’s submissions and the exemption clauses provided in
Schedule 1 of the FOI Act, it is for me to determine
whether to confirm, vary or
reverse the agency’s determination in regard to the document in issue in
this external review.
Consideration
agency stated in its purported belated determination:
I advise that Part 2 of the
Freedom of Information Act 1991
and specifically section 10(1), provides that an Agency (in this case DCP), must
cause copies of each of its policy documents
to be made available for inspection
and purchase by members of the public.
Consequently, pursuant to section 19(1)(a) and 20(1)(b) of the FOI Act, I
have determined to refuse your FOI application that seeks
access to the
”Department for Child Protection Practice Manual”
basis that I am providing it to you in accordance with Part 2 of the FOI Act.
I further note for your reference that section 10(2) of the FOI Act sets out:
Nothing in this section prevents an agency from deleting information from
the copies of a policy document if its inclusion in the
document would result in
the document being an exempt document otherwise than by virtue of clause 9 or 10
of Schedule 1.
Accordingly, you will note that some information has been redacted (deleted)
from the document provided to you where I have determined
that clause 16 of the
FOI Act is applicable. I have attached a copy of clause 16 for your reference.
agency initially refused to provide my Office with an unredacted copy of the
document in issue and took the view that, because
access has been refused in
accordance with section 20(1)(b), the applicant is not entitled to a review in
relation to the portions
of the documents redacted pursuant to section 10(2) of
the FOI Act.
consider that the agency’s initial submissions reflect a misunderstanding
of the provisions of the FOI Act, particularly around
the distinction between
proactive disclosure of information and disclosure pursuant to the determination
of an access application.
provisions of the FOI Act cannot be considered in isolation. Rather, each
provision should be considered in the broader context
of the Act and having
particular regard to the Part of the Act in which the provision appears. The FOI
Act is separated into the
following parts:
Part 1 – Preliminary
Part 2 – Publication of certain information
Part 3 – Access to documents
Part 4 – Amendment of records
Part 5 – External review
Part 6 – Miscellaneous
the various Parts will of course interact with one another, consideration of the
proper application of a section should be
conducted in the context of the Part
in which that section appears. Of relevance in this matter, Part 2 of the Act
deals with publication
of certain information. This refers to information which
agencies are required to publish regardless of any specific FOI application.
other words, information which must be proactively disclosed.
10(1) requires agencies to publish its current policy documents. Whilst section
10(2) permits an agency to delete information
from a policy document which might
be exempt, the application of this section does not extend to instances where a
policy document
falls within scope of an FOI application. Considering section
10(2) in the context of Part 2, clearly this discretion is only conferred
an agency in relation to its requirement to publish policy documents under
section 10(1).
short, section 10(2) has no relevance to an FOI application and cannot be relied
upon by an agency as a basis for determining a
document is partially exempt. The
manner in which an agency must determine an FOI application is governed instead
by Part 3 of the
receipt of an FOI application an agency is required to determine the application
in accordance with section 19. Further, section
20 sets out the grounds on which
an agency may refuse access to a document. The agency determined that access to
the document was
refused on the basis of section 20(1)(b) which states that
access to a document can be refused:
...if it is a document
that is available for inspection at that or some other agency (whether as part
of a public register or otherwise)
in accordance with Part 2, or in accordance
with a legislative instrument other than this Act, whether or not inspection of
the document
is subject to a fee or charge;
is important to note that section 20(1)(b) refers to a document, rather than a
document containing information or matter. This
specific wording indicates that
section 20(1)(b) may only be applied in instances where the entirety of the
document is available
for inspection.
interpretation is supported by section 20(4) which states that an agency must
not refuse to grant partial access to a document
if it is practicable to delete
the exempt matter. Given that Parliament saw fit to include this section, the
inference to be drawn
is that in the absence of section 20(4), section 20(1)(a)
would have the effect that where a document contains even a small portion
exempt material, the entirety of the document is exempt.
that section 20(4) refers only to the redaction of
matter and not
matter available for inspection, it is my view the section does not permit an
agency to partially refuse access to
a document in accordance with section
applicant has sought access to the agency’s practice manual, which appears
to me to be a standalone document. By the agency’s
own submissions, the
document is not available for inspection in its entirety. Accordingly, the
agency cannot rely upon section 20(1)(b)
to refuse access to the document.
20(1)(a) in conjunction with section 20(4) of course permits the agency to
partially release the document to the applicant,
redacting the portions
considered to be exempt on the basis of clause 16, and any such redactions are
subject to review.
said, in my provisional determination I concluded that as the agency had
declined to provide me with an unredacted copy of the
document and failed to
explain or justify a claim of partial exemption, I was not satisfied that the
agency had justified its position
in accordance with section 48. Accordingly,
based on the limited information before me I provisionally concluded that the
is not exempt and ought to be released in full.
response to my provisional determination the agency conceded that it has refused
partial access to the document in accordance with
clauses 6(1) and 16(1)(a)(iv),
and that such redactions are open to review by me. The agency has also provided
me with a copy of
the unredacted document as requested.
agency submits that, upon further consideration, several portions of the
redacted material can be released to the applicant. I
accept the agency’s
revised position and therefore advise that the remainder of this determination
will only consider the portions
of the document over which the agency maintains
a claim of exemption.
agency submits that a mobile phone number is exempt on the basis of clause 6(1)
as the number has now been allocated to an agency
staff member for the purpose
of case work. It is unclear whether the phone is also utilised for personal
purposes, however I accept
that the ability to be contacted beyond ordinary
business hours is sufficient to characterise the number as constituting personal
am also satisfied that disclosure would be unreasonable as the number does not
contribute to understanding the document generally.
to the application of clause 16(1)(a)(iv), with the exception of the redactions
applied to the Intake chapter and page 3 of the
Raising and Responding to Care
Concerns chapter, generally the agency submits that:
it employs a
broad range of processes and strategies to detect and minimise the risk of harm
to children and young people
disclosure of the agency’s processes and strategies may enable a person to
behave in such a way that could conceal
harm or risk of harm to a child or young
person. This may involve a perpetrator of abuse: :
their behavior to avoid detection
a child or young person to act or respond to questions in a certain way
an inaccurate home environment
steps to avoid being located.
16(1)(a)(iv) requires that disclosure is reasonably expected to have a
‘substantial adverse effect’. The phrase
is not defined in the FOI
Act but has been held to be a high threshold where the effect is
‘sufficiently serious or significant
to cause concern to a properly
informed reasonable
considering whether the agency’s effective performance of its functions
would be substantially adversely affected by disclosure,
I consider it relevant
to turn my mind to the nature of those functions. The agency has legislated
functions under the
Children and Young People (Safety) Act 2017
) which aim to detect and minimise risk of harm to children and
young people. Any impact upon the agency’s ability to carry
functions therefore arguably result in harm or risk of harm remaining undetected
and unaddressed.
consider that any effect which might place a child or young person at risk, or
allow a child or young person to remain at risk would
cause concern to a
properly informed reasonable person. Accordingly, in the circumstances of this
matter, I am satisfied that any
effect on the agency’s ability to perform
its functions may satisfy the initial requirements of clause 16(1)(a)(iv).
said, the anticipated effect must still be one that can reasonably be expected
to result from disclosure, and is not considered
to be irrational, absurd or
ridiculous.
accept that the kind of outcomes identified above can be characterised as
substantially adverse. I also accept that the agency has
experienced instances
of behaviour being altered in that manner. That said, it is not clear to me that
further instances of such
behaviour could reasonably be expected to specifically
eventuate as a result of disclosure of the redacted information.
person perpetrating abuse could, regardless of disclosure of this particular
document, alter their behaviour to avoid detection.
Such a person would
naturally turn their mind to the processes that the agency might employ to
detect problematic behaviour and I
consider that a reasonable person doing so
could speculate what the redacted material contains.
has been outlined, the document is a policy document; the processes contained
therein are general and high-level such that they
can be applicable in all
circumstances. From my viewing of the redacted material, the information appears
to be a kind which a reasonable
person would expect would be contained within a
policy document. I therefore consider that although the adverse effects
anticipated
by the agency may occur in the future, it would not specifically be
as a result of disclosing the document in issue.
to the public interest, the agency submits:
Agency considered the following factors in favour of disclosure:
public interest in fulfilling the objects of the FOI Act;
public interest in individuals who are impacted by Agency decisions in having
access to documents which guide the operations of
the Agency; and
benefit to the Agency in members of the public having access to documents such
as the Manual of Practice to provide them an opportunity
to participate in the
formulation of policy.
And the following factors in favour of non-disclosure:
document subject to the FOI application is the guiding document used by all
Agency practitioners in their work with children and
young people across the
spectrum of time that the Agency may be involved with that individual.
public interest in ensuring that children and young people at risk of harm are
protected by the very statutory Agency tasked with
the administration of the
risk to the welfare of a child or young person where methods employed to detect
risk of harm are disclosed resulting in the opportunity
for individuals to
thwart detection; and
the risk of harm to even just one child or young person is sufficient to justify
non-disclosure.
agree with the factors identified in favour of disclosure and further note that
section 10 indicates a Parliamentary intention that
an agency’s policy
documents ought to be available to the public.
to the factors contrary to disclosure, the first factor appears to simply be a
factual statement. The agency has simply described
the nature of a policy
document and it is unclear to me what relevance this has to the public interest.
strongly agree that protecting children and young people from harm and
safeguarding their welfare is in the public interest. I also
agree that a risk
of harm to even one child or young person would weigh substantially against
disclosure. However, as outlined above,
I am not satisfied that the agency has
established that disclosure of the redacted information specifically would
create that risk.
balance, I am not satisfied that disclosure would be contrary to the public
to the information redacted in the Intake chapter and on page 3 of the Raising
and Responding to Care Concerns chapter, it is clear
from the surrounding
information that the redacted information is a phone number. The agency has
explained that the number is a landline
dedicated solely for the agency to make
priority contact with the Child Abuse Report Line (
). Of particular
relevance, the agency further submits that:
The general CARL line received 66833 telephone calls in the 2020/2021
financial year.
The average wait time was 11 minutes and 49 seconds... It would be an
inefficient use of department resources if staff members were
required to spend
time on hold waiting to make a notification to CARL.
agree with the agency’s submissions in this regard. Noting the average
wait time for the general CARL line, it seems likely
that disclosure of the
priority line would result in members of the public utilising the latter,
effectively undermining the purpose
of establishing a separate priority line at
agency staff are unable to quickly and efficiently contact CARL, a task
presumably undertaken frequently, this will detract from
the time available to
staff to fulfil other functions. Again noting the frequency of this task, I am
satisfied that unrestricted
disclosure of the priority number could reasonably
be expected to substantially adversely affect the agency’s performance of
its functions.
consider that there is very little public interest in disclosing the number
beyond fulfilling the objects of the FOI Act. Balanced
against the public
interest in safeguarding the agency’s internal processes and ensuring
efficient use of the agency’s
resources, I am satisfied that disclosure
would be contrary to the public interest.
Determination
light of my views above, I vary the agency’s determination such that the
document be released in full except:
the mobile phone
number which is exempt on the basis of clause 6(1)
priority landline number which is exempt on the basis of clause 16(1)(a)(iv).
Wayne Lines
8 July 2022
Procedural steps
16 September 2021
The agency received the FOI application dated 12 September 2021.
15 October 2021
The agency failed to determine the application within the 30 day period
required by the FOI Act,
deemed to have refused access to the
16 November 2021
The agency purported to issue a belated determination to the applicant.
18 February 2022
The agency received the internal review application dated 18 February
3 March 2022
The agency varied the deemed refusal determination.
10 March 2022
The Ombudsman received the applicant’s request for external review
dated 10 March 2022.
22 March 2022
The Ombudsman advised the agency of the external review and requested
submissions and documentation.
5 April 2022
The agency provided the Ombudsman with some of the requested submissions
and documentation.
The agency provided the Ombudsman with some of the requested submissions
and documentation.
22 June 2022
The Ombudsman issued his provisional determination and invited submissions
from the parties.
24 June 2022
The applicant provided submissions in response to the provisional
determination.
6 July 2022
The agency provided submissions in response to the provisional
determination.
Freedom of Information Act
section 12.
Freedom of Information Act
sections 19(2).
Konieczka v South Australia
[2006] SADC 134.
State of South Australia
(Department of the Premier and Cabinet) v Seven Network (Operations) Ltd
[2022] SACAT 11
Freedom of Information Act
section 14(2).
Freedom of Information Act
section 19(2).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.05 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter