URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SALGCmr/2009/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:01:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Organic Store Restaurant [2009] SALGCmr 2 (7 April 2009)
LIQUOR LICENSING ACT, 1997
ORDER OF THE LIQUOR
AND GAMBLING COMMISSIONER
Application No:
97850, 97851 & 97852
Licence No:
THE ORGANIK STORE RESTAURANT
37 BROADWAY
GLENELG SOUTH 5045
ROARVALE ENTERPRISES PTY LTD
Effective Date:
7 April 2009
APPLICATION FOR A RESTAURANT LICENCE
This is an application by
ROARVALE ENTERPRISES PTY LTD
in respect of premises situated at
BROADWAY, GLENELG SOUTH 5045
and to be known as
THE ORGANIK STORE
I refer to my previous Orders numbered 134355, 134285 and 134368, which set
out the history of this matter and the issue to be determined
by way of a
preliminary point.
In short, I have granted leave to Fassina Pty Ltd:
“..... to intervene in respect of this application, however, solely
to the extent of being permitted to make written submissions
to this authority
in relation to whether it is appropriate for this authority to deal with the
restaurant licence application immediately
and in isolation to the Special
Circumstances Licence application, which is currently before the Licensing Court
Mr Peter Hoban, representing the intervener submits:
“In our respectful submission you should not proceed to deal with
the Restaurant Licence application for the following reasons:
Applicant originally applied in October 2008 to vary its current SCL by, inter
alia, increasing the number of lines and by introducing
dining with consequent
alterations and redefinition of the licensed area.
surprisingly this was viewed as an undesirable expansion of the current SCL
being contrary to at least the spirit if not the letter
of the Act in relation
to a licence of “last resort”.
current Application appears to us to be little more than a device to avoid that
result. In other words, it is designed to “force”
the Licensing
Authority to focus on separate applications when in reality (from a physical,
functional and legal point of view) there
will, effectively, be one
consider this Application in isolation will prevent the Licensing Authority from
examining the real issue for determination namely
whether (to use the words of
Section 40)
a licence of no other category (in this case a hotel licence)
could adequately cover
the kind of business proposed by the Applicant
(our underlining).
appropriate course is, with respect, in order to avoid a potential abuse of the
Court’s process, to refer this matter to
the Court for hearing at the same
time as the SCL application.”
Mr David Tillett, submits on behalf of the applicant:
”At the callover of the restaurant licence matter on Tuesday,
solicitors for the intervener Fassina Investments Pty Ltd, indicated
would withdraw the intervention on the basis of the applicant withdrawing their
application which is presently listed before
The restaurant licence application presently before the Commission was
lodged following the clear indication by the intervener at
the conciliation
hearing that they had no issue with the applicant having a restaurant licence in
respect of the restaurant area.
This hardly came as a surprise to the applicant
bearing in mind that the objector conducts a retail liquor merchant’s
and cannot possibly have any basis for objection/intervention to a
restaurant licence.
The restaurant licence is a separate application lodged under the
Licensing Act for a separate licence in respect of clearly identifiable
alongside the existing Organik Store. The application should clearly be dealt
with independently of the matter currently
before the Licensing Court.
The applicant has foreshadowed that should the restaurant licence be
granted, and application for variation of condition before the
Court will be
amended to:
(a) a variation of the hours; and
(b) the increase in the number
of permitted lines from 30 to 70.
Accordingly the matter before the Commission for a restaurant licence
should be permitted to proceed.
Pursuant to the order of the Commissioner dated 30 March (Order 134355)
the Commission determined:
“That Fassina Investments Pty Ltd be formally granted leave to
intervene in respect of this application, however, solely to
the extent of being
permitted to make written submissions to this Authority in relation to whether
it is appropriate for this Authority
to deal with the restaurant licence
application immediately and in isolation to the special circumstances licence
application which
is currently before the Licensing Court. As an intervener
they are a party to the proceedings. Refer definitions
Liquor Licensing Act
Pursuant to Order 134368 of 31 March 2009, following a request by
solicitors for Fassina Investments, the Commissioner directed that
Investments Pty Ltd be notified and permitted Fassina Investments to make
written submissions to this Office on the question
of whether that entity should
be granted liberty to be joined as a formal party to this application and if so,
to what extent.
It is therefore considered that Fassina Investments Pty Ltd are a party to
the proceedings, but on a very limited basis. The intervener
made its position
clear at the conciliation hearing, the applicant has relied upon that and acted
upon it and for the intervener
to now be seeking to prevent the restaurant
application proceeding is an abuse of process.
It is noted in the letter of 25 march 2009 that Wallmans Lawyers
indicated, “our clients are concerned that this application
for restaurant
licence is simply a device to avoid the deficiencies in the original application
for variation of conditions of the
special circumstances licence.”
It is submitted that there is nothing whatsoever in support of it being a
“device” and that the applicant is doing no
more than applying for a
restaurant licence under the Act and has to satisfy the requirements of the
Commissioner in respect of same.
If another party was applying for a restaurant
in respect of these premises we have no doubt that this application would have
no interest whatsoever from the intervener. The purpose of the
intervention is to try and have the applicant withdraw their application
variation of conditions of the special circumstances licence and, as such, has
no arguable case. The intervener should be permitted
no further involvement in
respect of this matter.”
Having fully considered the respective submissions in conjunction with the
qualified ability to intervene to the extent of providing
written submissions:
“on the question of whether that entity should be granted liberty to be
joined as a formal party and if so, to what extent ....”
I uphold the applicants’ submission and in the exercise of my
discretion under section 53(1) & (3) of the Act, I determine
that the Notice
of Intervention has “run its course” and for completeness I dismiss
the intervention and now proceed
with dealing with the application itself.
Under section 56 of the Act, I am satisfied that
PETER JOHN FRASER and
BRENDA FRASER
the applicants are fit and proper persons to
occupy a position of authority in a body corporate holding a licence of this
CORPORATE STRUCTURE
ROARVALE ENTERPRISES PTY LTD A.C.N. 129 951
SHAREHOLDERS
PETER JOHN FRASER
PETER JOHN FRASER
BRENDA FRASER
BRENDA FRASER
I am satisfied that the criteria in section 57 have been met, and that
landlord’s consent under section 72 has been obtained.
The application is granted, effective from
7 April 2009
The licensed premises are outlined in red on the plans lodged with the
application signed and dated by me
7 April 2009
A copy of the plan is to be kept at the licensed premises and made available
to an authorised officer on request.
Under section 71(1) of the Act I approve
PETER JOHN FRASER and
BRENDA FRASER
as responsible persons of the business to be
conducted under the licence.
(1)(c) of the
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
the licensee is
authorised to sell liquor on any day except Good Friday and Christmas Day for
consumption on the licensed premises
by persons; between the hours of 5 am to
midnight Monday to Saturday and 11 am to 8 pm Sunday.
The trading hours of the premises are restricted to the following:
Monday to Sunday (excepting Good Friday & Christmas Day) 8am to 8pm
an extended trade authorisation is granted subject to the
following conditions:
Areas 1 & 2
Sunday 8am to 11am
Capacities are as follows:
Area 1 50 persons
Area 2 28 persons
There shall be no more that 50 persons on the licensed premises at any
of the Act I extend the authority conferred by the
licence so that the licensee is authorised to sell and supply liquor in an area
adjacent to the licensed premises for consumption in that area, as outlined in
red on the deposited plan and shown as Area .
The authority is granted subject to the following
conditions:
The authority shall lapse and become of no effect if the Outdoor Cafe
Licence issued by the City of Holdfast Bay lapses or is cancelled,
withdrawn or
revoked and shown as Area 2.
Area 2 shall be clearly defined by means approved by the Liquor and
Gambling Commissioner and the Corporation of the City of City
of Holdfast
Area 2 shall operate during the following times:
Monday to Sunday (except Good Friday & Christmas Day) 8 am to 8
No more than 28 persons shall be in Area 2 at all times.
Liquor may only be sold or supplied for consumption by a patron whilst
seated at a table within Area 2.
Entertainment shall not be provided in Area 2.
The licensee shall maintain a clear path across the front of the
premises for pedestrian traffic.
There shall be no loud speakers on or in the fascia of the premises of
or on the adjacent footpath.
The grant is subject to the following conditions:
The licence is subject to any conditions imposed by the
Liquor Licensing Act
or its regulations.
The licensee is obliged to maintain all essential safety provisions
regulation 76
of the regulations under the
Development Act, 1993
detailed in schedule 16 identifying all essential safety provisions each item
must be specified in the schedule.
I note that monies to finance this transaction are self funded.
Eugene Milograd
Assistant Liquor and Gambling Commissioner
Delegate of the
Liquor and Gambling
Commissioner
(EM/MW) Date of Order: 7 April
Box 2 Adelaide 5001
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (55.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter