URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAET/2025/109.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:57:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Farrell v Department for Education [2025] SAET 109 (8 October 2025)
Farrell v Department for Education
[2025] SAET
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNAL
FARRELL, Glenn
DEPARTMENT FOR EDUCATION
South Australian Employment Court
Work Health and Safety Act 2012
ET-23-03892
HEARING DATE:
22 April 2025, final written submissions
30 September 2025
DECISION OF:
His Honour Deputy President
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Work Health and Safety prosecution
– Guilty plea – 16 year old student suffered head injuries after
falling from a broken
swing in a school playground – Failure to provide
and maintain safe playground equipment, so far as was reasonably practicable
– Australian Standard for playground inspections was not followed –
No inspections of load bearing moving parts for eight
years after installation
– Failure to observe that a shackle bolt was severely worn to 5% of its
diameter – Playground
equipment inspection obligations were delegated on
paper to site Principals without them being informed, and without a system for
ensuring inspections actually occurred – Aggravating circumstance of the
vulnerability of the disabled children exposed to
the unsafe swing –
Second offence –
: Objectively serious offence resulting from
adoption of a flawed safety system – Fine of $225,000 imposed after
reduction by
10% for limited contrition – Conviction
Work Health and Safety Act 2012
Sentencing Act
Australian Standard AS4685:2017 Playground equipment and
Patterson v Department of Education and Children’s Services &
[2008] SAIRC 68
Campbell v Woolworths Group Limited
REPRESENTATION:
: Kelledy Jones
25 August 2021, a 16-year-old student was using a playground swing provided by
the defendant when one of its severely worn supporting
bolts broke, throwing him
to the ground. As a result of using the swing, the student was placed at risk of
serious injuries and did
suffer significant head injuries.
swing failed because one of the two shackle bolts that supported the
swing’s chains had worn down over years of use so that
only 5% of its
cross-section remained. That is, 95% of one of two critical bolts had worn away
without anyone ever inspecting it.
worn bolt was observable on a visual inspection of the swing’s moving
parts. Quarterly and annual inspections were required
by the applicable
Australian Standard, but no such inspection had taken place and the defendant
did not have a system for ensuring
they occurred.
an investigation by SafeWork SA, the Department for Education was charged with
one breach of its primary safety duty as
25 August 2021, at Port Augusta West in the State of South Australia, the
Defendant, being a person conducting a business or undertaking,
and who had a
health and safety duty, failed to comply with that duty, and that failure
exposed [a Student] to a risk of serious
Contrary to
Work Health and Safety Act 2012
(SA). This is a minor
indictable offence.
Particulars
material times ... the Defendant owed a health a safety duty within the meaning
of s 19 of the WHS Act to the [students
attending its] ... Port Augusta Special
School located at 27 McSporran Crescent, Port Augusta West in the State of South
(the School).
Student] was a 16-year-old boy enrolled at the School in 2021 to study year 11.
2.3 On 25 August
2021, the Student was exposed to a risk of serious injury while using a double
bay quad swing set (the Plant) at
the School when the attachment of the swing to
the frame of the Plant snapped on one side (Risk).
2.4 The injuries
sustained by the Student on 25 August 2021 when he fell from the Plant after the
swing snapped, were a manifestation
of the Risk.
material times, the Plant was an asset owned by the Defendant and located at the
material times the Defendant was responsible for the management and maintenance
of plant, structures and equipment at the
School, including the Plant.
material times the maintenance of plant and equipment at the School was managed
pursuant to the Across Government Facilities
Management Arrangements (the
Defendant failed to maintain, so far as was reasonably practicable, a safe
system of work in that it failed to:
(i) ensure that the Plant had been included as an item of plant requiring annual
preventative maintenance on the Preventative Maintenance
Schedule (the PMS); and
(ii) ensure the Plant had undergone annual preventative maintenance.
Defendant failed to maintain, so far as was reasonably practicable, safe plant
at the School in that it failed to:
(i) identify and address, during the annual preventative maintenance, the
condition of the pin, d-shackle and anchor point of the
Plant (with respect to
Defendant failed to ensure, so far as was reasonably practicable, the provision
of a safe system of work in that it failed
(i) ensure that the School had a documented system of work to track annual
preventative maintenance undertaken and/or required on
the Plant, under the PMS.
Defendant failed to ensure, so far as was reasonably practicable, that:
(i) the Principal(s) of the School were adequately trained in the operation of
the Defendant’s requirement for annual preventative
maintenance of the
maximum penalty is a fine of $1,500,000.
The circumstances
late 2024, the prosecution and defendant agreed that the original charge would
be withdrawn and refiled, based on the same alleged
breach of primary safety
duty regarding the playground inspection failures. The defendant then entered a
guilty plea within one month
of the charge being refiled, but more than three
years after the offence and about one year after it was first charged.
swing was installed as part of a new playground in 2012. It was inspected when
installed. The swing had seats for four users.
Each seat was independently
suspended by two chains. The failed attachment point referred to in particular
2.3 was one of two simple
bolts used to support the chains of each seat. Only
one of the four seats was affected.
load bearing ‘U’ part of the shackle was worn to 5% of its diameter.
Later testing confirmed there was no manufacturing
defect in the worn shackle.
The damage to the shackle likely occurred gradually over multiple annual
inspection periods after a brass
bush failed. The failed bush and worn bolt were
readily identifiable on inspection.
inter-agency facilities maintenance policy referred to in particular 2.7
included a Preventative Maintenance Program, which had
the capacity to undertake
the required annual inspections. But that depended on the defendant asking
another agency for its playground
equipment to be included in the program, for
which an internal ‘fee’ was charged. The defendant’s relevant
makers did not ask for this work to be undertaken, and did not inform
the school’s Principal.
of the school’s playground equipment was ever given a comprehensive annual
inspection in the eight years prior to the offence.
Nor did any of the quarterly
inspections include the load bearing moving parts of the swings.
Standard AS4685:2017
(previously
AS4685:2014
) (‘the Australian
Standard’) applies to playground equipment and surfacing.
quarterly operational inspections required checking of the load bearing moving
parts for excessive wear, i.e. the shackles and
annual inspection also requires checking of these critical load bearing parts,
with 40% wear being indicated as excessive.
Australian Standard allowed a maximum three-month period between inspections of
the shackles and bearings. The Australian Standard
was never correctly applied
or followed by the defendant in the eight years prior to the offence.
defendant also had the benefit of prior written advice from the Department for
Infrastructure and Transport (‘DIT’)
in the form of Technical Data
Schedule S51 (‘TDS’) that outlined the Australian Standard’s
recommended minimum
quarterly inspection of moving parts of playground
equipment. Annual and three-yearly inspections were also advised.
March 2021, a senior officer of the defendant was advised by a senior officer of
DIT of the Australian Standard’s requirement
for at least quarterly
inspections of playground equipment, and of significantly increased fees for DIT
undertaking the inspections,
if asked to. DIT pointed out that only 360 of the
defendant’s playgrounds were then being inspected as required.
June 2021, DIT conducted what it called an Asset Assurance Inspection of the
school. DIT then recommended to the defendant that
it apply the TDS to the
school, so that DIT could include the school in its Preventative Maintenance
Schedule. DIT sought a response
on two occasions, but none was received, for
reasons that were not explained to the Court.
the time of the offence in August 2021, the defendant had not made any
arrangement for all its playgrounds to be included on the
inspection register,
or for DIT to conduct the recommended inspections.
defendant did not keep regular inspection or maintenance records for the
playground equipment over the many years it was in use.
After installation in
2012, daily and quarterly visual inspections were recorded on only five
occasions between April 2018 and January
2021. There is no evidence the critical
load bearing moving parts of the swing were ever inspected on these occasions.
defendant had no system of reviewing, checking or auditing to ensure that all
playgrounds were included in its centrally controlled
inspection and maintenance
program. The defendant’s existing safety system was limited to a
policy-based delegation of its
responsibilities to site leaders.
school’s Principal at the time was Anthony Holden. He had been appointed
in October of 2020. He was aware of a requirement
for some form of daily and
quarterly inspections of plant, based on his previous experience as a Deputy in
a different school. He
assumed these were being carried out. He was not aware of
the need for annual inspections.
school’s Deputy from 2018 to 2022, and Acting Principal for most of 2020,
also did not know about a requirement for yearly
inspections of playground
equipment. She believed no-one had ever done a yearly comprehensive inspection
prior to the incident. The
Deputy only later became aware of the need for annual
inspections through her own training efforts.
did the school’s Principal between 2017 and 2019 know about a need for
annual inspections of playground equipment. She was,
however, aware of the
Department’s system for preventative maintenance of other plant, whereby
the school would be informed
when inspections and maintenance were due, and
staff would then arrange for the work to be undertaken.
2.4 refers to the victim falling from the swing when the bolt failed. The fall
involved being thrown and landing on his
2.5m from the swing. He
suffered immediate degloving injuries to the left side of his face and forehead
from eyebrow to scalp, with
lacerations to his eyelids and nose.
victim was initially treated at the Port Augusta Hospital, then transferred to
the Royal Adelaide Hospital (‘RAH’)
for surgery, with ophthalmic
investigation. He remained an inpatient for three days, and later had to return
for his eyes to be checked.
The victim’s father had to take considerable
time off his employment to look after him.
Victim Impact Statement (‘VIS’) was prepared and signed by the
victim and his father. It was read out to the court and
a copy was provided to
the defendant.
family lives in Quorn. The father is a single parent. He was initially phoned by
the school and told his son had been in an accident,
had gone to hospital, and
would need “a few stitches” to a cut on his face.
father left work and arrived at the Port Augusta Hospital about 90 minutes
later. His son’s head and eyes were covered in
bandages, and a note on his
forehead said, “Do not remove bandages without a plastic surgeon
present”. His son was about
to have a CT scan of his neck, which had been
hyper-extended on impact. They were later airlifted to the RAH, where his son
had surgery
the next day. They were discharged after three days, and the father
took care of his son for the next seven weeks, including taking
him to medical
appointments as far as Adelaide. He was then able to return to school. The
father later needed to take another two
weeks off work to deal with the
father knew his son “used that swing at every opportunity he got to help
him through his day”. After the incident,
the father saw how his
son’s autistic symptoms “ramped up” and so sought
psychological help for him from the school.
The school declined to assist. To
make matters worse, the father felt unreasonably criticised for seeking that
psychological help,
which took two years to access.
father describes the facial injuries as “horrific”. His son’s
forehead was degloved to his hairline, his eyelids
were “hanging
off”, and some tear ducts were severed. He now needs to wear glasses. He
has very noticeable scars on his
forehead, on both eyelids, and on the bridge of
his nose. The scars are a constant reminder of the incident. The victim says he
“devastated” when he looks at them.
father states that he only ever received one phone call from the defendant about
the offence. Mr Holden phoned him a couple of
days later to enquire about and
express some concern for his son. The father does not recall any apology being
conveyed, and nothing
was received in writing.
offer of any restitution, reparation, or victim of crime compensation was made
by the defendant.
defendant’s most senior WHS officer since October 2024 has been David
Randall. His title is Assistant Director, Work Health
and Safety.
Randall asserts that at the time of the offence in 2021, the defendant had a
“comprehensive” WHS management system,
with “clear and defined
WHS roles and
responsibilities”.
Randall states the defendant “sincerely regrets that, at the local level,
its system failed and that the risk of injury to
[the student] came to
He adds that the
defendant “deeply regrets and apologises for the harm”
Randall has used language of ‘event’, ‘incident’, and
‘harm’, but has not acknowledged the
defendant committed a crime, or
that the Student is a victim of this crime.
Randall stated that the defendant provided support to the injured student and
his family after the incident. The identified support
was providing immediate
first aid, calling an ambulance, and accompanying the victim to the local
Randall does not explain why the family’s request for psychological
assistance for the victim was declined.
Randall states that one of the defendant’s specialist WHS officers (called
a WHS Business Partner) visted the school’s
Principal in February 2021 to
discuss some WHS matters. WHS officers provide some type of safety advice to
allocated schools. While
topics of the February 2021 discussions were not
identified, they did not include compliance with the required inspection regime
for playground equipment.
Randall did not identify any process for checking the correct practical
application of its inspection and maintenance policies
for playgrounds.
Randall provided a one page summary of the defendant’s current Work Health
Safety Management System. It refers to 21 ‘Key
Risk’ topics and the
availability of more internal information. The key risks do not mention
playground equipment. Possible
provided categories that would cover playgrounds
include ‘falls from heights’, ‘outdoor learning
environment’,
and ‘machinery and equipment’. The document then
lists six topics related to hazard controls under a heading of ‘Key
support material’. They are: ‘frequently asked questions’,
‘hazard alerts’, ‘posters and
brochures’, ‘child
accident prevention’, and ‘regional safety guidelines’. The
final item on the list
is ‘playground equipment register’. An arrow
then appears to link the listed support material to another section titled
‘safety inspections’, with 11 listed subjects. The list starts with
‘playground (internal and external)’,
but does not include any other
specific types of plant or machinery other than vehicles.
Randall did not outline how the defendant discharges its central
responsibilities for ensuring that all playgrounds, and new additions,
included in each site’s inspection schedule, and for ensuring all required
inspections take place at each site.
Randall stated the school’s playground equipment was immediately fenced
off and later decomissioned. A new playground was
installed at a cost of about
$290,000. That followed the initial investigation by SafeWork SA, which also
resulted in Prohibition
Notices being issued against the use of a seesaw and a
rocking motorbike. No other information was provided about the state of the
equipment that was disposed of.
Randall stated the offence also highlighted a range of training deficiencies
which are being remedied by greater resource allocation
to sites. The defendant
has also since spent $475,000 on other identified WHS safety deficiencies.
Submissions
informant submits the objectively serious offending created an unmanaged risk,
and the foreseeable occurrence of serious injury
to a vulnerable child.
risk was taken every time a student used the swing, which was frequently. The
student population was also particularly vulnerable
to falls from broken
equipment, as each student in the special school had a type of disability.
to manage the risk was significant because of the available information in the
Australian Standard, the information provided
by DIT, and the defendant’s
own stated policy.
defendant had identified the hazard of broken playground equipment and risks of
serious harm to children, but it failed to adopt
and implement reasonably
practicable hazard controls.
defendant did not provide a safe school environment, through failing to take
simple administrative steps to ensure the load bearing
moving parts of the
playground equipment were regularly inspected with documented results.
was an available system for conducting annual preventative inspections of
playgrounds, but the defendant failed for eight years
to take the necessary
steps to include the playground in that system, to inform and train site
Principals about these tasks, and
to check for site compliance.
penalty should reflect the need for general deterrence of employers who
regularly use plant.
is also a need for specific deterrence of the defendant. That arises from its
continuing obligation to arrange for appropriate
comprehensive inspections of
its hundreds of playgrounds. It must be constantly vigilant over maintaining a
compliant inspection
program in practice, and in taking all reasonably practical
safety precautions to ensure the safety of its students.
defendant accepts the risk of serious injury was foreseen.
defendant accepts that realisation of this risk, i.e. by a student being
seriously injured, was likely, but it was not inevitable
due to the existence of
the defendant’s WHS section, and the possibility of annual comprehensive
inspections within its system.
defendant accepts it failed to ever record the playground in the annual
inspection program, and it failed to ensure annual inspections
occurred between
installation and failure. It accepts that the particularised hazard control
measures were all reasonably practicable.
defendant submits the following factors support a reduced need for specific
deterrence: the offence has no mental element, the
defendant is of good
character, the defendant was aware of and intended to address the risk, and the
defendant is unlikely to reoffend
due to an enhanced safety system.
defendant’s initial written submission at the sentencing hearing asserted
its “profound contrition and remorse in
relation to the
but otherwise made
no reference at all to the victim’s experience as the injured victim of
this crime. In oral submissions,
the defendant only offered a verbal apology to
the victim, who was not in court, for the “incident” but not for its
defendant later submitted there had been verbal communications between the
school’s Principal and the victim’s father
in 2021, to the effect of
the Principal offering a verbal apology and financial support. The defendant
accepts nothing was sent in
writing, and accepts it declined the victim’s
request for professional psychological assistance.
18 October 2023, the victim’s lawyer wrote to the defendant asking it to
admit liability for his injuries. By response of
30 November 2023, the defendant
declined to make any admission. It did however offer to facilitate a number of
therapy sessions,
provided it received a report.
defendant did not voluntarily pay any reparations, restitution, or compensation
to the victim, and it opposed the Court awarding
any compensation to the victim
because it did not wish to use any of its public funds for this purpose.
defendant anticipated a common law claim for damages would be brought and
preferred to take advantage of its insurance arrangements.
The defendant’s
lawyers had put consideration of its liability for damages on hold until after
the sentencing process concluded.
defendant fully co-operated with the regulator. There have not been any similar
subsequent incidents.
defendant initially submitted it had not committed any prior safety offences,
without disagreement from the informant. After the
hearing, the defendant
acknowledged a prior safety offence from 2005, described in sentencing reasons
published as
Patterson v Department of Education and Children’s
Services & Jones.
submissions were made about this prior offence by either party.
defendant submits its degree of criminality fits at the low end of a mid-range
of severity.
Developments after the sentencing hearing
the circumstances of the offence suggested a right to compensation had arisen
Sentencing Act 2017
, the Court had an obligation to
give reasons for not making a compensation order, yet no submission had been
made by the informant.
Therefore, on 22 May 2025, I invited further submissions
from the informant, and a responding submission from the defendant, on the
following questions:
prosecutor informed the victim, and his father, of [the victim’s] right to
seek compensation from this sentencing Court,
in accordance with s 12 of the
Victims of Crime Act
Sentencing Act
If so, what was
their response?
If not, will the
prosecutor now do so?
prosecutor will now do so, and the victim does wish to apply for compensation,
will the prosecutor assist the victim to do
so? And if so, will any such
assistance extend to marshalling and submitting to the defendant and Court
currently available relevant
medical and other documents, including photos of
the scarring, regarding the injury, loss, and damage suffered by [the victim],
including records of the father’s use of paid leave while caring for
[the victim]?
Court was promptly informed that an officer of SafeWork SA would make enquiries
of the victim and his father about the topic of
compensation. SafeWork
SA’s enquiries resulted in the victim indicating he did wish to apply to
the sentencing Court for compensation
for his losses. The victim then presented
the relevant supporting evidence through his lawyer directly to the defendant,
in the first
defendant responded by engaging with the victim and reaching an agreement that
if the Court decided to make an order for interim
compensation under
appropriate amounts would be $40,000 for the victim’s non-economic loss
and $15,000 for his father’s services based
on the evidence available to
defendant maintained its opposition to any compensation being awarded.
defendant took two other steps. First, on 5 August 2025 it admitted liability
for the victim’s loss and damage caused by
what it described as a breach
of its “duty of care”. Second, on 8 August 2025 the
defendant’s Chief Executive conveyed
a written apology and acknowledgement
of the victim’s experience as described in his VIS. The letter explained
the defendant’s
failings as “a lack of oversight and compliance with
the Department’s processes which led to a failure to conduct annual
inspections of the playground...”.
defendant submitted its recent actions demonstrate its remorse and contrition.
It cited its admission of liability for breach
of its duty of care, the Chief
Executive’s apology, and the agreement about an appropriate amount of
compensation if any was
to be awarded over its opposition.
response to its lack of any psychological assistance to the victim, the
defendant submits it now appreciates a need to “clarify”
processes so that schools “may provide timely and appropriate support to
students and the families of students injured
on Department sites.”
late development was advised by the defendant on 30 September 2025. That is an
in-principle settlement of the victim’s rights
to common law damages has
been reached with the defendant. The defendant raised the question of whether
the issue of
compensation still needed addressing. No other submission was
Consideration
objective seriousness of this offence is high. The risk was of serious but not
fatal injury. The victim’s injuries are indicative
of the type of harm the
children using the swing were exposed to. While the extent of the neck condition
is unknown, a serious neck
or other type of head injury was quite possible.
seriousness is aggravated by the defendant placing a particularly vulnerable
group of disabled children at risk of serious injury
over a long period.
uncontrolled hazard of increasing wear to the load bearing shackle meant
realisation of the risk was highly probable. I disagree
defendant’s submission that the existing system had any realistic chance
of preventing the incident. That is because
the defendant never included the
playground in its annual inspection regime, and its policy overlooked the
critical steps of practical
implementation and enforcement. The defendant did
not conduct any check or audit of its inspection policy during the many years of
the swing’s use.
defendant’s safety system failed at the centre, not at the local or school
level. The school leaders had no control of,
and were not responsible for, the
Department’s defective safety system. The fact that none of the three
school leaders since
2017 knew about the comprehensive annual inspection
requirement, together with the lack of any evidence of how they should have
demonstrates the defendant’s central failings.
to Mr Randall’s assertion, the defendant did not have clearly defined WHS
roles and responsibilities.
existing safety policy was based on a fundamental misconception that the
defendant could delegate its key responsibilities to
site leaders, without a
system for any checking. The defendant unrealistically wanted its Principals to
liaise with DIT to know what
should be added to DIT’s inspection and
maintenance schedule,
but without
conveying this expectation to them. The defendant’s existing safety policy
for ensuring the inspection and maintenance
of potentially dangerous playground
equipment was little more than aspirational.
were a number of secondary or contributory failures.
defendant did not require inspection records to be made and kept. If inspection
records had ever been checked, the failure to
inspect would have been obvious.
role of the school’s allocated WHS officers who visited until early 2021
was so limited that none of the compliance failures
were ever identified.
defendant failed to act, for unexplained reasons, on prompts or warnings from
DIT earlier in 2021 about the need for annual inspections
of playgrounds.
defendant also failed to ensure quarterly inspections were conducted that
sighted the load bearing moving parts. The Australian
Standard required monthly
or quarterly inspections for these critical moving parts, not just annually.
That failure is however subsumed
by the defendant’s major failure to ever
conduct annual comprehensive inspections.
agree with the informant that specific deterrence remains a significant
sentencing factor. That is partly due to the defendant needing
to maintain a
correct understanding of the extent of its non-delegable WHS obligations as a
PCBU operating schools with playgrounds.
The defendant’s continuing
attribution of its safety failures to the local level raises a concern about the
defendant correctly
discharging its central obligations as the PCBU into the
future. The defendant also needs to be vigilant that its administrative
controls remain effective in dynamic physical and staffing environments.
important consideration is how the defendant now ensures its compliance through
checking, reviewing, or auditing. The Court
only has Mr Randall’s
subjective assurance of future compliance, an existing one page document to
which playground inspections
has been added, and the absence of any similar
later reported incidents to base this assessment on.
prior safety offence is also a relevant consideration to the assessment of the
need for specific deterrence. While that offence
was in 2005, the sentencing
took place in 2008, only four years before the playground was installed at the
Port Augusta school. The
2005 offence also involved a central failure to manage
a known hazard: children accessing roofs to retrieve balls. That offence arose
from a teacher permitting a student to climb through an open window onto a roof
to retrieve a ball. The student fell through the
roofing material, suffering
injury. The staff were not aware of any instruction or policy that prohibited
accessing roofs to retrieve
balls, which was a known practice. There was no
departmental policy about the topic. This prior offence apparently did not
the defendant to review its safety systems and adopt a compliant
centrally managed system for playground inspections between 2013
reject the defendant’s submission that the lack of a ‘mental’
element to its crime could justify a lighter sentence.
The defendant’s
submission is based on a misconception about category 2 and 3 safety offences,
noting the defendant is guilty
of a category 2 offence against
apply when a PCBU has omitted or failed to discharge a positive legal duty to
comply with the WHS Act’s primary safety
obligations. The mental elements
of criminal negligence or recklessness are elements of a category 1 or s 31
offence, and if proven,
a much higher penalty regime applies including with a
possibility of imprisonment. If a hypothetical PCBU intended to cause harm
someone from its operations, the mainstream criminal law could apply. The
defendant cannot legitimately minimise its criminal
conduct in this way.
any proof of a decision maker’s subjective good intentions to fully comply
with the WHS Act also misses the point
that the primary safety obligation is to
be objectively complied with. That is because subjective intentions do not
ensure safety
and prevent injury, so far as is reasonably practicable. In any
event, the defendant has not produced any evidence of the decision
process of its senior officers, who were responsbile for approving and managing
the inspection policy, and for responding
to DIT’s advice in 2021.
defendant asserts it has a ‘good character’ which should also
contribute to a lower penalty. While the defendant’s
official disregard of
the victim’s welfare for years together with its opposition to a
compensation order are very difficult
to reconcile with good character, this is
an irrelevant subjective factor in the assessment of prospects for future
compliance.
penalty must also serve to generally deter other PCBU’s from the two
practices of delegating safety responsibilities to
employees who are not in
control of safety systems, and of overlooking the need for practical enforcement
of policies about safety
systems to the greatest extent that is reasonably
practicable.
welfare of the victim of this offence is another important issue in the
sentencing process.
legal context of the victim sustaining injury is significant. He was not injured
by a lack of care, civil wrong or act of negligence.
He was injured by the
defendant’s criminal conduct. This defendant bears the same level of
criminal liability as do all private
sector PCBU’s. The defendant faces
accountability for the effects of its conduct in a criminal court: not in a
civil court
or by a discipline or administrative process. The victim is entitled
to be treated and compensated as a victim of a serious crime.
He has already
waited more than four years since age 16 for restitution and reparations.
defendant’s considered refusal to pay any compensation to its victim was a
poor response to its criminal conduct. The defendant’s
self-interest through reliance on insurance was more important than restitution
and reparation for its victim. Even then,
the defendant’s insurer refused
to admit liability until after the Court raised the question of s 124
compensation. To that
point, the defendant demonstrated very little regard for
its victim’s welfare, and thereby, a lack of contrition.
issue of s 124 compensation is now moot. I accept the victim has now reached an
agreement with the defendant as to his full rights
to damages for his losses,
with this agreement subsuming the right to summary or interim compensation under
for this agreement I would have made an award of compensation in the agreed
amount. I had concluded that the circumstances of
the victim’s known loss
and damage did entitle him to an interim award of compensation and s 124
provided an appropriate process
in this case.
penalty, I have taken account of the sentencing decisions cited by both counsel.
While each case is different, they offer
some guidance for the goal of
consistency of sentencing.
disagree however with the defendant’s submission that the decision of
Campbell v Woolworths Group
concerned a similar
serious failure to inspect and maintain equipment. That case involved a 2m high
bakery trolley which fell onto
an employee after its wheels jammed, causing
multiple injuries and broken bones. It was designed for display but was later
a trolly as it had small wheels. The hazard of the trolley falling due
to jammed wheels was not identified. The court found the hazard
to be a blind
spot of an otherwise compliant safety system. The court imposed a penalty based
on a starting point of $120,000. Woolworths
also voluntarily paid substantial
reparations to the employee victim and made a personal apology to her.
consider the defendant’s offending to be much more serious in the present
case. The offence occurred due to a fundamental
failure to implement and enforce
a policy about having annual inspections of known serious hazards to
particularly vulnerable children,
and after not responding to warnings received
at a high level.
next issue is the defendant’s claimed entitlement to a reduction of 40%
based on the timing of the guilty plea.
Sentencing Act 2017
provides for reductions of penalties of up to 40% in certain
circumstances.
the defendant’s guilty plea was entered within four weeks of the charge
being refiled in late 2024, a possible 40% reduction
may be granted to the fine
that would otherwise have been imposed.
circumstances of the guilty plea being entered so long after the offence are
unusual. Without the charge for the
offence being refiled, no reduction of
more than 10% could have been granted. Refiling the charge was not the only way
the parties
could have co-operated regarding the withdrawal of certain
particulars. That is because the admitted key allegation of failing to
the swing in a safe condition so far as was reasonably practicable, due to no
annual comprehensive inspections, was included
in the initial particulars.
for this fundamental inspection system failure over many years, before Mr Holden
was appointed, could have been admitted to
the Court and to the school’s
community long before the charge was refiled. A timely admission might well
have been meaningful
to the victim and his family, and to Mr Holden who had been
wrongly blamed by the defendant for its own management failures. A sophisticated
defendant that understood its failings and was genuinely contrite and remorseful
would have admitted its guilt at an earlier opportunity.
relevant factor to the assessment of contrition is the defendant’s
continuing opposition to its victim receiving an
award of interim compensation
by this sentencing Court. By this self-interested stance, the defendant avoided
accepting full responsibility
for the serious harm its offending caused to a
vulnerable child placed in its care.
defendant’s initial couched expressions of remorse and contrition to the
Court were not communicated to the victim, and
were made in a context of the
defendant expressly declining to admit liability for its victim’s loss and
damage. I place no
weight on the reported initial utterance of sorry and offer
of financial support by Mr Holden to the victim’s father. It was
recalled by the father, was not put in writing, and the offer was meaningless
given the subsequent refusal to provide psychological
assistance and opposition
to paying any reparations.
defendant’s subsequent written apology and liability for loss and damage
are of some value, but much diminished by the intervening
four years. The
apology for the offence is further diminished by its avoidance of accepting
central responsibility for the offence.
defendant’s poor regard for the welfare of its victim, its performative
remorse in the sentencing hearing, and its continuing
opposition to compensation
being awarded by the sentencing Court would all have to be overlooked if the
defendant was to be rewarded
for the technical timing of its admission of guilt
by a 40% reduction in penalty. I consider that would be contrary to the
of justice.
accept the guilty plea has some limited utilitarian value. The defendant has
acknowledged its guilt and has expressed some remorse
and contrition to the
Court and to the victim. In these circumstances a reduction of 10% is the most
that can be justified.
regard to all the circumstances and the above considerations, I start with a
notional fine of $250,000. After reduction by
10%, I impose a fine of
Department for Education is to pay a fine of $225,000.
conviction will be recorded against the Department for Education for the offence
Work Health and Safety Act 2012
order the Department for Education to pay a contribution to the
Informant’s legal costs of $2,310, and a Victim of Crime Levy
Exhibit D1 [15].
Defendant’s written
submissions [24].
[2008] SAIRC 68.
Exhibit D1 [15].
[2021] SAET 53.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (314 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter