URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCAT/2004/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:08:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sudomlak v Workcover/Cgu Workers Compensation (SA) Ltd (Eglo Engineering Pty Ltd (no longer trading)) [2004] SAWCAT 1 (7 December 2004)
Sudomlak v WorkCover/CGU Workers Compensation (SA) Ltd (Eglo Engineering
Pty Ltd (no longer trading))
] SAWCT 123
WORKERS COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL (SA)
WORKERS COMPENSATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
SUDOMLAK, Gregory
WORKCOVER CORPORATION/CGU WORKERS COMPENSATION (SA) LTD (EGLO ENGINEERING PTY
LTD (NO LONGER TRADING))
Application to set aside a consent order; Application for
leave to appeal out of time; Application for summary relief; Appeal from
3W of 2000 and 7191 of 1998
HEARING DATES:
20 June 2001,10 September 2001, 11 February 2003,
22 September 2003, 11 March 2004,10 August 2004 and 16 September 2004
JUDGMENT OF:
His Honour Deputy President Judge BP Gilchrist
DELIVERED ON:
7 December 2004
CATCHWORDS:
Application to set aside consent order dismissing an appeal from a Review
Officer - Application for leave to appeal - Purported appeal
from a purported
determination of a Review Officer - Application to strike out proceedings in
the Workers Compensation Tribunal as
an abuse of process - Previous
determinations determined that the worker was only entitled to weekly payments
of income maintenance
for closed periods - Found that the worker had instructed
his previous solicitors not to proceed with actions challenging these
determinations
- Found that although medical evidence now establishes that the
worker was partially incapacitated at all relevant times the corporation
prejudiced by the delay because an earlier hearing on the then state of the
evidence might have resulted in a ruling in its
favour and if it did not it
would have had an opportunity to consider strategies to moderate its liability
to pay weekly payments
- In all the circumstances it would not be in the
interests of justice to permit the continued prosecution of these claims -
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Kairns v WorkCover Corporation/CGU Workers Compensation (SA) Ltd (Chateau
Yaldara PTY Ltd)
[2004] SASC 352
General Motors Holden Ltd v D'Andrea
(1985) 122 LSJS 301
Cave v Mills
[1862] EngR 494
(1862) 7 H&N 913
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr M Saies
Respondent: Mr K Luke
Solicitors:
Applicant: Andersons Solicitors
Respondent: Donaldson Walsh
1 I have before me several applications arising out of actions in the Workers
Compensation Appeal Tribunal and the Workers Compensation
Tribunal all of which
are designed to enable Gregory Sudomlak ("the worker") to prosecute claims for
weekly payments of income maintenance
from 17 September 1992 to 25 March 1993
and from 6 November 1993 until 2 January 1998, being the date upon which
he turned 65 years.
2 The background to these applications is as follows.
3 The worker was formerly employed by Eglo Engineering Pty Ltd ("the
employer"). On 22 July 1992 he completed a Notice of Disability
alleged that as a result of kneeling, whilst welding and grinding over the
preceding six months in his employment with
the employer, he developed painful
knees. He identified the date of injury as being 21 July 1992.
4 At around this time the employer was proposing to retrench a number of its
staff and in connection therewith it directed employees
with lengthy accrued
annual leave entitlements to arrange to take their leave. The worker was one
such employee and he was absent
from work on annual leave from 27 July 1992
until 3 September 1992 at which time he resumed his normal duties until he was
on 17 September 1992.
5 On 21 September 1992 the worker notified the employer that he intended to
pursue a claim for compensation pursuant to the
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1986
") in respect of the alleged injuries to his
6 By letter of that date the employer notified the Corporation that it opposed
any such claim for income maintenance being accepted
on the basis that it
contended that the worker had not been incapacitated for work. It seemingly did
not oppose a determination accepting
the claim for medical treatment only.
7 By letter dated 23 September 1992 the Corporation accepted the worker's claim
for medical expenses. Relevantly, the terms of that
determination were as
"Your claim for `painful stiff knees' which was sustained on 21/07/92 has been
accepted. However, any incapacity for work as a result
of this disability has
not been determined. If at a later stage you become incapacitated for work as a
result of this disability,
we will then make a determination as to your
entitlement, if any, to weekly payments.
Expenses reasonably incurred by you as a result of this disability will be
paid. If you have, or receive, any further accounts or
certificates please
forward them to this office for attention."
8 The determination contained a statement of appeal rights. Those appeal rights
were not exercised.
9 In a medical report dated 1 September 1992 the worker's treating general
practitioner, Dr Ian Kerr, recorded that he had seen
the worker on two
occasions in connection with this claim, they being on 21 July 1992 and 17
August 1992. Dr Kerr records that the
worker had complained that he had been
kneeling a lot at work in his job as a welder for the past six months and had
noticed that
his knees had become stiffened. He records that on his initial
examination he could find no abnormality but in his re-examination
of 17 August
1992 he detected some tenderness along the medial joint line of the worker's
left knee. He thought that the worker had
mild early osteoarthritis of both
knees and that kneeling had exacerbated this condition.
10 In a subsequent report dated 15 July 1993, Dr Kerr recorded that much had
happened since his earlier report. He recorded the
worker's retrenchment in
October 1992, the worker's continued complaints of pain in both of his knees
thereafter when kneeling or
going up and down stairs and sitting. He noted that
he had referred the worker to Dr Kwiatek, a rheumatologist and to Dr Richard
Jones, an orthopaedic surgeon. He also recorded the performance of bilateral
arthroscopies that were undertaken on 25 March 1993.
11 By letter dated 3 May 1993 the worker's then solicitors, Johnston Withers,
formally made a claim for compensation for weekly
payments on behalf of the
worker. The medical certificates to which the claim referred comprised of
certifications that the worker
was unfit for work from 25 March 1993, being the
date of the arthroscopies until 10 May 1993.
12 Further medical certificates were later produced.
13 By determination dated 20 October 1993 the Corporation accepted the worker's
claim for weekly payments. It determined that as
a result of a disability
allegedly sustained by him on 21 July 1992 that he had been incapacitated for
work for the period from 25
March 1993 to 10 May 1993 and stipulated that any
further period of incapacity for work beyond that date was denied. It contained
a statement of the worker's appeal rights.
14 The following day the Corporation issued a further determination in similar
terms and this also contained a statement of the
worker's review rights. The
worker exercised those rights. By an Application for Review dated 1 November
1993 he stipulated that
he was dissatisfied with the Corporation's decision of
21 October 1993 and complained that the decision was wrong because he had
returned to work and because he was still partially incapacitated as a result
of the injuries to his knees that he sustained
whilst employed with the
15 Pursuant to the provisions of the then
, the Corporation endeavoured to
discharge its obligations under
to resolve the questions in issue by
agreement. By letter dated 14 December 1993 it corresponded with the worker's
solicitors and
invited them to contact one of its Administrative Review
Officers by telephone. I am unclear as to whether that invitation was responded
to but in any event, it would seem that agreement was not reached and the
Application for Review was referred to a Review Officer.
16 A hearing took place before a Review Officer on 14 January 1994 the
transcript of which records the following:-
"Review Officer: In accordance with
of the act I confirm the
determination of the corporation of 20 October concerning accepting the claim
for compensation and for the
period of incapacity of 25 March 93 to 10 May 93.
On the basis of the submissions of the parties and the provision of further
medical certificates I determine that there is a further period of
incapacity, 28 May to 28 July 1993.
Further, I determine that subject to further prescribed medical certificates
being provided to replace the existing sickness certificates
that there is a
further period of incapacity as a result of this disability from 6 August 1993
to 6 November 1993. I think that disposes
of the matter and the terms of the
determination. In accordance with 92(a) costs are awarded and just draw to your
attention as a
matter of procedure the appeal right as to the tribunal in
respect of this extempore determination."
17 On 11 February 1994 the Workers Compensation Appeals Tribunal recorded the
receipt of an appeal from the decision of the Review
Officer. The grounds of
the appeal were as follows:-
"1. The Review Officer failed to take into account or give sufficient weight to
the report of Dr. Keene dated 3
2. Failed to consider whether the worker was entitled to income maintenance
from September 1992 when his employment was terminated
to March 1993.
3. The Review Officer failed to consider whether the worker was entitled to
income maintenance from November 1993 to date and continuing.
4. The worker alleges that he is partially incapacitated for work as a result
of the injury to his knee and in the circumstances
incapacity should be deemed
18 The Notice of Appeal records that the worker sought income maintenance from
September 1992 to March 1993 and from November 1993
to date and continuing.
19 The appeal was referred to Justice Stanley. The matter came before the
learned judge on 7 April 1994. An order prepared and filed
in the Registry
UPON THE NOTICE OF APPEAL
of the above named appellant filed herein on
day of February 1994
COMING ON FOR HEARING
in Chambers
day of April 1994
AND UPON HEARING
Ms A Faulkner of counsel for the appellant and Mr J Walsh of counsel
for the respondent
THE TRIBUNAL DOTH ORDER BY CONSENT
: the appeal be dismissed and the decision of the Review Officer
: there be no order as to costs."
20 Pursuant to s 100 of the
as it then was, the appellant by leave of the
Supreme Court, could have appealed that decision to the Full Court of the
Supreme Court.
That appeal had to be instituted within a month after the
appellant received the notice of the decision. No such Notice of Appeal
ever lodged.
21 By letter dated 10 February 1994 the Corporation corresponded to the worker
in the terms following:-
"As a result of your application for review, (it obviously being the review
dated 1 November 1993) we advise we are now in receipt
of a prescribed medical
certificate for the period 6 August 1993 to 6 November 1993 and confirm
your claim for `painful stiff knees'
which was sustained on 21/7/92 has been
accepted for a further period of incapacity for the period 6 August 1993 to 6
November 1993
and that any further incapacity is denied.
Income maintenance will be paid direct to you for this period at the rate of
$483.70 gross per week.
Expenses reasonably incurred by you as a result of this disability will be
paid. Accordingly if you have, or receive, any further
accounts or certificates
please forward them to this office for attention."
22 The worker treated this letter as a determination and by Application for
Review dated 23 February 1994 he sought its review on
the grounds that:-
"1. I was incapacitated as a result of my compensable disability from September
1992 to March 1993.
2. That I was incapacitated from November, 1993 to date and continuing."
23 The application was sent under cover of a letter from the worker's then
solicitors dated 23 February 1994.
24 The Workers Compensation Review Panel advised the worker's solicitors by
letter dated 2 March 1994 of the requirement that the
Corporation endeavour to
resolve the questions in issue by agreement. Presumably, on the understanding
that no such agreement was
reached, by letter dated 31 March 1994 the
Workers Compensation Review Panel advised the parties that the matter was
listed for hearing
before a Review Officer on 15 April 1994.
25 The records of the Review Panel indicate that a short hearing occurred on 15
April 1994 and that the matter was adjourned until
13 May 1994.
26 On 3 May 1994 the worker's then solicitors corresponded with the worker in
these terms:-
"We refer to previous correspondence and confirm your instructions that you do
not wish to proceed with your Application for Review
for income maintenance for
the 12 months prior to the surgery and income maintenance since on the
basis of Dr. Keene's recent report
which indicates that you (sic) believe that
you would suffer from discomfort as opposed to an incapacity for work.
We advise that your matter is listed on the 13
May 1994 and we
would be pleased if you could sign the enclosed authority to authorise us to
withdraw the Application for Review."
27 The worker signed the letter and it seems that the worker's solicitors
failed to attend before the Review Officer on 13 May 1994
and the matter was
adjourned until 10 June 1994.
28 By letter dated 6 June 1994 the worker's then solicitors corresponded with
the Review Officer and advised that they had instructions
from the worker not
to proceed with the Application for Review.
29 It seems that the hearing scheduled for 10 June 1994 did not take place. By
letter dated 20 June 1994 the Workers Compensation
Review Panel advised all
relevant parties in the terms following:-
"We refer to the abovementioned application for review and note that the issues
outlined in that application have been resolved.
No further action will be taken by the Review Panel in this matter."
30 On 19 September 1994 the Corporation made a determination of the worker's
entitlements to compensation pursuant to
. It assessed him as
having suffered a 10 per cent loss of full function of his left and right legs
at or above the knee. The worker
did not take issue with these assessments.
31 It would seem that shortly after this, the worker withdrew his instructions
to Johnston Withers and engaged Duncan and Hannon,
solicitors, to act on his
behalf. By letter dated 9 August 1995 Duncan and Hannon corresponded with the
WorkCover's then agent Heath
CIC Workers Compensation Pty Ltd ("Heath").
32 By letter dated 15 September 1995 Heath corresponded with Duncan and Hannon,
the relevant terms of which are as follows:-
"We advise that your client has no further entitlement to income maintenance as
it was determined at review that the worker was
incapacitated for a closed
period only. Further your client lodged an appeal to the W.C.A.T. but withdrew
the application.
We consider your client is estopped from any appeal to a Review Officer."
33 In the meantime on 15 August 1995 the worker lodged a Notice of Disability
and Compensation Claim asserting entitlements to compensation
pursuant to the
on account of the alleged knee injuries.
34 The Corporation determined on 24 November 1995 to reject this claim. The
worker filed an Application for Review and the matter
came on for hearing
before a Review Officer who by letter dated 13 January 1997 advised the parties
that the Corporation's determination
to reject the claim was confirmed.
35 The worker, through his solicitors, very recently seeks to appeal that
36 As I said at the outset, any potential entitlements that the worker had to
weekly payments of compensation ended on 2 January
37 As at that date, the Corporation had every reason to assume that this
matter, insofar as it concerned common law,
and income maintenance
entitlements pursuant to the
was finalised.
38 The Corporation did not have cause to think otherwise, until 2 December 1998
when the worker lodged a Notice of Dispute in the
Workers Compensation Tribunal
that clearly sought to revisit the issue of income maintenance.
39 Mr Saies, counsel for the worker, has over the journey of this litigation
put many arguments about the status of alleged determinations
Corporation and the actions of the Review Panel and various Review Officers.
40 In my opinion, ultimately what needs to be decided is whether it is in the
interests of justice to permit the worker to now prosecute
these claims. If it
is, whether that is achieved by granting leave to set aside an order dismissing
an appeal, granting leave to
appeal out of time or permitting the belated
prosecution of actions in the Workers Compensation Tribunal might not be
particularly
to the point. To put it another way, if I were to conclude that it
would be unjust to permit the prosecution of these claims the
precise mechanism
by which that would be achieved is not particularly relevant because the net
effect would be a conclusion that
it would be an abuse of process to allow
these matters to continue. I note that the Full Supreme Court has recently
acknowledged
that the Workers Compensation Tribunal possesses the power to
prevent abuses of its processes:
Kairns v WorkCover Corporation/CGU Workers
Compensation (SA) Ltd (Chateau Yaldara PTY Ltd)
[2004] SASC 352
, and there
is every reason to assume that the Workers Compensation Appeal Tribunal also
possesses that power.
41 I now turn to consider whether it is in the interests of justice to permit
the worker to now prosecute these claims.
42 In my opinion, it was quite plain that at all relevant times the Corporation
was only ever accepting a liability to pay weekly
payments of income
maintenance for a closed period from the premise of the worker's incapacity for
work had ceased as at the particular
dates specified and that in light of the
worker's discontinuance of the appeal to the Workers Compensation Appeals
Tribunal, his
conduct in respect of other matters before the Review Panel and
his failure to take any action following the Review Officer's letter
January 1997 that the worker accepted at all relevant times that to be so.
43 It now appears that at all relevant times the worker was partially
incapacitated for work and that if he were now permitted to
prosecute claims
for weekly payments for the periods prior to his 65
birthday in
respect of which he was not paid, that he would almost certainly succeed in
establishing those entitlements. In determining
whether the worker ought now be
permitted to prosecute these claims, the fact that he would almost certainly
succeed, is in my view
not decisive. It is an important factor to be taken to
account but it has to be weighed in with all of the other relevant factors.
44 I now turn to consider other factors that I consider relevant.
45 Based on the written material that was placed before me and the worker's
oral evidence I find that at all relevant times he instructed
his solicitors
not to proceed to trial in connection with his claims. He accepted the advice
that he had been provided with that
there was insufficient evidence to
establish an incapacity for work beyond the periods determined in his favour.
That advice may
or may not have been sound, but that is not for me to
46 The evidence does not permit a finding that the Corporation induced the
worker or his previous solicitors not to proceed with
any of his matters that
were pending in the Workers Compensation Appeal Tribunal or before the Review
47 The evidence does not permit a finding that the Corporation or its
solicitors reached a common understanding with the worker's
previous solicitors
Review Officers that is different
to that which it is now contending.
48 In other words, there is no basis to find that the Corporation ought bear
any responsibility for the worker's need to seek the
indulgence of the Workers
Compensation Appeal Tribunal.
49 Had the worker proceeded with the opportunities he had to conduct a full
hearing in respect of his claims and had he exercised
his appeal rights within
the various time limits prescribed, this case would have been determined years
ago on the evidence available
years ago and that evidence may not have been as
50 Moreover, as I have said earlier in these reasons, the worker, through his
conduct, had given the Corporation every reason to
think that he accepted that
he had no entitlement to compensation in respect of the accepted compensable
disabilities beyond that
which he had been paid. Had he not withdrawn his
appeal in the Workers Compensation Appeal Tribunal, and had he proceeded with
Applications for Review that he had lodged, these matters would have
proceeded and if the worker was to succeed in any of those claims,
Corporation would have been in a position to decide whether it would take steps
to attempt to moderate its liability to pay weekly
payments to the worker. I
accept that it was not likely that the Corporation would have or could have
found alternative employment
given the worker's then age, but the possibility
of it doing so through initiatives such as the RISE scheme (the existence of
in my opinion I am permitted to know) cannot be excluded.
51 As it was the worker did not take steps to prosecute the within applications
until after 2 January 1998, by which time any opportunity
for the Corporation
to modify its liability to pay weekly payments had been lost.
52 Accordingly in determining this matter I cannot assume that the Corporation
has not been prejudiced by the worker's delay.
53 I have given this matter much consideration and I have agonised over the
outcome. No one likes seeing what now appears to be
a meritorious claim
defeated by delay. But the plea from the worker's counsel that all he wants is
his day in court is a little hollow
because the worker has had that opportunity
on the more than one occasion and has failed to take it.
54 Although at times I was inclined to think that the worker should be
permitted to pursue these matters upon further reflection
I have come to the
conclusion that what has occurred here has much in common with the situation
referred to by O'Loughlin J in his
judgment in
General Motors Holden Ltd v
(1985) 122 LSJS 301
- 311 where he quotes a passage from the
decision of Wilde B in
Cave v Mills
[1862] EngR 494
(1862) 7 H&N 913
at 927 - 928:
"A man shall not be allowed to blow hot and cold - to affirm at one time and
deny at another - making a claim on those whom he has
deluded to their
disadvantage, and founding that claim on the very matters of the delusion. Such
a principle has its basis in common
sense and common justice, and whether it is
called `estoppel', or by any other name, it is one which courts of law have in
times most usefully adopted."
55 Through his prior conduct the worker denied the Corporation the opportunity
to conduct litigation that might have conclusively
absolved it to pay the
worker weekly payments and thereby have ended any chance for the worker to
re-litigate that issue. If he prosecuted
his claims when he had the chance to
do so and had established an entitlement to ongoing weekly payments he would
have then given
the Corporation the opportunity to consider its options.
56 In all the circumstances I have concluded that it is not in the interests of
justice to permit the worker to prosecute his claims.
57 I conclude that it would be an abuse of the processes of the Workers
Compensation Appeal Tribunal and of the Workers Compensation
Tribunal to now
permit the worker to resile from his prior acquiesance in the various
determinations of Review Officers and the Corporation
that limited his
entitlement to weekly payments of compensation.
58 I therefore refuse leave for the worker to set aside the dismissal of the
appeal to the Workers Compensation Appeal Tribunal.
I decline to grant him
leave to be permitted to appeal the other decisions of the Review Officers. I
strike out any proceedings pending
in the Workers Compensation Tribunal as an
abuse of process and do likewise in respect of any other matters (if there are
any) pending
under the former dispute resolution regime.
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are advised that if a party wishes to appeal against any part of this
decision in connection with the Workers Compensation
Tribunal which is
appealable pursuant to
such appeal must be filed with the
Registrar in accordance with the form titled Notice of Appeal within 14 days of
the delivery of
this decision and must be served on all parties.
In accordance with the requirements of the former section 93 of the
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
the parties are notified that if a
party wishes to apply to the Full Supreme Court for leave to appeal against any
part of this decision
in connection with the Workers Compensation Appeal
Tribunal which raises a question of law, such appeal must be instituted within
one month after a party who is entitled to appeal receives notice of this
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are respectfully requested to note the provisions of the Supreme Court
Rules 96.04(a) and 97.05 which require that in the
event of an appeal a copy of
the Notice of Appeal filed in the Supreme Court is to be served upon `the
proper officer of the Court
or Tribunal below.'
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter