URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAET/2025/113.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Walker v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia [2025] SAET 113 (14 October 2025)
v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia
[2025] SAET 113
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNAL
WALKER, Robert Edward
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
South Australian Employment Court
South Australian Employment Tribunal Act 2014
ET-24-05494
HEARING DATE:
REASONS FOR
DECISION AND
DECISION OF:
His Honour Deputy President Judge Rossi
DELIVERED ON:
October 2025
CATCHWORDS:
The respondent made
application pursuant to
South Australian Employment
Tribunal Act 2014
to strike out an application for review and to dismiss
proceedings – the applicant did not attend some medical examinations
arranged by the respondent in order to determine claims for compensation
submitted by the applicant – the respondent determined
to reject the
claims for compensation by reference to a failure to attend medical examinations
that were reasonably arranged –
the applicant then sought a review of that
determination – the application for review proceeded as a hearing de novo
the respondent also raised a defence to the claims on the basis that the
applicant had failed to prove a work injury – the
applicant thereafter
failed to attend on a number of occasions either before a commissioner or a
presidential member of the Tribunal
upon referral for hearing &
determination –
– the respondent has discharged the onus
upon it – order made that the application for directions be struck out and
proceeding dismissed.
Hill v Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Corporation
[1997] 191 LSJS 300
Roll v Return to Work SA
(Equals International (Aust) Pty Ltd
[2017] SAET 131
Martin v Return
to Work Corporation of South Australia (Aquaessence Pty Ltd)
[2020] SAET
Condie v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia
[2019] SAET
Hughes v Gales
(1995) 14 WAR 434
Cosenza & Anor v Gill
[2016] SASC
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: No
Respondent: Ms D Caretti
Solicitors:
Applicant: Self
represented
Respondent: Minter Ellison Lawyers
The application
application for directions dated 25 September 2025 the respondent sought orders
of the Tribunal that would strike out an application
for review dated 11
December 2024 and for the proceeding to be dismissed.
application for directions was listed for the hearing of oral argument on 10
October 2025. There was no appearance by the applicant
or a representative on
his behalf on that occasion. That followed prior non-attendances at scheduled
pre-trial hearings. Orders for
disclosure and the filing and serving of a
Statement of Facts, Issues and Contentions and affidavit evidence were not
complied with.
being satisfied that the applicant had received notice of the scheduled hearing,
and upon being satisfied on the basis of the
submissions received from counsel
for the respondent that the requirements of
and s 42(2)(a)
South Australian Employment Tribunal Act 2014
(the SAET Act) were
satisfied, I exercised the discretion conferred to strike out the application
for review dated 11 December 2024
and ordered that the proceeding be dismissed.
These are the reasons for the orders made that day.
for the purpose of determining the application for directions was the book of
documents prepared by the respondent for the
compulsory conciliation conference.
An affidavit of Deanna Caretti sworn on 26 September 2025 was also received. The
background that
appears below has been taken from these documents.
applicant was employed by Spotless Services Australia Ltd as a Patient Services
Assistant. He was based at the Royal Adeliade
Hospital. Solicitors for the
applicant submitted a claim form on his behalf dated 20 August 2024. It referred
to a date of injury
of 1 April 2021. The claimed work injuries included
pericarditis and a post-traumatic stress disorder. The cause was claimed to be
mandatory third COVID-19 vaccine. The applicant claimed that complications
developed within 48 hours of receiving the third vaccine.
Sub-section
31(1) of the
(the RTW Act) provides that, on
receipt of a claim, the respondent may undertake such investigations and
enquiries as are necessary
in order to achieve an evidence-based decision with
respect to the determination of the claim. Sub-section 31(2) of the RTW Act
that, for the purpose of satisfying itself of the nature, extent, or
probable duration of an injury, the respondent may require a
worker to submit to
an examination by a recognised health practitioner nominated by the respondent.
respondent made arrangements for the applicant to be medically examined by
recognised health practitioners of its choosing. It
also sought copies of the
confirmations of COVID-19 vaccinations that had been received by the applicant.
Whilst there was an attendance
by the applicant for a medical examination
undertaken by a haematologist, the applicant did not attend other appointments
by the respondent for the applicant to be examined by a cardiologist
and a psychiatrist. Repeat appointments were also not attended.
There is no
evidence before the Tribunal of any unreasonableness associated with any of the
arrangements made by the
respondent.
On one occasion, after
the appointment time had passed, the applicant’s solicitor stated that the
non-attendance was due to
the applicant’s hospitalisation, but counsel for
the respondent was not aware of any medical evidence having been provided
applicant to prove the hospitalisation, and as the applicant did not attend the
hearing of oral argument, it was unable to
be confirmed through him. On another
occasion, the applicant forwarded an email transmission to the respondent
stating that he was
unable to attend the appointment scheduled for that morning
as a result of not having an available vehicle. In relation to some
non-attendances,
there is no evidence before the Tribunal of an explanation
having been given to the respondent.
letter dated 13 November 2024 the respondent’s nominated claims agent EML
determined to reject the claims for compensation
for loss of wages and medical
expenses. The basis of the rejection of the claims was a failure or refusal by
the applicant to provide
information required to determine the claim and a
failure or refusal to attend medical examinations as was reasonably required
s 31(2) of the RTW Act.
Sub-section
31(3) of the RTW Act provides that if a claimant fails or refuses to furnish
information reasonably required to assess
or determine the claim or fails or
refuses to submit to an examination as required under sub-section 31(2) then the
claim may be
11 December 2024 solicitors for the applicant filed an application for review of
the determination dated 13 November 2024. The
grounds for seeking the review
largely relate to the merit of a causal link between the COVID-19 vaccination
and the work injuries
claimed. The grounds then assert that various medical
records were not provided by the respondent to the applicant and the application
for review then asserts that as a result the applicant has not been able to
“effectively respond to the reasons given in the
determination”.
There is no evidence of a response to the reasons given in the determination,
since the filing of the application
for review.
compulsory conciliation conference process was conducted by a commissioner by
telephone. The affidavit of Deanna Caretti indicates
that the applicant did not
participate and, in particular, at the time of the compulsory conciliation
conference on 13 May 2025,
attempts by the Commissioner to contact the applicant
by telephone were unsuccessful.
Commissioner referred the matter for hearing and determination on 21 May 2025.
initial directions hearing before myself took place on 3 June 2025. At the time,
the applicant was still represented by Shine
Lawyers. Orders were made to
advance the matter towards trial. The directions included a requirement that
each party file and serve
a list of documents by 24 June 2025 and that the
applicant file and serve a Statement of Facts, Issues and Contentions and
evidence by 15 July 2025.
15 July 2025 Shine Lawyers made application for leave to cease acting for the
applicant. The basis of the application was difficulty
experienced in making
with the orders made on 3 June
2025. The application was granted on 23 July
2025. The applicant had been directed to attend in person at that hearing, but
do so. No explanation was given by the applicant for the non-attendance.
An order was made that day directing the applicant to attend
a directions
hearing at 9 am on 4 August 2025. The order was served upon the applicant by the
Tribunal at his nominated email address.
A further email transmission was also
sent by my Judicial Support Officer to the applicant reiterating the need for
him to attend
at 9am on 4 August 2025. The applicant was advised that a failure
to comply with directions of the Tribunal could result in an order
to strike out
or dismiss his application for review.
applicant failed to attend the directions hearing at 9am on 4 August 2025, but
did attend at approximately 9:30am that day. By
that time the directions hearing
had been concluded and the respondent’s solicitor was no longer available.
The applicant referred
to difficulty with traffic. The failure to have complied
with the orders relating to the filing of a list of documents, Statement
Facts, Issues and Contentions, and affidavit evidence was confirmed with the
applicant. He was asked whether he intended to be
legally represented. He
suggested that he may wish to do so, and the matter was adjourned to a further
directions hearing at 9:30am
on 3 September 2025.
applicant failed to attend the directions hearing on 3 September 2025. Ms
Caretti, who appeared for the respondent on that occasion,
foreshadowed an
application to strike out or have dismissed the application for review. A
direction was made that any such application
and supporting affidavit be filed
and served by 17 September 2025. The matter was adjourned to a directions
hearing on 1 October
2025 at 9:10am and Mr Walker was directed to attend in
person on that occasion. The application for directions and affidavit were
filed and served.
each occasion, the directions made were confirmed in writing and forwarded by
the Tribunal to the applicant via his nominated email
address. His attendance in
person, albeit late, on 4 August 2025 indicated that Mr Walker was receiving the
email transmissions forwarded
1 October 2025 the applicant again failed to attend the directions hearing. As
with the prior occasions where he failed to attend
direction hearings scheduled
before me, there was no explanation for the non-attendance. On 1 October 2025
orders were made listing
the application for directions of the respondent dated
25 September 2025, for the hearing of oral argument commencing at 11:30am
October 2025. A further direction was made as follows:
2. Mr Walker is again directed to attend in person at the Tribunal at 11:30am on
9 October 2025. Should he not attend on that occasion,
then the Tribunal may
proceed to hear and determine the application for directions of the respondent
dated 25 September 2025 in his
applicant did not attend upon the hearing of oral argument on 9 October 2025. No
explanation for the non-attendance has since
been received.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent’s counsel Ms Caretti addressed in some detail the facts as set
out earlier in these reasons. She submitted the
facts prove that there has been
a want of prosecution within the ambit of s 40(4) of the SAET Act. Moreover, as
I understood her
submission, the failure to attend the Tribunal after the filing
and serving of the application for directions, without explanation,
indicative of a lack of desire to continue with the proceeding.
Caretti submitted that the facts were also within the ambit of s 42(1)(a) and
(f) of the SAET Act as the applicant has failed,
repeatedly, to comply with
orders and directions of the Tribunal and had repeatedly failed to attend
hearings in the proceedings,
and the applicant had failed to give a reasonable
cause for that failure. Ms Caretti advanced submissions as to why the failure to
comply with the orders and directions of the Tribunal has been causing
disadvantage to the respondent within the ambit of s 42(1)(a)
of the SAET Act.
Reference was made to costs where there is no reasonable prospect of recovering
from the applicant if an adverse
order as to costs were to be made against him
in relation to the repeated failures to attend the Tribunal and to comply with
and directions of the Tribunal. Reference was also made to the impact of
the delays upon the ability of the respondent to understand
the case of the
applicant it is expected to meet at trial and to effectively present its case.
Consideration
40 of the SAET Act relates to the dismissal of proceedings and, relevantly, for
want of prosecution. Sub-section 40(4) provides:
(4) At any time, the Tribunal may make an order dismissing or striking out all,
or any part, of any proceedings for want of prosecution.
background set out earlier in these reasons demonstrates that the applicant has
failed to prosecute his application for review.
Sub-section 104(1) of the RTW
Act provides that before the Tribunal proceeds with the hearing of a matter
under that Part, a compulsory
conciliation conference between the parties must
be held in accordance of s 43 of the SAET Act.
compulsory conciliation conference is an important part of the Tribunal
resolving disputes in accordance with the main objectives
of the SAET Act. Those
objectives include ensuring that applications are processed and resolved as
quickly as possible while achieving
and keeping costs to
parties involved in proceedings before the Tribunal to a minimum insofar as is
just and appropriate.
the evidence before the Tribunal the applicant did fail to attend a number of
medical examinations that had been arranged by
the respondent in order for it to
properly consider and determine his claims for compensation on its merits. An
objective of the
compulsory conciliation conference process was to encourage the
applicant to attend medical examinations to enable a merits-based
decision, and
that may have resulted in a resolution of the dispute. The applicant failed to
attend the further scheduled appointments
and failed to participate in the
compulsory conciliation conference by telephone as requested.
the referral for hearing and determination, apart from one attendance at a
directions hearing, the applicant repeatedly failed
to attend direction hearings
and a hearing set to receive oral argument, and has failed to comply with
directions for him to file
and serve a list of documents, a Statement of Facts,
Issues and Contentions, an affidavit evidence.
at the single attendance before me there was an indication of the possibility of
further legal representation, there is no
evidence that the applicant contacted
any other solicitor. This is in circumstances of his previous solicitors seeking
leave to be
removed from the court file as representing the applicant because of
difficulties experienced by them in obtaining instructions from
the circumstances, there had been a failure to prosecute the application for
review within the ambit of s 40(4) of the SAET Act.
Upon the evidence before the
Tribunal, I was satisfied when the order was made that if an order were not made
now to strike out the
application for review and to dismiss the proceeding, that
it would be likely that the applicant would continue to not comply with
and directions of the Tribunal, and would continue to fail to prosecute the
application for review. The circumstances had
been causing unnecessary expense
for the respondent and, as has been noted previously by the Tribunal, such
conduct, especially if
allowed to continue, may erode public confidence in the
proper administration of
was satisfied that the failure to comply with the directions and orders of the
Tribunal and the failure to attend hearings in the
proceedings, set out earlier
within these reasons, been without reasonable cause and I was further satisfied
that this has caused
disadvantage to the respondent within the ambit of s
42(2)(b) of the SAET Act. Sub-section 30(1) of the RTW Act requires a claim
compensation to be made within the prescribed period. Sub-section 30(10)
provides that the prescribed period means the period
of 6 months commencing on
the date on which the entitlement to make the claim arises. The claim form
identifies the date of injury
as being 1 April 2021 and medical expenses appear
to have been incurred from about that time. The claim for compensation was not
submitted until 20 August 2024. The effect upon the respondent’s ability
to present its case at trial, as a result of the
non-compliance with the orders
and directions of the Tribunal, is to be understood in the context of the
current lack of detail of
the applicant’s case in relation to the claimed
causal link between COVID-19 vaccination and his claimed work injuries, and
compounding effect of further delay upon the ability of the respondent to obtain
evidence, including expert medical opinion evidence,
and to be able to rely upon
the recall of witnesses.
requirements of both s 40(4) and s 42(1)(a) and (f) and s 42(2)(b) of the SAET
Act were thereby satisfied.
accepted the submission of the respondent that if the applicant were to fail in
relation to his application for review and there
were to be an adverse costs
order pursuant to s 106(3) of the RTW Act, against the applicant, then there is
evidence currently before
the Tribunal to indicate an inability to recover those
costs. That too constitutes a relevant disadvantage.
is no medical evidence that supports a causal link between the COVID-19
vaccination received by the applicant and his claimed
work injuries. A report of
the applicant’s general practitioner Dr Chhanabhai refers to longstanding
chronic cardiac and psychiatric
conditions. It does not support his other
claimed work injury. The likely prejudice to the applicant if the application
were granted
was a factor taken into account in the exercise of discretion.
determining whether the discretion should be exercised to strike out the
application for review or to dismiss the proceeding, I
also took into account
that if such orders were not to be made, then it is unlikely that the applicant
would comply with orders and
directions of the Tribunal in the future. There has
been no indication of a likely change in compliance in the future.
worker who seeks review by the Tribunal of a reviewable decision has a right to
be given the
opportunity
to present the case at trial if the matter is
unable to be resolved by agreement. The effect of provisions such as s 40
of the SAET Act is to dispel any suggestion of an unqualified right to
proceed to trial. The repeated failure to attend direction
hearings and to
comply with orders and directions of the Tribunal not only impacts upon the
other parties in the proceedings, but
also the use of the Tribunal’s
resources. In a busy jurisdiction frequently addressing claims where a party may
be mentally
or financially distressed, or in pain seeking pre-approval for the
cost of medical treatments, other claims may be unnecessarily
delayed. As noted
earlier in these reasons, such failure can also erode the public’s
confidence in the administration of justice.
has been noted in earlier decisions of this Tribunal, where there is an absence
of communication, the Tribunal cannot rule out
altogether the unlikely
possibility of exceptional circumstances relevant to the failure to prosecute
claims and comply with orders
and directions of the Tribunal. However, the
Tribunal does not speculate and a dismissal of the application for review that
based upon the merits of the application would not, in itself, render a
subsequent application for review, dealing with the same
subject matter, an
Hill v Workers
Rehabilitation and Compensation Corporation
[1997] 191 LSJS 300.
Section 8(c) of the SAET
Section 8(c) of the SAET
Roll v Return to Work SA
(Equals International (Aust) Pty Ltd
[2017] SAET 131
; Martin v Return to
Work Corporation of South Australia (Aquaessence Pty Ltd)(Martin)
Condie v Return to Work
Corporation of South Australia
[2019] SAET 249
Hughes v Gales
(1995) 14 WAR 434
Cosenza & Anor v Gill & Ors
[2016] SASC 154.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (149 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter