URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRC/2017/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Marschall v McKechnie Iron Foundry Pty Ltd [2017] SAIRC 13 (13 April 2017)
Marschall v McKechnie Iron Foundry Pty Ltd
[2017] SAIRC
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT (SA)
MCKECHNIE IRON FOUNDRY PTY LTD
Monetary Claim
2091 of 2016
HEARING DATE:
2 December 2016
JUDGMENT OF:
Industrial Magistrate M
DELIVERED ON:
13 April 2017
CATCHWORDS:
The applicant claims an entitlement to a payment for long service having
been employed from 17 March 2006 until 1 March 2016 - The
applicant resigned -
As at the date of cessation of his employment the applicant had completed
9 years and 11 months - At the time
of cessation of employment the
applicant was covered by the McKechnie Iron Foundry Single Enterprise Agreement
2015 which commenced
operation on 27 February 2015 - Cl 13 of the Enterprise
Agreement deals with long service leave - Interpretation of the clause is
required to ascertain the applicant’s entitlements upon termination - In
the alternative s 113(6) of the Fair Work Act (Cth)
2009 applies and there is no
applicable agreement-derived long service term - The State Long Service Leave
Act 1987 then applied
- The statutory scheme in Part 2-2 of the Fair
Work Act (National Employment Standards) does not preclude the operation of
approved Enterprise Agreements that applied in the workplace –
interpretation of Cl 13 leads to the conclusion that the applicant
entitled to be paid pro-rata long service leave - The application is dismissed -
Fair Work Act 2009
Kucks v CSR Limited
[1996] IRCA 166
(1996) 66 IR 182
Geo A Bond &
CO. LTD. (In Liquidation) v Mc Kenzie
(1929) 28 AR 499
Board Pty Ltd t/as Visy Specialties
Amcor Limited v
Construction,Forestry,Mining and Engineering Union
[2005] HCA 10
(2005) 222 CLR
The Australasian Meat Industry Employees Union v Golden Cockerel Pty
[2014] FWCFB 7447
Oceanic Coal Australia Pty Ltd v Parker
Kucks v CSR
[1996] IRCA 166
(1996) 66 IR 182
Automotive, Food,
Metals, Engineering and Printing and Kindred Industries Union v Skilled
Engineering Ltd
[2003] FCA 260
Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees
Association v Woolworths SA Pty Ltd
[2011] FCAFC 67
Mount Bruce Mining
(2015) 256 CLR 104
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Ms L
Respondent: Mr D Miller with Ms M
Solicitors:
Applicant: WK Lawyers
Respondent: Australian
Industry Group
Introduction
applicant in opening tendered a statement of agreed
agreed facts were as follows:
“1. The applicant was an employee of the
respondent.
applicant commenced employment with the respondent on 17 March 2006.
applicant was employed as a jobbing moulder. His duties included general trade
style work, specifically making sand moulds. The
finished mould cavities were
filled with molten metal to produce castings.
applicant’s last day of employment was on 1 March 2016 (Termination). The
applicant’s termination was by way of resignation.
at the applicant’s termination, the applicant’s continuous service
with the respondent totalled nine (9) completed
years and 11 completed
applicant’s weekly earnings were $994.38 gross at the time of his
termination.
the time of the applicant’s termination of employment, the applicant was
covered by the McKechnie Iron Foundry Single Enterprise
Agreement 2015.
to the enterprise agreement specified in paragraph 7, there had been previous
enterprise agreements that covered the respondent
and its employees, including
the applicant, as follows:
McKechnie Iron Foundry Single Enterprise Agreement 2014.
McKechnie Iron Foundry Single Enterprise Agreement 2011.
McKechnie Iron Foundry Single Enterprise Agreement 2010.
McKechnie Iron Foundry Single Enterprise Agreement 2007.
McKechnie Iron Foundry Consolidated Certified Agreement 2004.
respondent is in the business of manufacturing iron and steel castings.
respondent has been continuously a member of the Australian Industry Group and
its predecessor, the Engineering Employers Association
of South Australia, since
applicant when opening stated that the Metal, Engineering and Associated
Industries 1998 Award (Metals Award) did not apply to
the applicant’s
employment pursuant to
Fair Work Act
of the FWA 2009 did apply the applicant agreed that the
Metals Award would be the award derived long service leave term applicable
applicant went on to say that if the Metals Award did not apply then the
provisions of the South Australian
Long Service Leave Act 1987
applied at the time of the applicant’s cessation of employment. This
resulted in the applicant being entitled to
be paid pro rata long service leave
for service of more than seven years but less than ten years.
the court found that the Metals Award did apply the applicant’s position
is that the respondent has breached clause 13 of
the 2015 Enterprise Agreement.
Under this clause the applicant was entitled to be paid long service leave in
accordance with the
The hearing
applicant’s affidavit sworn on 24 November 2016 was
He was not required for
cross-examination. Two further witnesses were called as part of the
applicant’s case, Peter Geuenich
and Joseph Kane.
affidavit of Mr Geuenich was tendered on the basis that the respondent objected
to the content of paragraphs 7, 9, and
The affidavit of Mr Kane was
tendered on the basis that the respondent objected to the second sentence in
lines 2 and 3 of paragraph
13, and the whole of paragraphs 14, 15 and
Geuenich when cross examined ultimately agreed that in para 4 of his affidavit
he incorrectly said “that pro rata long service
leave would be paid after
7.5 years” whereas the 1996 Agreement (clause 11) limited pro rata to
those employees terminated
“due to redundancy.” He further agreed
that the 1996 Agreement did not mean long service leave would be paid after ten
years as he stated in his affidavit. What the 1996 agreement did say was that
after ten years there was a greater rate of accrual
of benefits (1.3 weeks per
year instead of 0.866).
was taken to the 2004 Agreement. He did agree there was a change in sub clause
(3) enabling access to pro rata after seven years
but contrary to the wording in
the clause he maintained that anyone who left after seven years was entitled to
maintained sub clause (3) had served its purpose by 2004. He was told it was
still in all Agreements including the current 2016
Agreement. This he said was
an oversight.
Kane was taken to annexure 4 of his affidavit. This was correspondence from the
respondent dated 21 June 2004 relating to the 2004
agreement. There was a
reference to long service leave namely:
“Accumulated leave stands unchanged to 30/6/2004
as per 2002 EBA. From 1
July 2004 the State Award conditions will
be used for the accumulation and use of leave.”
He said the reference to the State Award should really be to the State LSL
Act. He said his understanding of that paragraph was that
as of 1 July 2004
the whole of the State Act would apply to long service leave.
Kane was cross-examined regarding the application of the LSL Act. He was taken
to the 2004 agreement, clause 11 sub section (3).
This dealt with employees
being terminated due to redundancy and being entitled to pro rata long service
leave after seven years
of continuous service. It was put to him that this
contradicted his understanding that the LSL Act would apply across the board.
agreed it had not been changed from the previous agreement and that it had been
voted on and accepted by the majority of the employees.
He put forward the view
that it was an oversight in
He did agree that the
clause appeared in all subsequent agreements including the 2016 agreement.
Kane agreed if clause 2 and clause 1 are read together they relate to a rate of
accrual and in particular referred to a higher
rate of accrual namely 1.3 weeks
for each year of continuous service from 1 February 1996 compared with
0.866 weeks for each year
of continuous service as referred to in the Metals
further agreed that clause 3 provided an extra benefit over and above what was
in the Metals Award namely an employee terminated
due to redundancy was entitled
to pro rata long service leave after seven years of continuous service.
phrase used by Andrew Nixon general manager of the respondent namely,
“From 1st July 2004 the State Award conditions will
be used for the
accumulation and use of leave” Mr Kane said was not explained by
His view of that
phrase was that it indicated a complete adoption of the State LSL Act
provisions.
Nixon was called to give evidence. He had been employed with the respondent
since 8 January 1990. For most of that period he had
been involved in the
negotiations surrounding the enterprise agreements.
said the phrase in the 2004 agreement namely “from the 1 July 2004
employees will be entitled to the provisions of the South
Australian Long
Service Act. Any service before this date is as detailed below” was
intended by the respondent to refer to
the accumulation and the use of accrued
In the type written
memorandum of 21 June 2004 he had stated that “accumulated leave
stands unchanged to 30/6/2004 as per 2002
EBA. From 1st July 2004 the State
Award conditions will be used for the accumulation and use of leave.” He
considered that
this was plain English and could not be really misconstrued. He
said this coincided with the rate of accrual changing to 1.3 weeks
did not think that he had ever indicated that the State LSL Act applies to
everything in terms of long service leave. In this context
he referred to
subclause (3) which remains and it was a negotiated and agreed
Nixon was referred to annexure 5 of Mr Kane’s affidavit which was an
extract from the respondent’s employee Handbook.
Under the heading long
service leave it stated that “employees are entitled to long service leave
as per McKechnie’s
enterprise bargaining agreement. State award applies.
Effective as of 1/7/04.” It was suggested to him in crossexamination
this wording is meant to confirm that the State LSL Act applied with no
exceptions. His response to that was that the enterprise
agreement is the ruling
document, and the wording in this document has been poorly
constructed.
Submissions
applicant’s position is that he is entitled to long service leave under
the LSL Act. Irrespective of the enterprise agreement
the LSL Act applies by
virtue of s 113 of the FWA 2009.
113 is part of the National employment standards.
Section 113(1)
“If there are applicable award- derived long
service leave terms in relation to an employee, the employee is entitled to long
service leave in accordance with those terms.”
Section 113(2)(a) states that subsection (1) does not apply if
“a workplace agreement, or an AWA, that came into operation before the
commencement of this Part applies to the
the time s 113 came into operation namely 1 January 2010 the 2007 agreement
applied to the applicant. The 2007 agreement was a
workplace agreement so as s
113(2) makes clear an award derived long service leave provision does not apply
given that there is a
workplace agreement in operation before the commencement
of this Part of the act that deals with National Employment Standards.
13 of the 2007 agreement whilst providing for long service leave is not
considered an agreement- derived long service leave
term as under subsection (6)
of s 113 there needs to be an order by the Fair Work Commission (FWC) that those
terms of the instrument
are applicable agreement-derived long service leave
there never ceased to be an agreement of the kind referred to in s 113(a)
or (b) of subsection (2) s 113(1) does not apply. Therefore
as there was no
applicable award-derived long service leave term nor was there an applicable
agreement-derived long service leave
term during the currency of the
applicant’s employment the LSL Act applies.
the alternative consideration must be given to cl 13 of the 2015 Enterprise
Agreement which applied at the time of termination
of the applicant’s
employment.
13 provides for an entitlement greater than the Metals Award.
13 provides:
“From the 1 July 2004 employees will be entitled
to the provisions of the South Australian Long Service Act. Any service before
this date is as detailed below.
The parties agree that ‘long term’ employees, defined as those with
ten (10) or more years of continuous service, shall
receive a ‘higher
rate’ of accrual, defined as 1.3 weeks for each year of continuous
service, on and from 1 February
1996. Accrual prior to 1996 1 February, LSL
at 0.866 weeks per year.
An employee with 10 or more years service prior to 1/2/96 shall accrue leave
prior to 1/2/96 at 0.866 and at 1.3 in respect to post
1/2/96 service.
An employee with 4 years service prior to 1/2/96 shall not accrue leave at 1.3
weeks per year until a further 6 years have elapsed,
and only then in respect to
post 10 years service.
An employee who commences on or after 1/2/96 shall accrue leave at 0.866 until
10 years have elapsed and there after at 1.3 in respect
of post 10 years
The due date for 13 weeks Long Service Leave for ‘long-term’
employees will be that date when the sum of the product
of the two different
rates of accrual totals 13 weeks.
Notwithstanding anything elsewhere in this Clause, an employee terminating due
to redundancy only, shall be regarded as entitled
to pro rata Long Service Leave
after 7 years of continuous service.”
applicant’s position is that the opening sentence of clause 13 means that
the whole of the LSL Act provisions apply. The
applicant relies on the
collective evidence of Mr Kane and Mr Geuenich. He also relies upon the content
of the extract from the employee
and that part of the
memorandum compiled by Mr Nixon that refers to long service
Kane in his affidavit
that an agreement was reached that the LSL Act would apply to all service after
1 July 2004. He says that it was his understanding
that sub clauses 11(1),
11(2), and 11(3) of the 2004 agreement would not apply in relation to service
from 1 July 2004 and this is
why they remained as subclauses.
first paragraph has clear meaning namely that all service from 1 July 2004 will
be covered by the LSL Act. The evidence of Mr
Kane in this regard should be
applicant referred to various decisions regarding the interpretation of an
industrial instrument including:
Kucks v CSR Limited
[1996] IRCA 166
Geo A Bond & CO. LTD. (In Liquidation) v Mc Kenzie
(1929) 28 AR
AWU v Visy Board Pty Ltd t/as Visy Specialties
Amcor Limited v Construction,Forestry,Mining and Engineering Union
[2005] HCA 10
(2005) 222 CLR 241.
finding should be that the applicant who commenced employment on 17 March 2006
namely after 1 July 2004 was entitled to be paid
long service leave in
accordance with the LSL Act.
The respondent did not disagree with
the principles of interpretation contained in the authorities referred to by the
applicant. It
made reference to a decision of the full bench of the Fair Work
Commission namely:
The Australasian Meat Industry Employees Union v Golden
Cockerel Pty Ltd
[2014] FWCFB 7447.
evidence without dispute discloses that from 1996 through to 2016 the respondent
has negotiated with the union for an enterprise
agreement. In each of those
enterprise agreements there is a clause that relates to long service leave.
entitlements to long service leave were derived from the Metals Award but over
time enhanced benefits were applied to employees.
After 10 years of service the
rate of accrual increased from 0.866 to 1.3 weeks per year of service. The 1.3
weeks came from the
state LSL Act.
saw the introduction of the words “from the 1 July 2004 employees will be
entitled to the provisions of the South Australian
Long service act. Any service
before this date is as detailed below.” The respondent’s position is
that this is confined
to the rate of accrual and the use of accrual and did not
bring about an introduction of the LSL Act.
open up the agreement to incorporate all elements of the LSL Act would have been
a significant departure from previous agreements.
Mr Nixon had no
recollection of that sort of discussion. His memorandum being part of JK 4
(annexure to Mr Kane’s affidavit)
under the heading “Adjustments to
existing conditions” states that “from 1
July 2004 the
state award conditions will be used for the accumulation and use of
leave.” Employees who started from 1 July
2004 and this included the
applicant would be entitled going forward to accrual at the rate of
1.3 weeks per annum.
final paragraph which restricts the payment of pro rata long service leave after
seven years of continuous service to employees
terminated due to redundancy
remained in the 2004 agreement and the same clause has appeared from 1996 to
2016. The meaning is clear
namely if you have more than seven but less than 10
years of service (apart from redundancy) when you are terminated there is no
payment of pro rata long service leave.
final paragraph would have no work to do if the applicant’s position was
to be accepted namely the entire LSL Act was introduced
into the agreement.
clause relating to long service leave contains three elements from 2004, firstly
a comment that the LSL Act will apply, secondly
issues concerning accrual and
thirdly confining pro rata payment after seven years of continuous service to
employees terminated
due to redundancy. These three elements work together only
if the respondent’s interpretation of the clause is accepted.
applicable award is the federal Metals Award which contains long service leave
provisions. As at 31 December 2009 (given that
Part 2-2 of the FWA 2009 where s
113 is found commenced on 1 January 2010) the federal Metals Award was in
existence. Section 113(1)
says if there are award-derived long service terms
then they apply. But s 113(2) says if there was an enterprise agreement (and
was from 1996 to the present) then the award-derived terms do not apply.
Metals Award previously applied until such time as the parties entered into an
enterprise agreement, which in its terms was more
generous than the Metals
113(6) gives FWC power to order on application by a person to whom the
enterprise agreement applies that the terms of an enterprise
agreement in
operation at 31 December 2009 “are applicable agreement-derived long
service leave terms.” No application
was made as employees continued to be
covered by the various agreements going forward and if this was not the case the
Metals Award
again applied. There was no point in time where the LSL Act as a
matter of law becomes the applicable instrument.
Consideration
firstly with the applicant’s submission that irrespective of the terms of
the various enterprise agreements the LSL
Act applies by virtue of s 113 of the
113 is contained in Part 2-2. Part 2 commenced on 1 January
Section 113 provides:
“113 Entitlement to long service leave
Entitlement in accordance with applicable award-derived long service leave
(1) if there are applicable award-derived long service leave terms (see
subsection (3)) in relation to an employee, the employee
is entitled to long
service leave in accordance with those terms.
Note: This act does not exclude State and Territory laws that deal with long
service leave, except in relation to employees who are
entitled to long service
leave under this Division (see paragraph 27(2)(g), and except as provided in
subsection 113A(3).
(2) [Exceptions] However, subsection (1) does not apply if:
(a) a workplace agreement, or an AWA, that came into operation before the
commencement of this Part applies to the employee; or
(b) one of the following kinds of instrument that came into operation before
the commencement of this Part applies to the employee
and expressly deals with
long service leave:
(i) an enterprise agreement;
(ii) a preserved State agreement;
(iii) a workplace determination;
(iv) a pre-reform certified agreement;
(v) a pre-reform AWA;
(vi) a section 170 MX award;
(vii) an old I R agreement.
Note: if there ceases to be any agreement or instrument of a kind referred to in
paragraph (a) or (b) that applies to the employee,
the employee will, at that
time, become entitled under subsection (1) to long service leave in accordance
with applicable award-derived
long service leave terms.
(3) [Meaning of applicable award-derived long service leave terms] Applicable
award-derived long service leave terms, in relation
to an employee, are:
(a) terms of an award, or a State reference transitional award, that
(disregarding the effect of any instrument of a kind referred
to in subsection
(i) would have applied to the employee at the test time (see subsection(3A)) if
the employee had, at that time, been in his or her
current circumstances of
employment; and
(ii) would have entitled the employee to long service leave; and
(b) any terms of the award, or the State reference transitional award, that are
ancillary or incidental to the terms referred to
in paragraph (a).
(3A) [Test Time] For the purpose of subparagraph (3) (a) (i), the test time
(a) immediately before the commencement of this Part; or
(b) if the employee is a Division 2B State reference employee (Not
Applicable).
Entitlement in accordance with applicable agreement-derived long service leave
(4) if there are applicable agreement-derived long service leave terms (see
subsection (5)) in relation to an employee, the employee
is entitled to long
service leave in accordance with those terms.
(5) [Meaning of applicable agreement-derived long service leave terms] There
are applicable agreement-derived long service leave
terms, in relation to an
employee if:
(a) an order under subsection (6) is in operation in relation to terms of an
instrument; and
(b) those terms of the instrument would have applied to the employee
immediately before the commencement of this Part if the employee
had, at that
time, been in his or her current circumstances of employment; and
(c) there are no applicable award-derived long service leave terms in relation
to the employee.
(6) [FWC may order that terms of prior instrument are applicable] If the FWC is
satisfied that:
(a) any of the following instruments that was in operation immediately before
the commencement of this Part contained terms entitling
employees to long
service leave:
(i) an enterprise agreement;
(ii) a collective agreement;
(iii) pre--reform certified agreement;
(iv) an old I R agreement; and
(b) those terms constituted a long service leave scheme that was applying in
more than one State or Territory; and
(c) the scheme, considered on an overall basis, is no less beneficial to the
employees than the long service leave entitlements
that would otherwise apply in
relation to the employees under State and Territory laws;
the FWC may, on application by, or on behalf of, a person to whom the instrument
applies, make an order that those terms of the instrument
(and any terms that
are ancillary or incidental to those terms) are applicable agreement-derived
long service leave terms.
References to instruments
(7) References in this section to a kind of instrument (other than an
enterprise agreement) are references to a transitional instrument
of that kind,
as continued in existence by Schedule 3 to the Transitional
test time referred to is 31 December 2009 given that Part 2 of the FWA 2009
commenced on 1 January 2010.
respondent at all material times was a respondent to the Metals Award which
award contained provisions dealing with long service
leave. Section 113(2) as
set out above makes it clear that the award derived long service leave
provisions do not apply given that
there was an enterprise agreement in
existence (the 2007 agreement) which agreement expressly dealt with long service
applicant contends that clause 13 of the 2007 agreement whilst providing for
long service leave is not to be considered as an
agreement-derived long service
leave term as there had been no application under subsection (6) whereby FWC if
satisfied could have
made an order that clause 13 was an applicable
agreement-derived long service leave term.
Court is of the view that this contention is incorrect. No application was made
by on behalf of a person to whom the instrument
applies under subsection (6)
with respect to the 2007 agreement which was in operation immediately before the
commencement of Part
2. Employees continued to be covered by the various
agreements that were made over the years following 2007. If these agreements
were not made then the Metals Award (which contained long service leave
provisions) would once again have applied to the respondent
and its employees.
There was no vacuum into which the LSL Act could become applicable. All of the
Enterprise Agreements at the workplace
were subjected to approval by the FWC and
subsequently approved by the FWC.
then leads to the construction of clause 13 of the 2015 enterprise agreement
which applied at the time of the termination of
the applicant’s
employment.
applicant referred to various decisions (the respondent agreeing with them)
which set out the principles of construction. The
principles of construction
extracted from the decisions are:
the primary task
is to give effect to the language of the enterprise
interpretation
is always a text based
the search is
for the meaning intended by the framer(s) of the
the object as
always is to objectively determine the intention of the parties from the words
of the document;
“purposive” approach should be adopted, as opposed to a narrow or
pedantic one. In that regard, the High Court in
emphasised the need
to use context to strive to find the “industrial purpose” behind the
disputed provision;
an available
construction should be preferred if it “contributes to a sensible
industrial outcome such as should be attributed
to the parties who negotiated
and executed the
agreement”;
important to keep in mind therefore the desirability of a construction, if it is
reasonably available, that will operate
fairly towards both
text of the enterprise agreement is to be considered in the context of any
relevant broader objective circumstances. Recourse
may not be had to evidence of
the parties statements and actions reflecting their actual (that is subjective)
intentions and
expectations.
2004 enterprise agreement saw the introduction of the reference to the LSL Act.
The words introduced were:
“From the 1 July 2004 employees will be entitled
to the provisions of the South Australian Long Service Act. Any service before
this date is as detailed below.”
As the principles of interpretation set out above require the words
introduced need to be considered in context. Reference is made
following these
words to the fact that employees currently derive their long service leave from
the Metals Award which amongst other
things provides a rate of accrual of 0.866
weeks for each year of continuous service. Importantly the following words then
“Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3) hereof, all of
the terms of the above-mentioned Award shall continue to regulate Long Service
Leave at the enterprise.”
Paragraph (2) makes reference to long-term employees being those with ten or
more years of continuous service and that such employees
will receive a higher
rate of accrual namely 1.3 weeks for each year of continuous service from 1
February 1996. Certain examples
are then set out and the paragraph also
indicates that “the due date for 13 weeks long service leave for long-term
will be that date when the sum of the product of the two different
rates of accrual total 13 weeks.”
accrual rate of 1.3 weeks is the same as that in the LSL Act. This is an
enhanced benefit given that the Metals Award provides
a rate of accrual of 0.866
text is clear namely that the Metals Award shall continue to regulate long
service leave except for the enhanced benefit for employees
who are long-term
employees of 1.3 weeks for each year of continuous service.
text in no way indicates an adoption of the content of the LSL Act and paragraph
(3) further reinforces the notion that all that
is being taken from the
reference to the LSL Act is an enhanced benefit of 1.3 weeks for each year of
continuous service. Paragraph
(3) states that an employee “terminating
due to redundancy only, shall be regarded as entitled to pro rata long service
after seven years of continuous service.” This is not what the LSL
Act provides.
memorandum dated 21 June 2004 from Mr Nixon which appears at Tab JK 4 of Mr
Kane’s affidavit which memorandum was prepared
in the context of
negotiating the 2004 agreement stated “from 1 July 2004 the state award
conditions will be used for the accumulation
and use of leave”. Section
113(1) states:
“If there are applicable award- derived long
service leave terms in relation to an employee, the employee is entitled to long
service leave in accordance with those terms.”
Section 113(2)(a) states that subsection (1) does not apply if a workplace
agreement, or an AWA, that came into operation before
the commencement of this
Part applies to the employee.”
the reference to state award should be to the LSL Act. The reference to
accumulation reinforces the notion that only the enhanced
benefit of 1.3 weeks
is being derived from the LSL Act.
applicant resigned his employment with less than 10 years service. Only
employees who are terminated due to redundancy are entitled
to pro rata long
service leave after seven years of continuous service.
the circumstances referred to above the claim made by the applicant must be
PUBLICATION
OF THESE REASONS
It is the practice of this Court to publish its
reasons for decision in full on the Internet. If any party or person contends
these reasons for decision should not be published in full the party or
person must make an application within seven days of the
delivery of these
reasons. The application shall be by an Application for Directions with a
supporting affidavit and should be addressed
to the presiding member(s). If no
such application is lodged within the time specified these reasons will be
published in accordance
with the Court’s usual practice.
Exhibit A1.
Exhibit A2.
Exhibit A3.
Exhibit A4.
Annexure JK 5 to Mr
Kane’s affidavit.
Annexure JK 4 to Mr
Kane’s affidavit.
Paras 11-16 inclusive.
See para 16 of Mr
Kane’s affidavit.
Oceanic Coal Australia
Pty Ltd v Parker
(2010) 198 IR 455
at paras 44-45.
Amcor Limited v
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
[2005] HCA 10
(2005) 222 CLR 241
Kucks v CSR
[1996] IRCA 166
Automotive, Food, Metals,
Engineering and Printing and Kindred Industries Union v Skilled Engineering
[2003] FCA 260
at para 21.
paras 2, 13, 30, 93 and 96, 130-131.
paras 96 and 131;
Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees Association v
Woolworths SA Pty Ltd
[2011] FCAFC 67
at para 18.
(supra) at para
Mount Bruce Mining
(2015) 256 CLR 104
at para 50 per French CJ, Hayne, Crennan and Keifel JJ.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (185 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter