URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCA/2025/114.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SAADAT v COMMONWEALTH [2025] SASCA 114 (3 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Court of Appeal: Civil)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
SAADAT v COMMONWEALTH
[2025] SASCA 114
Ruling of the Honourable
President Livesey
(ex tempore)
3 October 2025
PROCEDURE - CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS - JOINDER OF
CAUSES OF ACTION AND OF PARTIES
In the proceedings below, Mr Saadat, the applicant, sued the Commonwealth,
the respondent, in damages. The respondent joined as third
parties Australasian
Correctional Services Pty Ltd, G4S Australia Pty Ltd, GEO Group Australia Pty
Ltd, and G4S Regional Management
(UK & I) Ltd by means of third-party claims
seeking relief in contract and negligence (the
third parties
respondent contended that each of the third parties were jointly and severally
liable to indemnify it in respect of any damages
awarded to the applicant and,
if applicable, for interest.
After dismissing the applicant’s claim, the primary judge dismissed the
respondent’s third-party claims. The applicant
has now appealed, serving
the respondent with his Notice of Appeal containing more than 30 grounds of
The question for the Court is whether the applicant or the respondent is
obliged to join the third parties to this appeal, pursuant
to r 214.2(2) of the
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
there is an “arguable possibility” that the third parties’
rights and interests may be affected by orders
made on an appeal between the
applicant and the respondent, their interests are not directly affected where no
relief is sought against
the extent that the third parties may have at least an indirect interest in the
appeal, that could be addressed by their joinder
as interested parties so that
they can be both heard and bound.
an order could be made joining the third parties as interested parties, that
would not permit relief to be sought against them
and the Court is reluctant to
make that order pending a decision from the respondent about whether it intends
to seek orders and
relief against the third parties.
only the respondent stands to benefit from the joinder of the third parties, the
respondent should join them to a new appeal,
which can be heard at the same time
as the applicant’s appeal.
Supreme Court Act 1935
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
(SA) rr 211.1, 214.2, 217.11,
referred to.
Barclays Bank v Tom
[1923] 1 KB 221
Brougham v Edwards (No 2)
[2024] SASCA 129
Chapman v Chapman
[1946] SAStRp 22
[1946] SASR 217
Duke Group Ltd
(in liq) v Arthur Young (No 2)
(1991) 4 ACSR 355
Edwards v Edwards
[1912] ArgusLawRp 145
[1913] VLR 30
Grovenor v Permanent Trustee Co of NSW Ltd
(1966) 40 ALJR
John Alexander’s Clubs Pty Ltd v White City Tennis Club Ltd
[2010] HCA 19
(2010) 241 CLR 1
Law Society of South Australia v Betro
[2025] SASCFC 2
News Ltd v Australian Rugby Football League
[1996] FCAFC 870
(1996) 64 FCR 410
Mining Co Ltd v Choong Sam
[1969] MLJ 52
Pera v Pera
(2008) 218 FLR
Rayney v Aw
[2009] WASCA 203
Saadat v Commonwealth & Ors
[2025] SASC 59
Victoria v Sutton
[1998] HCA 56
(1998) 195 CLR 291
, considered.
SAADAT v COMMONWEALTH
[2025] SASCA 114
Court of Appeal – Civil
LIVESEY P (
Introduction
the proceedings below Mr Saadat, the applicant, sued the Commonwealth, the
respondent, in damages. The respondent joined as third
parties Australasian
Correctional Services Pty Ltd, G4S Australia Pty Ltd, GEO Group Australia Pty
Ltd, and G4S Regional Management
(UK & I) Ltd by means of third party claims
seeking relief in contract and negligence (the
third parties
applicant’s claim was dismissed and he has now appealed, serving the
respondent with his Notice of Appeal containing more
than 30 grounds of appeal.
The case is being managed at callovers, and a tentative hearing date has been
set during early May 2026.
The question for the Court is whether the applicant
or the respondent is obliged to join the third parties to this appellate
proceeding,
pursuant to r 214.2(2) of the
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
respondent contends that it is the applicant who is obliged to join the third
parties to the appellate proceeding because the
third parties were parties at
first instance and it cannot be said that they have “no interest” in
the appeal.
The applicant counters
that he is not obliged to join them because the third parties are neither
parties nor “interested parties”
within the meaning of rr 214.2(2)
of the UCR.
the following reasons, where only the respondent stands to benefit from the
joinder of the third parties, the respondent should
join them to a new appeal,
which can be heard at the same time as the applicant’s
Relevant background
appeal is against the order of Stanley J (as his Honour then was, the
) dismissing the applicant’s claim against the respondent. The
applicant alleged that he had suffered psychiatric harm caused
by the conditions
in which he was detained by the respondent at the Baxter Immigration Reception
and Processing Centre (
), in breach of a duty of care the
respondent owed to him.
alternative, the applicant alleged that, as a result of the respondent’s
breach of duty, he suffered psychiatric harm
caused by the conditions of his
detention at the Curtin Immigration Reception and Processing Centre, aggravated
by the conditions
of his detention at Baxter.
applicant also alleged that the respondent breached its duty of care by failing
to treat his psychiatric injuries whilst he was
third parties were engaged by the respondent to operate and manage the detention
The respondent contended
that each of the third parties were jointly and severally liable to indemnify it
in respect of any damages
awarded to the applicant and, if applicable, for
dismissing the applicant’s claim, the primary judge dismissed the
respondent’s third party claims.
The parties’
contentions
applicant contends that the third parties are neither parties nor
“interested parties” within the meaning of r 214.2(2)
and r 211.1 of
the UCR because the primary judge dismissed the third party
proceedings,
and by his appeal he
does not challenge that order.
applicant contends that finality on the third party proceedings has been
If the appeal succeeds,
the order dismissing the third party claims will remain undisturbed, and only
the respondent will be liable
to him in damages. The applicant contends that
this Court has no jurisdiction to disturb the order dismissing the third party
proceedings
absent an appeal against that
respondent contends that the order dismissing the third party proceedings is a
“consequential order” and, where a
first instance order is set aside
on appeal, consequential orders may also be set
The respondent relied on
the following passage of the primary judge’s reasons, which it contended
demonstrated that the primary
judge anticipated that the third party claims may
be revived if the applicant succeeded on
applicant’s claim against the Commonwealth must be dismissed, there is no
entitlement to an indemnity by ACM or G4S in
favour of the Commonwealth given it
has no liability to the applicant. In these circumstances the submission was put
that I should
refrain from considering the issues that arise on the third party
claims by the Commonwealth as there was no work for them to do.
consider that in case there is a successful appeal from the order dismissing the
applicant’s claim against the Commonwealth,
where practicable I should
address certain issues that arise on the third party claims. Those issues are
necessarily limited by the
dismissal of the applicant’s claim. They are
largely confined to questions of law rather than fact.
respondent contends that it is wrong to assert that the third parties have no
interest in the appeal. The respondent contends
that the Notice of Appeal
demonstrates that the third parties’ interests have not been
“extinguished” because:
applicant seeks, in the alternative, the relief of a re-trial. If a re-trial
were ordered, the factual allegations made against
the third parties would
necessarily re-emerge.
grounds of appeal expressly impugn the primary judge’s findings concerning
the conduct of the third parties. The respondent
points to appeal ground 17, by
which the applicant challenges findings that the security measures taken by the
respondent and the
third parties at Baxter were reasonable and
Joinder of parties and interested
to r 214.2 of the UCR, it is necessary for the applicant to join any parties to
the first instance proceeding unless it
can be said that they have “no
interest” in the appeal. That, however, does not determine whether their
joinder should
be made as respondents or as “interested parties”,
still less whether it is in the interests of justice to make an order
214.2(2) and (3) provide:
(2) The appellant must join as a respondent or interested party in the appellate
(a) any party to the first instance proceeding unless that party has no interest
in the appeal; and
(b) any other person falling within paragraph (b) of the definitions of
respondent or interested party in rule 211.1.
(3) The Court may order the addition or removal of a person as a party to an
appellate proceeding; however a person cannot be added
as an appellant without
the person’s consent.
211.1 defines an “interested party” and a “respondent”
as follows:
interested party
in an appellate
proceeding means a party (whenever joined)—
(a) who was an interested party in the proceeding at first instance unless the
party has no interest in the appellate proceeding;
(b) against whom no relief is sought in and whose interest is not directly and
adversely affected by the appellate proceeding but
who should be given the
opportunity to be heard in relation to the proceeding or who must be joined to
be bound by the result;
to an appellate proceeding means a party (whenever
(a) who was an applicant or respondent in the proceeding at first instance,
unless the party has no interest in the appellate proceeding;
(b) against whom orders are sought in, or whose interest may be directly and
adversely affected by, the orders sought in the appellate
proceeding;
Victoria v Sutton
, McHugh J explained the general law principles of
natural justice concerning
of natural justice require that, before a court makes an order that may affect
the rights or interests of a person, that
person should be given an opportunity
to contest the making of that order. Because that is so, it is the invariable
practice of the
courts to require such a person to be joined as a party if there
is an arguable possibility that he or she may be affected by the
making of the
That practice also
assists in avoiding duplication of hearings on the same issues and in avoiding
the spectre of inconsistent decisions
by courts or the judges of the same
a Court proposes to make orders directly affecting the rights or liabilities of
a non-party, that non-party is a necessary
party and ought to be
That is to say, whether
a person is a necessary party to a proceeding is generally determined by whether
that person’s “rights
against or liabilities to any party to the
action in respect of the subject matter of the action [will] be directly
affected by any
order which may be made in the
rules as to the joinder of necessary parties should, however, be “strictly
established that an “order which directly affects a third person’s
rights against or liabilities to a party
should not be made unless the person is
also joined as a party” and if made, absent joinder, “the order will
be set aside”.
general propositions must, however, be read subject to the Rules of Court,
having regard to the relief which can or may be
sought, and by which party it
may be sought.
Disposition of the issue of joinder
applicant does not intend to disturb the order dismissing the third party
proceedings. That is unsurprising in circumstances
where the applicant seeks no
relief against the third parties.
there is an “arguable possibility” that the third parties’
rights and interests may be affected by orders
made on an appeal between the
applicant and the respondent, their interests are not directly affected where no
relief is sought against
the order dismissing the third party proceedings might loosely be regarded as a
form of consequential order, and the dismissal
of the third party claims
“follows logically or of necessity from” the order dismissing the
applicant’s claim against
the respondent, it is no part of the
applicant’s case to reinstate those
Accordingly,
though there may be potential consequences for the third parties associated with
challenging the dismissal of the applicant’s
claim, as well as of pressing
a ground of appeal which impugns certain of the primary judge’s findings
concerning the conduct
of the third parties, their rights are only indirectly
affected. Their rights are only potentially affected because it may be that
what happens on appeal will in some way be used against them later.
rights will only be directly affected if they are joined and relief is sought
against them.
that sense, the potential, indirect interest of the third parties might require
that they be given some opportunity to be heard,
and it would usually be
desirable that they be bound by the outcome of the applicant’s appeal.
I say desirable, I mean desirable from the perspective of the respondent.
Usually, no respondent would wish to assume the burden
of having to demonstrate
the existence of a liability to an applicant in order to found a basis for third
party relief in respect
of that liability. Most respondents would want to
pursue third party relief with the benefit of a finding that they are liable to
the applicant in circumstances where that finding binds the third parties.
all of these circumstances, there is something to be said for the proposition
that the third parties presently have no interest
in the appeal. It is,
however, not necessary to form any concluded view about that. To the extent
that the third parties may have
at least a potential, indirect interest in the
appeal, that could be addressed by their joinder as interested parties so that
can be both heard and bound, see r 214.2(2)(b) of the UCR.
that kind of order would not address what lies at the heart of this application.
That is, a contest between the applicant
and the respondent as to who should
assume the risk and burden of joining the third parties. That contest is, I
think, resolved by
determining which party will benefit from joining the third
applicant is not likely to obtain any benefit from joining the third parties.
That can be tested in this way. In so far as
the applicant seeks, as an
alternative to damages, an order for a re-trial that would not affect the
interests of the third parties
unless and until that order included a re-trial
of the third party claims. The applicant does not seek that order and has no
in seeking that order.
if the applicant were to join the third parties as parties to his appeal, that
would provide no opportunity for the applicant
to secure any relief from them.
Indeed, no orders could be made against the third parties, whether at the suit
of the applicant
or of the respondent, on the present terms of the Notice of
fact, only the respondent would ever be interested in seeking that order. That
is because only the respondent would want indemnity
or contribution from the
third parties, and the respondent could not obtain that relief without first
taking the step of appealing
the dismissal of the third party claims. Only that
would open up the opportunity to obtain orders against the third parties,
with any re‑trial of the third party claims.
order to do that, the respondent would first have to join the third parties as
respondents to its own appeal.
the means of obtaining third party relief tends to expose the artificiality of
the respondent’s position. The respondent
wants the applicant to join the
third parties and have them brought into the appeal. That is not through
altruism. The respondent
wants the third parties before the Court because, if
the applicant succeeds, the respondent will want to obtain indemnity or
contribution
from the third parties.
Accordingly,
whether the third parties’ rights are directly or indirectly affected by
the applicant’s appeal, and even
if they should be given an opportunity to
be heard in relation to it, their joinder by the applicant would have little
later, the respondent would have to face up to the need to join the third
parties as respondents to a new appeal if it
is to have any prospect of
obtaining relief on its third party claims.
if the respondent has no intention of seeking relief from the third parties, it
is difficult to see why they should be joined
at all. If it is only possible
that the respondent will seek relief from the third parties, their joinder as
interested parties
provides them with procedural fairness and will ensure that
they are bound by the outcome. That, however, would not necessarily
third parties to take any active role on the appeal, separate and distinct from
the role of the respondent,
and, of course, no relief at all could be sought against them in the appellate
proceedings as presently configured.
however, the respondent really does propose to seek relief from the third
parties in connection with the hearing in May 2026,
“stand-off” should now stop. Otherwise, significant time and costs
could be wasted should it later become necessary
to commence a new, separate
appeal against the third parties. That may jeopardise the hearing in May
Accordingly,
though an order could be made joining the third parties as interested parties, I
am reluctant to make that order pending
a decision from the respondent about
whether it intends to seek orders and relief against the third parties.
it does, that step should now be taken. There is no point waiting until the
fate of the applicant’s appeal is known. That
is consistent with the
object of the third party procedure, which is “to avoid an undesirable
multiplicity of proceedings and
to prevent similar, intertwined issues from
being determined separately with possible inconsistent
Supreme Court Act 1935
(SA) provides:
27—Court to do
complete justice in cause so as to avoid multiplicity of suits
The court in every cause or matter pending before it shall have power to
grant, and shall grant, either absolutely or on such reasonable
conditions as it deems just, all such remedies whatsoever as any of the parties
thereto may appear to be entitled to in
respect of every legal or equitable
claim properly brought forward by them respectively, in such cause or matter, so
that, as far
as possible, all matters so in controversy between the parties may
be completely and finally determined, and all multiplicity of
legal proceedings
concerning any of such matters avoided.
multiplicity of appeals should likewise be avoided.
applicant is not obliged to join the third parties pursuant to r 214.2(2) of the
UCR as interested parties to this appellate
proceeding pending a decision by the
respondent about the course it intends to take.
granting the respondent a short adjournment, it has indicated that it seeks
leave to file a Notice of Appeal, joining the third
parties. I will give leave
to the respondent to do that in seven days.
hearing from the parties and the third parties about the joint trials on related
issues which will commence before O’Sullivan
J in the Federal Court on
4 May 2026, with an anticipated listing of around 12 weeks, I will make the
following orders:
respondent is granted leave to file a Notice of Appeal against the third parties
in seven days.
matter is listed for hearing before the Court of Appeal on Monday, 27 April
2026 at 10.15am, with five days set aside.
appellant is to file and serve written submissions and a list of authorities by
4.00pm on Friday, 19 December 2025.
respondent is to file and serve written submissions and a list of authorities by
4.00pm on Tuesday, 17 February 2026.
proposed third parties are to file and serve their written submissions and lists
of authorities by 4.00pm on Friday, 13 March
appellant may file and serve any reply by 4.00pm on Friday, 20 March 2026.
parties have liberty to apply.
matter will be called over on Friday, 20 February 2026 at 9.15am. On that
occasion I expect the parties to have conferred and
fairly allocated a division
of issues and time for the hearing, ensuring that there is no repetition of
issues where any common interest
can be identified.
Relying on UCR, r
214.2(2)(a).
Saadat v Commonwealth &
[2025] SASC 59
Saadat v Commonwealth &
[2025] SASC 59
Saadat v Commonwealth &
[2025] SASC 59
, [2700], [2707].
Saadat v Commonwealth &
[2025] SASC 59
See FDN 722, Order 3:
“The respondent’s third party claims are dismissed”.
[1946] SAStRp 22
[1946] SASR 217
, 218 (Napier CJ, Reed and Ligertwood JJ).
Supreme Court Act 1935
Relying on UCR, r 217.11.
Saadat v Commonwealth
[2025] SASC 59
UCR, r 214.2(2); See
Brougham v Edwards (No 2)
[2024] SASCA 129
, [51] (Livesey P, S Doyle JA
and Buss AJA).
Victoria v Sutton
[1998] HCA 56
(1998) 195 CLR 291
, [77] (McHugh J).
News Ltd v Australian
Rugby Football League
[1996] FCAFC 870
(1996) 64 FCR 410
Grovenor v Permanent Trustee Co
(1966) 40 ALJR 329.
This rule is derived both from the common law
and by implication through the power of courts to join parties who are necessary
proper for hearing, for example, New South Wales Supreme Court Rules, Pt 8,
r 8, High Court Rules, 0 16, r 4.
John Alexander’s
Clubs Pty Ltd v White City Tennis Club Ltd
[2010] HCA 19
(2010) 241 CLR 1
, [131] (French
CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Heydon and Kiefel JJ).
Pegang Mining Co Ltd v
[1969] MLJ 52
, 55-56 (Diplock LJ), referred to in
[1998] HCA 56
(1998) 195 CLR 291
, [77] (McHugh J).
Grovenor v Permanent
Trustee Co of NSW Ltd
(1966) 40 ALJR 329
, 330 (Barwick CJ, Kitto, Taylor,
Windeyer and Owen JJ).
News Ltd v Australian
Rugby Football League Ltd
[1996] FCAFC 870
(1996) 64 FCR 410
, 524 (Lockhart, von Doussa and
Sackville JJ), cited with approval in
Victoria v Sutton
[1998] HCA 56
(1998) 195 CLR
, [78] (McHugh J).
Victoria v Sutton
[1998] HCA 56
(1998) 195 CLR 291
, [77] (McHugh J).
[2009] WASCA 203
, [33] (McLure JA, with whom Buss JA and Newnes JA
Pera v Pera
(2008) 218 FLR 22
, [61] (Coleman, May and Boland
JJ); FDN 722, Order 2: “The applicant’s claim in negligence is
dismissed”.
See UCR, r 211.1.
Law Society of South
Australia v Betro
[2025] SASCFC 2
, [37]-[42] (Bleby, Stein and B Doyle
Duke Group Ltd (in liq)
v Arthur Young (No 2)
(1991) 4 ACSR 355
, 405 (Olsson J), referring to
Edwards v Edwards
[1912] ArgusLawRp 145
[1913] VLR 30
Barclays Bank v Tom
[1923] 1 KB 221.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (375 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter