URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAOmbFOI/2022/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:02:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Department for Correctional Services 2022/04667 [2022] SAOmbFOI 4 (28 November 2022)
Determination
External review - section 39
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Department for Correctional Services
Ombudsman reference:
Agency reference:
CEN/21/0332(7); CEN/21/0332(12); CEN/21/0332(13)
Determination:
The determination of the agency is confirmed, the effect of which is that
the agency has refused to deal with the FOI application.
Date of Ombudsman’s determination:
28 November 2022
Issues considered:
Abusive pattern of conduct
Substantial and unreasonable diversion of
agency resources
Exemption clauses relied upon:
Legislation considered:
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Application for access
three applications under the
Freedom of Information Act 1991
) the applicant requested access from the agency
All emails sent and received by the Department for Correctional Services
regarding myself, [applicant’s name]
application is identically worded save for the time frame applied. The
cumulative time frame of all three applications spans
from 5 May 2020 to 5
January 2021.
applicant initially lodged one FOI application in the terms above, spanning the
entire period of 5 May 2020 to 5 May 2021. Following
correspondence from the
agency, the applicant subsequently lodged three separate applications,
separating the initial time frame
into smaller periods and omitting four months
of the initial timeframe.
ease of reference, procedural steps relating to the application and the external
review are set out in Appendix 1.
external review is within the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman as a relevant review
authority under section 39 of the FOI Act.
Provisional
determination
provided my tentative view about the agency’s determination to the
parties, by my provisional determination dated 23 September
2022. I informed the
parties that subject to my receipt and consideration of submissions from the
parties I proposed to reverse the
agency’s determination.
to section 39(5)(c)(ii) of the FOI Act, on 13 October 2022 the agency requested
that I suspend my external review to allow
the parties an opportunity to explore
whether this matter could be partially or fully settled. By letter dated 17
October 2022 I
formally advised the agency that my external review would be
suspended for a period of two weeks, recommencing on 1 November 2022.
1 November 2022 the agency provided submissions in response to my provisional
determination. The agency advised that it had revised
its view such that it now
submits that section 18(1) be applied in lieu of section 18(2a). Having formed
the view that the agency’s
additional submissions are persuasive, I
considered it appropriate to issue a revised provisional determination to afford
the parties
an opportunity to comment on my revised views.
provided my revised tentative view about the agency’s determination to the
parties, by my revised provisional determination
dated 4 November 2022. I
informed the parties that subject to my receipt and consideration of submissions
from the parties I proposed
to confirm the agency’s
determination.
email dated 10 November 2022 the agency advised that it had no further
submissions to make. I did not receive a response from the
Accordingly, this determination is in the same terms as my revised provisional
determination.
Relevant law
person has a legally enforceable right to be given access to an agency’s
documents in accordance with the FOI
agency may refuse to deal with an application in limited circumstances. Section
18(1), (2) and (2a) of the FOI Act relevantly provides:
(1) An agency may refuse to deal with an application if it appears to the
agency that the nature of the application is such that the
work involved in
dealing with it within the period allowed under
(or within any reasonable extension of that period under
section 14A
would, if carried out, substantially and unreasonably divert the agency's
resources from their use by the agency in the exercise
of its functions.
(2) An agency must not refuse to deal with such an application without first
endeavouring to assist the applicant to amend the application
so that the work
involved in dealing with it would, if carried out, no longer substantially and
unreasonably divert the agency's
resources from their use by the agency in the
exercise of its functions.
(2a) An agency may refuse to deal with an application if, in the opinion of
the agency, the application is part of a pattern of conduct
that amounts to an
abuse of the right of access or is made for a purpose other than to obtain
access to information.
section 48, the onus is on the agency to justify its determination ‘in any
proceedings’. This includes the external
review process.
39(11) provides that the Ombudsman may confirm, vary or reverse the
agency’s determination in an external review, based
on the circumstances
existing at the time of review.
Issues in this
agency initially made submissions to this Office to the effect that the three
applications in issue enliven section 18(2a) of
the FOI Act. Accordingly, the
initial issue to be determined in this external review was whether the
applications were part of a
pattern of conduct that amounts to an abuse of the
right to access or were made for a purpose other than to gain access to
information.
considered the agency’s purported initial determination, internal review
determination and further submissions, I issued
my provisional determination
proposing to reverse the agency’s determination. In response to my
provisional determination the
agency advised its revised view that I ought to
confirm the determination to refuse to deal with the applications on the basis
section 18(1).
such, the issues I must now consider in this review are:
whether the
agency has complied with section 18(2)
whether the work
involved in dealing with the application would substantially and unreasonably
divert the agency's resources from
their use by the agency in the exercise of
its functions, as required by section 18(1).
said, I confirm that for completeness I have repeated my assessment of section
18(2a) as set out in my provisional determination,
before then addressing the
agency’s revised submissions.
Consideration
Application of section 18(2a)
section 12 of the FOI Act ‘a person has a legally enforceable right to be
given access to an agency’s documents
in accordance with this Act’.
The latter part of that phrase makes clear that the right to access documents
is not absolute.
18(2a) of the FOI Act allows an agency, or in this case an external review
authority, to refuse to deal with an application
where, in its opinion,
‘the application is part of a pattern of conduct that amounts to an abuse
of the right of access or
is made for a purpose other than to obtain access to
information’.
18(2a) serves to strike a balance between the right of access on the one hand
and the resources utilised by an agency in dealing
with an application in
certain circumstances.
Gabrielsen v Nurses Board of SA
Honour Judge Simpson was of the view that in order to satisfy section 18(2a) of
the FOI Act the agency/external review authority
need only be:
of the (subjective) opinion that the application ... was part of a pattern of
conduct that amounted to an abuse of the right to access,
or was made for a
purpose other than to obtain access to
information.
Honour was of the view that the agency/external review authority’s opinion
need not be necessarily right, but must be:
reasonably open on the material facts underlying the reasons given for the
opinion - that it is not open to criticism on the basis
of overlooking relevant
material, or taking into account irrelevant or inaccurate factual material or
because it was subject to illogicality
in reasoning or was capricious or
irrational.
consider that, to properly assess the current circumstances, it is necessary for
me to briefly address the background which led
to the applicant lodging the 3
FOI applications the subject of this review.
10 May 2021 the applicant lodged an initial FOI application in the same terms as
the current 3 applications, but requesting a date
range of 5 May 2020 to 5 May
2021. On 17 May 2021, pursuant to section 18(2) of the FOI Act, the agency
requested that the applicant
narrow the scope of his application as dealing with
it in its original terms would substantially and unreasonably divert the
relation to this correspondence, the agency submits to this Office that:
On 17 May 2021, the Department sent the applicant correspondence and advised
that his request was deemed too large in scope, and he
was asked to amend the
scope and provide a response by 14 June 2021. Pursuant to section 18 of the FOI
Act, the Department provided
him with an example of how the scope could be
narrowed (emails between specific DCS Units) to allow him to receive the
so it would not substantially and unreasonably divert the
agency’s resources from their use by the Department in the exercise
functions. In the same correspondence the applicant was also advised of the
provisions of section 18(2a) of the FOI Act.
consider it appropriate to directly address these submissions as it is my view
that they speak to whether the agency has overlooked
relevant material or taken
into account inaccurate material.
first note that the return date of 14 June 2021 may have been confusing to the
applicant, depending on his familiarity with the
provisions of the FOI Act.
Noting that the initial FOI application was received on 14 May 2021, the agency
was deemed to have made
a determination to refuse access to the documents sought
on 13 June 2021, resulting in a nonsensical outcome of the applicant being
expected to amend an application after it had already been determined.
I acknowledge that the agency provided the applicant with an example as to how
his application might be amended, however
I query whether the one example
provided is sufficient to satisfy the requirements of section 18(2). The agency
provided the following
advice to the applicant:
The Department requests that you consider reducing the scope of the documents
you want access to. For example, you might consider
changing your request to all
emails to and from SMU in regard to your most recent case review (9 September
2020 until 5 August 2020
amendment suggested by the agency reflects a substantial change to the initial
application, such that I consider it could in fact
be characterised as an
entirely new application rather than an amendment to the initial application.
The proposed amendment changes:
the date range
from 12 months to 1 month
recipients from agency staff to only members of the Sentence Management Unit
the topic of the
emails from the applicant to a single case review.
Additionally,
the agency did not provide any explanation of how or why dealing with the
original application would substantially and
unreasonably divert the
agency’s resources. I consider that this placed the applicant at a
disadvantage where if the suggested
changes provided by the agency were not
satisfactory to the applicant, he was essentially expected to guess what kind of
other amendment
might be suitable to the agency.
18(2) requires that an agency must endeavour to assist the applicant to amend
their application. The applicant was afforded
no opportunity to discuss the
agency’s correspondence, or work together with the agency to amend the
application.
agency has submitted to this Office that:
Between 31 May 2021 and 7 June 2021, three applications [CEN/21/0332(7), (12)
and (13)] were received from the applicant. There was
no indication that each of
them was a response to the Department’s request to narrow the scope of the
initial application
and as such the Department considers these as separate
applications
. These applications again contained the same request
“All Emails”
) as his previous application but with a
timeframe of between 3 and 4 months respectively between May 2020 to January
2021. It appears
that the applicant had chosen to disregard the
Department’s suggestion of a narrowed scope for his previous application
[CEN/21/0332(2)]
and instead chosen to pursue the original request for
All emails...”
. Although the requests were for the same
topic but for smaller timeframes, they still amounted to almost the original
timeframe (of
between May 2020 to January 2021 [sic]) and these applications
were also deemed too large in scope.
light of my consideration above, and particularly noting the paucity of the
information provided to the applicant by the agency,
as well as the timing of
the 3 applications being lodged almost immediately after the applicant was
requested to narrow the scope
of his initial application, I do not agree that
‘it appears that the applicant has chosen to disregard the
Department’s
suggestion of a narrowed scope...’.
applicant clearly wishes to access all emails about himself across a period of
time. Absent any proper explanation of why that
request was problematic, and
presented with only one suggested alternative which the applicant was clearly
unhappy with, I consider
that the more likely explanation for the
applicant’s 3 subsequent applications is merely that he believed that
splitting up
his application was an acceptable way to narrow the scope such that
each application was appropriate.
Additionally,
the agency’s statement that the 3 applications in issue are
‘separate applications’ rather than a
revision of the first
application, would appear to be in conflict with the statement that the
applicant disregarded the agency’s
request and instead chose to pursue the
original request, the latter submission indicating the agency’s
acknowledgment that
the 3 applications were lodged in response to the request
that the applicant narrow the scope of the first matter.
outlined above, the agency submits that at the time of requesting the applicant
to narrow the scope of his initial application
he was advised of the provisions
of section 18(2a) of the FOI Act. Having reviewed the copy of this
correspondence provided to my
Office, this submission is incorrect. No reference
was made to section 18(2a).
section 18(2a) does not require an applicant to be forewarned that the agency
may rely on that section, I consider that this
submission again speaks to
whether the agency has taken into account inaccurate material.
also reject the agency’s submission that the 3 new requests amounted to
‘almost’ the original timeframe. The first
FOI application requested
documents between 5 May 2020 and 5 May 2021; a 12 month period. The three
applications in issue collectively
span from 5 May 2020 to 5 January 2021, a
timeframe more than 30% shorter than the original timeframe. Again noting that
the applicant
was requested to narrow the scope of his application with very
little information, I consider it would have been reasonable for the
to believe this was an appropriate reduction of scope.
addressed the events which preceded the applicant lodging the 3 FOI applications
in issue, I also consider it appropriate to
address the events which followed.
15 June 2021, pursuant to section 18(2), the Department sent the applicant
correspondence requesting that he narrow the scope of
each of the 3 FOI
applications in issue. The agency has again incorrectly stated that the
applicant was advised in that correspondence
of the provisions of section
18(2a). The applicant then subsequently lodged 13 FOI applications cumulatively
spanning the same amount
of time as the first FOI application, about which the
agency states:
It is submitted that on examination of the application dates for the thirteen
requests, it appears the applicant has sought to frustrate
the FOI process by
submitting multiple applications in separate individual correspondence in the
hope that the individual applications
would escape the censorship of the FOI
unit and be processed individually.
is my view that this submission reflects the agency having considered irrelevant
material in making its determination. The determination
relates to the 3 prior
FOI applications, not the subsequent 13 applications. I consider that any
inference which might be drawn about
the applicant’s behaviour
he had lodged the applications in issue, is irrelevant to a
consideration of whether those 3 applications form part of a problematic
of conduct.
acknowledge that the agency belatedly determined these 3 applications long after
the further 13 applications had been lodged, however
this was due to error by
the agency. The applicant should not be prejudiced by the agency’s failure
to issue a belated determination
until more than 12 months after the
applications were lodged.
now turn to consider the way in which the agency dealt with the 3 FOI
applications the subject of this review. The agency submits
Secretary, Department of Treasury and Finance v Kelly
found that were
an applicant submits many small request it is
similar to one voluminous
that was aggregated on the basis of the
commonality of the
This is considered exploitive of the concept of Freedom of
Information generally.
accept that in the matter of
Secretary, Department of Treasury and Finance v
the Victorian Supreme Court of Appeal concluded that, where an
applicant lodges multiple access requests which share a commonality,
is entitled to aggregate the requests and treat them as being one larger access
although I query the basis
of the agency’s conclusion that the lodging of multiple applications in
such a way is considered
to be ‘exploitative’. The Victorian Supreme
Court of Appeal made no such observation and I have queried this submission
the agency in numerous previous matters. It is unclear why the agency continues
to include this statement in its submissions without
explanation.
Her Honour Judge Simpson observed that:
The expression ‘pattern of conduct’ itself implies a number of
applications of series of
agree, and therefore query why the agency would opt to treat the 3 applications
as one when it intended to rely upon section 18(2a).
By treating the 3
applications in issue as one, the agency has given itself the task of having to
justify why it considers essentially
only 2 separate requests to amount to a
series of events.
agency’s submissions clearly indicate that it believes that by lodging the
3 applications in issue, the applicant is simply
pursuing his original
application albeit in a different fashion. If this were the case, the agency
should have dealt with the 3 applications
in the same way it proposed to deal
with the initial application. That is, it should have made a determination
refusing to deal with
the applications on the basis of section 18(1).
said, the agency instead relied upon section 18(2a) in its determination.
Accordingly, I must be satisfied that there are sufficient
grounds for me to
reasonably form the view that the applicant’s applications are ‘part
of a pattern of conduct that amounts
to an abuse of the right of access or ...
[are] made for a purpose other than to obtain access to
information’
each case will depend upon its own
agency was entitled to rely on the following factors:
whether it was
the last of a number of requests which could be regarded as excessive according
to reasonable standards;
whether the
nature and scope of any of the total number of requests were identical or
whether the
timing of the requests appeared to be connected to other proceedings;
whether the
requests appeared to be intended to accomplish an objective other than to gain
access to documents;
inference could be drawn from the behaviour generally of the appellant that he
had a purpose other than to gain access
to documents, bearing in mind that the
purpose of the pattern of conduct is more likely to be established by inference,
rather than
by a statement from the
do not consider that the 3 applications were the last of a number of requests
which could be regarded as excessive, especially noting
that the initial
application was not actively determined by the agency. I also draw the
agency’s attention to the wording of
whether the application was
of a number of requests, again reinforcing that the agency was not
permitted to consider the 13 subsequent applications lodged by
the applicant in
relying upon section 18(2a).
accept that the cumulative nature of the 3 requests is similar to the initial
FOI application, although as outlined above the scope
is reduced by more than
30%. I also again advise my view that the applicant likely lodged the 3 similar
applications reasonably believing
this to be an appropriate way to respond to
the agency’s lacking request to narrow the scope of the initial request.
regard to whether the intention of the applications was to accomplish an
objective other than to gain access to documents, the
agency submits that the
applications demonstrate an intention to ‘tie up the resources’ of
the Department. I disagree.
Rather, I consider that the applicant has
demonstrated a clear intention to gain access to documents about himself. This
in the content of the FOI applications, and the fact that the
applicant has pursued this information despite the issues which have
light of the above, I am not satisfied that it was reasonably open to the agency
to form the opinion that the applicant has demonstrated
a pattern of conduct
that amounts to an abuse of the right of access or is made for a purpose other
than to obtain access to information.
Accordingly, the current three
applications cannot form part of such a pattern of conduct.
note that the circumstances of this matter are substantially similar to those in
one of my previous external reviews concerning
the same applicant and
In that matter I addressed
and rejected many of the same submissions put forward by the agency in this
matter, and ultimately reversed
the agency’s reliance upon section 18(2a).
that the applicant in fact raised this with the agency upon internal review, it
is unclear to me why the agency made the same
submissions again and declined to
address the applicant’s submission in its internal review determination,
or otherwise explain
why this matter should be differentiated from my previous
external review.
Whether the agency
complied with section 18(2)
order to rely upon section 18(1) I must first be satisfied that the agency has
complied with section 18(2).
is a question of fact as to whether the agency has endeavoured to assist the
applicant to amend the application so dealing with
it would not substantially
and unreasonably divert the agency's resources from their use by the agency in
the exercise of its functions.
In assessing the agency’s endeavours I
consider the following are relevant:
has the agency
advised the applicant that it intends to refuse to deal with the application
under section 18(1)?
has the agency,
as far as is reasonably practicable, given the applicant information to assist
in making an application which would
remove the grounds for
outlined above, on 15 June 2021 the Department sent the applicant correspondence
requesting that he narrow the scope of each of
the 3 FOI applications in issue.
For the reasons already canvassed, I am not satisfied that correspondence was
sufficient for the
agency to have discharged its obligations under section
agency also made a further attempt to comply with section 18(2) after
consideration of my provisional determination. On 17 October
2022 the applicant
was advised of a scheduled phone linkup with the agency’s FOI team to
discuss the scope of his three applications.
On 18 October 2022 a telephone
meeting between the applicant and the agency took place. I am advised that
during that phone call,
the agency:
explained the
work required to deal with the three applications in their original terms and
advised that the work would be substantial
outlined the
ways in which the agency could identify documents falling within scope
advised that
dealing with the applications in their original terms would likely take up to
six months to complete
requested that
the applicant consider:
identifying
specific units within the agency of interest
identifying
specific documents of interest
up the requests across various Units and lodge those requests in a staggered
fashion to afford the agency longer than 30 days
to deal with the applications
offered the
applicant an opportunity to consider the agency’s suggestions and engage
in a further discussion at a later date.
am advised that the applicant declined to consider or adopt any of the amendment
suggestions put forward by the agency, nor did
he raise or query any other kind
of amendment. The applicant confirmed that the three applications are to remain
in their original
is clear to me that the agency appropriately explained to the applicant the
barriers to processing the applications in their original
terms, and made
appropriate suggestions as to how the applications could be amended such that
section 18(1) would no longer be applicable.
I also acknowledge that the agency
gave the applicant advanced notice of the meeting and an opportunity to consider
amendment options
and continue that meeting at a later date.
am satisfied that the additional steps taken by the agency in October 2022 were
sufficient to comply with section 18(2).
Whether the
requirements of section 18(1) are met
agency has provided submissions estimating both the amount of time and money
which would be required to deal with the applications
in their original terms.
It is noted that the monetary amounts appear to have been calculated based on
the fees prescribed in the
Freedom of Information (Fees) Notice 2022
my view, it is the time estimates rather than the monetary estimates which I
should give the most weight to in considering whether
section 18(1) is
applicable. Section 18(1) requires me to consider whether dealing with the
application would divert the agency’s
resources. The estimated monetary
amounts are based on what the Notice states an agency is entitled to claim in
dealing with an FOI
application. There is no indication that those monetary
figures actually represent resources that the agency has, or that any such
monetary resources were intended for another purpose and hence would be
‘diverted’ if put towards dealing with the three
applications.
accept that the amount the agency would be entitled to claim for dealing with
the application is not irrelevant to my consideration,
however I consider it is
merely indicative of the amount of time and work required of the agency to deal
with the applications.
agency has advised that the discovery of documents relevant to the three
applications could be achieved in one of two ways: requesting
that every agency
employee conduct a search of their own emails, or requesting that the
agency’s IT department conduct one
agency-wide search. The latter is
clearly preferable in my view as this avoids the need for multiple discovery
requests and responses,
and allows for searches of emails sent or received by
former employees.
agency has advised:
Advice received from the IT team is that dependant on the search criteria
utilised (a basic and advanced search), identification of
DCS emails through the
Mimecast Recovery system has populated 3 different totals of emails captured
(Annexure 7). The three searches
undertaken returned the following number of
an advanced
name]” or “[applicant’s
prisoner ID number]” for the
specified time frame;
a basic search
returned 1233 messages using the search “[applicant’s full
name]” or “[applicant’s prisoner
ID number]” for the
specified time frame; and
an advanced
surname]” and “[applicant’s prisoner
ID number]” for the
specified time frame.
The IT team have advised that they are unsure as to why the irregularities in
the import of the data has occurred for the first 2
to be discussed with the Mimecast developers. Due to the complexity of the word
“[applicant’s surname]” in it (which could include other
with the same last name, and employees or external parties with the
same last name who have sent emails to the Department or external
third parties)
or possibly any phone number with [applicant’s] ID sequence. This has
indicated that the Mimecast Recovery system
is not a reliable tool for the
extraction of all the emails within scope of the application and this could
potentially increase the
work in dealing with the three applications in issue.
have disregarded the result of 31,933 documents being identified for the reasons
identified by the agency: the omission of the applicant’s
first name in
the search will skew the results such that they include emails about people
other than the applicant.
to the discrepancy between the first two searches, despite the agency’s
submissions, I query whether the second ‘basic’
conducted for the relevant timeframe. A brief internet search regarding the
functionality of Mimecast reveals
that a date restriction on searches is only
available for the advanced search function. In a basic search, or by default in
an advanced
items over the last 12 months.
to the agency’s submissions is an email chain between the agency’s
FOI Unit and its IT department. Having reviewed
those emails, I note that when
advising the results of the first advanced search it was confirmed that a
timeframe of 5 May 2020
to 5 January 2021 had been applied. Conversely, when the
results of the subsequent basic search were conveyed, there was no mention
that timeframe. Noting the restriction against applying a timeframe to a basic
identified emails spanning
24 October 2021 to 24 October 2022, being the 12 months prior to the search.
consider that this would explain why the basic search yielded more results as it
and to my knowledge the
applicant has had more dealings with the agency in the last 12 months than in
the relevant timeframe.
such, I have disregarded the results of the basic search and have proceeded on
the basis that the result of the advanced search
likely provides the most
accurate indication as to how many documents fall within scope of the
applications, being 598. Noting the
agency’s comments that a search might
return documents containing phone numbers matching the applicant’s ID
this number might be lower still.
agency submits that it would take an IT staff member approximately nine hours to
extract the emails from the first two searches,
download the data to a Personal
Storage Table and send the data to the FOI team for processing. Noting that the
598 messages account
for approximately a third of the files identified in the
first two searches, and it is only those documents which need to be extracted,
consider that it is reasonable to estimate that the discovery and extraction
process would take approximately three hours rather
the discovery and extraction process, the agency estimates that it will take
272.25 hours for one FOI accredited officer
to deal with all three of the
applications based on the following:
on average, each
document is anticipated to span three pages
on average, half
of the emails are anticipated to contain attachments
on average, each
attachment is anticipated to span five pages
accredited officer will take two minutes to read, assess and redact each page
it is estimated
that 15% of the documents will require consultation and that four consultation
requests can be sent per hour.
first observation is that the estimate of 272.25 hours was calculated based on
the agency considering 1233 documents rather than
598. I therefore intend to
recalculate the total number of hours after determining whether the basis for
the agency’s calculations
are reasonable.
the agency has not provided any evidence to support the averages set out above,
I do not consider the estimates to be unreasonable.
Even if the agency has
slightly overestimated the number of pages per document and/or the number of
attachments, I consider that
this is balanced by an underestimation of two
minutes to read, assess and redact each page.
to the consultation required, based on the potential ‘interested
parties’ that the agency has identified, it seems
unlikely that the formal
consultation requirements of sections 25-28 of the FOI Act would be enlivened.
That said, I accept that
it may be appropriate for the agency to conduct an
informal consultation with certain parties to best inform itself as to whether
the documents are exempt.
I accept that 15% of the documents will require consultation, this equates to
approximately 90 documents. Contrary to the agency’s
submissions, I do not
agree that this would require 90 separate consultation requests. The agency
identified six interested parties;
I see no reason why the documents cannot be
collated such that each party is only consulted once. I am satisfied that the
estimate of being able to send four consultation requests per
hour is appropriate, in addition to a further 30 minutes per consultation
the purpose of collating the documents as needed. On this basis, I consider that
45 minutes to send each consultation request
is appropriate.
the agency does not appear to have factored this in, I also consider it
reasonable to afford the agency additional time to
consider the consultation
responses and make any changes to redactions as it considers appropriate. Absent
any submissions from the
agency about this, I am inclined to conclude that an
hour per consultation response would be appropriate.
light of the above, I would amend the agency’s calculations as follows:
598 documents spanning three pages each = 1,794 pages
299 attachments spanning five pages each = 1,495 pages
Estimated total number of pages = 3289
Discovery and extraction of the documents by the IT department = 3 hours
Two minutes to read, assess and redact each page = 109.63 hours
Six consultation requests allowing 45 minutes per consultation = 4.5 hours
One hour to consider each of the six consultation responses = 6 hours
Estimated time to deal with the applications = 123.13 hours or 16.42
this total falls far short of the agency’s estimate, I am nevertheless
satisfied that the requirements of section 18(1)
are met. Bearing in mind that
dealing with the applications will largely only take place during business
hours, ensuring that the
applications are dealt with within 30 days would
require one of the agency’s accredited FOI officers to work exclusively on
these applications for over three weeks, almost the entirety of the 30-day
the agency has outlined, its FOI team deals with a high volume of FOI
applications as well as non-FOI related work on a daily basis.
understanding that the FOI team consists of five or less people. To essentially
take one person offline for over 16 days
would amount to a 20% reduction in
resources to undertake the functions of dealing with other FOI applications and
non-FOI related
work. I am satisfied that this would be unreasonable.
Determination
light of my views above, I confirm the agency’s determination to refuse to
deal with the access application but clarify that
the basis of this
determination is section 18(1) rather than section 18(2a).
acknowledge that this is a disappointing outcome for the applicant after having
waited more than a year since lodging the three
FOI applications. I remind the
agency of the importance of prompt and open communication with applicants,
whether that be by way
of acknowledging receipt of applications with appropriate
advice as to how an applicant might progress an application in the absence
response, or by attempting to resolve or partially settle matters at an early
Wayne Lines
28 November 2022
Procedural steps
14 May 2021
The agency received an FOI application from the applicant dated 10 May
17 May 2021
The agency requested that the applicant narrow the scope of his FOI
application pursuant to section 18(2) of the FOI Act.
31 May 2021
The agency received the first FOI application dated 24 May 2021.
4 June 2021
The agency received the second FOI application dated 31 May 2021.
15 June 2021
The agency received the third FOI application dated 7 June 2021.
15 June 2021
The agency separately requested that the applicant narrow the scope of the
first, second and third FOI application pursuant to section
18(2) of the FOI
30 June 2021
The agency failed to determine the first application within the 30 day
period required by the FOI Act,
and is deemed to have refused access to the
4 July 2021
The agency failed to determine the first application within the 30 day
period required by the FOI Act,
and is deemed to have refused access to the
15 July 2021
The agency failed to determine the first application within the 30 day
period required by the FOI Act,
and is deemed to have refused access to the
29 June 2022
The agency purported to issue a belated determination cumulatively refusing
to deal with all three FOI applications.
13 July 2022
The agency received the internal review application dated 2 July
21 July 2022
The agency varied its deemed refusal determinations such that it refused to
deal with all three FOI applications.
17 August 2022
The Ombudsman received the applicant’s request for external review
dated 7 August 2022.
24 August 2022
The Ombudsman advised the agency of the external review and requested
submissions and documentation.
7 September 2022
The agency provided the Ombudsman with its submissions and
documentation.
23 September 2022
The Ombudsman issued his provisional determination and invited submissions
from the parties.
13 October 2022
At the agency’s request, the Ombudsman suspended his external review
to allow an opportunity for a settlement to be
negotiated.
1 November 2022
The agency provided submissions in response to the provisional
determination.
1 November 2022
The Ombudsman recommenced his external review.
4 November 2022
The Ombudsman issued his revised provisional determination and invited
submissions from the parties.
10 November 2022
The agency advised that it had no further submissions to make.
Freedom of Information Act
section 12.
Gabrielsen v Nurses Board
[2008] SADC 51 (Unreported
, SA District Court, Judge Simpson, 2 May
Gabrielsen v Nurses Board
[2008] SADC 51 (Unreported
, SA District Court, Judge Simpson, 2 May
2008), [21]; owing to the lack of reference to ‘reasonable’.
Gabrielsen v Nurses Board
[2008] SADC 51 (Unreported
, SA District Court, Judge Simpson, 2 May
2008), [25].
Secretary, Department of
Treasury and Finance v Kelly [2001
Gabrielsen v Nurses Board
[2008] SADC 51 (Unreported
, SA District Court, Judge Simpson, 2 May
2008), [44].
‘There may be other
relevant factors in different cases’:
Gabrielsen v Nurses Board of
[2008] SADC 51 (Unreported
, SA District Court, Judge Simpson, 2 May
2008), [43].
Gabrielsen v Nurses Board
[2008] SADC 51 (Unreported
, SA District Court, Judge Simpson, 2 May
2008), [41].
My reference 2021/04655.
Freedom of Information
section 14(2).
Freedom of Information
section 19(2).
Freedom of Information
section 14(2).
Freedom of Information
section 19(2).
Freedom of Information
section 14(2).
Freedom of Information
section 19(2).
Freedom of Information
section 39(5)(c)(ii).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.46 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter