URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SADC/2025/130.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:56:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v TONKIN [2025] SADC 130 (30 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
[2025] SADC 130
Reasons for Decision of her
Honour Judge Telfer
30 October 2025
CRIMINAL LAW - APPLICATION TO VACATE GUILTY PLEA - APPLICATION TO SET
ASIDE SUBPOENA
The Commission of Police has applied to set aside a subpoena issued for the
production of documents forming part of an application
for an authority under
Criminal Investigation (Covert Operations) Act 2009
. The Commissioner
argues that no legitimate forensic purpose has been demonstrated in obtaining
the documents in circumstances where
the scope of collateral challenge to the
authority is limited. Consideration of the scope of collateral challenge to an
issued under the
Criminal Investigation (Covert Operations) Act 2009
and the lawfulness of the operative’s actions even in the absence of a
valid covert operation authority.
Application to set aside the subpoena is granted.
Criminal Investigation (Covert Operations) Act 2009
(c) and (d);
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
, referred to.
Central Adelaide Local Health Network v Whitehouse
[2024] SASCA 22
Attorney-General (NSW) v Chidgey
[2008] NSWCCA 65
(2008) 182 A Crim R 536
Federal Police v XYZ
(2015) 123 SASR 274
Police v Stacey
[2016] SASC 54
R v M, I and Ors
[2018] SASC 24
(2019) 276 A
Crim R 9 192;
Ridgeway v The Queen
(1995) 184 CLR 19;
Question of Law
Reserved (No 1 of
[1998] SASC 6634
70 SASR 281
[2025] SADC 130
is an application made by the Commissioner of Police for a subpoena issued to
the South Australian Police to be set aside. On
11 August 2025 I granted leave
for a subpoena to be issued for various documents relevant to an approval for an
undercover operation
pursuant to the
Criminal Investigations (Covert
Operations) Act
). Prior to the date for production of
the documents, the Commissioner brought an application to set aside the
subpoena, on the basis
that the subpoena is not underpinned by any legitimate
forensic purpose, its only purpose being an impermissible collateral attack
regularly issued statutory approval.
understand the context for this application it is necessary to set out some
historical background.
29 January 2025 Mr Tonkin pleaded guilty to three counts of communicating with a
child intending to make them amenable to sexual
The offences occurred in
November and December 2022. The conduct on which the charges are based are
conversations between Mr Tonkin
and a police officer purporting to be a
14-year-old child. The charged conduct comprises sexualised conversations over
the internet
with the officer using that assumed identity. The use of that
assumed identity, and associated behaviour, including potential criminal
conduct, had been authorised by two approvals issued pursuant to the
application filed on 11 June 2025 Mr Tonkin sought to withdraw his guilty pleas.
The application is made on the basis that allowing
the pleas to stand would
result in a miscarriage of justice. It is submitted that Mr Tonkin entered his
pleas to the three counts
without the benefit of legal advice about a potential
challenge to the admissibility of evidence of the conversations on which the
three charges rely. That challenge depends on the lawfulness of the two
approvals which governed the use of the assumed identity
in electronic
communications.
The scope of permissible collateral
power to authorise the issue of a subpoena is governed by
section 126
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
(SA). It is well settled that leave should
not be granted to issue a subpoena unless a clear legitimate forensic purpose
material sought is established by the
legitimate forensic purpose is a standard which is more rigorous that
establishing that the material sought is relevant, or that
the material sought
might assist an argument about
illegality.
subpoena seeks documents falling into the descriptions set out below:
and all documents which formed part of an application by Detective Brevet
Sergeant Jacob O’Callaghan for approval to conduct
a Covert Investigation
submitted to James Andrew Jeffrey and approved on 27 October 2022 at 1.40
and all documents which formed part of an application by Detective Brevet
Sergeant Jacob O’Callaghan for approval to conduct
a Covert Investigation
submitted to James Andrew Jeffrey and approved on 28 November 2022 at 2 pm.
and all documents which set out or contain grounds for consideration relative to
covert operations approvals for the Joint Anti
Child Exploitation Team
motherhood undercover operation approval.
documents sought are each referred to on the face of the two approvals issued
pursuant to section 4 of the
. What is sought is documents which
formed part of the application placed before approving officer James Jeffery.
They are documents
that he had regard to when authorising the operation.
for Mr Tonkin accepted that the scope of collateral challenge to an
administrative decision of the kind under consideration
here is restricted. The
precise scope of the limitation is a complex and vexed issue. To illustrate the
scope of permissible challenge
in the circumstances of the statutory scheme in
it is necessary to set out the relevant provisions of
section 4(2):
(2) An approval may not be given unless the senior
police officer or the Independent Commissioner Against Corruption (as the case
(a) suspects, on reasonable grounds, that persons (whose identity may—but
need not—be known to the officer) have engaged,
are engaging or are about
to engage in serious criminal behaviour of the kind to which the proposed
undercover operations relate;
(b) is satisfied on reasonable grounds that the ambit of the proposed undercover
operations is not more extensive than could reasonably
be justified in view of
the nature and extent of the suspected serious criminal behaviour; and
(c) is satisfied on reasonable grounds that the means are proportionate to the
end; that is, that the proposed undercover operations
are justified by the
social harm of the serious criminal behaviour against which they are directed;
(d) is satisfied on reasonable grounds that the undercover operations are
properly designed to provide persons who have engaged,
or are engaging or about
to engage, in serious criminal behaviour an opportunity—
(i) to manifest that behaviour; or
(ii) to provide other evidence of that behaviour,
without undue risk that persons without a predisposition to serious criminal
behaviour will be encouraged into serious criminal behaviour
that they would
otherwise have avoided.
collateral challenge is permitted to the sufficiency of the information relied
upon to reach the state of satisfaction described
Criteria 4(b)-4(d)
however concern a state of satisfaction about the design of the undercover
operation and may be the subject of
collateral challenge.
, Hamill J in the Supreme Court of New South Wales made the
following observations (emphasis added):
Whether or not there is any
real distinction between the principles applying to warrants and those applying
to a controlled operation
authority, the fundamental issue remains whether the
accused has established a legitimate forensic purpose in seeking production
the material. There is no such purpose in an attempt to discover material that
will support an argument that there was insufficient
material upon which to
grant the authority.
There may be a legitimate forensic purpose in
uncovering material that is relevant to the validity of the certificate (beyond
sufficiency of the material upon which it was granted) and the lawfulness of
the operation including the propriety of the application
for the authority.
there must be some basis or
foundation upon which the material is sought. A party is not entitled to seek
such material to discover
whether there is any material that might support a
case of impropriety or
illegality.
relevance of the comments highlighted above to the
is confirmed
implicitly by Lovell J in
R v M, I and
In that case Lovell J
heard and determined a collateral challenge to an authority issued pursuant to
section 4 of the
which authorised a covert operation into the
suspected criminal activities of members of a team of investigators within South
Police. The identity of the membership of that team was not
identified and changed over time.
Honour concluded that the criteria in section 4(2)(b) and (d) were not satisfied
because of the authorising officer’s failure
to properly appreciate the
state of satisfaction required by those paragraphs. The authorities relied on
for the covert operation
were invalid therefore, which meant that aspects of the
operation which involved illegal acts being committed by investigators were
affected. The discretion to exclude evidence was
am satisfied that the law does not prohibit collateral challenge to be made to
an authority issued pursuant to the
on the basis of section
4(2)(b), (c) and (d). It does not follow necessarily from that conclusion that
there is a legitimate forensic
purpose in seeking production of material forming
part of the application for that authority. That question requires an
examination
of the basis or foundation on which the material is sought. It is
not enough to submit that the material sought may support a case
of impropriety
or illegality.
In this case, each authority permitted authorised persons to (relevantly) engage
in the following illegal behaviour:
Access and take
steps to access child exploitation material [by] entering into an agreement or
arrangement to do so contrary to the
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
To possess child
exploitation material, in accordance with
section 63C
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) for evidentiary purposes.
legality of the conduct engaged in by SA Police Officers participating in the
operation did not however rely solely on the lawfulness
authorities.
The protection of
section 63C
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act
Criminal Law Consolidation Act
(SA) provides that no
offence is committed against Division 11A by reason of the production,
dissemination or possession of, or dealing
with, material in good faith by a
police officer acting in the course of his or her
This provision means that
the officers participating in the operation did not commit any offence if an
offence against any provision
of Division 11A was
So long as the
officer concerned was acting in the course of her duties, she committed no
unlawful act if she behaved contrary to
the identified provisions in Division
11A. In those circumstances no discretion to exclude evidence because of police
those circumstances it is difficult to identify any legitimate forensic purpose
in obtaining material to challenge the lawfulness
of the authorities issued
pursuant to the
, because pursuant to 63C(2a) the officer
committed no illegal act in any case.
Improper Conduct and the
relevant authorities do not restrict the application of the public policy
discretion to the exclusion of evidence obtained by
illegal acts. The discretion
also arises where the evidence has been obtained as a result of improper, but
not illegal, conduct.
conclusion that no illegality attended the obtaining of the relevant evidence,
is not, therefore a complete answer to the question
of a legitimate forensic
for Mr Tonkin did not submit that the legitimate forensic purpose for obtaining
the documents related to
conduct which tainted the evidence
relied upon or procured the commission of the offences to which Mr Tonkin has
pleaded guilty.
No legitimate forensic purpose was identified in respect to
improper conduct associated with the authority.
The Legitimate
Forensic Purpose identified
for Mr Tonkin submitted that the known circumstances mean that it is ‘on
the cards’ that the documents show no
connection between the authorising
officer’s suspicion pursuant to section 4(2)(a) and his approval of the
scope of the operation.
Counsel pointed out that the first contact between the
police officer using an assumed identity and the accused was not until the
day of the operation of the first authority. The suspicion held by the
authorising officer could not have relied on conduct
by Mr Tonkin. This, he
submitted, raises the prospect that the suspicion attached to a class of persons
which did not include Mr
Tonkin, and the operation was too widely framed to
provide reasonable grounds to reach the state of satisfaction required in
4(d) of the
. That is, the scope of the operation was
not sufficiently protective of persons without a disposition to engage in
criminal behaviour.
the material sought supports that conclusion, then the authority will be
invalid, and will not authorise unlawful acts by police
officers. As noted
above, the police officer’s acts would not be unlawful however because of
the protection in
section 63C(2a)
Criminal Law Consolidation Act
A finding that the authority was invalid would not, of itself, enliven the
discretion to exclude the evidence relied on in proof
of the charged acts.
Accordingly, there can be no legitimate forensic purpose in seeking to challenge
the lawfulness of the section
4 authority in those circumstances.
I am wrong about the conclusion that
section 63C
would protect the covert
officer’s actions (for example if they were not acting in the course of
his or her duties), I turn
to consider whether, in any case, there is a proper
basis or foundation identified upon which the material is sought.
4(2)(a) of the
Act anticipates that an authority may be granted
where the suspicion attaches to persons whose identity may not be known. It
the suspicion to relate not only to persons who have committed offences,
but also to persons “
behaviour”.
fact that persons are identified in the course of an authorised operation whose
identity is not known at the time of the authority
being granted does not
provide a basis or foundation for the conclusion that there is a legitimate
forensic purpose in obtaining
the material sought. Section 4 anticipates
authorisation of a covert operation targeting persons whose identity are not
the date of authorisation. The fact that a person is identified
behaving in a prohibited way during the investigation when their
identity or
behaviour could not have formed the basis for the suspicion reached pursuant to
section 4(2)(a) is a result which is
anticipated by the structure of the
authorising process. That such behaviour is identified is not evidence of an
operation design
which might transcend the restrictions in section
4(2)(b)-(d).
am satisfied that no proper basis or foundation has been identified for the
material sought. I conclude that the subpoena does
no more than seek material
to discover whether there is any material that might support a case of
impropriety or illegality. This
does not meet the requirement that a legitimate
forensic purpose be identified.
Are the documents part of the
written authority?
for Mr Tonkin argued that the documents sought pursuant to the subpoena formed
part of the written authorities which had
already been disclosed by the
prosecution.
authority contains the following statements:
“I am reliably
informed that: Refer to Application to conduct a covert investigation of
Detective Brevet Sergeant Jacob O’Callahan.
Refer to grounds for consideration document relative to the COAC for the
JACET motherhood undercover operation approval”.
references on the face of the authority to those documents, it was argued,
incorporates those documents into the totality of
material the authorising
officer intended to represent the approval record.
for the Commissioner of Police argued that the reference to the material on
which a state of satisfaction is based cannot,
by implication, incorporate those
documents into the authority record itself. That conclusion, it was argued, is
supported by a
reading of section 4(4) which sets out what must be stated in
writing on the face of any authority issued under that provision:
(4) The approval must—
(a) be in writing; and
(b) be signed by the person giving the approval; and
(c) specify—
(i) the date and time of the signing, and the time from which the approval takes
effect (which may be contemporaneous with or later
than the time of signing but
cannot be earlier); and
(ii) the persons who are authorised to participate in the operations; and
(iii) the nature of the conduct in which the participants are authorised to
engage; and
(iv) a period (not exceeding 3 months) for which the approval is given.
is no requirement to record the grounds on which the approval has been
am not satisfied that the reference to the two documents on the face of the
approval incorporates them into the approval document
and makes them subject to
disclosure. I do not consider the reference to the documents on the face of the
authority adds any force
to the submissions already outlined identifying the
legitimate forensic purpose.
the reasons I have outlined I conclude the following:
is no legitimate forensic purpose in seeking the documents sought in paragraphs
1-3 of the subpoena issued to South Australian
Police. This is because a
finding that the authority to conduct the covert operation is found to be
invalid could not result in
a discretionary exclusion of the evidence obtained
during the operation, due to the operation of
section 63C(2a)
Law Consolidation Act
If I am wrong about the conclusion in paragraph 1, there is no proper basis or
foundation for the documents sought so as to establish
a legitimate forensic
documents sought do not form part of the written authority record so as to
require their disclosure.
order therefore that the subpoena issued to South Australian Police, paragraphs
1-3 inclusive, be set aside. I note production
of items sought pursuant to
paragraphs 4 and 5 of the subpoena is not pressed by Mr Tonkin.
Criminal Law Consolidation
Central Adelaide Local
Health Network v Whitehouse
[2024] SASCA 22.
Attorney-General (NSW) v
[2008] NSWCCA 65
(2008) 182 A Crim R 536
Australian Federal Police v XYZ
(2015) 123 SASR 274
The principles concerning the
permissible scope of collateral challenge are conveniently located in
[2016] SASC 54
(2016) 125 SASR 50
(Parker J).
(2019) 276 A
Crim R 9 192 at [50].
[2018] SASC 24.
Ibid at [152]-[153].
(2019) 276 A
Crim R 9 192 at [50].
Criminal Law Consolidation
Subject to the specific
carve out for an offence against
section 63AB
Ridgeway v The Queen
(1995) 184 CLR 19;
Question of Law Reserved (No 1 of
[1998] SASC 6634
Criminal Investigation
(Covert Operations) Act 2009
section 4(2)(a).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (357 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter