URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCA/2025/122.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
LANE v THE KING [2025] SASCA 122 (23 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Court of Appeal: Criminal)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
LANE v THE KING
[2025] SASCA 122
Judgment of the Court of Appeal
(The Honourable Justice S Doyle, the Honourable Justice Bleby and
the Honourable Justice David)
23 October 2025
CRIMINAL LAW - APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - APPEAL AGAINST SENTENCE
CRIMINAL LAW - APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - APPEAL AGAINST SENTENCE - GROUNDS
FOR INTERFERENCE - GENERALLY
CRIMINAL LAW - PARTICULAR OFFENCES - OFFENCES AGAINST THE PERSON - ACTS
INTENDED TO CAUSE OR CAUSING DANGER TO LIFE OR BODILY HARM
OR SERIOUS INJURY -
Appeal against sentence.
The applicant pleaded guilty to three offences of aggravated creating
likelihood of harm, creating likelihood of harm, and aggravated
assault. The
offending arose out of an incident of domestic violence against the
applicant’s former partner, C. The appellant
was sentenced to two years,
eight months and 17 days’ imprisonment, with a non-parole period of one
year and four months.
The applicant’s grounds complain that the judge erred: (i) in failing
to make deductions for time served on remand and on home
detention when fixing
the non-parole period (Ground 1), and (ii) in not ordering that the sentence be
served on home detention (Ground
Held, per the court, granting permission to appeal and allowing the appeal on
judge erred in deducting the allowance for time served from only the head
sentence and not the non-parole period.
is appropriate that the sentence below be set aside and that the appellant be
resentenced on a basis which appropriately reflects
the allowance for time
original sentence is set aside and the applicant is resentenced to imprisonment
for two years, eight months and 17 days with a
non-parole period of one year and
five days, backdated to commence on 6 August 2025.
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Sentencing Act 2017
, referred to.
Owens v The King
[2024] SASCA 65
(2018) 131 SASR
Ribbon v The Queen
[2022] SASCA 15
Kentwell v The Queen
(2014) 252 CLR 601;
Millwood v The King
[2024] SASCA 84
considered.
LANE v THE KING
[2025] SASCA 122
Court of Appeal – Criminal: S Doyle, Bleby and David JJA
: Following pleas of guilty, the appellant was sentenced for three
offences, each of which was committed in an episode of domestic
violence on
17 November 2022:
creating likelihood of harm
(with a maximum penalty of imprisonment for seven years) (Count 5);
likelihood of harm
maximum penalty of imprisonment for five years) (Count 7); and
(with a maximum
penalty of imprisonment for three years) (Count 9).
5 and 9 were aggravated by reason that the victim was the appellant’s
former partner, C. The victim of Count 7 was
J, the partner of C’s
sentencing the appellant, and after identifying notional head sentences for each
of the offences, the judge identified an overall
notional head sentence of
imprisonment for three years, eight months and 12 days. From this, his Honour
deducted a period of close
to one year for time served in custody and on home
detention bail, resulting in a head sentence of imprisonment for two years,
months and 17 days. His Honour fixed a non-parole period of one year and
four months, being slightly less than 50 per cent of the
head sentence.
appellant seeks permission to appeal his sentence on two grounds:
the judge erred
in not deducting the 56 days spent in custody and 10 months for two years and
seven months spent on home detention
bail, when fixing the non-parole period;
the judge erred
in not exercising his discretion under
Sentencing Act 2017
(SA) to make an order that the term of imprisonment be served on home
the reasons which follow, the application for permission to appeal should be
granted, the appeal allowed, and the appellant resentenced
on the basis
indicated at the conclusion of these reasons.
Circumstances of
the offending
way of background, the appellant and C met in 2017, when the appellant was 26
years of age and C was 18. They commenced a relationship
which lasted about
four years, and produced three children. Although the relationship was strong
in its early stages, it began to
deteriorate as they struggled with the
combination of C being unwell and the responsibilities of raising their young
children. The
appellant accepts that he became verbally and physically abusive
towards C. C left the appellant for a short period in 2019, and
relationship ultimately came to an end in about May 2021. This followed an
instance of domestic violence by the appellant against
C in April 2021 (for
which the appellant was later convicted and sentenced for aggravated assault and
breach of an intervention order).
their relationship ended, the appellant had no contact with C for a few months.
However, despite intervention orders being
in place from time to time which
prevented the appellant from having contact with C, they remained in
intermittent contact with one
another through to the date of the offending
described below. The appellant was charged with breaching an intervention order
to protect C in September 2021, although this was ultimately dealt with
on a ‘without conviction’ basis.
appellant and C had been together the night before the offending and had made
some plans to see each other the following evening.
In the immediate lead up to
the offending, they had been exchanging messages in which the appellant was
questioning C about her
whereabouts given their plans to see each other
to the events of 17 November 2022, C had been at a local shopping centre with
her sister (H), her sister’s partner
(J), and their infant son (B).
around 7.30 pm, they left the shopping centre in J’s car, with J driving
them towards C’s home address. C saw a silver
Commodore driving in the
opposite direction and suspected it was the appellant’s car. When they
arrived at C’s home,
the appellant’s car was parked there, and the
appellant was sitting in the driver’s seat. On noticing the
appellant’s
car, C directed J to continue driving. The appellant, in his
car, began to follow J’s car.
appellant pursued J’s car along North East Road. He caught up with
J’s car and drove into its right rear. The collision
caused J’s car
to complete a full rotation and come to a stop.
was able to drive a further 500 metres along North East Road before the
appellant again caught up with them. From the right adjacent
appellant swerved his car into J’s car, colliding with its front wheel.
J’s car rotated and hit the median
strip, causing it to come to a complete
reckless and dangerous driving, resulting in a likelihood of harm to C and J,
was the subject of Counts 5 and 7. It was accepted
that the appellant did not
know that H and the infant were in J’s car, although this was nevertheless
relevant to the overall
seriousness of the appellant’s offending.
got out of J’s car and attempted to run away from the appellant. However,
the appellant parked his car nearby and intercepted
C on foot. He grabbed her by
the shirt and threw her onto the road. He then punched her in the head several
times while she was
on the ground. This conduct was the subject of Count 9.
appellant returned to his car, and drove away. In doing so, he collided with
two further vehicles. Rather than stopping, he
drove from the scene of those
collisions. As the judge explained, whilst not part of the offending for which
the appellant was sentenced,
this conduct nevertheless showed that his driving
at the time of his collisions with J’s car was not an isolated instance of
disregard for other road users.
was taken to hospital via ambulance and treated for minor injuries, including to
her wrist and shoulder.
C did not provide a victim impact statement, the judge was prepared to infer
that she would have been terrified by the appellant’s
J’s victim impact statement included reference to the physical and mental
impact of the offending upon him.
Personal circumstances
the time of sentencing, the appellant was 34 years of age. He was born in South
Australia and his parents separated when he was
young. He lived at his
father’s house in Whyalla and visited his mother in Adelaide on weekends.
He maintains a positive relationship
with his mother.
appellant left school at year 11. After completing an apprenticeship, he
commenced working in a concreting business. He thereafter
maintained what the
judge described as a good work history. He was employed at the date of
sentencing, and his employer provided
the court with a letter attesting to his
character and contribution.
mentioned, the appellant commenced a relationship with C when he was 26 years of
age. Their three children are currently under
the supervision of the Department
for Child Protection. The appellant does not have any contact with C or his
children. He does
not have a partner, but remains in regular contact with his
family, with his mother visiting him on weekends. The judge noted that
appellant had taken steps to end some of his former antisocial
associations.
his arrest, the appellant spent 56 days in custody, before then spending the
remaining two years and seven months through
to the date of sentencing on home
detention bail.
the pre-sentence report prepared by the Department of Correctional Services,
there was reference to the appellant reporting that
he had been suicidal when
arrested, due to a build up of stress and panic. However, he reported
subsequently feeling more stable.
judge was informed that the appellant found his time in custody very difficult,
and that his strong motivation not to return
to prison would serve as
significant personal deterrence. The judge accepted that the appellant had
complied with the conditions
of his home detention bail, and that he was not
using illicit drugs or alcohol.
appellant sought to explain his offending as a reaction to the thought that C
had another boyfriend. He said that, at the time
of his offending, he had
wanted to confront her and the unknown male. His counsel sought to characterise
his offending as involving
a momentary lapse of reason. On appeal, his counsel
described the offending as involving a complete loss of self-control, but that
this was ‘situational’ rather than part of a continuous or
persistent pattern of behaviour.
Sentencing remarks
judge accepted that the appellant had some insight, remorse and regret.
However, he remained guarded about the appellant’s
risk of reoffending and
prospects of successful rehabilitation. He also rejected the suggestion the
offending was momentary. His
Honour explained:
I accept that you
have since this offending acquired some insight and that you are remorseful and
that you do regret what you did.
I accept you have complied with lengthy home
detention and that you will do anything to not return to custody. I am also
you do not intend to contact C again, albeit you may wish for some
future contact with your children.
I am concerned, none the less, as to the depth of your insight and I am
guarded about your prospects of rehabilitation and risk of
re-offending.
This was not momentary offending. You weaponized your car for the purpose of
domestic violence against your former partner and you
had multiple opportunities
to stop what you were doing.
describing the relatively extended period of the offending, and the multiple
opportunities to reflect and desist, the judge
characterised the offending as a
serious instance of domestic violence, calling for a strong measure of community
protection and
deterrence:
This is a serious example of domestic
violence. The paramount consideration in sentencing you is the protection of
the safety of
the community, personal and general deterrence are also
significant sentencing considerations. The court must deter you and others
this type of offending and domestic violence of any kind must be condemned.
That is particularly the case when it occurs in breach of an intervention
order intended to protect against such abuse. Parliament
has created a regime
to protect vulnerable persons from the use of violence to control or intimidate
in a domestic setting. A strong
message must be sent to the community that the
courts will not tolerate this type of behaviour.
announced that he intended to impose a single sentence for all three offences,
the judge commenced by identifying notional
sentences for each count. In so
doing, his Honour held that it was appropriate to make the maximum available
reduction for the appellant’s
guilty pleas of 5 per cent.
the offence of aggravated creating a likelihood of harm, the judge identified a
starting point of three years imprisonment, which
he reduced to two years, 10
months and seven days. For the offence of creating a likelihood of harm, the
judge identified a starting
point of one year and 10 months, which he reduced to
one year, eight months and 28 days. The judge explained that he would have
these sentences wholly concurrent, given that the offending arose out of the
same conduct.
the offence of aggravated assault, the judge identified a starting point of one
year and five months, which he reduced to one
year, four months and five days.
The judge explained that he would have ordered that six months of this sentence
be served as partially
concurrent with the other two, given that this offending
occurred close in time and as a continuation of the appellant’s pursuit
this approach, the judge identified a single notional sentence of imprisonment
for three years, eight months and 12 days.
His Honour said that this reflected
the inherent criminality of the whole of the appellant’s offending.
judge said that it was appropriate to reduce this notional sentence for time
served, and in particular, by day-for-day credit
for the 56 days spent in
custody, and a further 10 months in recognition of the two years and seven
months the appellant had spent
complying with his home detention bail
conditions. This resulted in a reduced head sentence of two years, eight months
and 17 days
imprisonment.
then fixing a relatively short non-parole period of one year and four months
(being slightly less than 50 per cent of the reduced
head sentence), the judge
I consider, given your work history, long-term compliance
with home detention conditions, and the family support that you enjoy, that
you and the community would benefit from a longer than usual period on parole
under the supervision of the Parole Board.
judge noted the matters put by the appellant’s counsel in favour of his
sentence being suspended or served on home detention,
including: that he had
already commenced his rehabilitation given the deterrent effect of the periods
already spent in custody and
then complying with strict home detention
conditions; that he was contrite; that his risk of offending had reduced; that
continue to work if his sentence was suspended or served on home
detention; and that this would aid the appellant’s rehabilitation
benefit the community.
the judge declined to suspend the appellant’s
Turning first to suspension. It is the case that those
matters do favour a community-based sentence. This offending though is very
serious. Your actions were extremely dangerous and occurred on a busy road. It
was offending which involved domestic violence against
the victim, against whom
you have previously offended. It occurred while an intervention order was in
place to protect that person.
It was offending which completely disregarded the
safety of those in J’s car and of other road users. I am not satisfied
balancing all those matters that there is good reason to suspend in your
also declining to order that the sentence be served on home detention, the judge
As for whether I should order your sentence be served on home
detention, for the same reasons I decline to do so. I do not consider
relevant sentencing considerations applicable in this case will be appropriately
served by the imposition of a community-based
judge concluded that the appellant’s sentence should be served in custody,
commencing immediately. His Honour also made
the requisite order disqualifying
the appellant from holding or obtaining a driver’s licence for five years,
commencing from
the day of his release from custody. He also ordered that he be
served with an intervention order naming C as the protected person
in the terms
drafted by the prosecution.
is merit in the appellant’s first ground of appeal. Although the judge
indicated an appropriate allowance for time served
(that is, 56 days for the
time spent in custody, and 10 months for the time spent on home detention bail),
he only deducted this
from the head sentence. Whilst fixing a non-parole period
by reference to this reduced head sentence, his Honour did not make a
deduction from the non-parole period for the time served.
As this Court has previously explained, approaching the sentence in this way,
whilst not necessarily erroneous, has the effect of
diluting the credit given
for time served. In allowing an appeal in very similar circumstances in
Owens v The King
explained the difficulties in the approach adopted by the judge:
The appellant's complaint on appeal is not the length of the head
sentence but rather that the sentencing Judge, when fixing the non-parole
period, failed to take into account, or take into account sufficiently, the 220
days spent in custody prior to sentence.
By adopting the approach of reducing the head sentence and then fixing a
non-parole period by reference to the head sentence, the
deduction for time
served is diluted so far as the non-parole period is concerned. Only a
proportion flows through to the non-parole
The preferable approach, referred to in earlier cases of this Court, is that
a sentencing judge should fix both the head sentence
and the non-parole period,
and then both the head sentence and non-parole period should be reduced for the
time served. This approach
allows for an explicit reduction from both the head
sentence and non-parole period for time served which better reflects the time
accused has actually spent in custody. It allows for transparency in the
sentencing process so there can be no sense of grievance
by a defendant that the
time served has not properly been accounted for in the non-parole period.
However, it is not necessarily an error for a sentencing judge to reduce the
head sentence for time served in custody and then fix
the non-parole period by
reference to the head sentence, provided the time served in custody is not
overlooked when fixing the non-parole
the Court of Criminal Appeal held that where a
sentencing judge does decide to give less than full credit, there must be good
circumstances it is incumbent upon the judge to disclose the amount of credit
given for time served in custody and the reason
or reasons for giving less than
full credit.
The sentencing Judge here made no reference to how the 220 days were
accounted for when fixing the non-parole period. The appellant
submitted the
sentencing Judge erred in not giving reasons for failing to deduct the 220 days
from the non-parole period.
Unlike the sentencing Judge in
Ribbon v The Queen
where the Judge
referred specifically to the fact that she took into account time in custody
when fixing a non-parole period,
the sentencing Judge here simply fixed the non-parole period without explaining
how she arrived at the final figure.
The respondent accepted that the sentencing Judge failed to give reasons why
the 220 days were not deducted from the non-parole period.
However, the
respondent submitted that we could infer from the low non-parole period actually
fixed that proper allowance had been
We reject that submission. That asks too much of this Court. While the
non-parole period fixed was towards the lower end of the available
range, there
were factors personal to the appellant which allowed for the imposition of a low
non-parole period. The low non-parole
period fixed may or may not have been in
part due to a proper allowance being made for the time spent in custody. We
simply have
no way of telling.
In our view error has been established. We would resentence the
is no basis for distinguishing the present case. The judge in the present case
mentioned the appellant’s ‘long-term
compliance with home detention
conditions’ when deciding to fix a lower than usual non-parole period
(being slightly less than
50 per cent of the reduced head sentence). However,
taking time served into account in deciding to fix a lower than usual non-parole
period is not the same as giving appropriate credit for time served. It cannot
be said in the present case that the judge gave the
appellant full credit for
the 56 days and 10 months that he determined should be allowed for time
our view, error has been established and it is appropriate that this Court
resentence the appellant.
respondent concedes error but, relying upon
Kentwell v The
contends that the appeal
should nevertheless be dismissed on the basis that no lesser sentence would be
imposed in any event. As
will be apparent from the resentencing that we propose
below, we are not satisfied that this approach is appropriate in the present
Ground 1 has been made out, it is not necessary to consider the issue raised by
Ground 2 (namely, whether the judge erred
in not ordering that the sentence be
served on home detention). However, the submissions advanced under that ground
will inform
our fresh consideration of the discretion to order that the sentence
we impose be served on home detention.
exercising our independent discretion as to the sentence to be imposed, we have
had regard to all of the matters relevant to sentence.
As they have been
addressed in the course of summarising the approach below, there is no need for
us to repeat the matters we have
taken into account.
agree with the judge that the appellant’s offending was a serious example
of domestic violence. The importance of a strong
sentencing response to such
offending was recently addressed by this Court in
Millwood v The
were some features of the present offending that warrant emphasis. It involved
the very dangerous weaponisation of a motor
vehicle on a busy road. The
appellant had several opportunities to reflect and cease his offending, but did
not take them. The
offending was not isolated in the sense that it occurred
against a background of verbal and physical aggression towards the victim,
including his conviction for an aggravated assault. It also occurred in
contravention of an intervention order which had been imposed
to protect the
victim, and occurred only a couple of months after the expiration of the good
behaviour bond imposed in response to
the appellant’s earlier conviction
for aggravated assault.
appellant contends that his offending should be seen as a
‘situational’ loss of control rather than part of a persistent
course of offending. Whilst there were some circumstances which contributed to
the offending occurring on the occasion it did, referring
to the offending as
‘situational’ or ‘momentary’ tends to understate the
significance of the background to,
and relatively extended duration of, the
of that said, we are satisfied that the head sentence imposed by the judge below
adequately reflected the seriousness of the
appellant’s offending. In our
view, the individual notional sentences, degree of concurrency and reductions
for the pleas
of guilty indicated by the trial judge were all appropriate. Like
the sentencing judge, we would impose a single head sentence of
imprisonment for
three years, eight months and 12 days.
also agree with the appropriateness of the judge’s allowance for time
served; namely day-for-day credit for the 56 days
served in custody, and 10
months for the two years and seven months served on home detention bail.
However, for the reasons explained
earlier, we would deduct this allowance from
both the head sentence and the non-parole period.
fixing the non-parole period, it is appropriate to emphasise some of the
appellant’s personal circumstances. Given his
history of employment, and
his significant period of compliance with the conditions of his home detention
bail, there is a basis
for some guarded optimism as to the appellant’s
prospects for rehabilitation. His history of verbal and physical aggression
towards the victim remains a concern, but we are satisfied that it is
appropriate to fix a relatively low non-parole period. We
would fix a
non-parole period of two years, being slightly more than 50 per cent of the head
making the foreshadowed allowance for time served from the head sentence and
non-parole period, we would impose a head sentence
of two years, eight months
and 17 days imprisonment, and fix a non-parole period of one year and five
the reasons given by the judge, which were focussed upon the seriousness of the
offending, we would not suspend this sentence.
issue of home detention is finely balanced. On the one hand, as the judge
emphasised, the offending in this case was a serious
instance of domestic
violence. It was a disturbingly dangerous and public episode of violence. It
involved a sustained course of
conduct over a period of time which allowed for
opportunities to reflect and desist which were not taken. Moreover, it occurred
in the context of a history of violence against the same victim, and whilst an
intervention order intended to protect her was in
place. These aspects of the
matter, reflected in the appropriately significant head sentence to be imposed,
militate against any
order that the sentence be served on home detention.
these considerations, some of the appellant’s personal circumstances are
favourable. His history of employment, and
the apparent availability of work to
him upon his release from prison, weigh in the appellant’s favour when
considering his
prospects of rehabilitation. It is also significant that the
appellant has already served two periods of custody (the initial 56
to being released on home detention bail, and the 71 days since being returned
to custody upon being sentenced), as well
as a lengthy period on home detention
bail. This Court was informed that the appellant has found his time in custody
particularly
difficult, not least because he has suffered sexual and physical
abuse from fellow prisoners, and has had some health challenges.
accepted that the time served in prison and on home detention bail have achieved
a significant measure of personal deterrence.
may also be accepted that the appellant’s lengthy period of compliance
with his home detention bail conditions provides
some indication that the
appellant has progressed in terms of his self-control, and rehabilitation more
generally. He also relied
in this respect upon his participation in a lengthy
course which he says has provided him with some insight into his offending, and
assistance in developing strategies intended to reduce his risk of similar
reoffending. Against this, it is appropriate to observe
appellant’s progress may not be tested until he forms a new relationship;
and that the utility of the course he undertook
may be questioned in
circumstances where it was prompted by his previous offending, and appears to
have been commenced well before
his November 2022 offending. In the
circumstances, the judge was right to be guarded in his assessment of the
appellant’s
risk of reoffending and prospects of successful
rehabilitation.
our view, the matters favourable to the appellant, including the significant
measure of personal deterrence that has already been
achieved, are best, and
adequately, reflected in the relatively low non-parole period that we have
fixed. Even though the period
remaining to be served has been materially
reduced as a result of this Court giving additional credit for the time already
by the appellant, we are not satisfied that an order that the
appellant’s sentence be served on home detention would be appropriate.
are not satisfied that it would achieve an adequate measure of general
deterrence (and, relatedly, have adequate regard for the
protection of the
community). We also remain concerned about the appellant’s personal
deterrence and rehabilitation, given
the nature of the offending and the context
in which it occurred (that is, against the background of previous violence
towards the
same victim, and in contravention of an intervention order).
summary, despite the availability of a suitable home detention address, and some
considerations in favour of this sentencing option,
we are not persuaded that it
is appropriate to exercise our discretion to order that the appellant’s
sentence be served on
grant permission to appeal, allow the appeal, and set aside the sentence imposed
below. In lieu thereof, we impose a single head
sentence of two years, eight
months and 17 days imprisonment. We fix a non-parole period of one year and
five days. We backdate
both the head sentence and non-parole period to
6 August 2025, being the date the appellant was first sentenced. We impose
suspension and intervention order in the same terms as the judge
Contrary to
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Contrary to
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Contrary to
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Owens v The King
Ribbon v The Queen
[2022] SASCA 15.
Kentwell v The Queen
(2014) 252 CLR 601 at [35].
Millwood v The King
[2024] SASCA 84
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (377 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter