URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAOmbFOI/2023/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:02:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Adelaide University Union 2022/05006 [2023] SAOmbFOI 1 (23 January 2023)
Determination
External review - section 39
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Mr Edward Satchell
Adelaide University Union
Ombudsman reference:
Agency reference:
Determination:
The determination of the agency is varied, the effect of which is set out
in Appendix Two.
Date of Ombudsman’s determination:
23 January 2023
Issues considered:
Definition of personal affairs
Allegation or suggestion of improper
Unreasonableness (personal affairs)
Business affairs
entered into after 2005
Legal professional privilege
Exemption clauses relied upon:
7(1)(a), (b), (c), (3)
Legislation considered:
Freedom of Information Act 1991
University of Adelaide Act
Charities Act 2013
Application for access
application under the
Freedom of Information Act 1991
) the applicant requested access from the agency to:
documents relating to the rebranding of the Adelaide University Union from 01
January 2019 to 29 June 2022.
documents relating to the rebranding of the Adelaide University Union to YouX
from 01 January 2019 to 29 June 2022.
documents relating to the Adelaide University Union funding of the University of
Adelaide Student Representative Council from
01 January 2020 to 29 June 2022.
documents relating to the Adelaide University Union funding of the University of
Adelaide student media (On Dit and Student Radio)
from 01 January 2020 to 29
documents relating to directions of the Adelaide University Union and/or
Adelaide University Union Board to University of Adelaide
student media (On Dit
and Student Radio) from 01 January 2020 to 29 June 2022.
documents relating to the salary of the AUU Executive Officer from 01 January
2020 to 29 June 2022.
documents regarding Freedom of Information requests of the AUU from 01 January
2022 to 29 June 2022.
ease of reference, procedural steps relating to the application and the external
review are set out in Appendix 1.
to the commencement of this external review, the issue of whether the Adelaide
University Union falls within the definition
of ‘agency’ under the
FOI Act was dealt with by my Office as a complaint under the
Ombudsman Act
being advised of the agency’s view that it is not subject to the
provisions of the FOI Act, the applicant contacted my
Office advising his views
that the agency had erred in reaching that conclusion. Having reviewed the
information provided by the
applicant, I wrote to the agency advising my
preliminary view that it does meet one of the definitions of
‘agency’ within
the FOI Act, namely:
(f) an incorporated or unincorporated body –
(i) established or continued in existence for a public purpose by an Act;
formed this tentative view having specific regard to
University of Adelaide Act 1971
) which states:
21-The Adelaide University Union
(1) The Adelaide University Union continues in existence.
letters dated 1 August 2022 and 10 August 2022, the agency provided two
responses advising that it remains of the view that it
does not meet the
definition of ‘agency’ for the purpose of the FOI Act, and providing
the following reasons in support
of that conclusion:
existed prior to the introduction of the UA Act and would have continued to
operate in the same manner regardless of the
UA Act. Accordingly, it cannot be
said that the agency exists because of an Act
the agency was
not established and does not continue for a public purpose because it does not
benefit the community generally or a
substantial segment of it; the agency only
benefits its members
any purpose
(public or not) which the agency might serve has not been conferred upon it by
an Act, rather the objects of the agency
are governed by its constitution
the objects of
the FOI Act refer particularly to ‘government’ and so subjecting the
agency to the requirements of the
FOI Act would not achieve the objects of the
letters dated 4 August 2022 and 15 August 2022 I advised the agency that I was
not persuaded by the submissions it had provided
and remained of the view that
the Adelaide University Union is an ‘agency’ for the purposes of the
FOI Act. For completeness
I will summarise my reasoning in this determination.
do not consider that it is correct to conclude that the use of the words
‘established’ and ‘continued’ indicates
that section
4(f)(i) of the FOI Act requires a body to exist only because of an Act. There
may of course be many reasons for a body
to exist, and indeed the use of the
term ‘continued’ would indicate that a reason likely existed prior
to the introduction
of the relevant Act. Additionally, to accept this submission
would erroneously indicate that the Union has autonomous control over
existence. To the contrary, it would not cease to exist even if it wished to do
so as it is ultimately preserved by section 21
of the UA Act.
relation to the agency not benefiting the broader community, the agency stated
It was not established and does not continue for a public purpose, being a
purpose that is for the benefit of the community generally,
or a substantial
segment of it. This interpretation of pubic [sic] purpose was applied in the
decision of the Queensland Information
Commissioner in
English and Queensland
Law Society Inc. (1993 S0178, 4 August 1995).
The purposes of the AUU are
limited to benefiting its members and students of the University.
consider that more relevant than the question of whether the agency’s
purposes benefit the majority of the public, is whether
the purposes of the
agency have the potential to benefit the majority of the public. Whilst I accept
that the agency primarily benefits
its members, any member of the public would
be entitled to enjoy those benefits if they enrolled at the University of
Additionally,
I am of the view that the members of the agency compromise a ‘substantial
segment’ of the community. It
is accepted that the University of Adelaide
is an agency in accordance with section 4(f)(i) of the FOI Act. Arguably the
of Adelaide primarily benefits the same group of people who obtain a
benefit from the agency.
any event, I would argue that the community at large does in fact obtain a
benefit from the agency’s existence, being that
the interests of students
can be promoted and advocated for in the wider community in a clear and concise
manner. Similarly, the
wider community can confidently identify the agency as a
point of contact to discuss such issues.
this point, the agency has submitted that any benefit it provides to the broader
public is an incidental purpose rather than its
‘major’ purpose.
Firstly, I do not consider that section 4(f)(i) requires an agency’s
public purpose to be its
‘major’ purpose. Very clearly an agency may
have many purposes and I consider that provided one of those purposes can
characterised as a public purpose, this will satisfy the requirements of section
is supported by the existence of the
Freedom of Information (Exempt Agency)
Regulations 2008
which stipulate that a number of agencies are considered
exempt in respect of certain functions and/or information. Insofar as an
has both private and public purposes, I consider that it will meet the
definition of ‘agency’ by virtue of the
latter but may be prescribed
as exempt in respect of the former.
I consider that the benefit enjoyed by the community at large does in fact flow
from one of the agency’s ‘major’
purposes. The objects of the
agency are set out in its constitution, one of which states that the agency
1.2.4 to represent the interests of the students of the University,
individually and as a whole, to the University, government,
and the community
[emphasis added]
above is one of five objects included in the agency’s constitution. I
consider that this purpose, which is of benefit to
the community at large, is as
important or ‘major’ as any other purpose conferred by the
agency’s constitution.
to the question of whether the agency serves a public purpose, I have had regard
to submissions from both the applicant and
the interested party in response to
my provisional determination. The former has submitted:
I note that the agency continues in existence under the UoA Act. The UoA Act
does not provide an objects of act section, however at
s4A it provides that
‘the object of the University is the advancement of learning and
knowledge, including the provision of
university education.’ This is
expressed broadly and in a way consistent with a public purpose e.g. noting the
importance of
the role of education to the broader community. UoA Act s9
establishes the University Council to be the governing body of the University,
its primary responsibilities including at s9(d) the establishment of policy and
procedural principles, consistent with legal requirements
and community
expectations – this places emphasis on the importance of the University to
the broader community and public.
UoA Act s21(3) provides that the constitution
and rules of the Adelaide University Union require the ‘concurrence of the
to be altered. Noting the above, the purpose of the agency must
be taken in the context of the UoA Act which, through numerous provisions,
clearly intends to regulate institutions which are of a public purpose –
that being the University of Adelaide and ancillary
institutions such as the
that ‘the University’ is explicitly defined as meaning the
University of Adelaide, I do not necessarily agree that
the legislated object of
the university can be extended to the agency. I do however acknowledge the
relevance of the Council having
oversight of any alterations made to the
agency’s constitution and rules, particularly bearing in mind the
responsibility to establish policy and procedural principles
consistent with community expectations.
am however more persuaded by the submissions of the interested party, who has
drawn to my attention that the agency is registered
as a charity with the
Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission (
). Although the
interested party appears to have made this submission in support of a conclusion
that the agency is not subject to
the provisions of the FOI Act, I consider the
opposite to be true.
ACNC applies the provisions of the
Charities Act 2013
(Cth), which
stipulates that to be recognised as a charity, an organisation must have only
charitable purposes that are for the public
benefit. A charity’s purpose
is for the public benefit if achieving it would be of benefit to the public
generally or a sufficient
section of the public. The benefit might be achieved
through the provision of goods, services, education, counselling or
not only directly addresses the agency’s earlier submission regarding
benefiting the public generally but very clearly
speaks to the agency’s
public purpose. In my view, it is difficult to see how the agency could be said
not to exist for a public
purpose if its purposes are charitable and for the
public benefit. I also specifically note the Summary of activities of the agency
as provided on the ACNC website:
The Adelaide University Union provides a wide range of services to students
including: Academic advocacy, welfare and grants, events
on campus, student
radio and newspaper, employment and volunteering service and so much more. The
Union strives to enrich the student
experience by ensuring: that the student
voice is heard and valued; that the full range of student communities is
fostered and engaged;
the health, safety and well-being of students which allows
for development, both individually and collectively.
my view, there can be no doubt that the above summary indicates that the agency
continues in existence for a public purpose.
the agency has identified, I accept that the agency’s purposes are
governed by its constitution rather than being conferred
by an Act, however I do
not consider this to be fatal to my consideration. I refer to the following
comments made by the Supreme
Court of Queensland:
Applying that approach, if a body is to fall within the definition of "public
authority" in s9(1)(a)(i), the legislation requires
that the body to be
established by an enactment and that it be established for a public purpose. It
is not always necessary for the
purpose to be set out in the enactment which
establishes the body. The body which is established may, for example, be
established
with a constitution or rules which demonstrate a public purpose
which it is unnecessary to repeat in the Act which establishes it.
The history
of the Local Government Association demonstrates that proposition in this
agree with the views expressed above and consider this to be directly applicable
in the current circumstances. The public purpose
of the agency is set out within
clause 1.2.4 of its constitution, and section 21(2)(c) of the UA Act stipulates
that the agency has
the powers, authorities, obligations and functions conferred
upon it by its constitution.
agency’s final submission that subjecting it to the provisions of the FOI
Act would not further the objects of the Act is
a direct response to statements
made in my letter of 4 August 2022. I observed the following comment of the
Supreme Court of Queensland:
In any such legislation, the proper approach to construction is that any
ambiguity should be resolved using a broad rather than a
narrow approach. In
Victorian Public Service Board v Wright, the High Court after considering the
provisions of the
Freedom of Information Act
in Victoria held that:
"It is proper to give the relevant provisions of the Act a construction which
would further, rather than hinder, free access to information.
It is, in our
view, evident that such a purpose would not be promoted by adopting a narrow
construction. . . . beyond any limits
plainly imposed by the Act itself."
In Searle Australia Pty Ltd v Public Interest Advocacy Centre the Full Court
of the Federal Court of Australia applied the same principles
Commonwealth
Freedom of Information Act
. As the Information Commissioner held,
this is similar to the view espoused by Derrington J of this Court in Queensland
Law Society
Inc v Albeitz:
"This conclusion is consistent with what might be discerned to be the policy
of the Freedom of Information legislation in respect
of relevant matters. Its
remedial nature is directed towards opening to public scrutiny the information
relating to public affairs
held by agencies of the government. This militates
against a restrictive reading of the kind posited by the
further noted that this approach would appear to be endorsed in South Australia
Legislation Interpretation Act 2021
14—Interpretation best achieving purpose or object
(1) In interpreting a provision of an Act or a legislative instrument, the
interpretation that best achieves the purpose or object
of the Act or the
instrument (whether or not that purpose or object is expressly stated in the Act
or instrument) is to be preferred
to any other interpretation.
response, the agency submitted that:
The AUU is not a government agency and subjecting it to the FOI Act will not
facilitate effective participation by the public in the
administration of laws and policies. To read public purpose so broadly as to
encompass the activities of a single, student-funded,
university student union
does not promote the purpose or object of the FOI Act and is not endorsed by
Legislation Interpretation Act 2021
am not persuaded by this submission. Firstly, the definition of
‘agency’ is worded in such a way that it will clearly
number of non-government bodies and, despite the wording of
3A requires ‘agencies’ to give effect to the FOI Act.
I refer to the following comments made upon judicial review of a decision of my
Queensland counterpart:
There were some minor arguments which should be discussed. First, attention
was directed to the preamble of the
Freedom of Information
which describes it as applying to "documents held by government"
and to "documents held by the government". Moreover, the object
of the Act is
set out in s.4 which describes it as: "The object of this Act is to
extend as far as possible the right of the community
to have access to
information held by Queensland government". It is argued that this should lead
to a reading down of the definition
of "public authority" so that it extends
only to bodies administered by the government.
The difficulty with this submission is that it depends upon a reading of the
preamble and s.4 as though the word "government" is spelt
capital 'G', whereas it is not so in either case. In this context, the
expression connotes government in its broad sense.
There is nothing to recommend
that it should be limited to the formal institutions of the government rather
than the former, and
indeed the reference to "government" rather than "the . . .
government" supports the broader meaning.
Moreover, if there is any ambiguity about this, then the structure of the
machinery of definition supports the above conclusion. The
expression 'public
authority' is referred to in the definition of 'agency' which in turn is
included in the definition of 'government'.
This has the effect of explaining
and shaping the last mentioned term through the others, rather than the reverse.
It indicates that
the broader meaning is intended.
Consequently to the extent that the regulation of the profession is within
the jurisdiction of government, and because the legislature
has seen fit to take
steps to exercise that jurisdiction through the agency of the Society, there is
no reason why the public nature
of the activities which it was established to
undertake should not be regarded as governmental within the meaning of the
agree with the views expressed above and believe that a similar conclusion can
be drawn in the current circumstances. That is, to
the extent that the provision
of services for and by tertiary students is within the jurisdiction of
government, and because that
by virtue of the UA Act, my view is that the public purposes of the agency
be regarded as governmental within the meaning of the Act.
I acknowledge that the South Australian FOI Act does not define
‘government’ in the manner referenced above, neither
does it define
the term in such a way that would prevent the interpretation I have applied.
summary, I remain of the view that the Adelaide University Union falls within
the definition of ‘agency’ and is therefore
subject to the
provisions of the FOI Act. It therefore follows that this external review is
within my jurisdiction as a relevant
review authority under section 39 of the
Provisional determination
provided my tentative view about the agency’s determination to the
parties, by my provisional determination dated 16 December
2022. I informed the
parties that subject to my receipt and consideration of submissions from the
parties I proposed to vary the
agency’s determination.
6 January 2023 the applicant and agency provided submissions in response. On 26
January 2023 the interested party provided submissions.
I have addressed the
submissions of all of the parties in this determination.
Relevant law
person has a legally enforceable right to be given access to an agency’s
documents in accordance with the FOI
FOI Act provides that upon receipt of an access application, an agency may make
a determination to refuse access where the documents
are ‘exempt’.
Schedule 1 lists various exemption clauses which may be claimed by an agency as
a basis for refusing access.
following clause of Schedule 1 of the FOI Act are relevant to my external
6—Documents affecting personal affairs
(1) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter the disclosure of
which would involve the unreasonable disclosure of information
concerning the
personal affairs of any person (living or dead).
(2) A document is an exempt document if it contains allegations or
suggestions of criminal or other improper conduct on the part of
(living or dead) the truth of which has not been established by judicial process
and the disclosure of which would be unreasonable.
7—Documents affecting business affairs
(1) A document is an exempt document—
(a) if it contains matter the disclosure of which would disclose trade
secrets of any agency or any other person; or
(b) if it contains matter—
(i) consisting of information (other than trade secrets) that has a
commercial value to any agency or any other person; and
(ii) the disclosure of which—
(A) could reasonably be expected to destroy or diminish the commercial value
of the information; and
(B) would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest; or
(c) if it contains matter—
(i) consisting of information (other than trade secrets or information
referred to in paragraph (b)) concerning the business, professional,
or financial affairs of any agency or any other person; and
(ii) the disclosure of which—
(A) could reasonably be expected to have an adverse effect on those affairs
or to prejudice the future supply of such information
to the Government or to an
agency; and
(B) would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest.
(3) A document is not an exempt document by virtue of this clause if it is a
contract entered into by the Crown or an agency after
the commencement of this
10—Documents subject to legal professional privilege
(1) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter that would be
privileged from production in legal proceedings on the ground
professional privilege.
section 48, the onus is on the agency to justify its determination ‘in any
proceedings’. This includes the external
review process.
39(11) provides that the Ombudsman may confirm, vary or reverse the
agency’s determination in an external review, based
on the circumstances
existing at the time of review.
Documents in
agency did not determine the applicant’s FOI application or internal
review application within the statutory time frames
and is deemed to have
refused access to all documents.
being requested to provide the relevant documents and submissions to this
Office, the agency advised that, had it dealt with
the FOI application within
the required timeframe, it would have refused to deal with the application on
the basis of section 18(1).
The agency therefore requested that I make my
determination on that basis.
letter dated 26 September 2022 I advised the agency of my preliminary view that
the agency had not justified a reliance upon section
18(1) as it had not yet
complied with the requirement under section 18(2) to endeavour to assist the
applicant to amend the application
such that section 18(1) would no longer be
applicable. I also observed some deficiencies in the agency’s submissions
section 18(2).
light of the above, and having particular regard the agency’s lack of
experience in processing FOI applications, I enquired
whether the agency would
be willing to rectify its non-compliance with section 18(2) if I afforded a
two-week period for it do so.
By return letter of 4 October 2022 the agency
accepted that invitation.
subsequently confirmed on 10 October 2022 that the agency was afforded a
two-week period to properly comply with the requirements
of section 18(2), and
advised the outcome of same to my Office by 19 October 2022. I requested that,
if the agency and applicant
were able to agree to an amended scope, the agency
provide me with a copy of all documents falling within the scope of the amended
application together with any submissions regarding exemption.
19 October 2022 the agency provided a response to my Office advising that it had
reached an agreement with the applicant to narrow
the scope of the FOI
application such that the following categories of documents would be excluded:
All Monday and
Teams created documents.
messages and email documents apart from those which the AUU Executive Officer,
AUU Board President, and AUU Board Vice-President
have created.
the applicant and agency had agreed to an amended application, it was noted that
the agency had not provided copies of documents
falling within the scope of that
amendment. As such, on 19 October 2022 my Legal Officer reiterated my request
for a copy of the
relevant documents.
letter of 21 October 2022 the agency enquired the reason as to why I would
require a copy of the documents in issue to make my
determination, stating:
As an agreement was reached in respect of narrowing the request, the AUU no
longer presses its reliance on section 18(1), nor does
it assert that any
specific documents are exempt.
Rather, the AUU now accepts that
if it is an agency
(a mater which it
does not concede), then it will need to produce to Mr Satchell the documents as
narrowed, pursuant to the FOI Act.
Accordingly, the AUU respectfully requests that the Ombudsman now proceed to
finalise his external review based only on the AUU’s
position that it is
not an agency.
responding letter of 24 October 2022, I provided the following clarification to
the agency:
The issue of whether the AUU is an agency is a jurisdictional issue which
precedes my external review entirely. It was only after
satisfying myself that
the AUU is an agency that I commenced my external review; if I were persuaded
that the AUU Is not an agency,
my jurisdiction to conduct an external review
would not be enlivened.
My jurisdiction under the FOI Act is to confirm, vary or reverse an
agency’s determination based on the circumstances existing
at the time of
my review. In this case, the AUU was deemed to have determined to refuse access
to any documents falling within scope
of the application. It is that refusal of
access which is subject to review, and which I may ultimately confirm, vary or
It is therefore crucial that I view the documents in issue in order to
form a view as to whether they ought to be disclosed or are
otherwise exempt.
That said, I accept that if the AUU concedes that all documents within scope can
be released in full, it may not
be necessary for me to view those documents as
the parties are in agreement.
31 October 2022 the agency conceded that, having not yet undertaken steps to
identify and consider the documents falling within
the scope of the amended
application, it was not in a position to advise whether it would claim exemption
over any of those documents.
The agency further accepted that in order to
properly exercise my jurisdiction and make a determination regarding access to
it is crucial for me to view those documents.
agency requested an extension of time until 30 November 2022 to provide the
relevant documents. By email of 1 November 2022 my
Legal Officer advised the
agency of my approval of the requested extension, and reiterated that the agency
should also provide submissions
in support of any exemption claimed as was
previously requested by my Office.
30 November 2022 the agency provided me with a copy of all documents falling
within the scope of the amended application.
agency identified 106 documents within the scope of the application and submits
that access to 11 documents ought to be partially
refused and access to a
further 2 documents ought to be fully refused. The agency has provided no
submissions regarding the remaining
93 documents and it is therefore assumed
that the agency has no objection to their full disclosure.
is noted that documents 60-63 have ‘confidential’ within their
title, however this does not appear to be a claim of
exemption on the basis of
clause 13(1). Where the agency has claimed full exemption ‘exempted’
appears in the document
title. As documents 60-63 have not been titled as such,
I have not treated ‘confidential’ as being a submission from
agency. This is also supported by the fact that the agency has applied proposed
redactions to document 61, indicating that it
is not claimed to be fully exempt.
response to my provisional determination, the applicant observed that the list
of documents set out in Appendix Two does not appear
to include any text
messages or email documents created by the agency’s Executive Officer,
Board President or Board Vice-President.
The applicant submits that:
Given the significant nature of the agency’s decision to rebrand I
believe that text and email documents created by the noted
agency executives
regarding the topic subject to my application exist. Because of this, I am
concerned that the agency has failed
to comply with its obligations under the
FOI Act to provide the full list of relevant documentation that falls within the
the application.
advise the applicant that the identification of documents relevant to an FOI
application is a matter for the agency and is not something
that is subject to
review by me under the FOI Act.
has been determined by the South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
the Tribunal
that issues of this nature should instead be dealt
with as a complaint under the
Ombudsman Act 1972
if they cannot first be
resolved between the applicant and the agency.
the current circumstances, I confirm that this is an option available to the
applicant as the definition of ‘agency’
Ombudsman Act
includes the same definition which I believe renders the Adelaide
University Union an ‘agency’ for the purposes of the
FOI Act. That
said, as the agency has expressed an intention to seek a review of my
determination by the Tribunal, I take this opportunity
to express my misgivings
El Shafei v
Central Adelaide Local Health Network
present, matters of sufficiency of search and interpretation of scope both fall
beyond the ambit of my external review. In my view,
the preferable approach
would be to deal with all matters arising from an FOI application holistically
for a number of reasons.
a holistic approach is simply more straightforward as it would avoid the need
for me to entertain two related matters under
different jurisdictions. This
would be much less confusing for many applicants and would reduce duplication of
and perhaps of greater concern, although they share significant overlap, the
definitions of ‘agency’ in the
FOI Act and the
Ombudsman Act 1972
are not identical, the most obvious discrepancy in my view being Ministers;
Ministers are considered to be an ‘agency’
for the purposes of the
FOI Act but not under the
Ombudsman Act 1972
effectively means that although Ministers are subject to the provisions of the
FOI Act, there is no oversight or scrutiny of
the issues excluded from the ambit
of an external review by
. A Minister could fail to properly
unreasonable
manner, and there is no recourse for an aggrieved applicant.
I consider that a holistic approach would make most sense in terms of achieving
a meaningful outcome for the FOI applicant.
By dealing with one of the above
issues in the course of conducting an external review, an agency has the
opportunity to concede
that additional documents fall within the scope of the
application and agree to my review considering those additional documents.
However as such an issue is not raised or dealt with until after the conclusion
of my external review, neither myself nor the agency
has jurisdiction to make a
further determination about any additional documents, requiring the applicant to
lodge a new FOI application.
risk of this happening is particularly high noting that the applicant is
afforded 12 months to make a complaint under the
Ombudsman Act 1972
only 30 days to apply for external review under the FOI Act. Additionally, I am
generally not inclined to entertain a complaint
unless it has first been raised
directly with the agency, further delaying the time until my Office is made
aware of the relevant
issue and increasing the likelihood that my external
review will finalise in the meantime.
the application of
has, on numerous occasions, placed me in the
absurd position of being required to make a determination which has no practical
In instances where an agency has failed to make a determination within
the statutory timeframes, it is taken to have a made a deemed
determination. Even if an agency subsequently advises the applicant or myself
that it does not hold any documents relevant
to the FOI application, the fact
remains that the agency has made a determination by default which must be
reviewed by me upon request
by an applicant.
such, on numerous occasions I have been required to determine whether to
confirm, vary or reverse a deemed refusal determination
whilst simultaneously
knowing that there are no documents to be considered.
my view, a holistic approach which permits me to consider issues of sufficiency
of search and interpretation of scope in the course
of conducting an external
review would address the issues above and would generally improve the efficiency
of the FOI review process.
Issues in this
regard to the agency’s submissions and the exemption clauses provided in
Schedule 1 of the FOI Act, it is for me to determine
whether to confirm, vary or
reverse the agency’s determination in regard to the documents in issue in
this external review.
Consideration
outlined above, the agency has applied proposed redactions to 11 documents, and
has identified two documents as being ‘Exempted
Commercial in
Confidence’. Upon receipt of the documents in issue, it was noted that the
agency had not provided any submissions
to support its refusal of full access to
the documents. As such, on 30 November 2022 my Legal Officer requested that the
agency provide
submissions in support of its revised position.
return email of 1 December 2022 the agency advised that it relies on the notes
included in the relevant documents as its submissions.
My Legal Officer
responded the same day to advise that whilst those comments largely advise the
basis of refusal, no explanation
has been provided to support those redactions.
The agency was given the example that in the event it intended to rely upon
6(1), it should explain why the information constitutes personal affairs
and why disclosure would be unreasonable.
agency was afforded one final opportunity to provide my Office with supporting
submissions. On 6 December 2022 the agency indicated
via its solicitor that no
further submissions would be provided, stating:
In the circumstances, we’re instructed that our client has used its
best endeavours with regard to its explanation for the redaction
documents for irrelevance and its claims to exemption, and our client requests
that you treat its response with due consideration
notwithstanding what you
might normally expect, in terms of submissions to support such claims, from an
Agency with a duly appointed
& trained FOI officer.
I acknowledge that the agency is not experienced in dealing with FOI
applications, in the circumstances I consider that it
would not be unreasonable
for me to expect at least some submissions from the agency in support of its
although the agency may be restricted by its experience, I am mindful that it
has been represented by a law firm throughout
the entirety of this review, as
well as the preceding complaint process. Certainly, the quality of submissions I
would expect from
an agency represented by a law firm is higher than I might
expect of an unrepresented agency.
Additionally,
I am satisfied that the agency has been given sufficient guidance and
opportunity to rectify its failure to provide
me with submissions. I refer in
particular to the example provided by my Legal Officer as to what is generally
expected of an agency
relying upon clause 6(1) as an exemption.
agency’s failure to provide submissions to my Office is exacerbated by the
fact that the agency did not actively determine
the FOI application or internal
review determination. The agency has not advised either the applicant or myself
of any explanation
for its refusal of full access to the documents. This is
echoed in the applicant’s submissions responding to my provisional
determination. Under the FOI Act, it is the agency which bears the onus of
justifying any refusal of access.
am not satisfied that the agency has complied with this requirement.
I confirm that I have considered each refusal proposed by the agency, I can only
make my determination based on the limited
information before me.
this point, it is noted that documents 10, 61 and 68 contain proposed redactions
for which there is no corresponding comment advising
the basis for refusing
access to that information. Noting that the other redactions to documents 61 and
68 have been made on the
basis that the information is out of scope, I have
assumed that all redactions to those documents have been made on that basis.
to document 10, further redactions have been made to the document on the basis
of clause 6(2) and scope. Insofar as the clause
6(2) redactions and redactions
without reason appear within the same minute item, I have assumed all redactions
are on the basis
of clause 6(2). The remainder of the redactions have been
considered on the basis that the agency submits the information is out
agency submits that access to 11 documents should be partially refused on the
basis that those portions are out of scope. I refer
to the following findings of
the South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal:
Where an agency has identified that it holds a document of which only part
falls within the scope of a request for documents under
the FOI Act –
decision-maker permitted to treat only the part or parts that fall within the
scope of the request as constituting the subject
of a determination to grant or
refuse access under the FOI Act;
Answer: No.
withholding of part of a document identified by an agency as not falling within
the scope of a request a refusal to give access
for the purposes of ss 19 or 20
of the FOI Act;
Answer: Yes.
Ombudsman have jurisdiction to review, vary or depart from an agency’s
identification of what part or parts fall within
the scope of the request for
the purposes of a determination to grant or refuse access under the FOI
above excerpt makes clear that once the agency identified the 11 documents as
falling within scope, the entirety of the documents
had to be determined,
whether by way of a deemed refusal determination or otherwise. I accept that
part of those 11 documents may
be withheld on the basis of scope, but as the
agency’s deemed refusal determination covers the entirety of those
such a refusal is open to review by me.
that the objects of the FOI Act favour disclosure of agency information, absent
any submissions from the agency supporting
the submission that the 11 documents
are partially out of scope, I am not inclined to confirm that position.
agency submits that documents 5 and 10 are partially exempt on the basis of
clause 6(2). Both documents are described by the agency
‘In-Camera Minutes’.
response to my provisional determination the applicant has taken issue with the
agency claiming exemption ‘simply because
a document is listed as
‘in-camera’. I wish to clarify to the applicant that this is not the
case. A number of the documents
are described as being ‘In-Camera
Minutes’, yet the agency has only claimed exemption over documents 5 and
10. Additionally,
the nature of the documents being ‘In-Camera
Minutes’ is more likely to indicate exemption under clause 7(1) or 13(1),
whereas the agency has relied upon clause 6(2).
agency has redacted two items in document 5. It is not at all clear to me how
the first item would meet the requirement of clause
6(2). The only portion which
might be said to suggest improper conduct refers to a group rather than an
individual.
to the second item, I accept that the information contains an allegation of
improper conduct on the part of a person the truth
of which has not been
established by judicial process. Although the agency has failed to explain why
disclosure would be unreasonable,
I am satisfied that is the case based on:
the nature of
the information
the fact that
the matter was discussed confidence and does not form part of the publicly
available meeting minutes
the age of the
information
the potential
impact of disclosure upon the relevant individual.
also apply the same reasoning to the entirety of item 5 in document 10.
response to my provisional determination the applicant has submitted that if the
agency has failed to provide a compelling argument
as to why documents 5 and 10
ought to be exempt, the documents should be released in full.
acknowledge that section 48 of the FOI Act places the onus on the agency to
justify any claim of exemption and with that in mind
can appreciate the
applicant’s submissions. However, I am also mindful that section 39(12)
stipulates that if I am satisfied
that a document is exempt, I may not make a
determination to the effect that access be given to the document. In the current
circumstances
I am satisfied that the contents of documents 5 and 10 are
sufficient for me to be satisfied that clause 6(2) is applicable even
any explanation from the agency. As such, I am not able to determine that the
documents ought to be released.
agency has submitted that document 7 is partially exempt on the basis of clause
7(1). The agency has also referred to documents
51 and 52 as ‘Exempted
Commercial in Confidence’. I have treated this as a claim of full
exemption on the basis of clause
the agency has failed to identify a relevant sub-clause, I have briefly
considered each aspect of clause 7(1). I am satisfied that
none of the relevant
information constitutes trade secrets. It also does not appear to me that the
information has any commercial
value, or that disclosure would diminish any
commercial value that the information may have.
to clause 7(1)(c), whilst I accept that the information concerns the business
affairs of the agency, it is not clear to me how
disclosure could reasonably be
expected to have an adverse effect on those affairs or prejudice the future
supply of information.
It is also not clear why disclosure would be contrary to
the public interest. I am therefore not satisfied that clause 7(1) is applicable
to documents 7, 51 and 52.
I have now addressed all exemptions proposed by the agency, having reviewed all
documents in issue I consider it appropriate
to provide some additional
appears to me that document 16 might be subject to legal professional privilege.
That said, I acknowledge that it is the agency
who is in a position to enjoy or
waive that privilege as it sees fit. Noting that the agency had not claimed
exemption over document
16, in my provisional determination I took this as an
intention by the agency to waive privilege, and therefore did not consider
document 16 to be exempt on the basis of clause 10(1). That said, I foreshadowed
that if the agency responded to my provisional determination
confirming that
privilege had been established and had not been waived, I would likely be
persuaded to determine that document 16
is fully exempt.
response to my provisional determination the agency has advised that it agrees
that document 16 is subject to legal professional
privilege, and that it did not
intend to waive that privilege. Although the agency has failed to explain the
application of clause
10(1), I am nevertheless satisfied that the document is
exempt as it contains a confidential communication between a client and their
solicitor created for the dominant purpose of providing legal advice. As I
foreshadowed reaching this conclusion in my provisional
determination, I do not
consider it necessary to afford the applicant a further opportunity to comment
on document 16.
not claimed by the agency, I consider that document 77 is fully exempt and
document 101 is partially exempt on the basis
of clause 6(1). Both documents
contain information that would clearly be of private concern to the relevant
individuals.
I am satisfied that
disclosure would be unreasonable having regard to the nature of the information,
and particularly noting that
the information is tangential to what the applicant
appears to be seeking. Whilst I acknowledge that information may constitute both
personal and business affairs simultaneously, in this case the information is
solely personal.
response to my provisional determination the agency acknowledged my views and
confirmed that clause 6(1) ought to be applied to
documents 77 and 101.
to document 47, whilst I do not consider that the document is exempt, I am
satisfied that the information contained therein constitutes
personal affairs.
Section 39(10) of the FOI Act therefore required me to conduct consultation with
the relevant individual prior
to determining that the information be disclosed.
As such, at the time of providing my provisional determination to the applicant
and agency, I also invited comment from the interested party regarding the
disclosure of document 47. I also took the opportunity
in my provisional
determination to advise the agency that it is bound by the same consultation
requirements pursuant to sections
25-28 of the FOI Act.
response to my provisional determination the applicant has conceded that
elements such as a home address may fall under clause
6(1), but that salary
information ought to be disclosed on the basis that the salary of the
highest-level employee of the agency
should be subject to public scrutiny. I
confirm that document 47 does not include a home address or other similar
interested party has highlighted the objects of the FOI Act:
...to promote openness in government and accountability of Ministers of the
Crown and other government agencies and thereby to enhance
respect for the law
and further the good government of the State
interested party submits that he is not a government employee, has no reporting
relationship to the University of Adelaide and
receives no form of government
funding. It is also submitted that the agency is entirely separated from the
University of Adelaide
and receives no government funding whatsoever. On this
basis, the interested party submits that disclosure of document 47 would not
further the objects of the FOI Act.
outlined in my jurisdiction assessment above, I am not satisfied that the
reference to ‘government’ in the objects
of the Act is intended to
exclude non-government agencies from being subject to the provisions of the FOI
Act. As such, I am satisfied
that document 47 is liable to disclosure by virtue
of being held by an agency, and therefore ought to be released in full unless
is established that disclosure of the interested party’s personal affairs
would be unreasonable.
set out above, the interested party has drawn to my attention that the agency is
registered as a charity with the ACNC. As such,
the agency is required to keep
financial records and report to the ACNC annually. Contrary to the interested
party’s submissions,
in the 2021/2022 financial year the agency reported
that ‘revenue from government’ accounted for 100% of the
incoming finances. As such, it appears that not only does the
agency receive government funding, but also that the interested party’s
salary would be entirely funded by government money.
such, in considering whether disclosure of the documents would be unreasonable,
I consider it appropriate to have regard to comments
made by the
Ombudsman’s Queensland counterpart:
The public has a strong, legitimate and abiding interest in having access to
sufficient information to enable scrutiny of whether
funds raised by government
are expended efficiently and effectively in furtherance of the wider public
interest. This extends to
scrutiny of whether the public is obtaining value for
money from performance of the duties of particular positions for which a
has decided to allocate funding. This public interest is even
stronger in the case of senior officers who have responsibility for
and/or implementing strategic operational plans, and delivering key performance
agree with the views of the Ombudsman’s Queensland counterpart and note
that unreasonableness has ‘as its core, public
consideration’.
clear that the document relates to a senior officer who has responsibility for
devising and/or implementing strategic operational
plans and delivering key
performance outcomes as the interested party is the most senior employee of the
am also mindful that the reports provided to the ACNC indicate the amount of
expenditure for employee expenses. Whilst I acknowledge
that the amount is not
broken down per employee, I believe the reporting requirement indicates an
expected level of scrutiny for
such expenditure by a registered charity.
light of the above, I am not satisfied that disclosure of document 47 would be
unreasonable.
observe that the interested party has additionally submitted that document 47
ought to be exempt on the basis of another exemption
clause not previously
raised. I do not consider it appropriate to repeat those submissions or advise
the exemption clause which has
been claimed, as I consider that to do either
would reveal information which itself ought to be exempt. I do however advise
the parties
that I am not persuaded by the interested party’s submission
and will expand on this in a covering letter to the interested
party only.
Determination
light of my views above, I vary the agency’s determination in accordance
with Appendix Two.
Wayne Lines
23 January 2023
Procedural steps
The agency received the FOI application dated 6 May 2022.
5 July 2022
The FOI application became valid upon payment of the application fee by the
6 August 2022
The agency failed to determine the application within the 30 day period
required by the FOI Act,
deemed to have refused access to the
9 August 2022
The agency received the internal review application dated 9 August 2022,
together with payment of the application fee.
23 August 2022
The agency failed to determine the application within the statutory time
frame, and is taken to have confirmed the original
determination.
31 August 2022
The Ombudsman received the applicant’s request for external review
dated 31 August 2022.
1 September 2022
The Ombudsman advised the agency of the external review and requested
submissions and documentation.
14 September 2022
The agency provided submissions in support of a reliance upon section
26 September 2022
The Ombudsman advised that a determination would not be made on the basis
of section 18(1) unless the agency had complied with section
Ombudsman enquired whether the agency would be willing to utilise a two week
extension of time to comply with section
4 October 2022
The agency accepted the Ombudsman’s invitation to comply with section
5 October 2022
The Ombudsman confirmed that the agency had until 19 October 2022 to comply
with section 18(2) and provide a response to the Ombudsman
as to whether an
amended application scope could be agreed to.
19 October 2022
The agency advised that it had come to an agreement with the applicant to
amend the scope of the application such that section 18(1)
was no longer relied
19 October 2022
The Ombudsman requested that the agency provide copies of the documents
falling within scope of the amended application, together
with any submissions
regarding exemption.
30 November 2022
The agency provided the Ombudsman with copies of the documents falling
within scope. A number of the documents were marked with proposed
redactions. No
submissions were provided to the Ombudsman.
30 November 2022
The Ombudsman requested that the agency provide submissions in support of
the proposed redactions.
6 December 2022
The agency confirmed that it would not provide any further submissions.
16 December 2022
The Ombudsman issued his provisional determination and invited submissions
from the parties.
6 January 2023
The applicant provided submissions in response to the provisional
determination.
6 January 2023
The agency provided submissions in response to the provisional
determination.
16 January 2023
The interested party provided submissions in response to the provisional
determination.
APPENDIX TWO
Document in issue
Description
Agency’s revised position
Ombudsman’s provisional determination
Information to be released
01-22 In-Camera Minutes
Partially out of scope
Entire document
01-22 Special Meeting Minutes
Entire document
02-22 In-Camera Minutes
Entire document
04-22 In-Camera Minutes
Entire document
05-22 In-Camera Minutes
Partially out of scope and partially exempt on the basis of clause 6(2)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 6(2)
Release in full excepting the entirety of item 10
08-21 In-Camera Minutes
Entire document
09-21 In-Camera Minutes
Partially out of scope and partially exempt on the basis of clause 7(1)
Entire document
10-21 In-Camera Minutes
Partially out of scope
Entire document
11-21 Executive Meeting
Entire document
11-21 In-Camera Minutes
Partially out of scope, partially exempt on the basis of clause 6(2),
partially redacted without reason
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 6(2)
Release in full excepting the entirety of item 5
11-21 In-Camera Minutes
Partially out of scope
Entire document
12-21 Executive Meeting Minutes
Partially out of scope
Entire document
AUU – Copy f Rebrand_consolidated feedback GS additions
Entire document
AUU – Copy of Rebrand_consolidated feedback GS additions_xlsx
Entire document
AUU Front of House – Hub_Old Accommodation services space
Entire document
AUU rebrand legal advice
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
AUU rebrand presentation
Entire document
AUU year in review – Xmas special
Entire document
Board meeting – Rebrand update_status
Entire document
Board Resolutions Re SRC
Entire document
Breach of SRC Funding Due to Recent Post
Entire document
Entire document
Circular Resolution Re EO
Entire document
Directions RE SRC Funding_O_Week
Entire document
Exec Salary Data
Entire document
FW CONFIDENTIAL RE Breach of Funding Agreement
Entire document
FW Media inquiry The Oz
Entire document
FW Re motion for the upcoming AUU Board meeting
Entire document
FW Re motion for the upcoming AUU Board meeting A1
Entire document
FW Re motion for the upcoming AUU Board meeting A2
Entire document
FW_AUU Front of House – Hub_Old Accommodation services space
Entire document
FW_AUU Rebrand
Entire document
FW_Brand presentation for tonight
Entire document
FW_Brand workshop
Entire document
FW_FEEDBACK_Rebrand – audience testing
Entire document
FW_Re motion for the upcoming AUU Board meeting
Entire document
Entire document
FW_Rebrand Document for the Board
Entire document
FW_Rebrand GL code
Entire document
FW_Rebranding Budget
Entire document
FW_Schedule 4 to the AUU constitution and AUU rebrand
Entire document
Fwd AUU FOI 1
Entire document
Fwd AUU FOI 2
Entire document
Fwd_17 January 2022 AUU Board Meeting 01-22
Entire document
Fwd_AUU Front of House – Hub_Old Accommodation services space
Entire document
Fwd_AUU Rebrand presentation
Entire document
Gary Sutherland Signed Contract June 20 2019
Entire document
General Manager – Position Description May 2016
Entire document
Master Question List
Entire document
Media Interview
Entire document
Memo RE AUU EO Employment Contract renewal 2022
Fully exempt, presumably on the basis of clause 7(1)
Entire document
Memo RE AUU EO Employment Contract renewal 2022
Fully exempt, presumably on the basis of clause 7(1)
Entire document
Question Re SRC Motion
Entire document
RE AUU and SRC and funding 1
Entire document
RE AUU and SRC and funding 2
Entire document
Entire document
Entire document
Re CityMag Article 1
Partially out of scope
Entire document
Re CityMag Article 2
Partially out of scope
Entire document
RE CONFIDENTIAL RE Breach of Funding Agreement
Entire document
RE CONFIDENTIAL Salary information
Partially out of scope and partially redacted without reason
Entire document
RE CONFIDENTIAL Salary information A1
Entire document
RE CONFIDENTIAL Salary information A2
Entire document
RE Counter Guide Purchasing
Entire document
RE George Duncan Memorial Letter – SRC 1
Entire document
RE George Duncan Memorial Letter – SRC 2
Entire document
RE Media inquiry The Oz
Entire document
Re Protest and occult club media enquiry
Partially out of scope and partially redacted without reason
Entire document
RE Re motion for the upcoming AUU Board meeting
Entire document
Entire document
RE Rebrand – Club documents transition
Entire document
RE Rebrand – Q_A for AUU Board 1
Entire document
RE Rebrand – Q_A for AUU Board 2
Entire document
RE Rebrand – Q_A for AUU Board 2 A1
Entire document
RE SRC President’s report on AUU funding agreement KPIs to AUU
President Oscar Ong
Entire document
RE_ 11 August 2021 Board Meeting Agenda 08-21
Entire document
RE_ Annual leave request
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 6(1)
RE_ AUU Front of House – Hub_Old Accommodation services space
Entire document
RE_AUU Rebrand presentation
Entire document
RE_Board meeting – Rebrand update_status
Entire document
Re_ Board Meetings – YouTube recordings
Entire document
Constitution
and Rules documents
Entire document
RE_ Decision on Rebranding
Entire document
RE_ FEEDBACK_Rebrand – audience testing
Entire document
RE_Hub closure – rebranding
Entire document
RE_ phone call
Entire document
RE_ Re Brand
Entire document
RE_ Re motion for the upcoming AUU Board meeting
Entire document
Re_ Rebrand
Entire document
RE_ Rebrand – artwork files
Entire document
RE_Rebrand – budget_plan approval
Entire document
RE_ Rebrand Dcoument for the Board
Entire document
RE_ Rebrand project in Monday
Entire document
RE_ Rebrand_ Stakeholder Communications (EDM preview)
Entire document
RE_ Social Media – rebrand
Entire document
Entire document
Rebrand Board briefing
Entire document
Rebrand Briefing
Entire document
Rebrand Document for the Board
Entire document
Rebrand Project Outline June 19
Entire document
Rebrand Project Outline June 19_pdf
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 6(1)
Release in full excepting the second sentence in the body of the email.
Resolutions Passed in Today Board Meeting
Entire document
Survey link
Entire document
TAG Salary Survey Summary 2021
Entire document
Whole of team update when we do it
Entire document
youX preso to Martin and Jennie
Entire document
Charities Act 2013
Local Government
Association of Queensland Inc v Information Commissioner
[2001] QSC 052
Local Government
Association of Queensland Inc v Information Commissioner
[2001] QSC 052
Queensland Law Society Inc
v The Information Commission & SJ English
[1996] QSC 24
Freedom of Information Act
Freedom of Information Act
El Shafei v Central
Adelaide Local Health Network
[2017] SACAT 5.
Freedom of Information Act
section 48.
State of South Australia
(Department of the Premier and Cabinet)) v Seven Network (Operations) Ltd
[2021] SACAT 60
Commissioner of Police v
District Court of New South Wales
(1993) 31 NSWLR 606, 625, citing
Williams and Registrar of Federal Court of Australia
[1985] AATA 226
(1985) 8 ALD 219
Young v Wicks
[1986] FCA 169
(1985) 13 FCR 85
Lower Burdekin Newspaper
Company Pty Ltd and Lower Shire Council
[2004] QlCmr 2 at [27].
Colakovski v Australian
Telecommunications Corporation (1991) 29 FCR 429, 438.
Freedom of Information
Freedom of Information
Freedom of Information
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.34 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter