URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACAT/2025/72.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:53:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Psychology Board of Australia v Angelakis [2025] SACAT 72 (20 August 2025)
Psychology Board of Australia
Samantha Angelakis
NEUTRAL CITATION
Psychology Board of Australia v Angelakis
[2025] SACAT 72
Senior Member Rainford
Member N Gross
Member E Golding
20 August 2025
HEARING DATES
SACAT FILE NO.
2021/SHP000033
The Psychology Board of South Australia (the Board) referred a complaint to
the Tribunal pursuant to s 196 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (South Australia) Act 2010
(the National Law), alleging that
the respondent behaved in a way that constituted professional misconduct. On 10
May 2024, the Tribunal
found that the respondent behaved in a way that
constitutes professional misconduct under s 196(1)(b)(iii) of the National
between 8 July
2019 and 19 July 2019, the respondent failed to maintain proper professional
boundaries with her client;
from 20 July
2019, engaged in an intimate and sexual relationship with her client within two
years after terminating the professional
relationship; and
false/misleading information to the Board and the Australian Health Practitioner
Regulation Agency (AHPRA).
This decision considers the
disciplinary sanctions to be imposed in relation to that conduct.
The Board submitted that the respondent should be reprimanded, her
registration cancelled and that she be disqualified from applying
registration for three years. The Board additionally sought for the respondent
to be prohibited from providing any health service
until she is granted
registration. In support of the sanctions sought, the Board argued that the
respondent has a history of minimising
her conduct and giving half-truths such
that the Tribunal should not trust her and should cancel her registration and
impose a significant
period of disqualification and prohibition.
The respondent did not dispute the sanctions sought by the Board other than
seeking a suspension of her registration rather than cancellation
alternatively, a shorter period of cancellation. The respondent provided
evidence from her treating psychologist that there was
little risk she would
engage in boundary violations again. She also provided a character reference and
gave evidence to the Tribunal
Held, imposing sanctions:
The respondent
is reprimanded;
respondent’s registration as a registered health practitioner is
The respondent
is disqualified from applying for registration as a registered health
practitioner for a period of three (3) years;
The respondent
is prohibited from providing any health service until she is granted further
registration as a health practitioner
under the National Law, whether directly,
and whether as an employee, contractor, manager or volunteer including, but not
to, any health service that involves the provision of counselling or
other treatment relating to the mental health of any person.
Health Practitioner – Complaint by the Psychology Board of South
Australia – Professional misconduct –Boundary violation
False and misleading statements to authorities – Reprimand –
Prohibited from providing any health service until
re-registered –
Disqualified from applying for registration for 3 years – Registration
LEGISLATION CONSIDERED
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (South Australia) Act 2010
CASES CONSIDERED
Angelakis v Psychology Board of Australia
[2024] SASC 133
Craig v Medical Board of South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
(2001) 79 SASR 545
Health Care Complaints Commission & Litchfield
(1997) 41 NSWLR
Health Ombudsman v De La Rey
[2020] QCAT 223
Health Ombudsman v LNA
[2022] QCAT 194
Health Ombudsman v WFB
[2025] QCAT 3
Marin v Chiropractic Board of Australia
[2020] SASCFC 74
New South Wales Bar Association v Evatt
[1968] HCA 20
(1968) 117 CLR 177
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Williams
[2013] SAHPT
Pharmacy Board of Australia v Roberts
[2022] SACAT 111
Psychology Board of Australia v Angelakis
[2024] SACAT 24
Psychology Board of Australia v Cook
[2014] QCAT 162
Psychology Board of Australia v Garcia
[2015] VCAT 128
Psychology Board of Australia v Holmes
[2020] SACAT 122
Psychology Board of Australia v Maroulis
[2019] SACAT 69
Psychology Board of Australia v Meulblok
[2020] VCAT 579
Psychology Board of Australia v Wakelin
[2014] QCAT 516
REPRESENTATION
Mr A Schatz with Ms B Farinola appeared for the applicant
Ms G Walker SC with Mr D Gardner appeared for the respondent
REASONS FOR DECISION
10 May 2024, following a contested hearing which took place on 23 May 2023-26
May 2023 and 28 June 2023 (
Stage 1 hearing
), the Tribunal made findings
against the respondent Dr Samantha Angelakis on the referral of a Complaint by
the Australian Health
Practitioner Regulation Agency (
) pursuant to
Sch 2 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (South Australia)
particular, the Tribunal made formal orders finding that the respondent has
behaved in a way that constitutes professional misconduct
under s 196(1)(b)(iii)
of the National Law in that:
2.1 between 8 July 2019 and 19 July
2019, the respondent failed to maintain proper professional boundaries with her
client CA by:
(a) engaging in non-clinical and personal communication with CA; and
(b) engaging in social and/or close personal relationships with CA;
2.2 from 20 July 2019, the respondent engaged in an intimate and sexual
relationship with CA within two years after terminating the
professional
relationship;
2.3 the respondent provided false/misleading information to the Board and
AHPRA about the timing and other circumstances in which
boundary violations and
her relationship with CA occurred in:
(a) her self-notification of 7 February 2020; and
(b) her first interview with AHPRA on 27 May 2020.
respondent appealed the Tribunal’s decision in the Supreme Court of South
Australia (Supreme Court). That appeal was dismissed
on 27 November
Tribunal heard submissions from the parties’ counsel and oral evidence
from Dr Angelakis and her clinical psychologist Dr
Tony McHugh on 8 May 2025
Stage 2 hearing
). Prior to that hearing, the Tribunal was also provided
with comprehensive written outlines of submissions from counsel and the
applicant’s
Supplementary Book of Documents (SBOD) containing the relevant
documentary evidence concerning the issue of
It now falls to the
Tribunal to consider what sanctions ought to be imposed on Dr Angelakis in
accordance with the National Law.
The Parties’ contentions
Board seeks the following orders:
5.1 That the respondent be
reprimanded (in the strongest possible terms) pursuant to s 196(2)(a) of the
National Law;
5.2 That the respondent’s registration as a registered health
practitioner be cancelled pursuant to s 196(2)(e) of the National
5.3 That the respondent be disqualified from applying for registration as a
registered health practitioner for a period of three
(3) years (from the date of
the Tribunal’s order) pursuant to s 196(4)(a) of the National Law;
5.4 That the respondent be prohibited pursuant to s 196(4)(b) of the
National Law from providing any health service until she is
granted registration
as a health practitioner under the National Law, whether directly or indirectly,
and whether as an employee,
contractor, manager or volunteer including, but not
limited to, any health service that involves the provision of counselling or
other treatment relating to the mental health of any person;
5.5 That the respondent pay the applicant’s costs of and incidental to
the proceedings, to be agreed or assessed in default
of agreement, pursuant to s
195 of the National Law; and
5.6 Any further or other orders the Tribunal may deem fit to make including,
for example, any permanent orders dealing with the confidentiality
records or other sensitive material that is currently before the Tribunal.
respondent seeks the following orders:
6.1 A reprimand;
6.2 Either:
6.2.1 a suspension of her registration for between 16 and 21 months
commencing from a date 28 days after the Tribunal’s decision
finalisation of remaining clients); or
6.2.2 a cancellation of her registration and associated disqualification
order for 12 months commencing from a date 28 days after
the Tribunal’s
decision, and a prohibition order limited to the provision of mental health
services and for a specified period
6.2.3 a costs order in favour of the applicant, in an amount to be assessed
if not agreed.
The Legal Principles to be applied
starting point when considering the appropriate sanctions for professional
misconduct is always that the paramount purpose of
disciplinary proceedings is
the protection of the public and that there is no element of punishing the
practitioner concerned.
In the well
cited case of
Craig v Medical Board of South
at [553-555], former
Chief Justice Doyle set out succinctly the other important purposes of
sanctioning proceedings which were recently
canvassed in
Pharmacy Board of
Australia v Roberts
summarised accordingly:
The imposition of disciplinary sanction may
serve one or all of the following purposes-
(a) preventing practitioners who are unfit to practise from doing so;
(b) securing the maintenance of professional standards;
(c) assuring members of the public and the relevant profession that appropriate
standards are being maintained and that professional
misconduct will not be
(d) bringing home to a practitioner the seriousness of their conduct;
(e) deterring a practitioner from any future departures from appropriate
(f) deterring other members of the profession who might be minded to act in a
similar way;
(g) imposing restrictions on a practitioner’s right to practise so as to
ensure that the public is protected.
is important to note that sometimes the protection of the public requires
disciplinary action which has a greater adverse effect
on the practitioner than
may be warranted if punishment was the relevant
consideration
and that the personal
circumstances of a practitioner may be of limited significance in the process of
determining what sanctions
are necessary in the public
The Tribunal’s factual findings at the Stage 1 hearing
the Stage 1 hearing, the Tribunal made factual findings regarding the
respondent’s conduct which we summarise as follows:
between 17 April 2019 and 19 July 2019, CA underwent 17 treatment sessions with
the respondent for work-related Post Traumatic
Stress Disorder;
9.2 between 8 July 2019 and 19 July 2019, the respondent engaged in
professional misconduct as defined by s 5 of the National Law
9.2.1 engaging in non-clinical and personal communication with CA and
9.2.2 engaging in social and/or a close personal relationship with CA;
9.3 the respondent between 8-19 July 2019:
9.3.1 attended F45 exercise classes with CA during the treatment period on
3-4 occasions;
9.3.2 had takeaway coffee with CA on one occasion;
9.3.3 exchanged emails with CA that were personal in nature and
unprofessional including emails about walking together in the Adelaide
drinking Gin together, obtaining a house in the hills and travelling together
(including overseas);
9.4 the respondent after the last treatment session on 19 July 2019, sent
email correspondence to CA advising that she was free to
meet him and on that
same day, both she and CA separated from their respective spouses;
9.5 on 20 July 2019 (one day after the treatment period ended), the
respondent and CA commenced a sexual relationship in contravention
of the Code
of Ethics binding on the respondent;
9.6 in February 2020, the respondent (through her solicitor) made a
self-notification to the Board concerning her relationship with
included in that notification a written statement by him providing false
information about the commencement date and circumstances
of their relationship;
9.7 the respondent behaved in a way that constitutes professional misconduct
by deliberately misleading the Board and AHPRA by providing
false and/or
misleading information concerning the timing and circumstances in which the
boundary violations and the relationship
with CA occurred in her
self-notification of 7 February 2020 and her first interview with AHPRA on 27
May 2020; and
9.8 the applicant was an unsatisfactory witness, she was vague and evasive
on crucial issues, had a tendency to defer to the benefit
of reflection and
hindsight and at times, was seemingly in sightless regarding her conduct.
The evidence at the Stage 2 hearing
parties produced to the Tribunal, a SBOD containing the relevant documents
concerning the issue of sanctions.
Those documents
applicant’s outline of submissions (including a list of comparative
10.2 the respondent’s outline of argument on sanctions;
10.3 the applicant’s reply to the respondent’s outline;
10.4 the statement of Dr Samantha Angelakis (with a number of professional
educational course certificates and a written reflection
10.5 the report of Dr Tony McHugh, clinical psychologist dated 21 April
10.6 A letter from Natalie Bottroff of natalie bottroff & associates Pty
Ltd, recovery and return to work services for registered
and self-insured
employers (undated).
Tribunal also heard from Dr Angelakis on oath and Dr McHugh on affirmation via
an audio visual link to Melbourne. During the course
of the oral evidence, the
Tribunal also received into evidence, further documentary exhibits including the
written reflections of
the respondent provided to Dr McHugh in 2021 during a
period of mandatory supervision about which we will say more
Discussion about the evidence
Angelakis in evidence explained that she has recommenced supervision with Dr
McHugh on a voluntary basis to address issues concerning
boundary violations,
ethics and the deliberate misleading of the Board, AHPRA and the Tribunal (at
the Stage 1 hearing). She had
previously been under mandated supervision in 2020
and 2021 as part of the conditions placed upon her registration following her
self-notification to the Board. She says that she has found the current
counselling uncomfortable because whilst she understands
and fully accepts the
Tribunal’s findings (and the consequences which will follow),
the part I am still really struggling with and now working on is the
part of being deliberately
misleading.”
on to say in cross-examination, that
“...I can’t say that I
intentionally misled, and that’s the thing that I’m really
struggling with and that’s
the thing I need to keep working
The respondent
does however acknowledge that she did mislead about when she developed feelings
for CA, when she committed boundary
violations, the amount of contact she had
with CA outside of sessions via email correspondence, attending the gym together
coffee. She candidly admits that she was not as frank as she should
Dr Angelakis also
accepts that in her written reflections to Dr McHugh during the first period of
supervision, she made a series
of statements which were false and misleading and
that she did not show him the voluminous emails between her and CA.
respondent, to her credit says that she will continue to work hard to become a
trustworthy practitioner. She states that over
the last five years since the
disciplinary proceedings commenced, she has developed a better understanding
and is hypervigilant about avoiding any further
conflicts and breaches. She asserts that she will never commit a boundary breach
again and that it is her intention to continue to engage with Dr
The various course
certificates produced
the efforts she has made to date to increase her awareness about professional
boundaries and ethics and the written reflection
demonstrates some insight into
her professional misconduct and resolve to avoid any repetition. She states:
“I’ve had five years to reflect on all of this. It’s changed
the way I practice entirely. Now, I document everything
[emphasised]. I make
links. I think ethically before, during, and after every client interaction. I
self-reflect as a daily practice.
And yes - I’ve become hypervigilant.
Because I need to be.”
Angelakis in anticipation of the sanctions which the Tribunal will impose, says
that she is no longer providing trauma group therapy
because she may not be able
to see it through to completion. She is no longer taking on new clients and she
says that she has a concern
because of the sanctions. She states that these proceedings have impacted on her
family and her professional development and have been financially costly.
respondent has also provided the Tribunal with a character testimonial from
Natalie Bottroff who asserts that Dr Angelakis has
a good professional
reputation as a clinical psychologist treating patients who have a trauma
diagnosis. She says she has no concerns
services to any person, notwithstanding the Tribunal’s findings of
professional misconduct.
McHugh has given evidence both in his written report and orally, at the Stage 2
hearing. The saliant features of his report are
as follows:
He provided 21
mandated AHPRA sessions as a supervisor to the respondent between 21 June 2021
and 28 March 2022.
He most recently
saw her on 11 and 17 April 2025 focussing on the Tribunal’s findings.
It is now clear
that the respondent admits the boundary violations but views her dishonest
behaviour as being more reckless than deliberately
misleading.
It is important
that high-quality supervision of the respondent continue into the
He opines that:
... there is little risk that she
[the respondent]
would engage
in boundary violations of any sort in the
Regarding the
respondent’s reflections on her conduct as explained to him, the fact that
she now acknowledges that her statements
to the Board and AHPRA and her evidence
to the Tribunal were not a full and frank description of the true facts and that
the respondent
has expressed unconditional remorse, he opines that the risk of
the respondent engaging in dishonest or reckless conduct in her future
with the regulators and professional bodies is very
saliant features of Dr McHugh’s evidence are as follows:
He opines that
the respondent’s behaviour was so reckless at times as to be
deliberate.
respondent told him about her conduct during the mandatory supervisory sessions
in 2021 is not what she now acknowledges
- she has “
... substantially
shifted her
The respondent
was an active participant in the email correspondence between her and CA and she
made very poor decisions at that time.
It should have been clear to her that a
relationship was developing and she should have noticed: “
... she was
remiss in not doing that, and the
perplexing”
He believed that
the respondent was acting in good faith regarding what she initially told him
had occurred and that he was disappointed
when he read the Tribunal and Supreme
Court decisions and discovered that he had been
He believes that
the respondent has a substantially different view about her conduct now as
opposed to her view in
The Parties’ submissions
applicant submits the following:
A question, can
the Tribunal be satisfied that the respondent is being truthful now when she
says that she will not engage in similar
conduct in the future, that is, is she
now a reformed practitioner?
The respondent
is an effective communicator and is easy to believe. Notwithstanding, the
Tribunal found (at the Stage 1 hearing) that
she is not a witness of truth. As
evidenced, she misled Dr McHugh in 2020/2021 and she has a history, of
minimising her conduct and
giving half-truths.
The Tribunal
should not trust the respondent and should cancel her registration and impose a
significant period of disqualification
and prohibition.
respondent submits the following:
complicated and insight (into their conduct) can change quickly.
There have been
no boundary violations for the last five years. Accordingly, the Tribunal can be
satisfied that her conduct will not
be repeated. The Tribunal should find that
the respondent is today, a fit and proper person to practise.
The respondent
has been living with the consequences of her conduct and is genuinely
remorseful. She is now hypervigilant and in respect
to the honesty
transgressions, is continuing with Dr McHugh. Accordingly, there is a low risk
of any future transgressions.
While general
deterrence is a key issue, the conduct was isolated (as opposed to multiple
transgressions involving multiple clients).
Suspension with
appropriate conditions is more appropriate than cancellation.
Any prohibition
order imposed should be restricted to the provision of mental health services
and should have an end date.
The operation of
any cancellation or suspension orders should be delayed for a period of 28 days
to give the respondent time to make
appropriate arrangements to ensure the
continuity of treatment to her existing clients. (We note this is not opposed by
the Board).
Comparable cases
the Board and the respondent have referred the Tribunal to a number of
comparative cases.
appreciate that these are not binding regarding our decision (as each matter
must be individually determined on its own
unique set of facts, and specifically
here, according to our findings), we consider that the following cases in
particular do provide
some guidance regarding our task:
Psychology Boad of Australia v Wakelin
[2014] QCAT 516
The respondent provided treatment for a period of 11 days. Personal
information was exchanged with the client and a sexual relationship
immediately after the professional relationship ended. The respondent gave false
statements to AHPRA and was accordingly
Reprimanded by the responsible Tribunal
and disqualified for a period of 18 months with a costs order. The Tribunal
stated at [25]
that deceptive conduct made the boundary violation more serious
and emphasised the importance of deterring other practitioners who
need to know
that serious consequences will follow if they flout their professional
responsibilities.
Psychology Board of Australia v Maroulis
[2019] SACAT 69
The respondent provided two treatments and two weeks after the final session,
engaged in sexual conduct with the client. Whilst there
was no false or
misleading conduct, the practitioner’s registration was cancelled and a
disqualification period of three years
imposed. An appeal to the Supreme Court
proceeded but was dismissed with the Court pronouncing (per Bleby J) that:
cancellation of registration and a considerable period of
disqualification are commonly deployed in response to breaches of the
professional
boundary by sexual contact. The question of the appropriate
sanction in any given case directs attention to what, in the Tribunal’s
assessment, is necessary to protect the public in the particular circumstances,
having regard to the historical course of sanctions
for broadly comparable
transgressions.
Psychology Board of Australia v Meulblok
[2020] VCAT 579
A female psychologist provided treatment to a male client for a period of
text and digital messages and then commenced a sexual relationship just prior to
the end of the treatment period. Although
there was no dishonest conduct
concerning the disclosure of the relationship, she did state to the client that
she would lose her
professional registration and income if he reported the
matter. The respondent was reprimanded, her registration was cancelled and
was disqualified from seeking re-registration for two years and prohibited from
providing health services for the same period.
Psychology Board of Australia v Holmes
[2020] SACAT 122
The respondent engaged in a sexual relationship with a client for three
months at the end of the treatment period. There was a conspiracy
to conceal the
relationship which included the destruction of evidence together with the
misleading of the AHPRA investigation. The
respondent was reprimanded,
disqualified for five years and prohibited from providing health services for
seven years. The Tribunal
specifically stated that a health practitioner cannot
expect favourable consideration if they are not immediately cooperative with
regulatory authorities.
Psychology Board of Australia v Garcia
[2015] VCAT 128
The respondent of some 10 years standing, engaged in a sexual relationship
with a vulnerable client whom she later married. Another
practitioner reported
the conduct two years later. The respondent was reprimanded, suspended for six
months and ordered to undergo
education and mentoring.
Health Ombudsman v WFB
[2025] QCAT 3
A psychologist commenced a romantic relationship with a client immediately at
the end of the treatment period. There was a self-notification,
admissions were
made and steps were taken to educate. The responsible Tribunal reprimanded,
suspended the practitioner’s registration
for six months and imposed
supervisory conditions.
Health Ombudsman v LNA
[2022] QCAT 194
The respondent treated a vulnerable client with significant mental health
conditions over two years. A romantic and sexual relationship
developed during
the last month of treatment and was maintained for 15 months. The respondent was
reprimanded and suspended from
practising for a period of six months.
Psychology Board of Australia v Cook
[2014] QCAT 162
A psychologist formed a sexual relationship with a married client. There was
no notification for three years. Harm was caused to the
client. The responsible
Tribunal reprimanded the respondent and imposed a six month suspension with
conditions for supervision.
Health Ombudsman v De La Rey
[2020] QCAT 223
A psychologist formed a romantic relationship with an extremely vulnerable
client over a four year period. There were a large number
of emails and
telephone calls exchanged. The practitioner ended the relationship and made a
subsequent notification to AHPRA. The
responsible Tribunal found that the
practitioner did show considerable insight and remorse and accordingly, imposed
a reprimand and
a fine of $2000.
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Williams
[2013] SAHPT 1
The respondent falsified documents regarding her professional qualifications.
She lied to AHPRA and the Board during the course of
their investigations and
was also found guilty of committing criminal fraud offences. The respondent was
reprimanded by the former
Health Practitioners Tribunal and her registration was
cancelled and a disqualification of two years imposed.
previously stated, comparative cases are not binding and are of limited
assistance. We refer to the judgement of his Honour Chief
Justice Kourakis in
Marin v Chiropractic Board of
at [79]-[80]:
is well accepted that in sentencing for criminal offences the assistance
provided by comparative sentences is limited. That is
all the more the case in
periods of disqualification imposed to maintain professional standards. In
lee v Health care Complaints Commission,
the Court of Appeal of New South
Wales observed:
(a) comparison with the outcomes in earlier cases may be useful if those earlier
cases show some discernible range or pattern;
(b) such a range or pattern, even when discernible, cannot be regarded as a
precedent indicating what is ‘correct’;
(c) the range or pattern is, at best, a reflection of the accumulated
experience and wisdom of decision-makers;
(d) the range or pattern will potentially be of value only if it is possible to
gather from it an appreciation of some unifying
(e) since the predominant consideration is the protection of the public, a
decision can only be made by reference to the facts of
the particular case and
by considering what measures are needed to ensure that the future behaviour of
the particular practitioner
is shaped in a way that is consistent with that
protection...
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
, it was held:
The gravity of professional misconduct is not to be measured by reference to the
worst cases, but by the extent to which it departs
from proper standards.
The Tribunal’s considerations
treatment period here spanned a period of four months from April to July 2019.
As a trauma specialist, the respondent provided
treatment to CA in relation to
work related post-traumatic stress disorder, complicated by him being involved
in an unhappy marriage
at the time of treatment. Although we accept that there
is no evidence that CA was vulnerable to the influences of the respondent,
fact remains that he was her client and she had an ethical and professional
responsibility to maintain proper boundaries not
just during the treatment
period but for two years thereafter. Instead, she took advantage of the
situation having allowed an attraction
between her and CA to develop with the
knowledge that both of them at the time were involved in unhappy relationships.
respondent as we have found, sent a large volumes of emails to CA during the
treatment period which were of a personal, intimate
and flirtatious nature and
she also attended gym and had coffee with CA outside of those treatment
sexual relationship between the respondent and CA commenced the day after
treatment ended which is at the commencement of the
two year restriction period
imposed by the Code of Ethics regulating Dr Angelakis’ conduct as a
psychologist.
are mindful that Dr McHugh has opined that there is little risk that the
respondent would engage in boundary violations of any
sort in the future. He
also considers that the risk of dishonest or reckless conduct by the respondent
in dealing with her professional
regulators is very low as previously
referenced. It is a question of what weight we place on his evidence on the
basis of our assessment
of the respondent’s veracity in claiming that she
is now a reformed practitioner who is endeavouring to gain the trust of the
Board, her profession, AHPRA and the Tribunal against the background of her
professional misconduct. It must not be overlooked in
approaching this task that
she also misled Dr McHugh for some 21 sessions of mandatory supervision and has
only recently been candid
in her disclosures following the Tribunal and Supreme
Court findings and for that matter, in anticipation of the disciplinary outcome
of these proceedings. However, he has still not been provided by her with copies
of the copious emails passing between the respondent
and CA during the treatment
aggravating feature of the respondent’s conduct when viewed as a whole, is
the false and misleading statements she made
in her self-notification to the
Board compounded by the fact that the notification was made some seven months
after the relationship
commenced. Whilst the respondent admitted to a sexual
relationship, she did not disclose the earlier boundary violations during the
treatment period and she gave a misleading impression about how and when the
relationship began not just to the Board, but to AHPRA
during its investigation,
to Dr McHugh during the mandated supervisory sessions and ultimately to the
Tribunal in evidence during
the Stage 1 hearing. Even now, it is apparent from
the respondent’s evidence during the sanctions hearing, that she still
not really accept that her dishonest conduct was deliberate as opposed to
reckless or careless even though she states that she does
Tribunal’s findings in that regard. We consider that this is contrary to
the respondent’s assertions that
she is a reformed practitioner with
increased self-awareness.
we do accept that the respondent has taken steps to rehabilitate through the
voluntary resumption of counselling with Dr McHugh
and the completion of
professional education courses, we consider that her insight into her conduct as
a whole is still very limited
and accordingly, we are somewhat sceptical as to
the timing of those efforts pending the imposition of sanctions. We are also
relationship between the respondent and CA progressed and, given the
respondent’s
limited insight and her lack of candour, we cannot be
confident that such conduct may not occur again should her current personal
circumstances change.
coming to our decision we have had regard to the following:
28.1 The fact of no prior disciplinary history;
28.2 The rehabilitation efforts Dr Angelakis has taken to date and her
intention to continue with high level counselling supervision
with Dr McHugh in
the future as recommended by him;
28.3 Dr McHugh’s expressed opinions that any future risk of boundary
violations and/or dishonest or misleading conduct is very
28.4 The character testimonial of Natalie Bottroff and the fact that Dr
Angelakis provides a specialist service in the area of trauma
management, has
previously held a managerial position with a reputable psychology service and
has until recently held a tertiary
academic position which she has now
relinquished on account of our findings. There is no doubt that she is highly
regarded in her
27.5 The evidence before us, the submissions of the parties’ counsel
(both written and oral) and the legal authorities to which
we have been
referred; and
27.6 The concluding remarks of his Honour Justice B Doyle upon dismissing the
respondent’s Supreme Court appeal, namely
obligations are uncompromising, but life is complicated. Nothing could be
clearer than that the connection formed between
the appellant and CA was
powerful and mutually felt. That connection has, it seems been enduring.
is not alleged, and it would not appear to be the case, that CA was in fact
particularly vulnerable to any conduct by the appellant
in displaying interest
in him. Plainly, the appellant did not consciously exploit her position or any
power imbalance that existed.
To the extent that reference was made on appeal to
issues of ‘causality’ in relation to the timing of the end of
relationship, I would indicate that I see no basis for such findings.
Those observations are not intended to condone the ethical
transgression; but
rather to contextualise them and the findings of misconduct in connection with
the inaccuracies in her self-reporting
and the first interview.
Notwithstanding
the conclusions I have reached on the grounds of appeal, the fact remains that
the appellant did, ultimately, self-notify
and has embarked in a conscientious
way on a process of mentoring and self-refection. (reference footnoted) Although
some issues
were contested before the Tribunal, the appellant made significant
concessions. The ethical transgressions the subject of the notification
appear to have been an aberration in an otherwise promising and worthwhile
career. These will be matters for the Tribunal to
consider in the context of the
principles informing the imposition of appropriate sanctions under the National
The Tribunal’s determination
are firmly of the view that the respondent’s conduct is too serious for us
to consider suspension of her registration as
urged by her counsel, Ms Walker
SC. Under the circumstances, nothing but cancellation of Dr Angelakis’
registration and the
imposition of a significant disqualification and
prohibition period is appropriate. We consider that such sanctioning will not
provide public protection against the risk of any repeat conduct but will
specifically deter the respondent and importantly, other
practitioners from
engaging in such conduct and in particular, the misleading and deception of the
professional regulators. As the
Queensland Tribunal stated in
practitioners
who engage in boundary violations who then misrepresent the truth to the
regulators can expect serious consequences
will follow. We also have particular
regard to the comments of the Supreme Court (per Bleby J) in
Psychology Board
of Australia v Maroulis
as previously referred to in [20.2] of these reasons
concerning the imposition of substantial sanctions regarding professional
violations. By imposing what we consider are appropriate sanctions
here, we wish to highlight the seriousness of the respondent’s
conduct and
to ensure that professional standards are maintained at all times and that the
public are assured and the psychology
profession at large is in no doubt that
such conduct will not be tolerated.
regard to the circumstances of this matter, we consider that a period of three
years as recommended by the Board, is appropriate.
But for the developing (but
partial) insight now displayed by the respondent, her rehabilitation efforts to
date, her professional
standing to date and the fact that she comes before the
Tribunal with no prior disciplinary history, we would have considered imposing
an even greater period.
Consideration
will need to be given by the appropriate authority at the end of the period of
disqualification/prohibition as to whether
the respondent is a fit and proper
person to be re-registered should she make an application and if so, as to any
appropriate conditions
to be placed on her registration in light of Dr
McHugh’s evidence regarding the ongoing need for high level supervision
the future.
Orders of the Tribunal pursuant to s 196 of the National Law are as follows:
32.1 The respondent is reprimanded (s 196(2)(a));
32.2 The respondent’s registration as a registered health practitioner
is cancelled (s 196(2)(e));
32.3 The respondent is disqualified from applying for registration as a
registered health practitioner for a period of
three (3) years
(s196(4)(a));
32.4 The respondent is prohibited from providing any health service until
she is granted further registration as a health practitioner
under the National
Law, whether directly or indirectly, and whether as an employee, contractor,
manager or volunteer including, but
not limited to, any health service that
involves the provision of counselling or other treatment relating to the mental
any person (s 196(4)(b));
32.5 The Orders set out in [32.2-32.4] hereof, are to take effect 28 days
after the date of this decision.
32.6 The respondent is to pay the costs of and incidental to these
proceedings, to be agreed or assessed in default of agreement
pursuant to s 195
of the National Law.
Psychology Board of
Australia v Angelakis
[2024] SACAT 24.
Angelakis v Psychology
Board of Australia
[2024] SASC 133.
Exhibit A-7.
New South Wales Bar
Association v Evatt
[1968] HCA 20
(1968) 117 CLR 177.
[2001] SASC 169
(2001) 79 SASR 545.
[2022] SACAT 111.
Craig v Medical Board of
South Australia
, ibid at [43].
Health Care Complaints
Commission & Litchfield
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630, at 637F.
Exhibit A-7.
SBOD PP 2845-2988.
Exhibits A-8 and A-9.
Transcript (T) P 9 and SBOD
P 2949 [15].
SBOD P 2949 [21] and
SBOD PP 2952-2963.
SBOD P 2965.
SBOD P 2975 and T P 44.
SBOD P 2975.
SBOD PP 2974 and 2976.
NG: Dr McHugh stated in
evidence that he only became aware of the email contents after having read the
Tribunal and Supreme Court
decisions (as referred to therein).
SBOD PP 2875-2894.
[2021] SASC 16
[2020] SASCFC 74.
Ibid at [406]-[408].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.27 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter