URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWC/2010/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:08:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MAXIMUS RESOURCES LTD v JON BENNETT ALTON, ARTHUR JAMES FOWLER & RICHARD GORDON TEUSNER (NO.4) [2010] SAWC 2 (13 April 2010)
WARDENS COURT OF SOUTH
(District Court Administrative and
Disciplinary Division)
with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person using material in the
judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any
such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of
the Court in which it was generated.
RESOURCES LTD v JON BENNETT ALTON, ARTHUR JAMES FOWLER & RICHARD GORDON
TEUSNER (NO.4)
[2010] SAWC 2
Judgment of Senior Warden Dr
13 April 2010
ENERGY AND RESOURCES - MINERALS -
MINING FOR MINERALS
Exempt land, notice of entry, conditions of compensation, lessee as owner
MAXIMUS RESOURCES LTD v
JON BENNETT ALTON, ARTHUR JAMES FOWLER & RICHARD GORDON TEUSNER
[2010] SAWC 2
am dealing with an application under
Mining Act 1971
(SA) to remove exemptions over portions of Mr Richard Teusner’s land
comprised in CTRB Volume 4161 Folio 949. Under
the owner of the exempt
land has the benefit of the exemption as does the owner of any adjoining land
from where source of the exemption
arises. The exemptions are set out in
annexure B, and explained in paras.3 and 4 of Mr Scott Duncombe’s
affidavit of 2 June
mining operation is a proposed drilling program of 17 drill holes and their
proposed location is also set out in annexure B.
I accept that description of
the exempt areas and the location of the drill holes as sufficiently accurate
for my purposes. All
the proposed drill holes will be in exempt land from one
or more causes and the benefit of the exemptions all fall to Mr Richard
as the owner of the freehold title of the land, subject to exemptions. He has
the benefit of an exemption around a spring.
Mr James Fowler has the benefit of
exemptions, in respect of his house, over all of the land where drilling is
proposed and for
lesser areas for his dam and shed. Mr Jon Bennett Alton has
the benefit of an exemption over land affected by at least 12 of the
drill holes, one is on the boundary of the exemption and four are outside the
exemption. He also has the benefit of an
exemption arising from a dam affected
by five drill holes. Mr Richard Teusner has the benefit of the rights as a
landowner objecting
to entry by a miner and to the use of declared equipment.
John S. and Mrs Marina A. Teusner hold a lease for two years over Mr Richard
Teusner’s land. I so found at para.2 of my
judgment of 25 March 2010,
and at para.6 I noted, that they should be parties. They have the same rights
as Mr Richard Teusner in
relation to the exemption application that is before
me. They also have rights in relation to the objection to entry for mining
to the use of declared equipment (eg a drilling rig or an excavator) which
Maximus Resources Ltd has not applied for me to address.
note the supplementary submission of 7 April 2010 signed by Mr Justin Sharman.
It asserts that I cannot refer to the unstamped
lease by virtue of
Stamp Duties Act 1923
Statutes Amendment (Budget)
removed the obligation to stamp leases and this was confirmed by the
Stamp Duties (Tax Reform) Amendment Act 2009
. I refer to the lease and
to the oral evidence which would be admissible for this purpose of proving the
status of Mr John and Mrs
Marina Teusner even if the lease were not. I confirm
the findings in my March judgment. I note that by a written submission of
February, Mr John and Mrs Marina Teusner disclosed their interest and seek
compensation. It is clear that they must be joined
as parties to benefit from
any compensation and to be bound by any orders permitting access on conditions.
They are ‘owners’
of the subject land in the terms of the Act and
they are clearly objecting to entry and drilling on the exempt land. My order
not be effective until they are parties to this action and until I am asked
to deal with the objection to entry issues as well the
exempt land issues. I
still await an application to join them and an application to amend this
application to confirm that I am
asked to deal with the objection to entry
matters are essential but are procedural. The hearing proceeded on the basis
that I was considering the rights of Mr John and
Mrs Marina Teusner as well as
those of Mr Richard Teusner, Mr Arthur James Fowler and Mr Jon Bennett Alton and
in the context of
my July judgment, that I was also considering the objection to
entry issues. Maximus Resources Ltd assert urgency, so rather than
allowing the
failure of their advisors to address these procedural issues to cause further
delay, I have decided to proceed to consider
the substantive issues, with the
proviso that until these procedural issues are addressed, my judgment will have
no effect for or
against Mr John and Mrs Marina Teusner. I make it clear that I
reserve all parties’ rights to argue any issues arising from
application to amend this application or to join parties and the publishing of
these reasons do not assume any decision on those
my judgment of 4 July 2008 I decided not to deal with the separate rights of
each party but took one approach to conditions and
individual awards of
compensation to each party. I take the same approach here.
John Teusner grazes and breeds sheep on this land, as did his father. In
relation to the disruption to stock it has been suggested
that I should allow
the program to proceed and assess actual damage after the event by a comparison
of returns from the grazing of
sheep in the most recent season compared to the
actual returns whilst the exploration returns. This could be a contested and
process more expensive in legal fees than the amount in contention. I
am not inclined to allow that. In my previous judgment I
expressed a preference
to assess damages for disruption to stock on the basis of the cost of agistment
of the affected stock elsewhere,
but neither party has provided me with figures
to do this. In future cases of this type I will encourage an assessment on an
basis as it minimises the room for expensive debate.
have an application to require a bond because the nature of mining exploration
is speculative. If I agreed with the miner that
I should await the outcome of
the activity to assess the actual loss I might sensibly require a bond to be
lodged. If I assess damages
in anticipation, the calculation is less certain,
but it can be paid in advance and so the confidence that a bond would provide is
not necessary.
intend to follow the orders in my July judgment, with modifications. I first
explain the reasons for substantive changes.
am asked to permit one year from the start to the completion of any drilling
program. It is urged that the availability of drilling
rigs makes twelve months
realistic. Against this, the owners want any disruption I permit to the
enjoyment of their freehold to
be for as short a time as possible. I shall
permit one year to complete the program, but from the date of this order, not
date of commencement. That will require the work to be completed well
before the lambing season in 2011 which starts in June and
so will minimise
disruption to the Teusners.
accept the evidence of Mr John Teusner that electric fencing is not sufficient
to prevent the access of sheep and that the pads
should be kept isolated until
the end of summer to allow re-sown pasture to run to seed. I have excluded the
use of electric fencing
and extended the obligation to fence the areas to be
rehabilitated until the end of April 2011. I have left open how this is best
have modified the obligation to restore land to its prior contour to permit some
flexibility if Mr Teusner agrees in writing. I
have noted the undertaking by
Maximus Resources Ltd not to dig the sumps for each pad until the drilling is
ready to proceed. I
have extended the required minimum notice of commencement
of the works to seven days.
have clarified the obligation in relation to groundwater. I reiterate the
finding in my July judgment that the risk to the aquifers
is uncertain
(paras.32-34). The owners of bores and springs are entitled to certainty that
their access to water is not diminished
by mining activity. That is the purpose
of the exemption. When an exemption around a spring or bore is removed, any
should protect the access to quality and quantity of water. I accept
the central importance of water to the value of rural land
and the obligation I
impose below is intended to reflect that.
relation to losses to Mr Richard Teusner in his written submission forming part
of R1 he asserts that after my July judgment, in
anticipation of mining
commencing, he de-stocked 35 ewes which had not yet lambed. He seeks the
compensation previously ordered
by me. There was not discussion about whether
he had the opportunity to mitigate this loss by placing the ewes elsewhere, or
them when it became clear that the mining activity was not going to
proceed. There is no other evidence on this point. I shall
allow Mr Richard
Teusner the loss of profit I previously calculated at $1,620 (para.48). This
is for historic losses so no adjustment
for inflation is required and I am not
inclined to calculate any allowance for interest. Loss of amenity does not
apply to Richard
Teusner as no mining proceeded and he has now granted the right
to possession of the land by lease to John and Marina Teusner. Once
clear that no program would proceed without a fresh application then there was
nothing to stop Mr Richard, or John and
Marina Teusner undertaking pasture
improvement. I allow nothing for loss of productivity due delays in pasture
improvement.
relation to Mr John and Mrs Marina Teusner, I have their submission about
anticipated stock losses and the current improving price
of lambs. There is no
contrary evidence. I am sceptical of his confidence in bringing more than one
lamb per ewe to market. I
note, I allowed Mr Richard Teusner one lamb per ewe.
Although a generous line widely drawn around all the drill holes may equal
of the land, the drilling will not be on all holes at once and the loss of
available land for grazing over the season will be
likely to be less than the
10% I previously estimated. I remain content with my previous basis of
calculation of a 10% loss. That
is one successful lamb on average per ewe which
is 180 lambs. I shall allow a loss of 10% but at the now much better price of
after allowing a 5% deduction for levies and yardage. I shall allow for
disruption of stock 10% of 180 x $140 = $2,520. I am not
convinced any fleece
will be lost nor do I have sufficient information on shearing costs, dipping etc
to go down the path of calculating
that loss. I shall allow loss of amenity.
relation to general awards, such as loss of amenity, I should adjust these for
inflation that has occurred since July 2008. I
have of my own volition informed
myself from the Australian Bureau of Statistics
appreciate that this is a departure from the usual adversary process where the
parties bring the evidence to court, but it has
long been recognised that the
mining warden can inform him or herself from particular knowledge of the
involved in the mining
accessing this uncontroversial guide to price movements is consistent with that
approach. The Consumer Price Index, Australia,
June 2009, the All groups June
quarter 2008 to June 2009 showed an increase of 1.5%. The same index for the
September quarter 2009
showed an increase for that quarter of 1% and for the
December quarter 2009 an increase of 0.5%. That is a total change to between
July 2008 and December 2009 of 3%. The permission sought here covers activity
for up to a year hence so an adjustment of 5% to the
figures in my July 2008
judgment is a realistic allowance for general price movements since then. The
loss of amenity will be increased
from $220 to a figure in this judgment of
$231. I shall apply the same adjustment to the other general awards which are
my July 2008 reasons.
note the relevant Exploration Licence is due for renewal and the orders below
are made on the basis that the renewal is in place.
Accordingly,
I make the following orders:
permit Maximus Resources Ltd and its contractors access over Mr Richard
Teusner’s land with the required declared equipment
to undertake the
drilling program of 17 RC and diamond drill holes described in the particulars
(Exhibit P1) of the evidence of Mr
Maddocks and clarified by the evidence of Mr
Duncombe, including the rehabilitation work (all of which I shall call
‘the exploratory
drilling work’). I note that the actual location of
the drill holes may vary but any proposal to increase the number of drill
or to substantially change their location will require the leave of the court.
The land where the exploratory drilling work
is to occur and the access track is
to cease to be exempt land in respect of all exemptions, but only for the
purpose of the exploratory
drilling work. The permission to enter and to use
declared equipment and the removal of exemptions is subject to the limitations
in this order and the strict compliance by Maximus Resources Ltd with the terms
of this order. I give liberty to apply if it is alleged
that there is a breach
of this order. Nothing in this order or these findings implies any future
permission to enter or removal of
exemptions for other mining operations.
Resources Ltd will designate a person or persons who have authority to deal with
the landowners and that person(s) will have
authority to bind Maximus Resources
Ltd. Mr Richard Teusner and Mr John and Mrs Marina Teusner will designate which
of them has
authority to liaise with Maximus Resources Ltd and that person(s)
will have authority to bind all of them. A reference to Mr Teusner
conditions refers to all of Mr Richard Teusner and Mr John and Mrs Marina
Teusner. A reference to the landowners means
each of Mr Richard Teusner, Mr
John and Mrs Marina Teusner, Mr Arthur James Fowler and Mr Jon Bennett
Maximus Resources Ltd:
1. Will complete the exploratory drilling work within one year of this
liaise with Mr Teusner to use the most suitable access route and minimise
inconvenience to Mr Teusner in farming operations
on his property, while
ensuring that the work is conducted while Maximus Resources Ltd has access to
equipment and contractors.
Will give the landowners no less than seven days’ notice before it
commences the exploratory drilling work on Mr Teusner’s
b. Will delay the digging of any sump required for a drill
hole until the drilling is shortly to commence.
4. Will only conduct exploratory drilling work on Monday to Saturday
inclusive, between the hours of 7 a.m. and 5 p.m.
5. Will leave gates in the same position as they find them.
6. Within limits imposed by operational practicality and safety, will
facilitate access by Mr Teusner and his stock, to the area
affected by
exploratory drilling work.
7. Will comply with the requirements of the
Mining Act 1971
Mines and Works Inspections Act
, the conditions of
the Exploration Licence, any approval to carry out mining operations, and any
other legislation, regulations,
licences or government codes of conduct
affecting its activities on the landowners’ land;
8. Will ensure continuity of Mr Fowler’s power supply and Mr
Bourne’s water supply and in the event of any interruption
to them caused
by Maximus Resources Ltd, immediately arrange for alternative services
sufficient for their needs, whilst Maximus
Resources Ltd promptly reinstates
the usual supplies.
9. Will provide sufficient sheep proof fencing to sufficiently isolate the
exploratory drilling work to allow the grazing of stock
to successfully
continue without undue risk to stock and people and to ensure that all areas
that are re-sown are protected from
grazing until at least 30 April 2011 and
then to remove all such fencing.
10. Will reinstate any damaged fencing and gates as quickly as possible
after any damage occurs.
11. Will rehabilitate any land compacted or disturbed by exploratory
drilling work to at least its productivity prior to the mining
operation and
where possible improve it by appropriate measures such as:
a. Removing and replacing the topsoil and subsoil in such manner as to
ensure minimal loss of the topsoil, maintenance of soil structure
and organic
carbon and to ensure there is no bad clay closer to the surface than prior to
the mining operation;
b. Taking all necessary steps to prevent loss of rehabilitated soil,
including, where necessary, planting and watering a cover crop
as agreed by Mr
c. Remedying any compaction of the soil.
12. Will take sufficient profiles to establish the contoured form of Mr
Teusner’s land before the exploratory drilling work
and return the
Teusner’s land to substantially the same as the original contoured form
after the soil has settled, or to
such other contour as may be agreed with Mr
Teusner in writing.
13. Will use its best endeavours to protect all aquifers and in any event
ensure there is no lesser quality nor quantity of water
available to the
landowners during and after the mining operations, save lesser quality or
quantity which Maximus Resources Ltd
can establish is due to normal seasonal
variations or other causes that were not related to the exploratory drilling
a. Take two samples from one of any existing springs or bores on
Teusner’s land, Fowler’s land and Alton’s land
that each of
them nominates and give one sample to the landowner and test the quality of
water in the other sample and make the
results available to the landowners.
b. Upon there being a lesser quality or quantity of water available from
any nominated spring or bore, which Maximus Resources Ltd
cannot establish is
due to normal seasonal variations or other causes that are not related to the
exploratory drilling work, to
immediately make available an alternative supply
of similar quality and not less quantity until it succeeds in reinstating the
original quantity and quality of water.
c. If there is an ongoing obligation to supply alternative water in
accordance with clause 13.b the landowners may apply for an
appropriate bond
to be ordered to secure the expense of any ongoing obligation.
14. Will keep current with a reputable insurer, at its sole cost, a public
risk insurance policy in respect of the exploratory drilling
work to cover the
liability of Maximus Resources Ltd and Mr Teusner in which the limit of public
risk (being the amount which may
be paid arising out of any single claim) shall
be not less than $50 million and which shall include all provisions as are
contained in insurance policies for public risk.
15. Will indemnify, and keep indemnified, the landowners from and against
any liability, expenses and costs arising out of any claim
made against the
landowners by any third party for loss or damage suffered by that party
arising out of the conduct by Maximus
Resources Ltd of the exploratory
drilling work.
16. Will ensure no weeds or diseases are introduced to Mr Teusner’s
land, survey the area covered by the exploratory drilling
work and access
tracks for weeds and diseases before and after the exploratory drilling work
and co-operate with Mr Teusner to
control weeds.
a. Ensure dust and noise generation are minimised and buffered to the
extent reasonably possible, including the erection of hay
b. Take reasonable precautions to minimise the risk of starting fire,
including only bringing diesel powered vehicles onto the land
and have the
ability to extinguish fire;
c. Not permit dogs or firearms on the landowners’ land;
d. Not permit groundwater, oil, fuel, chemicals or other pollution to
escape onto the land;
e. Pay any sum due directly or consequentially under these conditions when
they fall due.
18. Will not conduct exploratory drilling work Christmas Day.
19. Will, if Maximus Resources Ltd deals with its interest in the
exploration licence or is taken over or amalgamates with any other
advise the party with whom it is dealing of these orders and upon such dealing,
take over or amalgamation being agreed,
forthwith advise the landowners of the
identity of the party and its interest.
The landowners:
20. Will permit Maximus Resources Ltd free and
undisturbed access to the area subject to the exploratory drilling program to
its rights under the Exploration Licence, and the
in accordance with and to the extent permitted by this order.
21. Permit Maximus Resources Ltd at its sole cost and expense, to erect or
construct such fences around the work areas as Maximus
Resources Ltd may
reasonably require.
All parties:
22. Will conduct their relationships in the utmost good faith to work
co- operatively to achieve the best progress for the exploratory
drilling work,
the least possible disruption of the farming business and the best possible
rehabilitation of the land.
23. If all agree in writing, may vary these terms in which event, the varied
terms shall be promptly filed by Maximus Resources
Ltd at the Wardens Court.
The variation is subject to acceptance by the court.
Compensation:
drilling will be a substantial visual imposition for each day that the
exploratory drilling work continues, and a substantial
noise and privacy
intrusion for each day whilst work is being done with the possibility of dust
and exhaust smells as well. This
will be most serious for Mr and Mrs Fowler and
a particular intrusion for Mrs Fowler. Due to the greater distance the
will be less but still significant for Mr Alton and his family. Mr
Teusner has different inconvenience as a landowner rather than
being able to
claim on account of a residential exemption.
accordance with my judgment of July 2008 and adjusted by 5% for the reasons
given above for each day that declared equipment is
in on site within 400 metres
of Mr Fowler’s dwelling house and operating for any part of that day I
order that he is entitled
to $300 and if declared equipment is on site within
400 metres of his dwelling and not operating $105 per day (including Sundays).
Mr Alton, for each day that declared equipment is on site within 400 metres of
Alton’s dwelling house and operating for
any part of that day, I order
that he is entitled to $105 and if it is on site within 400 metres and not
operating $31.50 per day
(including Sundays).
amounts for Mr Fowler and Mr Alton include loss of amenity and disturbance to
Resources Ltd must send each Wednesday by post to each of Mr Fowler and Mr
Alton, a statement of the amount owing, in accordance
with this judgment for the
previous Monday to Sunday inclusive and payment of that amount.
relation to Mr Richard Teusner, he now suffers no loss as the land is leased and
there is no suggestion to me that the rental will
be reduced during the drilling
program. For reasons given above I allow him $1,620 for losses previously
incurred. Mr John and
Mrs Marina Teusner will suffer loss of use of the
property during the drilling program. For reasons given above I allow them
for loss of profit caused by disruption to stock and $231 for loss of
sums payable to Mr Richard Teusner and Mr John and Mrs Marina Teusner are to be
paid within one month of the commencement of
the exploratory drilling program.
This covers all losses unless Mr John and Mrs Marina Teusner suffer actual loss
of stock. If that
occurs, there will need to be separate compensation assessed
for it. It is my intention that such payments be net of GST and if
that aspect
needs clarification I give liberty to apply.
confirm that these orders cannot bind Mr John and Mrs Marina Teusner until
someone joins them as parties and at that time I shall
confirm that objection to
entry and use of declared equipment are dealt with in this application.
http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (157 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter