URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWLRP/2010/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Valley View Nursing Home v WorkCover [2010] SAWLRP 2 (8 February 2010)
[2010] SAWLRP 2
WORKCOVER LEVY REVIEW PANEL
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
GRAMAR PTY LTD
VALLEY VIEW NURSING HOME
(Employer No. E10848903 -- File
reference 2008-0002753)
(Applicant)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION
OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
Deputy President R. R. Schroeder
Member P.G.
Member L.R. Birch
Member B. Sporton
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED 8
FEBRUARY 2010
Application for review -- alleged mismanagement of claim -- secondary
disability -- unrepresentative disability -- whether a gradually
disability may be a prior disability, and whether a secondary disability can
occur at the same time as the prior disability
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Cases referred
Benchmark Healthcare v WorkCover
[2009] SAWLRP 17
International Linen Service Pty Ltd v WorkCover
[2009] SAWLRP
Wami Kata Old Folks Home Inc v WorkCover
[2009] SAWLRP
Tolega v WorkCover
[2009] SAWLRP 11
[1996] SASC 5757
(1996) 66 SASR 474
Ta v WorkCover/CGU Workers
Compensation (SA) Ltd
[2005] SAWCT 52
Appearances:
Mr C. Sargent of counsel for the applicant employer.
Ms J. Gower, with Ms Agnes Rennie for the respondent WorkCover
Corporation.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
The applicant employer, by applications
dated 27 July 2007 and 12 October 2008, seeks reviews, pursuant to
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
("The Act"),
of decisions dated 24 May 2007 and 23 May 2008 by the respondent WorkCover
Corporation of South Australia ("WorkCover"),
fixing the levy rate to be paid
for the 2007-2008 and 2008-2009 years, based on the employer’s claims
(1) Where an employer considers that a decision of the Corporation as
(aa) the estimate of remuneration that is to be used for the calculation of
(a) the fixing or assessment of a levy; or
(b) the imposition of penalty interest or a fine; or
(c) the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead to
the imposition of a supplementary levy,
is unreasonable, the board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a levy,
penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined by
the board, by the board itself, or by a committee or
person to whom the board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the board has an
absolute discretion as to whether
it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the board may--
(aa) alter an estimate;
(a) alter a levy or an assessment;
(b) quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
(c) direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
(d) quash or vary a condition imposed by the Corporation.
(5) An application under this section for review of a decision of the
Corporation--
(a) must, if the decision relates to a class of employers, be made within
four months after notice of the decision was given; or
(b) must, if the decision relates to an individual employer, be made within
two months after the employer was given notice of the
unless the board (or its delegate) allows an extension of time for making the
application.
This Panel is the Board’s delegate,
pursuant to the
WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002
, as amended (see
South Australian Government Gazette
, 29 October 2009, p.4977, for a
consolidation encompassing recent
amendments).
Remissions of levy and
supplementary levies on employers are to be assessed in accordance with
of the Act. A bonus/penalty scheme has been implemented pursuant to
paragraph (1)(b) of that section, which scheme takes account
of such things as
secondary disabilities and unrepresentative disabilities. For that reason, it
can be important for information
to be gathered to indicate whether a particular
disability should be classified as a secondary disability or an unrepresentative
disability. Certain details of the bonus/penalty scheme have been published in
South Australian Government Gazette
of 26 July 2007 at page 3191.
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Amendment Act
1995, section 34 – transitional Provisions are also
The applicant, Gramar Pty Ltd
trading as Valley View Nursing Home operates a nursing home and employs staff
for that purpose. The
circumstances of the claims by two workers must be
considered separately. Issues relating to another worker were resolved prior
that hearing. We include page references to documents in the book of documents
provided for the hearing.
The first worker –
We have considered the facts in great
detail. The following is only a brief summary of the most relevant facts.
The first worker was employed as a carer.
On 23 August 2005, she suffered an injury at work of right tennis elbow, or
epicondylitis,
when a resident of the home slipped while being lifted, and the
worker tried to prevent the slipping (P 148). The general practitioner,
later stated in a report dated 6 November 2005 at P 358 that one of the usual
causes of epicondylitis is repetitive strain,
however it can also be caused by
acute straining incidents, as appears to have occurred
She continued to work until 20
September 2005, when she ceased work, and a few days later reported the injury
officially for the first
time. Naturally, there were some questions raised
had occurred. In late 2005 the worker returned to work on modified
duties. Certificates indicate that this occurred from October
It seems that at about that time, she
developed left shoulder pain, which continued to be significant. We say "it
seems" because
the details of how this occurred are quite vague. We refer to
various accounts of the injury to the left
At P 134 is the injury report
form. It is dated 18 January 2006 and states that the injury was from using the
left arm at all times
and its cause was the previous work related injury. It
states that the injury happened on 4 November 2005 (although the date on
form is not clear and could possibly read as 11 November
Dr Lim states in his report dated 6
November 2005 at P 358:
"When I reviewed her on 4th November
2005, the patient reported that she had pain in her left arm and left shoulder
as a result of
left handed duties provided. She was also experiencing pain in a
vein in her right forearm as a result of using a tennis elbow strap."
His medical certificate of 4 November 2005 at P 220 lists right lateral and
medial epicondylitis and left shoulder pain. It states
that they are consistent
with the stated cause, namely jarred right elbow in process of lifting client
who slipped. Interestingly,
it certifies that the left handed duties should
continue for 4 hours per day, as had been the case up to that time.
The later medical history shows that the right arm pain was not a significant
disability.
In a report dated 4 September 2006 at P
308, Dr John Meegan states:
"She has been off work nearly a year
with three attempts at return to work to light duties part time, lasting up to
two weeks but
with re-aggravation of her symptoms. She had attempted to
continue work in her normal duties for the first month after the right
injury, but with onset of her left shoulder pain."
This is a different account of the left
shoulder injury, as it relates it to the period before the worker stopped work,
rather than
while on modified duties. But on the next page of the report, he
"At present, she has partial incapacity in relation to
the left shoulder and right elbow, although with the left shoulder problem
more severe. The disabilities are interrelated in that the left shoulder pain
came on compensating for the right elbow."
We suspect that this later statement is
the more accurate one, as it can be read as consistent with the report of Dr
Lim, and the
history he took at the time. The difference in how the left
shoulder injury occurred makes no difference to the compensability of
but may affect an issue that we deal with
In a report dated 22 September 2006
at P 293, Dr James Economos states,
"She also began to notice the
gradual onset of left shoulder pain in approximately October of 2005. It came
on gradually and she
believed it was due to her activities at home. She advised
Dr Lim and this was noted on the WorkCover certificates."
We know that what was noted on the
certificate was clearly not that the left shoulder pain was due to activities at
that the worker was interviewed by an investigator on 17 October
2005 (date shown at P 447). This was at a time when she had returned
modified duties (P 519 Q 371).
305 she was asked,
"Just going back to the time of the injury,
after you felt this pain in your right arm, did you have any trouble with your
She answered "No".
This answer was confirmed in the next question.
On P 515 Q 334 the worker says that she
used her left arm more over the next few weeks after the injury at work. A few
questions later, she
says she also used her left arm at
At P 519 Q 375 she says that at home
she hasn’t done anything. At Q 380 she says that she stayed in her house
able to drive her car. There is nothing in the interview to
indicate that she was active at home to the extent that she hurt her
shoulder. Even if she had been, it may well have been that hurting the left
shoulder was the result of compensating for not
using the right arm, and the
injury would then presumably be compensable. But that is not necessary to
We find that the evidence
indicates that the left shoulder injury occurred while performing modified
duties in November 2005 because
the worker used her left arm for all such
Mr Anthony Walsh, a
neuropsychologist, in a report dated 27 February 2006 following a consultation
on 13 January 2006, found that
the worker displayed suicide ideation but without
intent and diagnosed an adjustment disorder with depressed mood (P 340). At P
342, he states,
"In my opinion [the worker’s] depression
has been substantially caused by the ongoing pain and disability arising from
the subject
work-related accident. In my opinion her early life history and
other issues in her personal life may have predisposed her to the
development of
this injury but have not been the cause of it. It would appear from [the
worker’s] report that her emotional
state was unremarkable prior to this
We continue with further relevant
matters of history. Mr Walsh was a treating psychologist. His report dated 27
February 2006 noted
that the worker was "not coping with the injury to her right
elbow and shoulders" (P 337). He took a history that the worker "developed
in her right elbow when she was helping with a resident" and that "she said that
she also has pain in her shoulders" (P 339).
The claims agent forwarded the
report on to the rehabilitation consultant and the applicant/employer (P 333,
Imaging is described by Dr Meegan at
P307, where he states by way of a convenient summary,
"Ultrasound
of left shoulder on 4/4/06 showed a calcific supraspinatus tendonitis and
subacromial bursitis with all movements of left
shoulder limited by pain
suggesting capsulitis with no impingement visible on the limited range of
abduction. X-ray of left shoulder
on 31/07/06 was normal and ultrasound of the
right elbow on the same date showed a common extensor origin tendonitis."
The worker underwent surgery to the left
shoulder on 21 October 2006, namely arthroscopic debridement of rotator cuff and
acromioplasty
(P 272 per Dr Meegan’s
There was also a claim for a right
shoulder injury on 10 January 2006 with the cause shown as "previous work
related injury" (P 133).
This alleged injury did not seem to be of
significance.
Likewise there is an alleged
injury to the left knee on 7 January 2006 when the worker’s foot slipped
on the floor, causing
her to fall down, but this does not seem to have been a
significant matter.
In summary, the
condition continued with the main complaints relating to the left shoulder and
the adjustment disorder with depressed
worker – mismanagement of claim
The applicant firstly pointed out that
the claim had been managed though all of the above events without a formal
decision to accept
or reject any claims except the right arm epicondylitis
claim, which was accepted, and the adjustment disorder with depressed mood,
which was accepted for medical expenses
It argued that the claims management
had not come to grips with the various alleged injuries and their role in
relation to the total
disability. Rather, all alleged injuries had been
referred to the rehabilitation consultant and generally dealt with on a
The thrust of its argument
was that it would be unfair to take account of all of the monetary amount paid
out for this claim in calculating
the levy amount, since the claim had not been
well managed. It argued that better claims management would have resulted in a
amount paid out by WorkCover.
not the type of argument where we could say that the applicant should have taken
up the issues in the Workers Compensation
Tribunal, as was referred to in
Wami Kata Old Folks Home Inc v WorkCover
[2009] SAWLRP 14
25, 26 and 34. The complaints are that no decisions or actions were taken
rather than that decisions or actions that were
We make this observation
notwithstanding section 36(8) which provides that an employer may request a
review where it believes that
reasonable grounds exist for a discontinuance or
reduction of weekly payments. See also section 28B of the Act which provides
an employer may request a review in relation into a rehabilitation and
the Act, which
provides that an employer may request progress reports from the claims
WorkCover acknowledged that the
various claims had been left undetermined, but argued that this did not affect
the result in terms
of the management of the
Specifically, WorkCover argued that
the bulk of the disability appeared to relate primarily to the left shoulder,
and the balance
of evidence clearly showed that this injury was compensable, in
that it occurred as a result of using the left arm excessively to
compensate for
the lack of use of the right arm that was
We accept the argument of
WorkCover on this point. We consider that the various alleged injuries all
appeared to be the result of
work activities. The only possible exception was
the reference by Dr Economos to the history taken of the left shoulder injury
been due to the worker’s activities at home. This was inconsistent
with the history taken by, and opinion of, the treating
general practitioner, Dr
Lim, very soon after the time. There is no other evidence to support the
contrary view.
Whilst we can see that the
failure to determine each of the various claims for injuries has meant that the
applicant/employer was
unable to challenge any such decision in the Workers
Compensation Tribunal, we do not see that such a challenge would have given
to any reduction in the amount paid for the
The applicant also argued that the
claims agent should have generally sorted out the medial issues more thoroughly.
But in our view
it is hard to see what difference this would have made. In our
view, there was no obvious point that was missed, which might have
lessened the
payments. Assumptions were made perhaps without detailed consideration, but
these assumptions appear to have been correct
when we look at the
The applicant argued that the
worker had moved interstate for a period, and no rehabilitation was undertaken
during this period, or
later when she returned to South Australia. This is a
matter that can be argued both ways. WorkCover argued that it is not uncommon
for the claims agent to decide that rehabilitation is not cost-effective for a
period of time. There certainly were lengthy periods
of time when
rehabilitation did not actively take place. We are concerned that this was so,
but acknowledge that decisions as to
rehabilitation are essentially value
We note that Dr Meegan has
reported on 4 September 2006 at P 309,
"She has strong concerns
fact that three return to
work attempts have failed there. Her anxiety has
reached a phobic level with her recently abandoning a case conference due to the
anxiety with associated panic attack."
Rehabilitation, if successful, certainly
limits the expenditure on a claim, but if unsuccessful, increases the costs and
to antagonism if it is seen as inappropriate.
Whilst we might have expected
rehabilitation to have occurred through a rehabilitation consultant at times
when this did not occur,
we find that this is not the type of mismanagement of
the claim that would cause us to use our discretionary powers to reduce the
levy. We say more about the use of these discretionary powers
The applicant argued that there had
been no two year review pursuant to section 39 of the Act. A two year review
may be conducted
by the claims agent based on section 39 with reference to
section 35 of the Act, and more recently, section 35A of the Act in relation
the third entitlement period. We note that the end of the two year period
occurred in September 2007. There may be some arguments
that other injuries
meant that the period expired a few months later, but this is not significant
here. We are not aware of any
reason for there being no two year review. It is
difficult for us to predict what might have been the result of such a
During the relevant time, the
worker was generally certified as fit for modified duties with the restriction
of no lifting over 5
kg, no overhead work and no repetitive shoulder movement.
Hours were limited for much of the time. These are very restrictive conditions.
It would have been difficult to have found real job opportunities with such
restrictions.
We note that the employer was
given a section 58B exemption, so that it is no longer required to provide
suitable duties. We further
note that the worker attempted to commit suicide in
July 2006 (See report at P 257). This indicates that the claims agent should
cautious in any actions that it takes. While we consider that on the material
before us, a two year review should have taken
place, with a view to reducing
the weekly payments that were being made, we find in all the circumstances that
failure to do so was
not an error that could be classed as out of the
Our view is that claims
management involves a very large number of value judgments. Many factors must
be weighed up. There are often
different ways to approach a claim. Time and
cost are also factors. One would not expect that all decisions made would be
possible decisions when examined in hindsight and in detail.
Our reason for this approach is as
follows. The determination setting out the terms of the levy adjustment scheme
as published in
Government Gazette
of 26 July 2007 at page 3191
includes clause 2.13(h) which allows a general discretion in the imposition of
the bonus/penalty scheme
"such further or other adjustment
of the operation of the Levy Adjustment Scheme as may in the opinion of the
Delegate, best give
effect to the objects of the [the Act]...".
The terms of section 67 of the Act contain numerous uses of the word "may",
which also implies a discretion.
Discretion should be used in a way that
is fair to all those who contribute to the scheme, i.e., employers. It would be
employers generally if some employers complained of claims management
decisions that were not the best decisions, but were within
the range of
decisions that were ordinarily made, and received a lower levy as a result. It
would be fair to all employers generally
if the levies were only adjusted on
account of such decisions where the decisions were clearly wrong, clearly out of
the ordinary,
and had a significant impact on the levy
calculation.
To do otherwise would be to
ignore the principles set out in
Benchmark Healthcare v WorkCover
[2009] SAWLRP 17
to the effect that the scheme should be fair to all users, and
that all employers should carry the burden of the cost of the scheme
between themselves.
For these reasons, we
decline to order an adjustment of the levy on account of the alleged
mismanagement of the claim.
The first worker –
secondary disability
A second argument of the applicant was
that the disabilities discussed above were secondary disabilities, and thus they
should have
been disregarded in the calculations of the levy adjustment. Since
the various disabilities were to different parts of the body,
the only question
for us is whether any of the disabilities were, or resulted from, an
aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation, deterioration
or recurrence of a prior
disability. We will use the term "aggravation" as shorthand for all of these
The applicant sent a letter (p 392)
dated 26 March 2007 and a further letter (P 389) dated 21 May 2007 to the claims
agent putting
forward its arguments on this
The applicant argued that the
psychiatric disability was a secondary disability in that it was an aggravation
of an earlier condition.
It also argued that the left shoulder disability was
an aggravation of an earlier condition of calcification and
tendonitis.
We refer to a number of
relevant principles.
A prior disability
that was asymptomatic can lead to a secondary disability if a link by way of
aggravation can be established.
International Linen Service Pty Ltd v
[2009] SAWLRP 8
at paras 13,
Prior minor degenerative changes can
lead to a secondary disability if a link by way of aggravation can be
established.
Wami Kata Old Folks Home Inc v WorkCover
at para 45.
An injury to a body
area that has suffered prior degeneration is not necessarily a secondary
disability. A link must be shown.
International Linen Service Pty Ltd v
[2009] SAWLRP 8
at para 30 and
[2009] SAWLRP 11
Psychological (or psychiatric)
symptoms suffered following a physical injury are ordinarily sequelae of the
physical disability, and
must therefore be classified in the same way as the
physical injury, notwithstanding that they relate to prior psychological
Tolega v WorkCover
[2009] SAWLRP 11
The applicant drew our attention to Mr
Meegan’s report at P 307, where he referred to "calcific supraspinatus
tendonitis and
subacromial bursitis" in the left shoulder. It argued that the
left shoulder disability that arose from compensating for the non-use
right arm could be seen as a secondary disability to the tendonitis and
Although tendonitis and bursitis
in the shoulder are technically different, they generally accompany one another
and for most purposes,
can be viewed as a common condition. They are
respectively inflammation of the tendon or of the bursa, which adjoin each
The cause of calcific tendonitis is
unclear. The condition comprises small calcium deposits within the tendons of
the rotator cuff.
The deposits may cause inflammation and pain, but are
generally spontaneously absorbed by the body over
We are not aware of any medical
evidence to suggest that the condition of calcific tendonitis has been
aggravated by use of the shoulder
at work. Our view on the medical evidence is
that the overuse of the left shoulder caused inflammation, and consequent
investigations
revealed that there was calcification present. We find on the
medical evidence before us that there is no sufficient proof that
calcification
or any other prior condition was aggravated by the additional use of the left
We therefore find that the left
shoulder disability was not a
The applicant also argued that
the adjustment disorder and depression were pre-existing conditions that were
aggravated by the events
at work and were thereby aggravated. The applicant
argued that the psychiatric condition, along with the shoulder condition, became
the more significant disability. We accept that the right arm disability, which
began the series of events, certainly became much
less significant as time
progressed.
The report of the
neuropsychologist Mr Walsh at P 342 states,
"It would appear from
[the worker’s] report that her emotional state was unremarkable prior to
this injury."
We find that in these circumstances, the
adjustment disorder and depression were secondary to the physical injuries, in
with the principle set out above concerning psychological or
psychiatric symptoms from
We therefore find
that the left shoulder disability was not a secondary disability in relation to
a psychiatric condition.
additional submissions from the parties as to whether section 113 of the Act was
an additional difficulty for the applicant
on the question of secondary
disabilities. This issue is considered in detail in relation to the second
worker. On the above findings,
there is no need to consider it in detail
The first worker – unrepresentative
Like secondary disabilities,
unrepresentative disabilities are exempt from the bonus/penalty adjustments by
virtue of the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Amendment Act
1995, section 34 – transitional
Provisions. The applicant therefore argued that the left shoulder injury was an
unrepresentative
disability.
Section 3(1)
of the Act provides,
"unrepresentative disability means a
disability arising from an attendance mentioned in section 30(3) or a journey
mentioned in 30(5)(b)".
Section 30(3)(e) is the relevant provision here, It provides that a
worker’s employment includes,
"(e) attendance at a place to receive a medical service, to obtain a medical
report or certificate (or to be examined for the purpose),
to participate in a
rehabilitation program or for the purposes of a rehabilitation and return to
work plan, or to apply for, or receive,
compensation for a compensable
disability."
The applicant argued, by way of an
additional and new argument, that the worker suffered the left shoulder
disability, being the main
cause of incapacity, while performing modified duties
pursuant to a rehabilitation and return to work plan. Although no such document
appeared in the book of documents, it was later agreed between the parties that
the return to work was pursuant to such a plan.
We also note that a letter from
the rehabilitation consultant dated 21 December 2005 at P 349 twice refers to a
"graded return to
work programme" to commence on 14 December 2005. The worker
had been on modified duties before that, presumably under similar
arrangements.
A letter from the
employer’s claims consultant dated 9 August 2006 at P 406 quoted Dr Ghan
and refers to "the proposed return
to work plan commenced on 14 December
The drafting of section 30(3)(e) is
interesting. Although in this case we are dealing with rehabilitation and
we must consider the wording as to both rehabilitation
programs and rehabilitation and return to work plans. We interpret the relevant
parts of the subsection, expressed in an expanded way as alternatives, to
"attendance at a place ... to participate in a rehabilitation
program..." and
"attendance at a place ... for the purposes of a rehabilitation and return to
work plan..."
The provision distinguishes between a
rehabilitation program and a rehabilitation and return to work plan. They are
referred to in
sections 26 and 28A respectively of the Act. There is
potentially some overlap between the two, but it is now clear that, in this
case, there were rehabilitation and return to work plans.
What activities does the word "attendance"
cover? Section 28A(4) of the Act states that a rehabilitation and return to
may impose obligations on the worker and on the employer. The
section, as a whole, emphasises a consultative approach to the preparation
the plan. Section 28A(3) sets out the steps that must be taken in the
preparation of a plan, which include consultation with
We interpret the word "attendance"
to refer to an attendance in relation to the consultative process for the
preparation of the plan,
or other steps preparatory for return to work, rather
than the working at modified duties that is the product or consequence of the
plan. There are two reasons for our
conclusion.
Firstly, the words "for the
purposes of a ... plan" appear to us to refer to the preparatory stage rather
than the carrying out stage
of the arrangements. The essence of our reasoning
is that the word "plan" carries that connotation. We also note in this context
that the word "participate" is omitted from this part of the subsection,
although we do not attach any great significance to
Secondly, the whole purpose of the
subsection is to list various activities that would not otherwise be within
employment, but to
provide that they are sufficiently connected to the
compensation process or to the employment itself that, if a disability is
during those activities, it should be compensable. The carrying out of
modified duties for the employer is clearly within employment
without any need
for the subsection. We therefore consider that the intention of the subsection
is not to refer to the carrying
out of modified duties under a
We note in this case that the worker
was paid wages for the work performed. It is important in our view that, in
this case, the worker
was carrying out productive work for the usual employer.
We leave for another day questions of whether work hardening might be attendance
at a place for the purposes of a rehabilitation and return to work plan.
We consider that the purpose of section
30(3)(e) in this context is to provide that, if a worker suffers a disability
while engaged
in the consultative process or preparatory stage, that disability
should be compensable. Without the subsection, it would arguably
compensable.
We have noted the arguments of
the applicant that there is no restriction expressed in relation to the word
"place". But we have
come to the conclusion that the meaning of the word
"attendance" is limited by the context and apparent purpose of the
subsection.
In reaching this conclusion, we
are conscious of the comments of Debelle J in
to the effect that an
activity can be within section 30(3)(e) even if it arises from
employment.
We also note that a
rehabilitation and return to work plan may result in the worker performing
duties that are essentially full duties
with some monitoring or alternatively
some very minor restriction, for a lengthy period of time. It would be a
strange result if
the fact that the duties were performed as a result of a
formal plan, as distinct from an informal arrangement with the employer,
the significant difference that any disabilities suffered were
unrepresentative.
We therefore conclude
that a disability suffered whilst performing modified duties under a
rehabilitation and return to work plan
is not an unrepresentative disability
within section 30(3)(e).
We therefore
dismiss all arguments concerning the first worker.
second worker
We mention at the outset the argument of
the applicant in relation to the second worker. It claims that a significant
psychiatric
condition was present in the worker prior to the occurrence of the
injury from an incident at work. Although the physical disability
from the work
related injury was significant, the psychiatric condition eventually overwhelmed
the physical symptoms, such that the
physical injury at work could be seen as an
aggravation of the pre-existing psychiatric
The applicant did not argue that
the worker had ceased to be incapacitated for work by the compensable
disability, as referred to
in section 36(1)(b) of the Act. Rather, it said that
the physical injury remained a factor, albeit a small
The work incident occurred on 6
December 2004 when the worker, a domestic care worker, was punched in the face
by a confused and agitated
resident. This resulted in a fractured mandible
There were a series of incidents in
2006 that were unrelated to work and could be described as personal crises in
life. Dr Milton
Bowman, a psychiatrist, had been treating the worker since late
2003, which was before the work injury (P 643). At that stage, she
difficulties coping with her relationship with her ex-husband and the legal
consequences of separation. She had poor
sleep and poor energy, and had
committed an offence of stealing some
As the applicant put it, the blow to
the jaw picked up all of the baggage of the previous history. The applicant
also argued that
the report of Dr Bowman dated 7 November 2006 at P 624 was the
lynchpin. Dr Bowman said that the work injury had acted as a focus
pre-existing behaviours.
The evidence
indicated that after the injury, the worker had told doctors of events that were
untrue or greatly exaggerated. She
had self harmed (see P 763). The diagnosis
reached in 2007 was Munchausen’s
The applicant argued that the
evidence showed that the physical injury had triggered a massive psychiatric
problem that was ongoing.
The medical certificates from 2 months after the
original injury certified the worker as fit for modified duties, but there was
no improvement on that. The psychiatric condition prevented any further
Counsel for the applicant agreed
that it was asking us to find that the evidence should now be looked at in
retrospect, and we should
now view the evidence in a way that was not apparent
at the time. He asked us to find that the prior disability was the psychiatric
condition, and that the blow to the jaw was a secondary disability. In that
sense it was a most unusual situation, as psychiatric
conditions are ordinarily
regarded as sequelae of the physical
disability.
We do find that the psychiatric
disability has prevented the worker from gaining any further capacity for work,
and this will presumably
continue on an ongoing basis.
We consider that the psychiatric
condition, to the extent that it was a disability, was one that developed
gradually for the purposes
of section 113 of the Act. There were numerous
symptoms and numerous events that led to it being detected and much later
We raised with the parties a
potential issue as to whether a condition that developed gradually could be a
"prior disability" for
the purposes of a later secondary disability. The
potential argument could be set out in
By virtue of section 113,
disabilities that develop gradually are deemed to have occurred when the worker
first becomes totally or
partially incapacitated for work as a result of the
disability.
If a condition that developed
gradually and did not result in any disability is aggravated by an incident at
work that results in
incapacity, the question arises as to whether the resulting
disability is a secondary disability.
virtue of section 113, the prior disability and the secondary disability would
have occurred at the same time. The word "prior"
ordinarily means "earlier".
The question arises as to whether the condition that developed gradually can be
a prior disability in
circumstances.
We have carefully considered
this question. We firstly find that section 113 is of general application and
is not restricted to particular
Ta v WorkCover/CGU Workers Compensation (SA)
as being consistent with that
Whilst it is a strange concept for a
prior disability to be deemed to have occurred at the same time as a secondary
disability that
arose in consequence of it, we see no inherent inconsistency
with that concept. We therefore find that a prior disability that developed
gradually and may not have previously resulted in incapacity can be the basis
for a secondary disability, even though both disabilities
may be deemed to have
occurred at the same time. As such, the provisions of section 113 are not a
barrier to the applicant’s
argument in this
There is much evidence that the
second worker did suffer a substantial disability from her mental condition
prior to the relevant
compensable
disability.
Her earlier symptoms and
general circumstances were (taken from the report of Dr Bowman commencing at
difficulties with anxiety
and self esteem
stress as a result of
an alcoholic father and sexual abuse by a neighbour up to age
a failed marriage in August 2000,
with consequent ongoing legal disputes about access and custody of the
"... she lurches from crisis to
crisis and does not cope well."
legal matters including one where she was charged with theft from her
Dr Bowman says that her level of
functioning prior to the work injury was "marginal". In his further reports
dated 29 August 2006
and 7 November 2006 he makes reference to the pre work
injury history at P 643 and 625. The latter adds some new information,
As a child she was in a motor
vehicle accident in which another child was killed, and was markedly traumatised
She developed significant
nephritis and Henoch/Schonlein purpura, which resulted in a large amount of time
in hospital and many medical
investigations,
She "has had recurring
illnesses of various types over the years, and there is a longstanding and clear
pattern of her responding
to stress by becoming
The worker’s mother raised
the possibility of factitious illness which has been raised by other members of
the family over the
illness/disorder is another term for Munchausen syndrome and exists where a
person deliberately and consciously feigns
or exaggerates symptoms. As we
understand it, factitious disorder may occur where the person wishes to gain
attention or care, or
for other reasons. It is essentially dishonest, although
it may or may not be done with the motivation of monetary gain. In the
of workers compensation, a result is generally monetary gain, even if the
motivation is additional attention or care. At
P 625, Dr Bowman
"It is my opinion that this worker suffers from either a
Munchausen’s syndrome or a conversion disorder. I think that the balance
of probabilities favours a conscious motivation; hence it is more likely to be a
Munchausen syndrome rather than conversion."
On the above basis, the symptoms of
Munchausen syndrome (feigned or exaggerated symptoms) would appear to be not
compensable. The
fact that the condition has been given a name does not change
that. That is not to say that all of the symptoms of the worker are
compensable. The consequences of the blow to the jaw are clearly compensable,
and this includes all genuine symptoms such as
psychological or psychiatric
Our interpretation of the
evidence is that there are various psychiatric conditions operating in this
worker. It is difficult for
us to identify them and differentiate between
For the purposes of this argument,
we must assume that the condition of the worker is compensable. There may well
be an argument
that the present apparent disability is a result of consciously
feigned symptoms, but it is not our role to evaluate such
possibilities.
We note the opinion of Dr
Bowman above, namely that the worker,
"has had recurring
illnesses of various types over the years, and there is a longstanding and clear
pattern of her responding to stress
by becoming ill."
We see this as significant. The psychiatric condition or conditions do
appear to have been both long-standing and very significant.
They also appear
to be the primary factor in the worker’s condition at the present
But the blow to the jaw was also very
significant. It resulted in a significant injury and significant expense for
both surgery and
weekly payments for time off work due to the physical injury.
The blow to the jaw caused symptoms of a completely different nature
psychiatric condition. For that reason we are unable to find that the
disability was secondary to the psychiatric condition,
when assessed at the time
of the work incident.
The question then
arises whether the disability could change, at some later point in time, to a
secondary disability.
The definition of
"secondary disability in section 3(1) of the Act
secondary disability
means a disability that
is, or results from, the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation, deterioration
or recurrence of a prior
disability ..."
We consider that the above definition
is one that in substance relies on the circumstances existing at the time the
disability occurs.
As a matter of principle, we find that once a disability
occurs, it must be characterised as primary or secondary. We find that
character of a disability cannot change from one to the
Presumably at some point in time
the provisions of section 36(1)(b) of the Act will apply and the worker will
cease to be incapacitated
for work by the compensable disability, namely the
blow to the jaw. At that point, liability for weekly payments may end, subject
to compliance with the provisions of that
We conclude on the facts before
us that the disability of the second worker is not a secondary
disability.
We therefore find that the
application fails in relation to both the first and second
Determination
Pursuant to our delegated powers under
section 72 of the Act, we dismiss the application for
Rick Schroeder
Deputy President
Benjamin Sporton
[1996] SASC 5757
(1996) 66 SASR 474
[2005] SAWCT 52
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (101 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter