URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAERDC/2025/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:57:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
PELLIGRA GROUP PTY LTD v STATE PLANNING COMMISSION (NO. 2) [2025] SAERDC 20 (7 October 2025)
ENVIRONMENT, RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT COURT OF SOUTH
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
PELLIGRA GROUP PTY LTD v STATE PLANNING COMMISSION (NO.
[2025] SAERDC 20
Judgment of Commissioner Ryan
7 October 2025
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING - PLANNING - DEVELOPMENT ASSESSMENT AND CONTROL -
APPLICATIONS
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING - COURTS AND TRIBUNALS WITH ENVIRONMENT
Application by an adjacent landowner 292 Rundle Street Pty Ltd (292 Rundle)
to attend and participate in a conciliation conference
held under s 16 of the
Environment, Resources & Development Court Act 1993 (SA) (Act) in
circumstances where the parties have
reached a settlement. 292 Rundle asserts
that it is a person with a direct or material interest in the matter who may be
prejudiced by the settlement under s 16(9)(b) of the Act and submits
that the Court should not accept the settlement absent it being
permitted to
participate in the conference.
Held: Application dismissed.
1. 292 Rundle has a direct or material interest in the matter for the
purposes of s 16(9)(b) of the Act: Maloney v 21-25 South Esplanade
[2024] SASCA 58
2. The power under s 16(7)(c) of the Act to permit a person to participate in
the conference must be in aid of the purpose for which
the conference is held,
namely, to facilitate the settlement of the dispute.
3. There is no basis to incorporate the principles of public participation in
the planning process when construing s 16 of the Act
or determining the
circumstances in which a person, who is not a party, may be permitted to
participate in a conference: Rossi v
City of Holdfast Bay Assessment Panel
[2022] SAERDC 18
4. There was no requirement, statutory or otherwise, for Pelligra Group Pty
Ltd (Pelligra) to have produced a copy of the compromise
proposal and/or the
terms of the settlement to 292 Rundle and an adverse inference cannot be drawn
from a mere failure to provide
the details of the compromise.
5. It is not the role of the presiding member to undertake a merits review of
a settlement proposal or to commence an inquiry or investigation
with respect to
the content and the basis of a settlement. In the context of a settlement that
has been reached between the parties,
the member does not take responsibility
for the merits outcome in the same way as if he or she had fully and
independently considered
the matter and given a reasoned decision: John Barr
Investments Pty Ltd v Mordialloc Sporting Club Incorporated & Anor
; The Big Apple Group Pty Ltd v Melbourne City Council
[2020] VSC 393
AGL Loy Yang Pty Ltd v Department Head of Economic Development, Jobs, Transport
and Resources
[2016] VCAT 1249
6. The presiding member may reasonably assume that in giving its consent to
the settlement, the Commission has had appropriate regard
to all of the relevant
matters it is required to consider under the relevant provisions of the Planning
and Design Code made under
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
(SA) (PDI Act), and that the settlement is in general conformity with the
relevant planning rules.
7. There is neither a legal requirement nor an obligation on the Court to
undertake its own notification process with respect to a
compromise proposal
that has been presented to it in a conciliation conference. The Court can if
necessary require a procedural
error to be corrected with respect to a matter
that is under appeal so as to ensure the settlement is consistent with the PDI
pursuant to s 16(9)(a) of the Act: City of Burnside and Another v
Development Assessment Commission and Another
[2005] SASC 434
8. In considering whether the Court should record a settlement pursuant to s
16(7)(d) of the Act, it need not consider whether the
settlement will materially
prejudice a person with a direct or material interest. Material prejudice is not
a ground for declining
to record a settlement.
9. There is no general discretion for the presiding member to refuse to
accept a settlement other than if the settlement is not appropriate
inconsistent with a relevant Act: Moloney v 21-25 South Esplanade Pty Ltd
[2024] SASCA 58
, [55] citing Kovalev v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs
(1999) 100 FCR 557
[1999] FCA 557
10. In circumstances where the member considers that a settlement may appear
to be inconsistent with a relevant Act, the member would
likely benefit from the
assistance of a non-party in determining whether or not the settlement is in
fact inconsistent with a relevant
Act. In the circumstances of this case, 292
Rundle would not provide assistance in determining that question.
Environment Resources and Development Court Act 1993
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
Uniform Civil
Planning, Development & Infrastructure (General)
Regulations 2017
Land and Environment Court Act 1979
referred to.
Pelligra Group Pty Ltd v State Planning Commission
[2023] SAERDC 16
292 Rundle Street Pty Ltd v Pelligra Group Pty Ltd & Anor
[2024] SASC
Maloney v 21-25 South Esplanade Pty Ltd & Ors
[2024] SASCA 58
AQC Dartbrook Management Pty Ltd v Minister for Planning and Public Spaces
[2021] NSWLC 76;
Pitt v Environment, Resources & Development Court
(1995) 66 SASR 274
Blencraft Manufacturing Co Ltd v Fletcher Development
[1974] 1 NZLR 295
Rossi v City of Holdfast Bay Assessment Panel
[2022] SAERDC 18
Double Bay Marina Pty Ltd v Woollahra Municipal Council
(1985) 54 LGRA 313
AQC Dartbrook Management Pty Ltd v Minister for
Planning and Public Spaces
[2020] NSWLEC 159
MH Earthmoving Pty Ltd v
Cootamundra-Gundagai Regional Council
[2018] NSWLEC 56
AQC Dartbrook
Management Pty Ltd v Minister for Planning and Public Places
[2021] NSWCA
Al Maha Pty Ltd v Huajun Investments Pty Ltd
[2018] NSWCA 245
John Barr Investments Pty Ltd v Mordialloc Sporting Club Incorporated &
[2022] VSC 100
Kovalev v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic
[1999] FCA 557
(1999) 100 FCR 323
The Big Apple Group Pty Ltd v Melbourne City
[2020] VSC 393
Rozen v Macedon Ranges SC
[2010] VSC 583
Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 24 ALR 577
City of Burnside and Another v Development Assessment Commission and Another
[2005] SASC 434
Kovalev v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
(1999) 100 FCR 557
Regina v Dickens
[1990] 2 Q.B. 102
considered.
PELLIGRA GROUP PTY LTD v STATE PLANNING COMMISSION (NO.
[2025] SAERDC 20
THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING JUDGMENT:
Introduction
question for determination in relation to this interlocutory application is
whether a non-party should be permitted to attend
and participate in a
conciliation conference held under
Environment Resources and
Development Court Act 1993
) in circumstances where the
parties have reached a settlement. The procedure invoked by the applicant has
not been the subject of
any judicial consideration in South Australia.
Procedural background
9 June 2023, Pelligra Group Pty Ltd (
Pelligra or the appellant
) lodged an
appeal against a decision of the State Planning Commission (
Commission or the
) to refuse to grant a planning consent for a multi storey mixed
use development (
Development
) on its land at 292-300 Rundle Street,
appeal between Pelligra and the Commission was referred to a conciliation
conference pursuant to s 16 of the Act on 19 July 2023.
11 August 2023, the adjacent landowner 292 Rundle Street Pty Ltd (
or the applicant
) filed an application to be joined as a party to the
proceedings. That application was heard by this Court on 30 August 2023.
the Court was satisfied that 292 Rundle had a special interest in the
subject-matter of the application,
the Court ultimately determined that it was not in the interests of justice that
292 Rundle be joined as a party to the
proceedings.
The application for
joinder was subsequently refused on 6 October
20 October 2023, 292 Rundle filed an appeal against the decision of this Court
to refuse its application for joinder. That appeal
was heard on 28 May 2024 and
was subsequently dismissed by a single judge of the Supreme Court on 12 August
13 September 2024, 292 Rundle filed an interlocutory application seeking
permission to attend and participate in the conference
being held in these
proceedings convened under s 16 of the Act (
application)
directions hearing held in the matter on 1 October 2024, the applicant clarified
that it was only in the event of a settlement
being reached between the parties
that it would seek permission to attend and participate in the conference. The
application was
therefore adjourned to a date to be fixed because, at that time,
there was no settlement.
a conciliation conference held on 13 February 2025, Pelligra and the Commission
informed the Court that they had reached an agreement
following the acceptance
of a compromise proposal by the Commission. On that occasion, draft minutes of
order together with a set
of amended plans detailing the compromise, which had
been accepted by the Commission, were presented to the presiding
The interlocutory
application of 292 Rundle to participate in the conference was then required to
be determined. The application
came on for hearing on 17 June 2025, with
further written submissions provided by the parties and the applicant following
the conclusion
of the hearing on 11, 14 and 17 July 2025. Pelligra opposed the
application. While the Commission made submissions on the application,
no position in relation to the making of the orders
application was supported by a number of
affidavits.
The agenda report
(minus attachments) dated 12 April 2023 of the Commission’s delegate which
contained the recommending officer’s
planning report was also tendered on
behalf of the applicant.
recommending officer had concluded that, on balance, the Development warranted
conditional planning consent subject to the assignment
of reserve matters as
“the proposal is considered to satisfy the majority of applicable Code
policies and the development would result in a planning
and design outcome of
satisfactory quality and with acceptable impacts on places of heritage
significance”.
previously mentioned, the Commission, through its delegate, initially refused to
grant planning consent to the Development contrary
to the planning
officer’s recommendation. However, earlier this year the Commission
considered a revised scheme (often referred
to as a compromise proposal in the
context of a planning appeal before the Court) which it now considers warrants
planning consent.
Legislative framework
16 of the Act sets out the legislative framework for conferences convened under
the Act. The sole identified purpose of
a conference under the Act is to enable
the member of the Court presiding at the conference to assist the parties to
explore any
possible resolution of the matters in dispute
resorting to a formal hearing.
A conference may, at the discretion of the presiding member, be adjourned from
time to time.
Unless otherwise
determined by the member of the Court presiding at the conference, a conference
will be held in private.
member of the Court presiding at a conference has a broad range of powers
including determining who, apart from the parties
to the proceedings (and their
representatives), may be present at the
conference.
The member may
record any settlement reached at a conference and may make any determination or
order necessary to give effect to
a settlement, subject to s 16(9) of the
Section 16(9) of the Act
(9) The member of the Court presiding at a
conference—
(a) must not accept a settlement that appears to be inconsistent with a
relevant Act (but he or she may adjourn the proceedings
to enable the parties to
explore the possibility of varying the settlement to comply with a relevant
(b) may decline to accept a settlement on the basis that the settlement may
materially prejudice any person who was not represented
at the conference but
who has a direct or material interest in the matter.
16(9)(a) of the Act strictly prohibits the presiding member of the Court from
accepting a settlement that appears to be inconsistent
with a relevant Act.
However, it also provides the member with an option to adjourn the proceedings
to enable the parties to explore
the possibility of varying the settlement so as
to comply with a relevant Act. Section 16(9)(b) of the Act confers a discretion
on the member to decline to accept a settlement if it, i.e., the settlement, may
materially prejudice any person who is not represented
at the conference but who
has a direct or material interest in the matter.
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
) contains rules relating to proceedings in this
UCR 366.4(1) restates s
16(2) in virtually identical terms. UCR 366.5(1) is similar to, but goes
further than s 16(9)(b) of the
Act by providing that if the presiding member
concludes that the parties have reached or
reach a settlement which
may materially prejudice any person not represented at the conference but who
has a direct or material interest
in the proceeding to which the conference
relates, the member may adjourn the conference and direct the Registrar to give
to such persons, which notice may permit the recipient to attend the
conference and participate in
The additional words in UCR
366.5(1) do not affect the substance of s 16(9)(b) of the Act but provides a
mechanism by which the
non-party who has the relevant interest may be notified
of the conference and therefore participate in it.
material interest
Rundle asserts that it is a person who, under s 16(9)(b) of the Act, has a
direct or material interest in the matter and may
be materially prejudiced by
the settlement. That being so, it submits that the Court should not accept the
settlement, absent it
being permitted to participate at the conference. It is
necessary to first determine whether 292 Rundle is such a person.
Pelligra Group Pty Ltd v State Planning
this Court in
dealing with an application for joinder, determined that 292 Rundle has a
special interest in the subject matter of
the proceedings, within the meaning of
s 205(2)(c)
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
That was held
to be the case not only because 292 Rundle is the owner of adjacent land but
because of the
“potentially significant impact of the proposed
development on owners or occupiers of
Maloney v 21-25 South Esplanade Pty Ltd
the Court of Appeal held:
As with the question of joinder, the real
issue is bound up in whether the absent person, usually a representor, has a
direct or material
interest in whether approval should be granted. The scope
for the development to deleteriously impact the amenity and value of the
property owned or occupied by Category 2 representors, together with any
demonstrated interest in the merits of the proposal and
whether it should be
approved under the applicable planning law and instruments,
demonstrated the
existence of a direct or material interest in the matter for the purposes of s
16(9)(b) of the
ERD Court Act
, together with a special interest in
the subject matter of the planning appeal for the purposes of s 88(2)(c)(i) of
Development Act
(My underlining).
the potentially significant impact of the proposed development upon its
property, together with their demonstrated interest
in the merits of this
proposal to date, including whether it should be approved under the PDI Act the
Court considers that 292 Rundle
has a direct or material interest in the matter
for the purposes of s 16(9)(b) of the Act.
There were no submissions to the
contrary at the hearing of this application.
Submissions
Basis for application to attend the conference
Rundle argues that there are four issues which the presiding member must
consider, with or without its participation,
the settlement appear to be inconsistent with the PDI Act or any other relevant
the settlement materially prejudice 292 Rundle? (it was argued that there is no
doubt that 292 Rundle is a person with a direct
or material interest);
yes to 2, should the presiding member decline to accept the settlement? It was
argued that the parties might formulate another
settlement, or the appellant may
elect to proceed to a trial on the merits undefended by the respondent. A third
alternative is
that the conference may be adjourned to permit 292 Rundle to
participate in the conference. That is explicitly contemplated by UCR
and, in my view, implicitly contemplated by s 16(9)(b), when read in conjunction
with s 16(4) and s 16(7)(c); and
the settlement be declined as being not appropriate for the Court to accept in
conference? This appears to be contending that
there is some residual
discretion to decline a settlement. I will address that contention later in
these reasons.
Rundle submitted that the issues which the Court must consider, identified
above, can only be properly considered after it has
the opportunity to be heard.
292 Rundle advanced four reasons in support of that contention:
the presiding member cannot know the extent of prejudice without hearing from
292 Rundle in respect of the settlement (as distinct
from the original proposal
which 292 Rundle addressed as part of the previous joinder application);
if the extent of prejudice of the present settlement leads to the presiding
member declining the settlement, it is only
with the participation of 292 Rundle
that the presiding member could continue to assist the parties to explore a
possible resolution
that would not be declined;
and relatedly, 292 Rundle’s participation may reveal that settlement
should be declined as a matter of general discretion;
the Court is (at present) denied a skilled contradictor who will promptly
identify and address any inconsistency of the
settlement with the PDI Act (for
example, serious variance or the absence of notification or referral which would
have occurred if
the settlement had been applied for initially).
Rundle submits that the source of the statutory power that it relies upon to
admit it to the conference appears not to make any
substantive
difference.
I consider s
16(7)(c) is the source of the power for an order for participation. The UCR are
in substantially the same terms and
do not give rise to a broader basis for
participation in a conference. Section 16(7)(i) simply provides a power to do
things that
the rules of the Court may provide. Contrary to the submissions of
292 Rundle, I consider that s 21(1)(b) of the Act is not applicable
conference and relates to principles governing hearings. In New South Wales, it
has been held that the power under
Land and Environment Court
) to inform itself on any matter in such
manner as it thinks appropriate permits an order to be made permitting a
non-party to participate
conference.
However, s 21 of
the Act is in different terms to s 38(2) of the LEC Act in that s 21(2) refers
to the hearing of proceedings whereas
s 38(2) refers to the proceedings.
Further, there is no equivalent to s 16(7)(c) of the Act in the LEC Act.
Rundle submits that the question is whether the Court should, as a matter of
discretion, exercised judicially, admit it to the
conference in order to assist
it in the resolution of some or all of the above issues (and if so, to what
extent or within what limits
may 292 Rundle
participate).
Rundle contends that if permitted to attend the conference its participation
would generally be in the nature of an
amicus curiae
or an intervenor and
that the extent of its participation would be controlled by the presiding
It submitted it would
be entitled to put submissions and refer to documents but only to the extent
permitted by the member.
would not seek to adduce evidence, or to cross examine or to make submissions at
If permitted to see the
compromise, 292 Rundle would identify a list of topics that it would like to
address, but that it
“will be for the conference president to say yes
or no, or to a more confined extent, just in writing; whatever might best assist
argued that the breadth of 292 Rundle’s submissions on this application
and the matters on which it seeks to be heard
or to explore on the speculative
basis that an issue might arise are contrary to the role of an
Pelligra contends
that 292 Rundle’s submissions are indicative of a non-party seeking to
adopt the role of a party and to
seek to raise all or any arguments of which it
may conceive or uncover to prevent or frustrate or delay the disposition of the
settlement.
It argued that the
Court already has the benefit of knowing about 292 Rundle’s concerns
regarding what was previously referred
to in the earlier joinder application as
the boundary interface issues. Pelligra submits therefore that the Court is in
to consider these planning issues itself. With the benefit of the
submissions of the model litigant, the Commission, there is no
reason to infer
that the Commission would other than undertake its proper task of assisting the
Preliminary
matters informing the exercise of the discretion under s 16(7) of the
Rundle has raised a number of issues that it says informs the way in which the
Court should consider the exercise of its discretion
under s 16(7)(c) of the
Act. It is appropriate to deal with those matters before considering the
exercise of the discretion.
Non-provision of compromise
proposal or terms of settlement to applicant
Rundle submitted that it was impossible to foreshadow the submissions that it
may make in relation to the settlement and whether
it will be materially
prejudiced by it because the parties have not permitted an inspection of the
plans and the details the subject
of the compromise
292 Rundle was
critical of Pelligra in relation to its failure to provide the comprise
proposal. Counsel for 292 Rundle submitted
that the failure of Pelligra to
provide a copy of the compromise plans reflected a determination on their part
to not allow anybody
to look at the proposal because they are concerned about it
and what an independent person may
Further, it was submitted
that this “
decidedly uncooperative
” behaviour demonstrated a
determination to not expose the compromise proposal to any level of
for Pelligra contends that there is nothing untoward about its decision to
refuse to permit the applicant to view the settlement
proposal and that there is
neither a basis nor a requirement for them to have been provided with a copy of
the settlement.
It says that
the settlement documents have not been “
agree that there is no requirement, statutory or otherwise, for Pelligra to have
produced a copy of the compromise proposal and/or
the terms of the settlement to
292 Rundle and that it was entirely a matter for Pelligra to decide whether or
not it would disclose
the details of the settlement to a third party. There was
no evidence to support the adverse inference which 292 Rundle invited
to draw in relation to Pelligra’s refusal to provide a copy of the
compromise proposal or the details of the settlement
to the applicant. The
adverse inference could not be drawn from a mere failure to provide the details
of the compromise proposal.
Public renotification
Rundle submitted that if the compromise had been put forward as an amendment to
the original application (while still under assessment
by the relevant
authority), that there may have been a real question whether it ought to have
been renotified pursuant to r 35(3)
Planning, Development & Infrastructure
(General) Regulations 2017
been renotified, then 292 Rundle would have had the opportunity to see the
plans, to understand the development, to make submissions
and probably be heard
in relation to them.
Counsel for
292 Rundle submitted:
But this process, this process diverts from
the public participatory nature of the PDI Act into a not just private but
secret process...at
odds with the statutory
was contended that it is illogical that when a development application has
undergone public notification and representations have
been made, a subsequent
compromise or revised proposal presented in a planning appeal conference does
not afford representors an
opportunity to be heard, despite the fact that, if
lodged as a new application, the compromise would have required public
notification.
292 Rundle submitted that this process undermines the public
interest in ensuring public notice of developments as envisaged by
Rundle submitted that there are two possible means by which this undesirable
approach could be remedied. The relevant planning
authority at first instance
could consider a compromise proposal in public and allow for representations to
be made informally.
In that way, the compromise is considered in the open and
the relevant planning authority can come back to the conference setting
report directly to the presiding member about what it has heard, including
whether there may be matters which may be of interest
or concern to the Court,
such as for example, material prejudice to a non-party. If that was to occur,
it was contended that there
would be no need to let anyone else into the
conference necessarily because the Court would at least be appropriately
Another way in which
the stated undesirable approach, (i.e., precluding public participation in the
consideration of a compromise
proposal in the conference setting) could be
remedied is, if the Court itself was to hold a public hearing in which people
to say something about the compromise proposal could do so. Neither of
these things have happened in this case. 292 Rundle submitted
that in these
circumstances, it is appropriate that its application to attend the conference
be granted, to give effect to the public
participatory objectives of the PDI Act
or to address what was referred to as
“fundamentally an imbalance
between the scheme prescribed for the PDI Act for publicly notifiable
developments and what occurs
or is proposed to occur
response, Pelligra submitted that firstly there is nothing secret about this
process, and that the conciliation conference is
one of private mediation and
how such matters are envisaged to proceed under the
Secondly, the obligations
of a planning authority to re-notify a proposal under assessment where the
changes made are considered
to be substantial by that authority, for the
purposes of r 35(3) of the PDI Regs, do not apply to the Court in a conciliation
process where a compromise proposal has been presented to the
conference chair pursuant to s 16(7)(d) of the Act. However, it correctly
accepted that if the changes made to a proposal resulted in an inconsistency
with a relevant Act, the Court would not be permitted
to record a settlement in
those circumstances.
my view, there is no basis to incorporate the principles of public participation
in the planning process when construing s 16
or determining the circumstances in
which a person, who is not a party, may be permitted to participate in a
conference. A conference,
unless otherwise ordered, is held in private. The
power under s 16(7)(c) to permit someone to participate in the conference must
be in aid of the purposes for which the conference is held, namely, to
facilitate the settlement of the dispute. It is not to circumvent
the private
nature of the conference or to promote some other purpose that is not specified
in s 16. The Court’s task under
s 16(9)(b) is to determine whether, in its
discretion, to decline to accept the settlement in the specified circumstances.
Third party participation
Rundle makes the overarching submission that their admission to the conference
would be in the interests of justice. In support,
it relies on the desirability
of third party participation in planning appeals previously acknowledged by the
judiciary in
Pitt v Environment, Resources &
Development Court
Duggan J with whom Nyland J agreed said:
I think there has been
an acknowledgement in recent times of the justice of community involvement in
planning applications. The commendable
practice of the City Council in this
case in permitting submissions from persons potentially affected by proposed
developments is
an example. Another example is the
Development Act 1993
provides for discretionary consultation in the case of Category 2
developments and compulsory consultation in the case of Category
developments...
I respectfully adopt the comments of Cooke J in
Blencraft Manufacturing Co Ltd v Fletcher
Development Co Ltd
[1974] 1 NZLR 295
This Court should not be swayed, of course, by
any fear, whether well or ill-founded, of a significant increase in the number
planning cases in its lists of business. I do not think that the New
Zealand courts will underestimate the importance for the public
individual of the issues with which town planning disputes are concerned an
importance sometimes transcending that of disputes
in the more traditional
fields of law.
If the discretion is too widely expressed in present legislation then it is
open for parliament to narrow
Rundle contends that given their direct or material interest and the potential
impact of the settlement upon them, a refusal
of their request to attend the
conciliation conference would be inconsistent with the participatory scheme of
the PDI Act. In the
Rossi v City of
Holdfast Bay Assessment Panel
Court identified that when the PDI Act was introduced, there were material
changes made both to the objects of the PDI Act and
the extent of third party
reviews that had previously been permitted under the
Development Act 1993
(now repealed). In
it was made clear by this Court that
there is now an emphasis in the PDI Act on public participation in the planning
process at the
policy preparation stage rather than through broader rights of
review which were previously available under the repealed act. The
amended provisions under the PDI Act suggest that one of the purposes of the PDI
Act is to limit third party rights of
202(1)(g) of the PDI Act provides only limited matters which may be the subject
of review proceedings by third parties.
Pelligra contends that the
applicant’s reliance on
does not support 292 Rundle’s
case to attend a conference under s 16 of the Act in circumstances where a
settlement has been
reached between the parties, and that the Court should not
permit reviews by third parties to occur
“via the back door as sought
by 292 Rundle”.
Pelligra argues that the interests of justice are concerned with the way in
which litigation is run, and that the interests of justice
do not call for third
parties to be heard on, or to fish around in respect of, settled disputes in
respect of their own interests.
do not consider that any broad principle of third party participation in the
planning process assists the Court in any significant
way in determining whether
to grant 292 Rundle’s application to participate in the conference. There
are two reasons for this
finding. First, under the PDI Act, third party
participation primarily is accorded at the policy participation stage rather
the review process. Secondly, the Court’s task is to exercise its
discretion under s 16(7)(c) in the context of ss 16(2), 16(7)(d)
Non-party participation in other jurisdictions and the
need for a contradictor
for non-party participation in a settlement conference for a planning appeal are
sometimes made in the New South Wales Land
and Environment Court (
where the relevant order for participation is known as a
Double Bay Marina
A Double Bay Marina
order is made pursuant to ss 38(2) and/or (3) of the
LEC Act which provides:
(2) In proceedings in Class 1, 2 or 3 of the Court's jurisdiction, the Court is
not bound by the rules of evidence but may inform
itself on any matter in such
manner as it thinks appropriate and as the proper consideration of the matters
before the Court permits.
(3) Subject to the rules, and without limiting the generality of subsection (2),
the Court may, in relation to proceedings in Class
1, 2 or 3 of the Court's
qualifications relevant to
any issue arising for determination in the
proceedings and may receive in evidence the certificate of any such person.
Double Bay Marina Pty Ltd v Woollahra Municipal
Council (Double Bay
considering an application to be heard at a conference from a group of objectors
to an application to modify a development consent,
Cripps CJ in the LEC
determined:
In class 1 proceedings, the court may inform itself on
any matter and in such manner as it thinks appropriate and it may obtain the
assistance of persons having professional or other qualifications relevant to
any issue arising for determination. The issue arising
for determination is
whether a consent granted by the court ought be modified and if so, in what
manner. In my opinion, it is appropriate,
in the special circumstances of this
case, that to the extent that the views of the objectors conflict with the
submissions of the
council, those views be independently put to the
AQC Dartbrook Management Pty Ltd v Minister for Planning and Public Spaces
AQC Dartbrook),
the parties to the appeal had reached an agreement as to the terms on which
the Court might grant consent to modify a development
consent. An objector to
the modification, the Hunter Thoroughbred Breeders Association Inc., applied to
be joined as a party to
the proceedings and to make submissions relating to the
Court’s power to dispose of the proceedings in the manner proposed
parties. Duggan J granted the
application.
The applicant then
appealed against the joinder order and the Court of Appeal allowed the appeal
and held that in the circumstances
of that particular case, there was no power
to join the objector but indicated there were other ways the objector might be
to participate in the hearing, such as an
The objector then
sought leave to be heard at the conciliation conference or hearing under s 38(2)
of the LEC Act
amicus curiae
, or in the alternative to
obtain a Double Bay Marina Order. In deciding whether to make an order under s
38(2), her Honour distinguished
MH Earthmoving
Pty Ltd v Cootamundra-Gundagai Regional
which limited
the power to make such an order in respect of a s 34
Ultimately, Duggan J
granted leave under s 38 of the LEC Act
limited to the objector making
written submissions as to the power of the Court to grant the modification
application. Their participation
was permitted to provide assistance to the
Court in determining
whether the settlement was within jurisdiction
Duggan J determined:
It is worth noting, however, notwithstanding
the manner in which a conciliation conference is conducted the legislative
make it clear that it is only the parties that are able to determine
whether an agreement will be made. That is, even if a non-party
were permitted
to be present at all times in the s 34 Conciliation Conference, that
non-party has no power to veto, frustrate or
prevent the entry into an agreement
by the parties to the proceedings.
If an agreement is reached the
Commissioner must dispose of the matter in accordance with s 34(3) of the
LEC Act, which may involve
considering the submissions of a non-party as to
power, but would not permit a Commissioner to decline to exercise the power
by s 34(3) merely because the Commissioner agreed with the
non-party on matters going only to merit
For those reasons, the legislative provisions that govern the conduct of
a s 34 Conciliation Conference do not, as a matter of power,
the making of a Double Bay Marina Order that would permit a non-party to
participate in a s 34 conference: on any matter
in such manner as
it thinks appropriate and as the proper consideration of the matters before the
Court permits.
Whilst there is a power to permit such participation (not a third party right
to require it) it will be a matter that will depend
on the circumstances of each
case whether such a power should be exercised in the Court's discretion.
(My underlining).
care must be exercised when applying the decisions of other jurisdictions. The
task of the Court in a conciliation conference
under s 34(3) of the LEC Act when
a settlement has been agreed to by the parties, is to determine if that is a
decision that the
Court could have made in the proper exercise of its functions.
That task is broader than the task of this Court under s 16 of the
Act. It has
been interpreted as requiring the Court to achieve a relevant level of
satisfaction and may require the Court to make
findings of fact, law or mixed
facts and law and usually give brief reasons as to why it was
Rundle submitted that there is no doubt that courts and tribunals around
Australia consider the presence of a skilled contradictor
to be highly useful,
including in planning matters. That is especially so, it was submitted, in
circumstances of settlement because
the parties as of right will adopt an
essentially common position and thereby deprive the Court of a
contradictor.
Furthermore, 292
Rundle contends that the raising of issues by a non-party, which no party would
otherwise raise or address, may
be useful and
appropriate.
In addition, in
equivalent NSW proceedings, such as in the
AQC Dartbrook
case, it is
clear that, even when parties have reached a settlement between themselves, a
non-party participant may still properly
and usefully be permitted to
participate in the settlement conference to assist the Court in determining
whether the settlement is
Rundle submitted that it will provide the sort of assistance that a properly
skilled contradictor can summon and
in the consideration of
the settlement, that they
“will bring the keen eye”
bring an appropriate level of scrutiny which the other parties are not
demonstrating that they will
Rundle contends that notwithstanding the respondent is an emanation of the
Crown, that its obligation as a model litigant will
not extend to putting up a
contrary case or indicate to the presiding member why it is that the settlement
be accepted. It was submitted that:
isn’t a case like an
application for orders where the
party seeking is obliged to put the contrary case. Nobody’s putting a
contrary case. Both
parties as of right will be telling you that this is a
settlement that is appropriate and [not] apparently inconsistent, and not
prejudicial to my client. That’s, as best we can tell from their
submissions, what they’ll be
disagreed with that submission and argues that notwithstanding that a
settlement has been reached, that the Commission
is still a contradictor and
that it will be able to engage with and provide assistance to the presiding
member, as necessary.
submits that it is undoubtedly the case that the Court will not act as a rubber
stamp in giving effect to a settlement.
However, it argued that the Court is
not making a judgment on the merits and that the Court’s assessment of the
involves a fairly “
” consideration of whether it is
appropriate
” in the sense of it being lawful and within the
(broad) range of outcomes that would be acceptable under a planning judgment
made under the
Planning & Design
parties accepted that the Court has a discretion to permit 292 Rundle to attend
the conference at least as an
Counsel for
Pelligra submitted however that it would be a relatively rare case that the
Court would seek out the assistance of a
non-party in relation to a
settlement.
Pelligra argued
that it is not the case that 292 Rundle ought to be provided with a copy of the
plans, or that they have got some
right to come into the conference setting and
convince the presiding member that it ought to be concerned about the settlement
some way. Rather, it is entirely a matter for the presiding member to
consider whether it has a concern with respect to the proposed
settlement, and
if it does, then the presiding member may, at
time, invite such
person(s) as necessary to attend the conference and to address it on any issues
of concern. In this case, Pelligra
says that unless the Court was to consider
that the changes are materially prejudicial in respect of the boundary issues
areas currently known to the Court to be of concern to 292 Rundle),
that there is no particular reason for the Court to hear further
again. It submits that 292 Rundle has no right to see the amended plans to see
if it can make out a case that the amended
proposal is so prejudicial that it
should not be approved or whether it can construct an argument that the
amendments are somehow
Pelligra contends that
this would “
invert the whole process”
and is not consistent
of the role of the presiding member under s 16(9) of the Act
John Barr Investments Pty Ltd v Mordialloc Sporting Club Incorporated & Anor
(John Barr Investments
proceedings were brought in the Supreme Court of Victoria pursuant to s 148 of
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1988 (Vic) (VCAT
, against the orders of a member of the Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (
VCAT or the Tribunal
). The orders in question
had been made by the member of VCAT with the consent of all parties to the
proceedings. The appellant
sought to argue that there was no consent of the
parties upon which the orders could be founded. It was contended that the
Club (being the respondent in the initial proceedings) lacked a validly
constituted Board of Directors at the time the orders were
made, and therefore,
it could not have given consent on behalf of that body corporate nor instruct a
representative to do so on its
That was not an issue
that was raised before the Tribunal.
J explained the manner in which VCAT derives its authority to make consent
orders under s 93 of the VCAT Act, with respect
to the authority of the Court in
recording a settlement reached between the parties. In considering s 93 of the
VCAT Act, His Honour
adopted the reasons of Ginnane J in
The Big Apple Group Pty Ltd v Melbourne City
where Ginnane J said:
[39] It was not disputed that at the time the
Senior Member made the Consent Orders, the parties requested him to do so and
on the basis that they had agreed to settle the Proceeding. That is why
the orders are headed ‘Orders by Consent’. In
my opinion, the Senior
Member was able to act on the basis that the parties had agreed to settle the
proceeding and therefore he
had power to make the Consent Orders under
s 93(1). The Big Apple now wants the Tribunal, more than 5 years later, to
inquire into
whether the settlement agreement was void for fraud or
misrepresentation or misleading conduct and to determine whether the
fact required for the exercise of the s 93(1) power was in fact
in existence at the time the Consent Orders were made.
[44] If the Big Apple’s construction of s 93 were accepted, the
Tribunal would have to conduct an inquiry or investigation into
whether the
settlement agreement was genuinely formed.
This ‘trial within a
trial’, to adopt Warren CJ’s description in
inconsistent with the legislature’s intention for the Tribunal to be a
speedy and inexpensive forum for dispute resolution
(My underlining).
was also made in the course of the
John Barr Investments
proceedings to
an earlier decision of the Tribunal in
AGL Loy Yang Pty Ltd v Department Head
of Economic Development, Jobs, Transport and Resources (AGL Loy
, Deputy President Dwyer considered the powers of the Tribunal when
considering whether to grant an order to give effect to a settlement.
President Dwyer stated that the Tribunal does not formally determine the
application
on its merits
pursuant to the relevant enabling
enactment that gave rise to the initial decision under review and that there are
no findings of
fact or law by the Court that resolves the dispute between the
Deputy President went on to state that in making a consent order, the VCAT
member does not take responsibility for the merits
outcome in the same way as if
they had fully heard the proceedings and given a reasoned
To take a different view in relation to a VCAT
review proceeding would effectively require a hearing by default
, before any
consent order could be made, with all of the associated costs and delays for the
parties, and resource implications for
the justice system.
This would run
contrary to the purpose and intent of s
. It would be contrary
to the purpose and objectives of VCAT in providing a forum for timely and
cost-effective dispute resolution,
including the use of mediation and compulsory
conferences to promote a settlement between the parties.
[23] The key authorities for the proposition that a tribunal in a review
proceeding has the function of making the ‘correct
or preferable
decision’ ordinarily relate to decisions following a hearing, with the
tribunal’s underlying task being
to reach the correct or preferable
decision ‘on the material before
In a planning
(albeit a little different to the MRSD Act context here),
has been suggested that VCAT is entitled to grant a statutory approval where it
is satisfied that the approval will result in
a reasonably acceptable outcome
having regard to the matters relevant to its
VCAT need not search
for the ideal outcome.
[24] The power under s 93 of the VCAT Act is
discretionary. However, in considering whether a proposed consent order is a
decision comprising one of acceptable outcomes, it is highly relevant
that the agreement reflects and promotes a settlement that
is obviously
acceptable to the parties.
In a review proceeding, where the public
decision-maker whose decision is under review is a consenting party to the
settlement, VCAT
can also reasonably assume that the decision-maker, in giving
its consent, has had appropriate regard to all of the relevant matters
required to consider under the enabling enactment (including relevant matters of
a ‘public’ character) and that
the consent position is in conformity
with the relevant regulatory regime administered by that decision-maker
[25] In most instances, in exercising the discretion
under s 93 in review proceeding, VCAT need do no more than
whether the settlement appears to be generally satisfactory and
within the range of acceptable outcomes on the material before it,
having regard
to the subject matter of the proceeding and the broad nature of the decision
under review, and that there is nothing
overtly wrong or odd about it. VCAT
therefore still has an important role to play in providing a ‘check and
albeit in many cases to a relatively cursory level
(My underlining).
President Dwyer confirmed that if a settlement is within the broad range of
acceptable outcomes on the material that is before
it, that it would generally
not be acceptable for the Tribunal to interfere with the settlement, nor is it
“under any obligation to investigate or consider all elements of the
John Barr Investments,
Croft J agreed that the position set out by Deputy
President Dwyer in VCAT expressed above, together with the reasons of Ginnane J
case, provided an
“accurate and comprehensive
analysis of the nature and extent of the power conferred on VCAT by s 93 and the
manner in which
the legislature would have expected it to be exercised.”
I consider that s 93 of the VCAT Act and the observations of Croft J with
respect to s 93 provides some assistance to the Court when
exercising its power
to give effect to a settlement under s 16 of the Act. The powers of the
presiding member are exercised at a
relatively high level and are not equivalent
to a full merits review. As Croft J held with respect to matters before the
In my view,
if this were not the position, it would
become necessary for the Tribunal, and courts in similar circumstances, to
assume some kind
of inquisitorial function with respect to the content and basis
of an agreed settlement
arrangement which the parties were putting to it.
Quite apart from the extent to which this would be a departure from the general
approach to civil litigation before courts and the Tribunal,
it would invite
more costs and delays and, in many cases, would likely involve a mini trial (or
perhaps more) at odds with the nature
of the Tribunal as an expert and
expeditious dispute resolution forum
. Clearly, where it is obvious that all
necessary parties are not before or the Tribunal sees some patent defect,
absurdity or manifest
injustice in what is being proposed, then it would be
expected that these matters would be raised with the
(My underlining).
identified earlier, Pelligra argues that 292 Rundle’s submissions on their
application to attend the conference are indicative
of a non-party seeking to
adopt the role of a party and to seek to raise all or any argument of which it
may conceive or uncover
to prevent or frustrate or delay the disposition of the
settlement. 292 Rundle submits in response that it will not seek to adduce
evidence, or to cross examine or to make submissions at large, that the
conference would not turn into a ‘mini trial’
and that if it is
permitted to see the compromise plans, the applicant would then identify a list
of topics that it would like to
address the presiding member on.
292 Rundle was permitted to identify a list of topics that it would wish to
address the presiding member on and then participate
in the conference, the
presiding member would then be required to undertake some form of merits review
of the proposal, in its revised
form. Such an approach would effectively impose
upon the Court an inquisitorial function with respect to the proposed settlement
that has been presented to it. It would be a natural consequence for the
presiding member to consider the issues of concern to 292
Rundle because they
have been brought to the member’s attention, and to then invite the
parties to consider these matters,
potentially identifying further amendments
that could be made to the proposal to somehow satisfy the applicant’s
In line with the Victorian authorities referred to herein, such as
the decisions in
John Barr Investments
, I consider that this would be contrary to the role of the presiding
member in the consideration of a
settlement of the parties
presented to
it under s 16 of the Act.
is not the role of the presiding member to undertake a merits review of a
settlement proposal or to commence an inquiry or investigation
with respect to
the content and the basis of the settlement and whether it may result in a
development that does not take into account
or satisfy those matters of
particular concern to a third party representor. Importantly, and contrary to
the submissions of 292
Rundle, the presiding member ought to be able to
reasonably assume that in giving its consent to the settlement, the Commission
had appropriate regard to all of the relevant matters it is required to
consider under the relevant provisions of the
Planning and Design Code
made under the PDI Act, and that the settlement is in general conformity
with the relevant planning rules. I do not agree with the
submissions of the
applicant that the Court should take a different view of that matter. There is
no evidence before the Court to
suggest that the Commission has not given the
compromise proposal its necessary consideration. In this regard, I note the
written submissions of the Commission provided to the Court following
the hearing in which the Court requested it to respond to the
the compromise proposal was provided to any referral agencies, and if so, which
the Commission’s delegate, the State Commission Assessment Panel,
considered the compromise proposal itself or delegated
that task to some other
entity or person, and if so, to whom?
there were any changes made to the proposed plans with respect to the
development along the western boundary of the subject
development site, now
forming part of the compromise proposal and if so, the general nature of such
response, the Commission informed the Court that the compromise proposal was
provided to Heritage SA on 6 November 2024 and a
written response was provided
on 13 November 2024. The revised scheme was also provided to the Adelaide City
Council on the same
date who provided a written response on 14 November 2024.
In addition, the Office for Design and Architecture SA (ODASA) was consulted
relation to the revised proposal who also provided a written response on 18
November 2024. Further, it was the Commission’s
delegate who considered
the compromise proposal at its meeting held on 17 December 2024, i.e., the same
entity who initially refused
to grant planning consent to the Development
contrary to the planning officer’s recommendation that the Development
the grant of planning consent in its original form. The Commission
also outlined the extent of the changes to the western elevation,
elevation of concern to the applicant earlier in the joinder
application.
matters provide evidence that it is not the case that the Commission has
accepted the compromise without undertaking a considered
review of the terms of
the compromise proposal. It has sought advice and input from a number of third
parties in reaching the conclusion
which it did with respect to the planning
merits of the revised scheme.
considering the compromise proposal, it seems that the Commission did not
consider that the amendments to the proposal were such
as to warrant a
renotification of the proposal in its revised form. In this regard, firstly,
the terms of r 35(3) of the PDI Regs
only apply to a relevant authority that is
undertaking an assessment of a development application that is
in circumstances where the changes may be considered to be
substantial (which is not this case here given the development application
already been determined). Secondly, notwithstanding r 35(3) does not strictly
apply, it was open to the Commission to re-notify
the revised proposal
it considered the changes were substantial. However, it declined to do so.
There is no obligation or requirement under the PDI Act
for the Commission to
undertake any public notification of a compromise proposal in relation to a
decision regarding a proposed development
that is under appeal and that is
before the Court. There is no public participation envisaged under the PDI Act
with respect to this
process. There is neither a legal requirement nor an
obligation on the Court to undertake its own notification process with respect
to a compromise proposal that has been presented to it in a conciliation
conference. It is open to parliament to broaden the requirements
of the PDI Act
or indeed the Act itself in this regard should it consider it to be necessary.
is not to say that the Court cannot require a public notification process to be
undertaken. If it appears, for example that,
erroneously, a proposed
development was not the subject of public notification at all in the first
instance, the Court could direct
that this process be undertaken to correct this
procedural error while under
Indeed, that would be a
situation where s 16(9)(a) would come into play and the member of the Court
would not be permitted to accept
a settlement that appears to be inconsistent
with, in that scenario the public notification requirements of the PDI Act. As
contemplated
by the provisions of s 16(9)(a), he or she may adjourn the
proceedings to enable the parties to explore the possibility of varying
settlement to comply with the PDI Act, or effectively to correct the procedural
error to ensure that the inconsistency is remedied
before a settlement is able
to be recorded.
Exercise of the discretion to allow a non-party
to participate in the conference
application to participate in the conference must be considered in light of the
purpose of the conference and be in furtherance
of that purpose. Pursuant to s
16(2) of the Act, the purpose of a conference, indeed the
purpose of a conference, is to enable the member of the Court presiding at the
to assist the parties
to explore any possible resolution of
the matters in dispute without resorting to a formal hearing. That purpose must
be considered
in the context of s 16(7)(d) that the presiding member may,
subject to s 16(9), record the settlement reached and s 16(9) where the
presiding member must not accept a settlement that appears to be inconsistent
with a relevant Act and may decline to accept a settlement
that may materially
prejudice a person not represented at the conference but who has a direct and
material interest in the matter.
The Court will also not record a settlement if
it forms the view that it is not
appropriate.
consequently two broad circumstances where the participation of the non-party
may assist in achieving those objectives.
They are: (1) to assist the parties
in reaching a resolution (which is not relevant in these proceedings); and (2)
to assist the
Court in determining whether the proposed settlement appears to be
inconsistent with the Act or is not appropriate.
is difficult to reconcile s 16(9)(b) of the Act with s 16(2) of the Act in
circumstances where a settlement has been reached between
the parties and the
matters in dispute between the parties have been resolved. In this scenario,
the member of the Court presiding
at a conference would not be
assisting the
in the resolution of
dispute, by inviting a non-party
to attend the conference and to potentially raise issues with respect to the
resolution that has
been reached between them.
16(9)(b) does not provide a further substantive basis by which a settlement
might be declined. If it did so, it would give
greater rights to a non-party who
might choose not to be involved in the conference to a non-party who was
involved. That cannot
be the intended consequence of s 16(9)(b). Section
16(9(b) in my view is intended to provide the opportunity for a person to make
an application to be present at the conference or an application for joinder.
The presiding member may adjourn the conference to
allow that application to be
made. The intent of s 16(9)(b) is not to require the presiding member to
conduct a merits review, on
behalf of but in the absence of, such a non-party.
If such a review were to be conducted, s 16(9)(b) does not set out the criteria
by which the Court might decline to accept the settlement. The fact that a
person has a direct and material interest for the purpose
of s 16(9)(b) suggests
that they may be a person who should be present at the conference under s
16(7)(c) because they may, in certain
circumstances, be able to contribute to
the question whether the settlement appears to be inconsistent with a relevant
considering how the Court should exercise its discretion, it is necessary first
to consider the contentions of 292 Rundle
which impact on the way in which the
Court should embark on that task. First, while I accept the submissions of 292
Rundle that
the presiding member must consider whether the settlement is
inconsistent with the PDI Act, for the reasons expressed above, I do
that the member must consider whether the settlement will materially prejudice
292 Rundle, being a person with a direct
or material interest. It is not
necessary for the member of the Court to determine that matter in considering
whether the Court
should record this settlement pursuant to s 16(7)(d) of the
Act. I do not consider that such an approach represents a “
fundamental
between the scheme prescribed for the PDI Act for
notifiable developments and what is proposed to occur in the recording of a
reached between the parties in the context of a planning appeal. As
I have previously indicated, there have been material changes
to both the
objects of the PDI Act and the extent of third party participation under the PDI
Act. Secondly, 292 Rundle submitted
that the presiding member cannot know the
extent of its prejudice without hearing from it in respect of the settlement.
prejudice is not a ground for declining to record the settlement. The
settlement may be declined to be recorded if it is inconsistent
with the Act or
is inappropriate. The fact of material prejudice may be a factor in the
participation application but does not require
the extent of the prejudice to be
identified. Thirdly, 292 Rundle submitted that its participation in the
conference may reveal
that the settlement should be declined as a matter of
general discretion. I do not accept that there is a general discretion to
refuse to accept a settlement other than if the settlement is not appropriate or
is inconsistent with the Act. That is consistent
Section 16(7)(d)
provides that subject to subsection (9), the member must not record a
settlement. Subsection (9) records one circumstance
where the member may not
record a settlement. The expression of that discretionary circumstance suggests
that there is not some
overarching discretion to refuse to accept a settlement.
As set out above, s 16(9)(b) is, in my view, designed to give the presiding
member the discretion to refuse a settlement because the relevant person is not
is not an uncommon occasion that a proposed development is the subject of some
objection by an adjoining neighbour, even after
revisions have been made by the
proponent, such as has occurred in this case. In the context of a settlement
that has been reached
between the parties, the member does not take
responsibility for the merits outcome in the same way as if he or she had fully
independently considered the matter and given a reasoned decision. In a
conference, the member does not have the benefit of having
viewed the site and
the locality nor has it heard any evidence from either the parties or their
experts. When the parties come to
the conference and ask the member to record a
settlement pursuant to s 16(7)(d) of the Act, the member must undertake the
enquiry as to whether the settlement appears to be inconsistent with
the relevant Act or is inappropriate.
s 16(7)(c), the Court has a discretion to invite a non-party to attend a
conference. That discretion is unfettered although
it must be exercised in
furtherance of the purposes of s 16, which have been identified. The following
factors favour permitting
292 Rundle participating in the conference. First,
292 Rundle is a contradictor, where no other contradictor exists. In
the non-party was invited to provide assistance to the Court in
determining whether the settlement was
within jurisdiction
. Pursuant to
s 16(9)(a) of the Act, if a settlement
to be inconsistent with a
relevant Act, the member of the court presiding at the conference must not
accept it. The phrase
appears to be inconsistent
within s 16(9)(a)
suggests that there is a lower threshold than proof that the settlement is
inconsistent with another Act. If there is
prima facie
that the settlement is inconsistent with another Act, then the member of the
Court may assume that that is the
In circumstances where
the member considers that a settlement may appear
to be inconsistent with
a relevant Act, in that situation, the member would likely benefit from the
assistance of a non-party in determining
whether or not the settlement is
inconsistent with a relevant Act. That is precisely a situation where
the Court would benefit from the assistance of a non-party.
Secondly, 292
Rundle has a direct and material interest in the proposed development and may be
materially prejudiced by the development.
Therefore, it is a person who has a
genuine interest in the outcome of the conference. Thirdly, the Court is able
to place limits
on how 292 Rundle might participate in the conference so as to
not interfere with the orderly hearing of the conference.
are a number of factors in this case which do not favour an order for
participation. First, the Commission initially opposed
the application for
planning consent made by Pelligra. Therefore, the basis upon which it might be
contended that there was inconsistency
between the Development (and the revised
proposal) and the Act can be ascertained. This initial opposition was despite
the recommending
officer’s planning report which assessed the Development
against the Code and concluded that the Development warranted conditional
planning consent. Secondly, the Commission has advised of the measures that it
has taken to ensure that the consequences of the
settlement have been fully
explored. The presiding member can assume that in giving its consent the
Commission has had appropriate
regard to all relevant matters and that the
consent position is generally in accordance with the relevant planning scheme
not inappropriate. Thirdly, the task of the presiding member is not a
merits review and is limited and confined to determining whether
a settlement
appears to be inconsistent with a relevant Act or is inappropriate. Fourthly,
it is a matter for the presiding member
whether it would be of assistance to
invite a non-party to attend the conference and to assist the Court in
determining the question
of apparent inconsistency or whether the settlement is
inappropriate. In the circumstances of this case, I do not consider that
Rundle would provide assistance in determining that question. Fifthly, there is
no evidence to suggest that the proposed settlement
is inappropriate or
inconsistent with the Act.
all of these matters, individually and in the context of each other, I have
formed the view that the application of 292
Rundle should be refused.
judgment of the Court of Appeal in
, although providing guidance
to this Court in its enunciation of principles, does not dictate the answer to
292 Rundle’s application.
The decision in
whether the appeal judge was correct to find that this Court erred in its
approach to the determination of the application
for joinder
pursuant to
Development Act
This application by
292 Rundle does not involve an application for joinder, rather it is an
application to attend the conciliation
conference pursuant to s 16 of the
the reasons that have been expressed, the application of 292 Rundle is
Planning, Development and
Infrastructure Act 2016
s 205(2)(c)(i).
Planning, Development and
Infrastructure Act 2016
s 205(2)(c)(ii).
Pelligra Group Pty Ltd v
State Planning Commission
[2023] SAERDC 16.
292 Rundle Street Pty Ltd v
Pelligra Group Pty Ltd & Anor
[2024] SASC 100.
Following the hearing, the
Registrar wrote to the parties and advised that, according to the Court’s
records, draft minutes
of order together with a set of compromise plans were
presented to the conference chair at the conference held on 13 February 2025.
Following the hearing of this application, the parties together with the
interlocutory applicant were invited to make further written
submissions in
relation to three matters arising, namely;
(1) whether the terms of settlement have in fact been agreed upon and are
reflected in those documents presented at the 13 February
2025 conference;
(2) if so, whether the presiding member should proceed to consider the
application in light of the terms of that settlement; and
(3) whether there are any particular terms of the settlement that the
parties contend bear upon the determination of the application.
Written submissions were filed by the parties in response on 11 July 2025
[FDN35] and 14 July 2025 [FDN36] and the interlocutory
applicant filed its
response to those submissions on 17 July 2025 [FDN37].
Respondent, Written
submissions of the respondent on the interlocutory application, FDN33, undated,
Exhibits A1, A2 and A3.
Exhibit A4.
Environment, Resources
& Development Court Act 1993
(SA), s 16(2).
Environment, Resources
& Development Court Act 1993
(SA), s 16(4).
Environment, Resources
& Development Court Act 1993
(SA), s 16(5).
Environment, Resources
& Development Court Act 1993
(SA), s 16(7)(c).
Environment, Resources
& Development Court Act 1993
(SA), s 16(7)(d).
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
(SA), r 361.1.
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
r366.5(2)(a).
[2023] SAERDC 16.
Pelligra Group Pty Ltd v
State Planning Commission
[2023] SAERDC 16
Ibid, [39].
[2024] SASCA 58.
Ibid, [195].
Although the proceedings in
concerned a Category 2 development under the relevant legislative
scheme, the
Development Act 1993
(SA) (now repealed), the equivalent
public notification process for a performance assessed development under the
provides for the same right enabling an adjacent land owner or
occupier to make a representation to the relevant authority in relation
should be the decision of the relevant authority as to planning consent in
relation to the performance based elements of
a development (see
Development & Infrastructure Act 2016
(SA), s 107(3) and (4)).
Interlocutory applicant,
Written submissions of the interlocutory applicant, FDN27, undated, [14].
Ibid, [30].
The applicant invokes a
number of statutory powers either together or in the alternative, namely s
16(7)(c), s 16(7)(i) and/or s
21(1)(b) of the Act including the implied powers
of the Court as a court of record under s 5 of the Act, and/or rule 366.5 of the
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
(SA) (see also Interlocutory applicant, Written
submissions of the interlocutory applicant, FDN27, undated, [7]).
AQC Dartbrook Management Pty Ltd v Minister for
Planning and Public Spaces
[2021] NSWLC 76, [13].
Interlocutory applicant,
Written submissions of the interlocutory applicant, FDN27, undated,
Interlocutory
applicant, Written submissions of the interlocutory applicant, FDN27, undated,
Transcript of Proceedings,
17 June 2025, 17, 23-29.
Appellant, Written
submissions of the appellant on the interlocutory application, FDN31, undated,
Ibid, [11].
Interlocutory applicant,
Written submissions of the interlocutory applicant, FDN27, undated, [29].
Transcript of Proceedings,
17 June 2025, 8, 20-25.
Transcript of Proceedings,
17 June 2025, 9, 3-5.
Transcript of Proceedings,
17 June 2025, 33, 2-5.
Appellant, Written
submissions of the appellant on the interlocutory application, FDN31, undated,
Regulation 35(3) of the PDI
Regs provides that if an application is varied following a referral or public
notification, the relevant
authority may, if the variations are not substantial,
consider the application without the need to repeat a referral or public
notification.
Transcript of Proceedings,
17 June 2025, 9, 29-36.
Transcript of Proceedings,
17 June 2025, 10, 1-5.
Transcript of Proceedings,
17 June 2025, 16, 4-9
Transcript of Proceedings,
17 June 2025, 17, 10-13.
Transcript of Proceedings,
17 June 2025, 35, 33-37.
(1995) 66 SASR 274.
(1995) 66 SASR 274
[2022] SAERDC 18.
Ibid, [76].
Appellant, Written
submissions of the appellant on the interlocutory application, FDN31, [undated],
Ibid, [38].
Named after
Marina Pty Ltd v Woollahra Municipal Council
(1985) 54 LGRA 313
Dartbrook Management Pty Ltd v Minister for Planning and Public Places
[2021] NSWLEC 76
, [11] – [34] (Duggan J).
(1985) 54 LGRA 313.
Double Bay Marina Pty
Ltd v Woollahra Municipal Council
(1985) 54 LGRA 313
[2021] NSWLEC 76.
AQC Dartbrook Management Pty Ltd v Minister for
Planning and Public Spaces
[2020] NSWLEC 159.
AQC Dartbrook Management Pty Ltd v Minister for
Planning and Public Places
[2021] NSWCA 112.
[2018] NSWLEC 56.
Her Honour added that if
MH Earthmoving Pty Ltd v Cootamundra-Gundagai Regional Council
distinguishable then she would consider the decision to be clearly wrong and not
AQC Dartbrook Management
Pty Ltd v Minister for Planning and Public Places
[2021] NSWLEC 76.
Al Maha Pty Ltd v Huajun Investments Pty Ltd
[2018] NSWCA 245
, [18] and [29].
Interlocutory applicant,
Written submissions of the interlocutory applicant, FDN27, undated, [17].
Ibid, [18].
Ibid, [19].
Transcript of Proceedings,
17 June 2025, 21, 8-11.
Transcript of Proceedings,
17 June 2025, 21, 21-24.
Transcript of Proceedings,
17 June 2025, 22, 27-34.
Transcript of Proceedings,
17 June 2025, 36, 12-20.
ACQ Dartbrook Management
Pty Ltd v Minister for Planning and Public Spaces
[2021] NSWCA 112
Maloney v 21-25 South Esplanade Pty Ltd
[2024] SASCA 58
[185] and the cases referred to therein on this issue;
John Barr Investments
Pty Ltd v Mordialloc Sporting Club Inc
[2022] VCS 100,
Kovalev v Minister for Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs
[1999] FCA 557
(1999) 100 FCR 323
, [11]-[15].
Respondent, Written
submissions of the respondent on the interlocutory application, FDN33,
[undated], [21], and Transcript of Proceedings
Transcript of Proceedings,
17 June 2025, 34, 7-11.
Appellant, Written
submissions of the appellant on the interlocutory application, FDN31, undated,
[2022] VSC 100.
[2022] VSC 100
[2020] VSC 393.
[2016] VCAT 1249.
Ibid, [20].
Rozen v Macedon Ranges SC
, [176] per Osborn J, and the cases there cited, and
Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic
(1979) 24 ALR 577
, 589 per Bowen CJ and Deane J.
[163]–[187].
[2016] VCAT 1249
In an email dated 24 June
2025 sent on behalf of the Commission to the Registry, the following changes
were described: The pre-cast
fins on the western elevation between levels 6 and
19 have been reduced in depth by 250mm (from 1m to 750mm). On level 5, there
are the following changes; (i) the western elevation now includes 750mm pre-cast
fins, and (ii) increased setback of the northern
end of the western elevation,
where that part of the façade line is now setback 2 metres from the
boundary. The compromise
proposal also includes changes which would impact upon
the development along all (or multiple) boundaries of the subject development
site. Most relevantly, that includes; (i) the reduction of the building’s
visual mass and overall height from twenty-one levels
and 67.8 metres to twenty
levels and 63 metres; (ii) changes to the podium design and materials used on
tower facades; and (iii)
the addition of external terrace spaces across the
southern elevation on levels 4 and 5, which also extends the western boundary
those levels by approximately 3500mm.
City of Burnside and Another v Development
Assessment Commission and Another
[2005] SASC 434.
Moloney v 21-25 South Esplanade Pty Ltd
[2024] SASCA 58
, [55] citing
Kovalev v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs
(1999) 100 FCR 557
[1999] FCA 557.
Moloney v 21-25 South
Esplanade Pty Ltd
[2024] SASCA 58
, [55] citing
Kovalev v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
(1999) 100 FCR 557
Regina v Dickens
[1990] 2 Q.B. 102
Ibid, [136].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (509 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter