URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SALC/2023/89.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:00:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cavan Trading Pty Ltd t/as Cavan Hotel [2023] SALC 89 (21 September 2023)
Cavan Trading Pty Ltd t/as Cavan Hotel
[2023] SALC
LICENSING COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
CAVAN TRADING
PTY LTD T/AS CAVAN HOTEL
Application for a Review of a decision of the
Commissioner
LC-23-00070
HEARING DATE:
14 June 2023
JUDGMENT OF:
Honour Judge BP Gilchrist
DELIVERED ON:
21 September
CATCHWORDS:
Application for review of the Liquor
and Gambling Commissioner’s rejection of an application to vary a
designated gaming area
and redefine licensed premises – The applicant is
the Cavan Hotel which is in a sparsely populated industrial area on the fringe
of Adelaide – The hotel has a kitchen area which has not be used since
2016 and an adjacent dining area and wishes to expand
its gaming room into these
areas – The Commissioner’s delegate refused the applications because
to grant them would take
away from the undertaking carried on at the premises;
it would sanction the hotel turning into a gaming venue; and it would set an
undesirable precedent that could lead to the collapse of traditional hotels
that the delegate erred in finding that the activities at
the hotel would change as the kitchen has been closed for many years –
that a general and hotel licence enables the holder of such a
licence to trade in ways that are different to how entities previously
under a hotel licence and the delegate’s personal disapproval of the
proposed business model was not a matter that she
could take into consideration
that the Commissioner has means available to deal with
applications that raise a concern around harm cause by gaming and in any event
this is a unique case such that an undesirable precedent would not be
established by granting the applications –
that on the
evidence the applications should have been granted –
Gaming Machines Act
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
Liquor Licensing Act
(Liquor Review) Amendment
Peninsula Providore
(Decision of the Liquor and
Gambling Commissioner dated 13 April 2021)
Australian Leisure and
Hospitality Group Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Police
[2020] WASCA
Liquorland (Australia) Pty Ltd and others v Lindsey Cove Pty Ltd
[2002] SASC 17
; (2002) 81 SAST 337
Parafield Plaza Supermarket
[2023] SALC 73
Mansfield Park Hotel (SA) Pty Ltd
[2023] SALC
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr G Coppola on behalf of the Australian Hotels Association
is an application seeking a review of a decision of a delegate of the Liquor and
Gambling Commissioner rejecting an application
to vary a designated gaming area
Gaming Machines Act 1992
(the GM Act) and redefine
licensed premises under the
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
(the Liquor
applicant, Cavan Trading Pty Ltd, is the proprietor of the Cavan Hotel, which is
situated on the western side of Port Wakefield
Road, just north of Gepps Cross,
Cavan Hotel has a gaming area that presently houses 36 gaming
It wishes to expand the
area in which they are housed, doubtless to make it a more attractive space.
application was supported by a report prepared by Commercial Licensing
Specialists dated 9 March 2023. The report noted that the
Cavan Hotel had
existed for many years and was due for renovation. It stated that the purpose of
the application was to enable an
upgrade to occur that would visually enhance
the experience for customers and increase the value of the amenity.
report noted that the net gaming revenue (NGR) of the 36 gaming machines at the
Cavan Hotel for 2021-22 was $44,236, compared
to the State average NGR of
$71,503 and the Port Adelaide Enfield Council
average NGR of $75,405. The
report stated that in light of these figures, gaming cannot be regarded as the
Cavan Hotel’s main
activity. It submitted that the redevelopment should be
regarded as reflecting “the main vision of the site being that of a
atmosphere of gatherings and socialising within the local community.” It
submitted that the main activity of the Cavan
Hotel should be seen as to sale of
liquor for on premises and off premises consumption.
Cavan Hotel has a kitchen area and dining area, although the kitchen area is not
used as such and has not been functioning as
a hotel kitchen since 2016.
not part of the licensed premises, the Cavan Hotel is identified with the Cavan
Hotel Steak Van, which sells steak sandwiches,
hamburgers and the like from 9.00
am to 6.00 pm, seven days a week. The applicant intends to also establish a
pizzeria. Patrons
of the Cavan Hotel can presently order meals from the Steak
Van and it is intended that they will be able to order from the pizzeria,
delivery to them so that the meals can be consumed in the hotel. It is not
within the applicant’s present plans for the
hotel’s kitchen to be
re-established. Hence its proposal to use the existing kitchen and dining areas
as the site of its renovated
and extended gaming area.
applicant submitted that it sought to increase the size of its gaming room to
meet the current demand for gaming services and
that patrons now seek more
personal space and privacy as well as a space that gives an illusion of an open
plan environment without
the stigma that can be associated with smaller gaming
delegate reasoned that because the proposed gaming area is larger than the
current area, this would take away from the undertaking
carried out at the
delegate stated that if she approved the application she would be sanctioning
turning the Cavan Hotel primarily into a gaming
venue. She noted that the Cavan
Hotel was first issued with a liquor licence in 1856. She then made reference to
a decision of another
delegate that had included a discussion about the role
that hotels have played and their significant provision of hospitality and
facilitating a focal point for the community.
delegate stated that to allow the application would be inconsistent with s 2(e)
of the GM Act, which provides that an object of
that Act is:
to ensure that the club and hotel
industry develops in a manner consistent with the needs and
aspirations of the community and is in the community interest.
delegate then stated that the grant of the application would create an
undesirable precedent. She said:
...other GML holders could follow suit by reducing the size of their bar and
dining to a minimal ‘footprint’ and maximize
gaming which could
ultimately lead to the collapse of traditional Hotels that have played such a
vital role in the history and social
fabric of the State, which would negatively
impact on the community and would be contrary to the aspirations of the
...I am also mindful of the potential impact it could have on country Hotels,
arguably the lifeblood of the outback. The temptation
for licensees to reduce
overheads by reducing their bar and dining and rely largely on gaming for
revenue could have a disastrous
impact on country towns and tourism.
review, the applicant submitted that the delegate appeared to reason that to
allow that application would result in a change to
what was on offer at the
Cavan Hotel. It submitted that this was mistaken because the hotel’s
kitchen had already been closed
and had remained closed at least since 2016. It
added that the proposed new pizzeria meant that there would be an increase in
food offerings of the hotel. It submitted that the Steak Van and pizzeria
will provide typical “pub” food in accordance
with the demands and
requirements of the hotel’s patrons. It added that in any event the
delegate gave too much weight to the
issue of meals. It submitted that the
effect of the delegate’s decision is to require hotels with gaming
machines not only
to keep their kitchens, but to operate them. It noted that
the requirement for hotels to provide meals was removed by
Liquor Licensing
Act (Liquor Review) Amendment Act 2017.
submitted that the delegate’s focus on preserving the so called
“traditional” attributes of a hotel was misplaced
because such a
concept no longer exists. It added that the Commissioner had accepted this as
evidenced by the decision in
in which a general
and hotel licence was granted. It contended that the licensed premises in that
case was effectively an olive processing
shed in a paddock with limited liquor
offerings, limited food offerings, and limited trading hours.
submitted that the delegate’s decision sets a dangerous precedent because
its effect is tantamount to the Commissioner exercising
the power to supervise
and overrule business decisions of hotel operators.
submitted that this is a modest application that does no more than seek to
improve the gaming experience for gaming patrons in
circumstances where there
will remain plenty of room for non-gaming patrons and continued food offerings
and no evidence of any negative
community impact. It submitted that the types of
factors that were relevant were those that pertain to the application for a
machine licence under s 15(5) of the GM Act. By reference to these it
contended that the gaming area was suitable for that purpose;
the arrangements
proposed for the security of the premises, each
, and of the gaming operations generally, were adequate; the conduct
of the proposed gaming operations on the premises would be unlikely
to result in
undue offence, annoyance, disturbance or inconvenience to those who reside, work
or worship in the vicinity of the premises;
and the conduct of the proposed
gaming operations on the premises would not detract unduly from the character of
the premises, the
nature of the undertaking carried out on the premises or the
enjoyment of persons ordinarily using the premises (apart for the purpose
gaming); and that no proposed
is so designed or situated that it would be likely to be a special
attraction to minors.
application for review was supported by a statement by the director of the Cavan
Hotel, Terry Board, as well as his oral evidence.
Board stated that when he took over the Cavan Hotel in 2021 the hotel was in a
poor condition. He said that comprised of an old
unused kitchen adjacent to a
small dining area that was used for adult entertainment advertised as XXX
explicit entertainment, a
front bar with only male amenities, a walk in bottle
shop, and a separate saloon bar. He said:
It had an explicit sex licence, and it was pretty much where the kitchen and
dining room was, it pretty much had two security on
every day, seven days a
week, and they had just sex acts, pretty much.
said that the Cavan Hotel is in a big industrial area with few if any residents
living within probably a kilometre and a half.
He said that the patronage was
mainly male truck drivers and labourers, with some limited numbers of women
occasionally using the
gaming room. He said that a lot of people on lunchbreaks
come down and ordering from the Steak Van. He said that because they deliver
into the hotel it has a menu for the Steak Van, and they will bring that across
to people in the bar for them to eat.
said the gaming area was average and had a very old fleet of machines, in a
very small, tight room. He explained:
The reason we bought it was probably because we thought that obviously the sex
acts would have detracted from the possibility of
including gaming, plus the old
fleet of machines, plus the room was already tight with the 32, and they
didn’t have their own,
they shared toilets with the people that were there
for the sex acts, and the people from the Steak Van. So part of our increasing
the size it was also to give them their own amenities, to the gaming room, give
them their own toilets and facilities, so they didn’t
have to share.
Board spoke of the change of clientele since he took over. He said that whilst
it remains an industrial area, it has attracted
more women.
said that he had spent $500,000 upgrading 20 of the hotel’s gaming
machines and that the current gaming room is greatly inadequate
because of the
increased size of the machines and patron expectation who had become accustomed
to wider space following distancing
measures implemented at gaming venues
generally during the Covid-19 pandemic.
Consideration
respect, in my opinion there are a number of difficulties with the
delegate’s reasoning.
was her concern that to allow that application would result in a change to the
activities being conducted at the Cavan Hotel.
There was no evidence to support
this. The kitchen has been closed for many years. The effect of the grant of the
application will
have no negative impact upon the range of activities on offer.
Indeed, given that the proposal includes the creation of a pizzeria,
of food offerings at the hotel will increase.
was the delegate’s concern that the business to be conducted at the hotel
strayed impermissibly away from the conventional
notions of a hotel. My
impression is that she regarded the notion of a licensed entity trading under a
general and hotel licence
whose business model was focussed on the sale of
liquor and providing gaming machines as generally undesirable and that this was
particularly so here, involving as it does one of the oldest hotel licences in
this State.
Commissioner’s power to determine the application is conferred by
s 24 of the GM Act and s 53 of the Liquor Act. Both Acts
confer upon the
Commissioner an unqualified discretion to refuse an application on any ground.
They both require the Commissioner
not to grant an application as a matter of
course without a proper inquiry into its merits, and direct that the application
be granted unless the Commissioner is satisfied that to grant the
application would not be contrary to the public interest.
despite the breadth of these provisions, the discretion is not at large, and it
must be exercised with the objects of both Acts
The Commissioner and this
Court must also heed the caution expressed by Doyle CJ in
(Australia) Pty Ltd and others v Lindsey Cove Pty
of being “careful not
to use the discretion as a basis for imposing views about what is desirable,
unless those views are firmly
linked to the principles on which the Act operates
or is administered.”
it must be accepted that the Liquor Act contemplates discrete categories of
licence and for there to be some correlation between
the licence and the
business model under which the licence operates, the position is much more fluid
than was previously the case.
This was explored in
Parafield Plaza
Supermarket.
In that case the
Court noted that prior to the recent amendments to the Liquor Act that changed
many of the categories of licence,
a hotel licence authorised the licensee to
trade as a hotel as that concept would be generally understood. It observed that
Act provided that the licensed premises would be open for certain
minimum hours, it would offer for sale liquor for on and off premises
consumption, with an expectation that meals would be available at certain times.
It then made the point that a hotel “licence
could only be granted if the
licensing authority was satisfied, having regard to the licensed premises
already existing in the locality
in which the premises or proposed premises to
which the application relates are or are to be situated, that the licence was
in order to provide for the needs of the public in that locality.
Those needs could be expected to apply to the full suite of services
hotel might be expected to
The Court then made
the point that “if it were otherwise, the public demand would already be
adequately catered for”
that the hotel licence would not have been granted.
Court then made the following observations about the licence category that has
replaced the hotel licence:
It is instructive that the hotel licence has now been replaced by the licence
now described as a general and hotel licence. The holder
of such a licence can
sell liquor for consumption on premises at any time and sell for consumption off
premises between 8 am and
10 pm subject to the qualification that it can only do
so for up to 13 hours a day. There is no longer an expectation that meals
be provided. There is no longer a requirement that the premises be open for
certain minimum hours. The licence can be granted
even though it is not
necessary to meet the needs of the public. It is sufficient that it is in the
interests of the relevant community
to grant the licence. Collectively these
changes suggest to me that
an entity trading under a general and hotel
licence may now trade in a way that might not resemble how entities that
previously traded
under a hotel licence were expected to
(Emphasis added mine)
this case, the Cavan Hotel will sell liquor for on and off premises consumption.
It will provide opportunities for those, so inclined,
to use gaming machines. It
will also make available a range, albeit limited, of food options. In my
respectful opinion, the delegate’s
concern that it does not seem to fit
within the notion of how a general and hotel licence might trade was misplaced,
and her personal
disapproval of the applicant’s business model was not a
matter that she could take into consideration.
delegate was right to be concerned that changes to licensed premises involving
gaming machines can have detrimental effects on
local communities. As this Court
recently observed in
Mansfield Park Hotel (SA) Pty
In connection with gambling, if the circumstances give the decision-maker pause,
or ring alarm bells, a conservative approach is
the Commissioner has options available to deal with this that do not necessarily
require the refusal to grant an application out
of concern that an undesirable
precedent might be created. If, in connection with a country hotel, the
Commissioner has concerns
that changes to the hotel’s layout and business
model might have negative consequences, the option of designating the
application
pursuant to s 17A(4)(b) of the GM Act so as to await the outcome of
the consultation and additional information that a designated
application
entails, could be considered.
this case is unique. It involves a locality that is on the fringe of
metropolitan Adelaide that is largely devoid of residents.
It concerns an
application calculated to facilitate the change of a tired looking hotel with a
male focused business model into a
modern hotel, that is attempting to appeal to
a wider demographic. With respect, the delegate’s concern that to grant
the application
would create a negative precedent was misplaced.
think it is reasonable to draw the inference that every venue that has gaming
machines is likely to attract some problem gamblers.
It is also reasonable to
infer that there is likely to be a relationship between the NGR at a particular
facility, and the number
of problem gamblers. In
Mansfield Park Hotel (SA)
this Court drew the
inference that a relatively high NGR suggests that there might be a relatively
higher number of problem gamblers
residing in the relevant locality using the
gaming machines at the venue, than is the norm. I think it is reasonable to also
an inference the other way in respect of a relatively low NGR. This might
suggest a lesser number of problem gamblers using the gaming
machines at that
venue, than is the norm.
Mansfield Park Hotel (SA) Pty
this Court thought it
significant that the venue had a NGR that was nearly 80% above the State average
NGR. In this case, I think
it is significant that the NGR at the Cavan Hotel in
the 2021-22 financial year was nearly 40% below the State average NGR. Whilst
is to be expected that the upgrading of the Cavan Hotel will make it more
attractive and that more gaming might take place as
a result, because it starts
from such a relatively low base, the granting of this application ought not give
the decision-maker pause,
or ring alarm bells.
my respectful opinion, the delegate erred in not granting the applications. The
application for review is therefore allowed and
in lieu of the delegate’s
decision, the applications to vary the designated gaming area and redefine the
licensed premises
are granted. The AHA is directed to forward draft orders to
the Clerk of the Court reflecting these
conclusions.
The Cavan Hotel has 40 gaming
machine entitlements.
The Cavan Hotel is within the
Port Adelaide Enfield Council area.
Decision of the Liquor and
Gambling Commissioner dated 13 April 2021.
See, for example:
Leisure and Hospitality Group Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Police
[2020] WASCA
[2002] SASC 17
; (2002) 81 SAST
Ibid at [28].
[2023] SALC 73.
Ibid at [71].
Ibid at [72].
[2023] SALC 83.
Ibid at [65].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (153 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter