URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASC/2025/176.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:05:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
IN THE MATTER OF JAMES BROWN MEMORIAL TRUST [2025] SASC 176 (21 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Civil: Application)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
In the Matter of JAMES BROWN MEMORIAL TRUST
[2025] SASC 176
Judgment of the Honourable
Justice Stein
21 October 2025
STATUTES - ACTS OF PARLIAMENT - INTERPRETATION - PARTICULAR CLASSES OF ACT
- PRIVATE ACTS
CHARITIES - CHARITABLE GIFTS AND TRUSTS - IN GENERAL -
CONSTRUCTION
CHARITIES - TRUSTEES OF CHARITIES - POWERS AND DUTIES - POWERS - POWER TO
DIVERT PROPERTY TO OTHER PURPOSES
James Brown Memorial Trust (“
”), the applicant, is a
charitable trust initially established by the last will and testament of Mrs
Jessie Brown and incorporated
and perpetuated by Acts of Parliament in 1894 and
The applicant seeks advice and directions as to whether it has the power to
remunerate its trustees.
Held (granting the application):
1. The Trust has the power to remunerate trustees for their services.
2. The Trust’s proposal for remuneration is reasonable.
James Brown Incorporation Act 1990
(SA) ss 4, 5, sch;
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Trustee Act 1936
James Brown Memorial Trust Incorporation Act 1894
Succession Act 2023
(SA) sch 4, referred to.
IN THE MATTER OF JAMES BROWN MEMORIAL
[2025] SASC 176
Civil: Application
The James Brown Memorial Trust (“
was established in 1892 under the will of Jessie Brown in honour of her late
husband, James. The terms of the Trust were
to found and endow an
institution, or institutions, and create funds as a memorial to James Brown,
bearing his name, for the benefit,
care, relief or maintenance of such of the
destitute, or the aged, physically or mentally afflicted, or deserving poor of
as the trustees deemed proper and expedient. The Trust is a
registered charity and provides a range of aged care services. The
Trust seeks
orders that the trustees may be remunerated for performing their duties as
are two issues for consideration. The first is whether the Trust has power to
remunerate trustees. If the answer to that
question is yes, the second issue is
whether the proposed remuneration is reasonable.
have determined that the Trust has the power and that the proposed remuneration
is reasonable. Accordingly, I have determined
to allow the application and make
the orders sought by the Trust.
Basis upon which orders are
Trust has applied for directions as to management and administration of the
Trust under s 5 of the
James Brown Incorporation Act 1990
”), s 70(1) of the
Administration and
Probate Act 1919
Trustee Act 1936
Administration and Probate Act 1919
provided that
the Court may allow any trustee to receive such commission or other remuneration
out of the estate or trust property
as is just and reasonable. Section 70
Administration and Probate Act 1919
trustees by
Trustee Act 1936
(SA). Section 5 of the Act
allows the Trust or any two trustees to apply to the Supreme Court for advice or
direction as to any matter
connected with the management or administration of
the Trust property or the construction of any document relating to the Trust or
the Trust property.
James Brown Memorial Trust Incorporation Act
was enacted to provide for the incorporation of the Trust and to prescribe the
powers and functions of that Trust. In 1990,
the Act was enacted which
re-stated the purposes of the Trust and revised the powers and functions of the
Trust’s balance sheet at the date of the application showed gross assets
of $178 million and net assets of $117 million.
At that date the Trust employed
586 people and had 44 volunteers.
at the date of the application, the Trust owned and operated residential care
facilities in Belair, Morphett Vale, McLaren Vale;
retirement villages in
Belair, Bellevue Heights, McLaren Vale, Woodside; and also provided subsidised
800 clients with a range of needs in districts
ranging from Murray Bridge and Victor Harbor to Mount Barker and Belair. The
also provides affordable living accommodation at Crafers, Campbelltown,
Clovelly Park, Findon and Mansfield Park.
Trust has eight trustees who meet bimonthly. Trustees hold appointments as
members of sub-committees. Trustees are required
to have in depth knowledge of
the complex laws and regulations relating to the environment in which the Trust
operates and trustees
have significant duties and responsibilities. The chair
of the Board deposed to the significant period of time trustees are required
devote to address the substantial information provided before each Trust meeting
and the need to engage in consideration of matters
relating to the Trust outside
of nominated meeting times from time to time.
Trust’s operations have become increasingly more complex over time.
chairman of the Trust deposed to awareness of plans by government to introduce
new aged care legislation, strengthen aged care
quality standards and introduce
a new regulatory model.
chair deposed to a belief that the Trust considers it is fair and reasonable
that the trustees should be remunerated given the
complexity of the
Trust’s property, holdings and business dealings and the regulation of the
aged care sector. Providing remuneration
will assist the Trust in recruiting
and retaining suitably qualified and experienced trustees.
of the Trust
first issue for consideration is whether or not, properly construed, the
Declaration of Trust allows for the application of Trust
property to pay
remuneration to trustees.
Act provides that the Trust continues in existence under the same name as a body
corporate with perpetual succession and a common
seal and the legal capacity of
a natural person. The Trust has the powers, functions and duties conferred or
imposed by the Declaration
The Declaration of Trust is
set out in a schedule to the Act. The Trust is declared as a public charitable
institution for the
purposes of providing accommodation, hospital services and
health and welfare services for the aged or infirm, or persons who lack
sufficient means or who are otherwise in need of charitable
assistance.
All Trust property is
held by the Trust on trust and, subject to the Declaration of Trust, may be
applied by the Trust for any of
the purposes of the
to the Declaration of Trust, the Trust is given power, among other things,
acquire and deal
with real and personal property;
erect buildings
establish and
operate facilities and services to advance the purposes of the Trust;
open and operate
bank accounts;
contracts of employment and other arrangements;
to charge fees
and recover out of pocket expenses;
to exercise any
other powers contemplated by the Declaration of Trust or necessary or expedient
for the fulfillment of its purposes.
Declaration of Trust contains detailed provisions about the appointment and
removal of trustees, the establishment of committees,
the delegation of Trust
functions, holding Trust meetings, record keeping and so
The Declaration of Trust
provides that no personal liability attaches to a trustee for acts or omissions
in good faith and a trustee
is not liable for debts and liabilities of the
The Trust is able to
make rules and regulations as it thinks fit in relation to the management of the
business and the affairs of
Trust is liable for any costs or expenses involved in insuring the trustees
against risks associated with the performance of
Trust’s powers, functions and duties contained in the Declaration of Trust
do not expressly include the payment of remuneration.
However, the Trust has a
range of powers in relation to Trust property which involve the use and
application of Trust property and
monies. These include to invest
to give security for the
discharge of liabilities
make donations and gifts,
consistent with the Trust having broad discretion about how Trust property may
be used and applied. The Trust has power to enter
into contracts of employment,
partnerships, joint ventures or other contracts or
arrangements.
The power to make
payments from Trust property is necessarily incidental to, and implied within,
the power to enter into such contracts
or arrangements. The concept of an
arrangement, in contradistinction to the other references within the clause
(contracts, partnerships,
joint ventures), connotes something less formal than a
binding contract. In my view, that power is sufficiently broad to allow the
Trust to enter into arrangements with trustees which provide for remuneration
for their services and to pay such remuneration.
Trust is also given a broad power to exercise any other powers that are
contemplated by the Declaration of Trust or necessary
or expedient for the
fulfillment of its purposes.
my view, the application of Trust property to pay remuneration to trustees
constitutes an exercise of powers contemplated by
the Declaration of Trust
because it contemplates the entry into contracts and arrangements with the
potential that associated payments
will be made from Trust property. I also
consider the payment of remuneration to trustees is expedient for the
fulfillment of the
purposes of the Trust taking into account the complexity of
the Trust’s operations, the nature of the services it delivers,
duties and responsibilities upon trustees, the regulatory environment in which
the Trust operates and the need to attract
candidates for trusteeship that
possess sufficient skill and acumen to administer such complex
operations.
Proposed remuneration
second issue is whether the proposed remuneration is reasonable.
Trust has undertaken a survey of other similar not for profit aged care
providers and considered the McGuirk Management Consultants
2023 Australian
Board Remuneration Survey Report (“
the McGuirk report
collated from information provided by members of the Governance Institute of
Australia. The Trust proposes the following
remuneration amounts:
for the chair per annum;
for the deputy chair per annum;
for trustees per annum;
additional for sub-committee chair position per annum;
additional for sub-committee members per annum;
per meeting attended for appointed members who are not trustees per annum;
as a professional development allowance per annum to each
The Trust proposes those amounts will be
regularly reviewed and increased in accordance with percentage rates of pay
determined by
the Fair Work Commission Annual Wage Review Decision. The Trust
also proposes to undertake an external market review no more than
every three
years based on an evidence-based established benchmarking tool, including
analysis of charities.
the assets of the Trust, the complexity of Trust operations and their size, I
accept that the Trust’s position on remuneration
of trustees is reasonable
and consistent with the best interests of the Trust. Taking into account the
information published in
the McGuirk report and the filed material, I consider
the proposed remuneration is reasonable.
the Trust is a charitable trust, I sought the Attorney-General’s views. I
was informed on 1 October 2025 that the position
of the Attorney-General was
that, subject to the approval of the Supreme Court generally and specifically as
to the deed the containing
sufficient power to do so, the Board of Trustees be
renumerated as requested.
consider the proposed remuneration and proposal for the regular review of the
remuneration to be reasonable.
Conclusion and orders
have determined to allow the application.
order that the trustees of the Trust may be remunerated for performing their
duties as trustees. The Trust may remunerate the
trustees in accordance with
the proposal set out in the affidavit of Mr Klenk filed in support of the
Trust’s application.
Between the filing of the
application and the delivery of this ruling the
Succession Act 2023
entered into force, thereby repealing the
Administration and Probate Act 1919
(SA). However, sch 4, cl 2 of the
Succession Act 2023
(SA) states
that “[a]ny proceedings commenced in the Court under a repealed Act that
have not been finally determined before
the designated day may be continued and
completed under that Act as if this Act had not been enacted”.
James Brown Memorial Trust
Incorporation Act 1990
James Brown Memorial Trust
Incorporation Act 1990
(SA), sch, cl 1.
James Brown Memorial Trust
Incorporation Act 1990
(SA), sch, cl 2.
James Brown Memorial Trust
Incorporation Act 1990
(SA), sch, cl 3.
James Brown Memorial Trust
Incorporation Act 1990
(SA), sch, cl 8.
James Brown Memorial Trust
Incorporation Act 1990
(SA), sch, cls 9 and 10.
James Brown Memorial Trust
Incorporation Act 1990
(SA), sch, cl 12.
James Brown Memorial Trust
Incorporation Act 1990
(SA), sch, cl 11.
James Brown Memorial
Trust Incorporation Act 1990
(SA), sch, cl 3(1)(e).
James Brown Memorial
Trust Incorporation Act 1990
(SA), sch, cl 3(1)(g).
James Brown Memorial
Trust Incorporation Act 1990
(SA), sch, cl 3(1)(k).
James Brown Memorial
Trust Incorporation Act 1990
(SA), sch, cl 3(1)(h).
James Brown Memorial
Trust Incorporation Act 1990
(SA), sch, cl 3(1)(m).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (327 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter