URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAEOT/2016/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:56:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BLIGHT v WOMEN'S & CHILDREN'S HEALTH NETWORK [2016] SAEOT 3 (3 May 2016)
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
(District Court Administrative and
Disciplinary Division)
to comply with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting
publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person
using material in the judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed
to the Registry of the Court in which it was generated.
v WOMEN'S & CHILDREN'S HEALTH NETWORK
[2016] SAEOT
Judgment of His
Honour Judge Costello, Member Mr R Altman and Member Ms H Jasinski
HUMAN RIGHTS -
DISCRIMINATION
Complaint issued pursuant to
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
Women's and Children's Health Network (WCHN) alleging unlawful discrimination on
the grounds of disability, sex and requirement
for a driver's licence -
complainant alleged discrimination in 2011-2013 during her training for
admission to Fellowship of Royal
Australian College of Physicians as a
Consultant Paediatrician.
HELD: Complainant has not demonstrated that WCHN unlawfully discriminated
against her - Complaint dismissed.
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
ss, 6, 29, 30, 66, 67, 93;
Health Care
, referred to.
Rodgers v Revenue SA, Department of Treasury and Finance
[2014] SASCFC
, considered.
WOMEN'S & CHILDREN'S HEALTH
[2016] SAEOT
Introduction
is a Complaint instituted by the complainant, Dr Blight, pursuant to s 93
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
(‘the Act’) against
the Women’s and Children’s Health Network (‘WCHN’)
alleging discrimination
on the grounds of disability and
her Complaint form, filed on 28 January 2014, Dr Blight alleged that
... was discriminated against by staff of SA Health
(some were also members of the Royal Australasian College of Physicians) in
progression through training and in my employment in General Paediatrics,
from 2011 to January 29 2013 in the Department of General
Medicine at the
Women’s and Children’s Hospital. Further discrimination related to
my diagnosis of epilepsy has continued
by staff of SA Health, most recently in
November 2013. My progression through my training program in General Paediatrics
after I disclosed my diagnosis of epilepsy in 2011 to staff in the
Department of General Medicine at Women’s and Children’s
Further, in November 2012 my progression was further stalled at a time when
another colleague in the same department told
me it was ‘Because
it’s a Boys’ Club’.
Background to the Complaint
respondent is an incorporated body, pursuant to the provisions of the
Care Act 2008
, known as WCHN Incorporated. The WCHN administers the
Women’s and Children’s Hospital (‘WCH’) and state wide
community based health services for women, young people and children in South
Blight was employed by the Chief Executive, Department of Health in various
training capacities with the respondent from 25 January
2006 to 29 January
2013 under the provisions of the
Health Care Act 2008
complainant commenced her basic training in paediatrics with the respondent in
January 2006 and undertook advanced training in
general paediatrics from
February 2009 until January 2013.
July 2011 Dr Blight suffered an episode of unconscious collapse which was
subsequently diagnosed as Temporal Lobe Epilepsy (TLE).
Dr Blight consulted a
neurologist who treated her on an ‘informal’ or gratuitous basis.
Despite her diagnosis Dr Blight
continued her training, which training included
the submission of a final written research project.
Blight’s research project was not ‘passed’ in 2011. She was
required to resubmit the project twice in late 2012
before it was awarded a
the course of her training Dr Blight did not hold a driver’s licence and
as a consequence did not drive a motor vehicle
during her employment with the
early 2013 the complainant was awarded a Fellowship of the
Royal Australasian College of Physicians (‘RACP’) which
entitled her to practice as a consultant in general paediatrics, either in a
hospital or in private practice.
to being awarded her Fellowship, in October 2012, the complainant was offered a
further 12 month contract as a Paediatric Advanced
Trainee/Registrar at WCHN for
the period 30 January 2013 to 2 February 2014 which she ultimately
declined. The complainant’s
contract of employment expired on 29
January 2013 and the complainant ceased to be an employee of the respondent from
as we indicated earlier, on or about 28 January 2014 the complainant made a
Complaint to the Commissioner for Equal Opportunity
alleging discrimination on
the grounds of disability and sex during her progression through training and in
her employment at WCHN
from 2011 to 29 January 2013.
to discussing the issues arising in this Complaint, it is convenient to set out
the statutory framework pursuant to which they
are to be considered.
The Statutory Scheme
93 of the Act relevantly provides:
93—Making of complaints
(1) A complaint alleging that a person has acted in contravention of this Act
may be made—
(a) by a person aggrieved by the act;
29 of the Act relevantly provides:
29—Criteria for discrimination on ground of
sex, chosen gender or sexuality
(2) For the purposes of this Act, a person discriminates on the ground of
(a) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of the other's sex; or
(b) if he or she treats another unfavourably because the other does not comply,
or is not able to comply, with a particular requirement
(i) the nature of the requirement is such that a substantially higher proportion
of persons of the opposite sex complies, or is able
to comply, with the
requirement than of those of the other's sex; and
(ii) the requirement is not reasonable in the circumstances of the case; or
(c) if he or she treats another unfavourably on the basis of a characteristic
that appertains generally to persons of the other's
sex, or on the basis of a
presumed characteristic that is generally imputed to persons of that sex; or
(d) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of an attribute of or a
circumstance affecting a relative or associate of the
other, being an attribute
or circumstance described in the preceding paragraphs.
30 of the Act relevantly provides:
30—Discrimination against applicants and
(1) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against a person on the
ground of sex, chosen gender or sexuality—
(a) in determining, or in the course of determining, who should be offered
employment; or
(b) in the terms or conditions on which employment is offered.
(2) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against an employee on the
ground of sex, chosen gender or sexuality—
(a) in the terms or conditions of employment; or
(b) by denying or limiting access to opportunities for promotion, transfer or
training, or to other benefits connected with employment;
(c) by dismissing the employee; or
(d) by subjecting the employee to other detriment.
67 of the Act relevantly provides:
67—Discrimination against applicants and
(1) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against a person on the
ground of disability—
(a) in determining, or in the course of determining, who should be offered
employment; or
(b) in the terms or conditions on which employment is offered.
(2) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against an employee on the
ground of disability—
(a) in the terms or conditions of employment; or
(b) by denying or limiting access to opportunities for promotion, transfer or
training, or to other benefits connected with employment;
(c) by dismissing the employee; or
(d) by subjecting the employee to other detriment.
66 of the Act relevantly provides:
66—Criteria for establishing discrimination on
ground of disability
For the purposes of this Act, a person discriminates on the ground of
disability—
(a) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of the other's disability,
or a past disability or a disability that may exist
in the future; or
(b) if he or she treats another unfavourably because the other does not comply,
or is not able to comply, with a particular requirement
(i) the nature of the requirement is such that a substantially higher proportion
of persons who do not have such a disability complies,
or is able to comply,
with the requirement than of those persons who have such a disability; and
(ii) the requirement is not reasonable in the circumstances of the case
6 of the Act relevantly provides:
6—Interpretative provisions
(3) For the purposes of this Act, a person (the
discriminator
another unfavourably on the basis of a particular attribute or circumstance if
the discriminator treats that other person
less favourably than in identical or
similar circumstances the discriminator treats, or would treat, a person who
does not have that
attribute or is not affected by that
circumstance.
The Hearing
Blight gave evidence in the complainant’s case. She did not adduce any
other oral evidence. In its case WCHN tendered three
volumes of documents and
adduced oral evidence from the following witnesses, in addition to tendering
their individual written statements:
Dr David Baulderstone: A Staff
Specialist General Paediatrician employed by WCHN
Dr Phillip Egan: A permanent, part-time Consultant Paediatrician employed by
Dr David Thomas: Head of General Medicine and Senior Consultant in Paediatric
Medicine employed by WCHN
Ms Stacey McPherson: Manager of the Trainee Medical Officer Unit at WCHN
is unnecessary in this case for us to rehearse, in any particular detail, the
various instances of discrimination or unfavourable
treatment asserted by
Dr Blight. It will suffice to note that Dr Blight complained of
unfavourable treatment because of her
, namely TLE
by reason of her
driver’s licence
unfavourable treatment may be identified as
comprising:
deliberate failure by WCHN to take action in relation to her TLE in the form of
support or rehabilitation motivated by an alleged
desire, on its part, to avoid
having to pay
compensation.
taken by Dr Baulderstone and Dr Thomas to alter, or cause to be altered, the
results of Dr Blight’s research project,
and thereby delay her otherwise
satisfactory completion of the project, and delay her progression to
Fellowship.
making of inappropriate or adverse comments with respect to her weight by a Dr
Tapp and with respect to her health by Dr Egan.
In her evidence Dr Blight said that she was surprised that Dr Egan made these
comments in front of a peer who was, to her knowledge,
unaware of her health
She suggested that there may have been a possible link between some medical
practitioners referring to her health problems and her
progression to Fellowship
being delayed by other doctors.
treatment in the employment process.
Specifically Dr Blight asserted that two other doctors (Drs Agrawal and
Scholar) were permitted to apply for and were subsequently
awarded consultant
positions prior to being awarded Fellowship status. Dr Blight said that, in
contrast, she was denied the same
opportunity and that the reasons proferred to
her for denying her such an opportunity included the fact that she had not
her Fellowship.
by WCHN to address workplace concerns raised by Dr Blight. Dr Blight
asserted that although she raised concerns about the
behaviour of Dr Agrawal
towards her, and the effect of that behaviour on her, neither Dr Thomas nor Dr
Baulderstone provided her
with an appropriate response.
and other personnel at WCHN taking action with the Australian Health
Practitioner Regulation Agency (‘AHPRA’)
with respect to Dr
Blight’s health and suitability to practice as a doctor.
Absence of a Driver’s Licence
In addition to the aforementioned areas of unfavourable treatment,
Dr Blight asserted that WCHN discriminated against her on the basis
inability to drive. We have approached this aspect of her Complaint on the basis
that it is asserted that the ability to drive
a motor vehicle was a
‘particular requirement’ under the
in relation to which she was
treated unfavourably when compared to persons without her disability.
In her evidence Dr Blight referred to a comment allegedly made by
Dr Thomas, namely ‘
how can you expect to be a specialist when you
don’t drive a car’
and by a Dr White (in an assessment following
a Paediatric Registrar Placement of Dr Blight in 2009), who expressed the view
reliance on public transport was a ‘weakness’.
considering whether or not WCHN has been shown to have discriminated against Dr
Blight on the grounds of her disability or in relation
to the requirement that
she be able to drive a motor vehicle, we propose to deal with each of her
concerns separately.
Lack of Support after her TLE
we observed earlier Dr Blight gave evidence that after she suffered her
workplace injury (the unconscious collapse in 2011), WCHN
discriminated against her in omitting to provide support to her. In particular,
she said that WCHN deliberately omitted
to notify its insurer of her workplace
the outset, on this issue, we note that, in cross-examination, Dr Blight
conceded that she didn’t know why it was that WCHN
failed to make the
notification to its insurer.
Nevertheless, Dr Blight proceeded to proffer an opinion that upon the
termination of her employment in 2013, WCHN should have had
details on its
worker’s compensation file of the circumstances of her unconscious
the fact that she didn’t know why WCHN had not notified its insurer, at
least in some of her answers she sought to ascribe
its motive for so doing as
one designed to obviate the need for WCHN to pay compensation. Apart from Dr
Blight’s speculation,
there is no evidence before us to support an
allegation that WCHN deliberately omitted to notify its insurer to avoid such a
Furthermore,
Dr Blight accepted that she did not make a claim for worker’s compensation
in relation to her unconscious collapse
prior to ceasing employment in
this issue we have also had regard to, and taken into account, the evidence of
who said that
Dr Blight informed him of the episode of unconscious collapse on the day it
occurred. Dr Egan said that he arranged
for her to be seen by his neurological
colleague, Dr Kneebone. We accept the thrust of Dr Egan’s evidence
that he did so out
of care and concern for a fellow practitioner and that at the
time he never considered the episode to constitute a workplace injury.
addition, we accept his evidence that at no time did he view the episode as in
any way being an impediment to her continuing and/or
completing her training for
her Fellowship.
the circumstances, we are not persuaded that there was an obligation under the
Act on employees at WCHN to take any particular
action with respect to this
any event, we are not satisfied that either the failure to notify its insurer or
the actions taken upon her behalf by Dr Egan constituted
unfavourable treatment.
Even if it did, we are equally satisfied that Dr Blight has not established a
connection between such alleged
unfavourable treatment and the TLE.
this issue, we find that WCHN did not treat Dr Blight unfavourably on the ground
of her disability and did not engage in unlawful
discrimination against
Alteration of Project Result – Delay in Project
this issue Dr Blight gave evidence that on 15 December 2011 she was informed by
a person from the RACP (in a telephone call) that
she had achieved a
‘pass’ standard on her final research project. Dr Blight then
advised both Dr Thomas and Dr Baulderstone
of this fact. A little less than
an hour later she was advised that a mistake had occurred, that her result was
in fact a ‘non-pass’
and that she would now be required to rewrite
the project.
her evidence
Dr Blight accepted
that although it was possible that the information telling her that she had
passed may have been the result of
a mistake, she preferred to take the view
that there had been a conscious decision to change her result by some person at
and that such a decision had been made at the request of a doctor or
doctors at WCHN.
from a comment to her which Dr Blight attributed to Dr Baulderstone and made
some six months later, that the project results
were not actually considered in
November 2011, there is no other evidence to even suggest that any person
employed by WCHN altered
her pass result or caused others to alter her
Baulderstone gave evidence. He told us that between 2008-2014 he was a member of
the Specialist Advisory Committee (‘SAC’)
which manages all trainees
around Australia in the final period of their training.
said that the SAC assesses the projects of all trainees each year.
Dr Baulderstone said that there
had been an SAC meeting
the projects in November
said that the practice of the Committee was for two of its members to
independently (of the rest of the Committee and each other)
assess each project
and report the results of their assessments to the Committee for endorsement.
In the event of a disagreement
between the two a third member would be
asked to assess the project. He stressed the role of the Committee was only to
endorse recommendations
and did not extend to substituting its own
assessment.
his capacity as a member of the SAC Dr Baulderstone assessed the projects of
various interstate trainees, but in relation to all
trainees from
South Australia (including Dr Blight), he declared a conflict of interest
and withdrew from any involvement in their
assessment.
said that he had discussed Dr Blight’s 2011 project result with her in
2012, but did not recall saying the project was not
ever considered because, as
far as he was concerned, it (along with all the other projects) was considered
but given a non-pass.
On this issue we prefer the evidence of Dr Baulderstone.
We accept that she did have a discussion with Dr Baulderstone in relation
to her project in mid 2012 but find that Dr Blight was mistaken when she said
that he had told her that no projects were discussed
in November 2011.
this issue we specifically accept his evidence that in November
He did not take
part in a discussion with other members of the SAC concerning Dr Blight or her
discuss her health or unconscious collapse with members of SAC;
Blight’s project was considered and given a non-pass;
He did not learn
of the outcome of Dr Blight’s project until after the meeting and
assessment process had been completed; and
He never sought
to intervene in the RACP’s processes to affect the result of Dr
Blight’s project.
are satisfied on this issue that the WCHN did not take action in any way to
alter Dr Blight’s project result.
Action to Delay Completion of the Project Result
Blight suggested that evidence to support her assertion that Dr Thomas and Dr
Baulderstone deliberately delayed the completion
of her project result, is to be
found in the fact that although, in December 2011, she was working in the Child
Protection and Paediatric
Emergency Department, her name was recorded on an
internal departmental version of the General Medicine Department roster at a
when Dr Thomas was in charge of that department. We were invited to
draw the inference that in some way this indicated that Dr Thomas
‘keeping an eye’ on Dr Blight.
Thomas proffered an opinion that the roster is likely to have recorded
Dr Blight’s name because it had been prepared by one
secretarial staff (not by him) and was probably done in the knowledge and
expectation that Dr Blight was going to be working
in his department in the
accept Dr Thomas’ explanation.
is no evidence to suggest that either Dr Thomas or Dr Baulderstone were
‘keeping an eye’ on Dr Blight as part of
an effort to delay her
progress to Fellowship.
was also suggested by Dr Blight that she was not given the appropriate level of
support throughout the year in 2012, in order to
permit her to do the
‘rewrite’ of her project.
Thomas said that his role in terms of support could only extend to providing
assistance in terms of things such as editing. He
said a number of people,
including a Dr Pearson, offered support in that
Dr Baulderstone
expressed the view, which we accept, that the workload of a person in
Dr Blight’s position was such that a
project rewrite could be
accommodated and that if a trainee needed extra time to do a rewrite, that would
always be accommodated.
also accept his evidence that before an opportunity was extended to
Dr Blight to submit her project for a third time via a ‘second
rewrite’, Dr Baulderstone requested the SAC to give Dr Blight
as much detailed information as you can on how to rewrite the
There is no
reason to doubt his evidence that he did so. It was not incumbent upon Dr
Baulderstone to do so and the fact that he
did seems to us to be at odds with
someone attempting to delay her progress.
Blight’s assertion that either Dr Thomas or Dr Baulderstone or indeed
anyone else at WCHN took action to inappropriately
delay her progress to
Fellowship is not supported by the evidence.
this issue, we find that WCHN did not treat Dr Blight unfavourably on the ground
of her disability and did not engage in unlawful
discrimination against
Adverse Comments
Blight asserted that Drs Egan and Tapp each made adverse comments with respect
to her weight and/or health and did so without making
appropriate provision for
her privacy.
her evidence Dr Blight conceded that e.g. Dr Egan’s comments may have been
made out of concern for her but said that they
should have been made in
She went on to suggest
that Dr Egan’s comment
could indicate
communicated
details of her unconscious collapse to the SAC prior to its
November meeting which, in turn, led to her project being ‘not
This was no
more than speculation on her part. There is no evidence to support it.
Furthermore, as we have said, Dr Egan did not,
at any time, consider her
TLE as an impediment to her progression to
Fellowship.
are not satisfied, even if his comments were made in front of another peer, that
they constitute actionable discrimination on the
grounds of her disability.
would regard Dr Tapp’s comments (even if also made other than in private)
to the effect that ‘
you’ve lost too much weight and you are far
too thin. Is there something troubling you? Are they working you too
’ in the same category. We would view these comments as a clear
expression of concern for a fellow medical colleague and as
falling far short of
actionable discrimination.
view of these conclusions, it is, strictly speaking, unnecessary for us to
determine (but we would also doubt), that the comments
made by either doctor
were made in the course of their employment, such as to render WCHN vicariously
liable under the Act.
this issue, we find that WCHN did not treat Dr Blight unfavourably on the ground
of her disability and did not engage in unlawful
discrimination against
Differential Treatment in the Employment Process
Blight pointed to positions to which each of Drs Agrawal and Scholar were
appointed prior to their admission as Fellows whereas
she had failed to obtain
positions in what she said were similar circumstances.
Thomas said that, in the case of Dr Agrawal, he was appointed to a short-term
consultant position which was conditional upon his
appointment as a
said that Dr Blight was not precluded from making similar applications and did
in fact apply for a consultant position ahead of
her appointment to Fellowship
but that she was not short listed by the selection
said that Dr Agrawal was preferred over Dr Blight, amongst others, in part
because he presented as a better candidate and because
the selection panel had
more confidence that he would obtain his Fellowship given that his project had
also said that at the time of the decision to appoint Dr Agrawal he was unaware
of Dr Blight’s disability and that accordingly,
it could not have and did
not play any part in the selection
the case of Dr Scholar he was considered for a position but only (unlike Dr
Blight) after he had satisfied all the pre-requirements
including the
satisfactory completion of his final
Thereafter Dr Scholar
obtained his Fellowship and 10 days later took up the post of
Consultant.
and in any event, we were made aware that Dr Blight was actively considered for
another consultant position by WCHN
being admitted to
Fellowship. She was ultimately not appointed to that position, not because of
her disability, but due to the fact
that a decision was made not to go ahead
with what would have been a temporary
appointment.
this issue we find that WCHN did not treat Dr Blight unfavourably on the grounds
of her disability and did not engage in unlawful
discrimination against
Failure to Address Workplace Concerns
Blight asserted that she raised concerns with Drs Baulderstone and Thomas about
her working relationship with Dr Agrawal and that
these concerns were not
appropriate addressed.
is tolerably clear that her working relationship with Dr Agrawal was strained
and that in response to this working environment
she raised her concerns with
Drs Baulderstone and Thomas.
his part, Dr Baulderstone did not recall having any detailed meetings with Dr
Blight and/or Dr Agrawal to address her concerns.
He said that whilst there were
tensions between her and Dr Agrawal he did not view the tensions to be such that
it was affecting
their clinical
He also said that he could
not recall Dr Blight raising her concerns with him in a formal sense although
they may have been generally
discussed during their car trip to
Blight did write to Dr Thomas setting out her concerns in some detail. Dr Thomas
said that in response they had a number of meetings.
He said that, despite the
tenor of her communications to him in September/October 2012, it remained his
view that there were frequent
enough occasions for her to ventilate her concerns
and that, in his opinion, they had been
is apparent to us from Dr Blight’s correspondence that whatever may have
been Dr Thomas’ view, her concerns were not
being adequately
find that Dr Blight’s workplace concerns were not adequately addressed in
2012. Having said that, there is no evidence that
the failure by Dr Thomas
to take appropriate action was related to and/or based upon any disability of
this issue, we find that WCHN did not treat Dr Blight unfavourably on the ground
of her disability and did not engage in unlawful
discrimination against
Constructive Dismissal
Blight asserted that WCHN discriminated against her by, in effect,
constructively dismissing her, which ‘dismissal’
Blight’s submission culminated in WCHN (in the person of Ms McPherson)
pressuring her to execute an ‘Exit Advice
our view, there is no doubt that Dr Blight’s employment came to an end in
late January 2013 when the contract, which she
had executed 12 months earlier,
expired. In our view, as a matter of law, thereafter no employment relationship
existed between WCHN
and Dr Blight.
Furthermore,
and in any event, we are satisfied that Ms McPherson was neither capable of, nor
did she, enter into a new contract in
October 2012 (or at any other time) with
Dr Blight. We are equally satisfied that the actions of Ms McPherson in
seeking to finalise
Dr Blight’s financial entitlements were perfectly
reject any suggestion that WCHN, in finalising her entitlements in 2013, treated
Dr Blight unfavourably on the grounds of her disability
and/or engaged in
unlawful discrimination against her.
Withholding Professional References and Incitement of
Egan gave evidence as to why he had decided to change his mind and decline to
provide Dr Blight with a professional
His reasons for so
doing were quite understandable, namely a breakdown in the relationship between
candidate and referee. We are
satisfied that, in giving that evidence,
Dr Egan was being entirely frank and honest. There can be no suggestion
that there was anything
untoward in his decision to do so.
in the guise of Dr Egan, did not treat Dr Blight unfavourably and did not engage
in unlawful discrimination against her on this
the issue of incitement of AHPRA, Dr Blight asserted that, in essence, Drs
Baulderstone, Thomas and Egan had either approached
AHPRA or caused others to do
so in order to incite AHPRA to suspend her registration.
Egan said that he had had no dealings with AHPRA in relation to Dr Blight
and had not encouraged anyone else to approach AHPRA
in relation to
We accept his evidence on
this issue.
Thomas denied having any involvement with AHPRA in relation to Dr Blight or
encouraging anyone else to do
We accept his evidence on
this issue.
Baulderstone provided a statement to AHPRA with respect to Dr Blight in 2014. He
said that he had provided the statement at the
request of AHPRA and that it was
AHPRA who approached him. He said that the statement taken from him involved a
format of him responding
to questions proffered by AHPRA’s
investigator.
So understood, we
accept that it was AHPRA not Dr Baulderstone who initiated and controlled the
nature of information conveyed to
Baulderstone also said that he had not encouraged anyone else to make
notifications to AHPRA.
accept his evidence on this issue.
McPherson gave evidence that she too provided a statement to AHPRA at the
request of AHPRA. The statement was taken in a similar
fashion to that of Dr
Baulderstone. She said that apart from cooperating with AHPRA’s request,
she did not encourage anyone
else to approach AHPRA in relation to
We accept Ms
McPherson’s evidence on this issue. We are also satisfied that no-one
employed by WCHN initiated an approach to
AHPRA concerning Dr Blight.
this issue, we find that WCHN did not treat Dr Blight unfavourably on the ground
of her disability and did not engage in unlawful
discrimination against
then leaves the alleged
requirement
that Dr Blight hold a
driver’s licence
Requirement for a Driver’s Licence
may be accepted that Dr Blight was required to complete rotations in suburban
and country areas. It is also apparent that some
people (e.g. Dr White) held the
view that the lack of a licence was a ‘weakness’ in the sense that
Dr Blight’s
ability to complete her tasks was rendered more difficult
WCHN recognised the absence of a licence and far from discriminating against her
on that basis, offered to address any difficulties
a lack of a licence might
present, by providing her with taxi vouchers to ensure that she could attend to
work as and when required.
Furthermore,
WCHN made arrangements for her accommodation, during her placement in
Mount Gambier, to be opposite the hospital. Far
from treating her
unfavourably, it seems to us that WCHN took positive steps to attempt to
ameliorate any inconvenience experienced
by Dr Blight by reason of her lack of a
Thomas does not accept that he made the comment attributed to him or, at least,
not in that context. In the event that it was made,
we would regard the comments
of Dr Thomas as both unfortunate and unwarranted. However, if he did make
such a comment, it did not
translate into any discriminatory conduct. As we have
said, if anything, WCHN actively attempted to overcome any difficulties Dr
Blight might have faced.
White’s assessment is no more than a comment at the end of a placement
which assessment, as far as we can discern on the
evidence, was not adopted
and/or acted upon in any material sense by those charged with Dr Blight’s
supervision.
Furthermore,
and in any event, there is no evidence that there was any meaningful
relationship between her disability and her inability
to her unconscious collapse she had not obtained a driver’s licence.
Thereafter, it was recommended by Dr Kneebone that
she not seek to drive for six
months. However, there is no suggestion that at that point in time she was in
fact intending to drive.
her evidence, Dr Blight said that she currently did not have a licence, but even
then she did not suggest that this was due to
our view, there can be no suggestion that WCHN treated Dr Blight unfavourably
upon the basis of her lack of a licence. We find,
therefore, that WCHN did not
unlawfully discriminate against Dr Blight on the grounds of her inability to
have considered each of these issues individually and have concluded that there
has been no unlawful discrimination demonstrated.
Even when the various issues,
which we have identified, are considered collectively, we remain of the view
that WCHN did not unlawfully
discriminate against Dr Blight.
Blight has not demonstrated that WCHN unlawfully discriminated against her and
the Complaint is therefore
Although Dr Blight’s
Complaint asserted discrimination on the grounds of sex, this ground was not, in
any material sense,
pursued during the hearing.
It was part of the
complainant’s case that she was constructively dismissed by WCHN in 2013.
For reasons we discuss later,
we reject this submission as having any validity
either in fact or law.
See s 66(b).
T188 ll23-31.
Rodgers v Revenue SA,
Department of Treasury and Finance
[2014] SASCFC 2.
T388 and 390.
Exhibit C1 vol 1 pp
Exhibit R4.
Exhibit R6.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (214 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter