URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SALC/2025/70.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:01:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Palace Gallery Pty Ltd t/as The Palace / Level Up v The Commissioner of Police for the State of South Australia [2025] SALC 70 (19 August 2025)
The Palace Gallery Pty Ltd t/as The Palace / Level Up
Commissioner of Police for the State of South Australia
[2025] SALC
LICENSING COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
GALLERY PTY LTD T/AS THE PALACE / LEVEL UP
THE COMMISSIONER OF
POLICE FOR THE STATE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Application for Review of a decision of the
Commissioner
LC-24-00168
HEARING DATE:
30 April 2025
JUDGMENT OF:
Honour Judge BP Gilchrist
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Application for review – The
applicant trades under a general and hotel licence in Hindley Street, Adelaide
– It has changed
part of its licensed premises to create a venue that
provides patrons with the opportunity to play a range of competitive games,
shuffleboard, to darts, air hockey and pool – In addition to these, it
wishes to conduct axe throwing – The Liquor
Commissioner through a
delegate exercised the powers conferred by s 42(2)(g) of the Act to
effectively ban axe throwing at the premises
on the ground that the imposition
of the condition was necessary in the public interest – The delegate took
into account the
fact that the applicant’s premises are within a
well‑known nightlife area that is considered by police to present a
higher risk to public safety, with public order offences, stabbings,
assaults and the like, occurring on a relatively regular basis
delegate decided the application on the understanding that the entry to the area
within which axe throwing was to occur
was only partitioned off by a rope
whereas at the hearing before the delegate it was proposed that the point of
entry be more secure
– On review the applicant tendered evidence that axe
throwing is permitted at a licensed facility in Victor Harbor and at other
licensed facilities across Australia and that axe throwing within licensed
premises conforms with a global trend of combining social
interactive
entertainment with licensed premises – Whether a condition to effectively
ban axe throwing at licensed premises
was within the power of the delegate to
impose – Whether the delegate was right to take into account that Hindley
relatively higher risk to public safety given the applicant’s
good trading record, the fact that axe throwing would cease at
11.00 pm and
that most public order issues within Hindley Street occur in the early hours of
the morning – Whether the delegate’s
approach was too cautious
having regard to the fact that axe throwing is permitted in other licensed
premises in Victor Harbor and
elsewhere in Australia –
the relevant public interest is not limited to matters pertaining to the sale
and supply of liquor, the live music industry,
tourism and the hospitality
industry and that it extends to matters of safety and preventing and detecting
unlawful activities and
offensive or disorderly conduct within licensed
premises, irrespective of whether it involves persons affected by alcohol or
it relates to the sale and supply of alcohol –
the delegate and this Court are permitted to know that the Hindley Street
entertainment precinct is a well‑known party
precinct where people gather
to consume alcohol, and that some also consume illicit drugs and that from time
to time it is a place
where there are issues with breaches of public order,
assaults and sadly, occasionally, serious injury and death –
that the licensing authorities
are entitled to assume that even
within the trading hours of 11.00 pm, there is a reasonable possibility
that there will be persons
within the applicant’s premises, who will be
under the influence of alcohol or illicit drugs, who may behave badly or
unpredictably
and that in the circumstances, the mere possibility of increased
risk is a relevant consideration –
that without evidence from
a suitably qualified expert who has conducted a proper risk appraisal, the Court
is not able to know whether
the current proposal reflects the implementation of
all reasonably practicable measures to ameliorate any potential harm that the
introduction of axe throwing at the applicant’s premises might cause to
patrons and staff –
that whilst the delegate based her
decision on an incorrect factual basis, she came to the right conclusion and the
application for
review is therefore dismissed –
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
Subordinate Legislation Act 1978.
Kruger v The Commonwealth
[1997] HCA 27
(1997) 190 CLR 1
[2011] HCA 4
(2011) 243 CLR 506
Woolworths Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2012] WASC 384
Wigmans v AMP Ltd
[2021] HCA 7
(2021) 270 CLR 623
Project Blue
Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
(1998) 194 CLR
Executive Director of Health v Lily Creek International Pty Ltd &
[2000] WASCA 258
(2000) 22 WAR 510
Liquorland (Australia) Pty
Ltd v Executive Director of Public Health
[2013] WASC 51
McLaren Vale (No. 2)
[2022] SALC 53
Executive Director of Public
Health v Lily Creek International Pty Ltd
[2001] WASCA
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr B
Respondent: Brevet Sergeant M
Solicitors:
Applicant: Fletcher Lawson
Respondent:
is an application seeking a review of a decision by a delegate of the Liquor and
Gambling Commissioner (the Liquor Commissioner)
to impose a condition on a
licence to effectively prohibit the applicant, Palace Gallery Pty Ltd, from
conducting axe throwing at
its licenced premises in Hindley Street,
Gallery trades under a general and hotel licence. It comprises of an upstairs
area that offers adult entertainment. It also
comprises of a downstairs area
that previously traded as a nightclub, known as Red Square. It now goes by the
name Level Up, and
it is intended to attract a diverse demographic interested in
an entertainment experience that is different to a more conventional
night club.
The revised focus of the venue is to provide patrons with the opportunity to
play a range of competitive games, from
shuffleboard, to darts, air hockey and
pool. Importantly, in the context of this application, it is the
applicant’s wish that
this range of games include axe throwing.
or about 30 October 2024, police became aware that the applicant intended to
conduct axe throwing at the premises from 1 November
2024. Police immediately
had concerns about the safety of this activity and as a result, pursuant to
s 43 of the
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
(the Act), the Commissioner of
Police (the Police Commissioner) made an urgent application to the Liquor
Commissioner seeking the
imposition of a condition to ban that activity at the
43(2)of the Act relevantly provides:
The licensing authority may impose, vary, suspend or revoke a condition under
subsection (1)—
(c) on application by the Commissioner of Police; or
(f) in any other proceedings under this Act involving the licensee; or
(g) if the Commissioner considers the imposition, variation, suspension or
revocation of the condition to be in the public interest—on
Commissioner's own initiative.
it was, the Liquor Commissioner had independently become aware of
applicant’s plans to permit axe throwing at the premises
and was concerned
Commissioner’s delegate contacted
the applicant and attended the premises
on 29 October 2024.
the transition to Level Up involved an alteration to the licensed premises, the
applicant had sought approval from the Liquor
Commissioner in conformity with
s 68 of the Act to alter the premises.
conducting her inspection, the delegate noted that the approval that the
applicant had obtained under s 68 of the Act did not
include an approval to
create three axe throwing lanes and she immediately brought this to the
applicant’s attention and of
the fact that additional approval was
required. Whilst not conceding that approval for this was necessary, the
applicant made an
application for approval in respect of this.
addition to this, the delegate resolved to use her powers under s 43(2)(g)
of the Act. On 31 October 2024, she imposed an interim
condition that there
shall be no axe throwing activities undertaken at the premises until further
conducting a hearing on the papers, the delegate confirmed that order on 28
November 2024. This is the order that is the subject
of the within application
for review.
delegate noted that the police submitted:
Hindley Street
entertainment precinct was a well‑known party precinct where young people
gather to consume alcohol and drugs;
that it is associated with violence that
can sometimes result in serious injury or death, and that it is a Declared
Public Precinct
that gives the police additional powers to maintain public
Alcohol and
drugs can lead to slower response, delayed reflexes, diminished hand‑eye
coordination and impaired judgement; and
Axe throwing
within licensed premises poses a serious and unacceptable risk to public order
and safety such that permitting the activity
was not in the public
delegate recorded that the applicant queried whether it was within the
banning axe
throwing as it was a lawful activity and was not directly related to the service
and supply of liquor. She noted that
it submitted that axe throwing could
legally operate in a non‑licensed venue in the same Declared Public
Precinct and high‑risk
location, and that neither SAPOL nor the Liquor
Commissioner, would have any ability to impose any restrictions on that
The applicant sought to draw a positive from this, by submitting that
it was of benefit to the public for this activity to be conducted
highly regulated environment that comprises of licensed premises.
delegate noted that the applicant proposed various measures to ameliorate risk.
These included:
Having trained
staff continuously supervise the axe‑throwing lanes; only allowing one
person in a lane at a time.
participants to two alcoholic drinks before and during their axe throwing and
monitoring signs of intoxication.
Breathalysing
patrons before each axe throwing session.
patrons involved in axe throwing to sign a waiver acknowledging the risks and
the alcohol restrictions.
delegate noted that the applicant submitted that what was proposed was a safer
and more regulated activity than driving a car,
the driver of which can lawfully
operate the car with a blood alcohol reading up to 0.05.
delegate also noted that the applicant, whilst acknowledging that there were
public safety issues with Hindley Street, contended
that Level Up operates
in a manner fundamentally distinct from the traditional late‑night venues
that contributed to Hindley
Street’s high‑risk designation, and it
relied upon its own record of good management and its proposal to limit axe
to no later than 11.00 pm, stating that public safety issues with
Hindley Street generally occur in the early hours of the morning.
The applicant
suggested to the delegate a trial period, in the expectation that it would allay
the concerns expressed by police.
delegate was satisfied that it was within the Liquor Commissioner’s power
to impose the condition as it was consistent with
one of the stated objects of
the Act of facilitating the responsible development of the licensed liquor
delegate observed that Hindley Street is a well‑known nightlife area that
is considered by police to present a relatively
higher risk to public safety,
with public order offences, stabbings, assaults and the like, occurring on a
relatively regular basis.
delegate accepted that the applicant had identified a significant number of risk
mitigation measures and strategies. However,
she remained concerned that what
was proposed involved exposing people who are participating in axe throwing, the
staff supervising
them, and non‑axe throwing patrons in the venue who
may access the area, a safety risk that could result in a catastrophic
The Licensee’s assertion that the axe throwing area in Level Up is a
dedicated space that is partitioned from the rest of the
room, is somewhat at
odds with what I observed during the site visit. Admittedly, the throwing lanes
are separated by mesh partitions,
and there is a dedicated space, but only a
rope separates the entrance to the axe throwing area from the rest of the room,
intoxicated person, or one affected by drugs or suffering a mental health
episode, would merely need to get past that rope to access
the area and
potentially get hold of an axe within that area, with potentially catastrophic
she imposed the condition to effectively prohibit the axe throwing at the
applicant’s premises.
review, the applicant tendered an affidavit that attested to the fact that a
licensed venue in Victor Harbor provides its patrons
with the opportunity to
participate in axe throwing of the type contemplated by the applicant. The
affidavit also referred to a website
of an entity known as Maniax Axe Throwing,
which conducts axe throwing at a variety of venues across Australia that are
fully licensed.
tendered these in support of a contention that the business model it has
implemented at Level Up is consistent with a global trend
of combining social
interactive entertainment with licensed premises.
affidavit also pointed to the fact that under the revised model that had been
provided to the delegate prior to her making her
decision, it was proposed that
there be a single point of entry into the axe throwing area that was away from
the centre of the room.
applicant submitted that this was significant because it demonstrates that the
delegate proceeded on a misunderstanding of the
facts. It submitted that the
misunderstanding was of considerable importance because it was apparent that the
delegate’s concern
that “only a rope separates the entrance to the
axe throwing area from the rest of the room” was critical in her decision
making process that led to the imposition of the condition.
hearing before this Court commenced with a view of the applicant’s
premises which are situated on the southern side of Hindley
Street. In the area
nearest to Hindley Street are four pool tables. Immediately south of that,
against the western wall, were three
dartboards. There was another area in a
separate room, adjacent to the southern side of Hindley Street, where there was
two shuffleboards. As one moves further south into the premises, there
are four more pool tables. In that area is a cupboard attached
to a wall, where
it is proposed to store the axes to be used in the axe throwing area. Further
south again, in the south‑western
corner of the premises, was a caged area
that contains three lanes, which is where the proposed axe games will be played.
be said that it might be expected than many would regard axe throwing in
this area to be an enjoyable experience.
the hearing before this Court, the applicant was asked whether there was any
policy in place as to how the axes would be moved
to and from the dedicated area
to the axe throwing area. This led to the following exchange:
Mr Lodge: I think the answer to that is “no” - but that is
something that could be attended to. I mean, there are a
number of policies or
measures that could be put in place to ensure that movement from the cupboard to
the axe cage doesn't pose
any risk. One potential option might be that there be
some kind of cupboard - locked cupboard - within the arena itself, if that
considered to be a safer option, so that it didn’t have to be walked
across the bar area. I mean, that’s just one
option. But - - -
His Honour: I don’t expect you to give an answer on the spot today, and
I'm going to be reserving in relation to that. But
I’ve got to say: that
was a matter that concerned me.
Mr Lodge: Yes.
His Honour: I think the premises itself has got an overall capacity of about
1400. Now, I can’t imagine there would be 1400
people in that area - but
it could get quite crowded.
Mr Lodge: Yes.
His Honour: And it is of - well, it does worry me that there would be axes -
there seems to be a good attention to detail of safety
inside the cage.
Mr Lodge: Yes.
His Honour: And it’s obviously essential that they be secured into
premises that the public can't get access to. And I - -
Mr Lodge: Yes.
His Honour: I was comforted by the fact that there was a lock on the door that
the public couldn’t get into.
Mr Lodge: Yes.
His Honour: But moving axes to and from the cupboard into the cage area - when
there are a lot of people milling about, some of
whom might not be - or some of
whom might be intoxicated by alcohol or drugs - is a
after an adjournment, the applicant indicated a willingness to construct a
locked cabinet within the axe-throwing arena to
prevent the axes being carried
in another part of the licensed premises. It also proposed constructing a gate
at the point of entry
to the axe throwing area so that access to that area could
be more easily controlled.
prosecuting the within application for review, the applicant’s overriding
submission was that the delegate took an overly
cautious approach to the
assessment of the risk associated with axe throwing within its premises. It
submitted that the risk of injury
was remote, and that if a person was motivated
to act in the way contemplated by the delegate, such a person would not be
from causing injuries or fatalities if there were no axes were on the
premises but would instead seek to deploy another object as
their weapon.
Consideration
on the face of it, s 43(2)(g) confers upon the Liquor Commissioner an
unfettered discretion, it is not without limitations.
The Liquor Commissioner
must exercise the discretion
reasonably.
And the Liquor
Commissioner “is not free to apply idiosyncratic notions of public
Ultimately, the
relevant public interest is defined by the Act itself. And in connection with
this, special consideration must be
given to the objects of the Act. That is so,
because s 3(2) of the Act directs a licensing authority to have regard to
the objects
in deciding any matter before it under the Act.
objects of the Act are as follows:
(1) The object of this Act is to regulate and control the promotion, sale,
supply and consumption of liquor—
(a) to ensure that the sale and supply of liquor occurs in a manner that
minimises the harm and potential for harm caused by the
excessive or
inappropriate consumption of liquor; and
(b) to ensure that the sale, supply and consumption of liquor is undertaken
safely and responsibly, consistent with the principle
of responsible service and
consumption of liquor; and
(c) to ensure as far as practicable that the sale and supply of liquor is
consistent with the expectations and aspirations of the
public; and
(d) to facilitate the responsible development of the licensed liquor industry
and associated industries, including the live music
industry, tourism and the
hospitality industry, in a manner consistent with the other objects of this Act.
(3)(1a) provides that for the purposes of s 3(1)(a)
“harm caused by
the excessive or inappropriate consumption of liquor includes”:
(a) the risk of harm to children, vulnerable people and communities (whether to
a community as a whole or a group within a community);
(b) the adverse economic, social and cultural effects on communities (whether on
a community as a whole or a group within a community);
(c) the adverse effects on a person’s health; and
(d) alcohol abuse or misuse; and
(e) domestic violence or anti-social behaviour, including causing personal
injury and property damage.
must be accepted that the objects of the Act are focussed on matters pertaining
to the sale and supply of liquor and the facilitation
of the responsible
development of the licensed liquor industry and associated industries, including
the live music industry, tourism
and the hospitality industry.
such, I can accept that it might be regarded as a stretch too far to suggest
that the objects include a consideration of activities
and behaviours within
licensed premises that do not relate to the consumption of liquor, the live
music industry, tourism or the
hospitality industry.
there are other provisions in the Act that do make it the business of a
licensing authority to be concerned with many such matters.
And although some
primacy must be paid to the objects of the Act, that does not means other
provisions in the Act are
irrelevant.
In conformity with the
principle of statutory construction that an Act must be read as a
“harmonious whole”,
Court must “construe the relevant provision so that it is consistent with
the language and purpose of all of the provisions
this in mind, regard must be had to s 11A of the Act which authorises the
Liquor Commissioner to issue codes of practice that,
subject to approval from
the Minister, have the authority of regulations within the meaning of the
Subordinate Legislation Act 1978
. They therefore form part of the
statutory matrix that defines the scope of the relevant public interest.
to this, the Liquor Commissioner has issued a Late Night Trading Code of
Practice (the Code). Whilst many of the provisions
of the Code relate to
primarily to the sale and supply of liquor, there are others that are more
directed to safety generally and
to antisocial or potentially threatening
behaviour in and around licensed premises.
8 of the Code requires holders of nominated licences in connection with licensed
premises open for trade between 2.01 am and
7.00 am to ensure that at
least one staff member is on duty who has been approved as a responsible person
under the Act, to have
successfully completed nationally accredited first aid
training. It can be presumed that it is intended that this person would render
first aid to anyone within licensed premises who needed it, however that need
11 of the Code imposes obligations upon such licensees to have licensed security
agents use metal detectors after midnight
to screen all patrons upon entry onto
the licensed premises, to detect persons who may be carrying weapons or other
potentially dangerous
objects. This plainly anticipates that there might be
fights, altercations and acts of intimidation and harassment within licensed
premises, that are not necessarily related to the sale and supply of liquor at
those premises, but which may escalate if they involve
weapons or other
potentially dangerous objects, and it expects licensees to play their role in
preventing this.
14 requires such licensees, while open for trade, to have a digital CCTV system
in place to take visual recordings at all entry
and exit points, the footpath
immediately adjacent to the licensed premises, and all other internal and
external licensed areas of
the premises (excluding toilets) to which patrons
have access, including areas where adult entertainment is occurring. Apart from
providing police with potential evidence to detect breaches of the Act and
conditions of the licence, and to assist in the prosecution
of individuals
involved in unlawful activities in and about licensed premises, the mere fact of
a CCTV system monitoring the premises
may deter persons from committing such
activities.
must also be had to other provisions of the Act that, independently of the Code,
impose obligations that extend to activities
and behaviours within licensed
premises that do not necessarily relate to the consumption of liquor.
117D imposes an obligation upon a licensee, a responsible person for the
licensed premises, and an employee or agent of the
licensee or responsible
person working at the licensed premises, not to allow a person who is wearing or
carrying a prohibited item
to enter or remain in the licensed premises.
124(1) of the Act allows an authorised person, which includes the licensee and a
responsible person under the Act, if necessary,
to use reasonable force to
remove a person from, or prevent the entry of a person onto the licensed
premises, if the person is behaving
in an offensive or disorderly manner,
irrespective of whether the person is affected by alcohol.
Section 125
of the Act allows a licensee or a responsible person for licensed premises to
bar a person from entering or remaining
on the licensed premises for a specified
period, if the licensee or responsible person is satisfied that the person has
an offence, or has behaved in an offensive or disorderly manner, on,
or in an area adjacent to the licensed premises. Again, this
is irrespective of
whether the person is affected by alcohol.
Collectively,
these inform the breadth of the ‘public interest’ that the Liquor
Commissioner is concerned with in considering
whether to impose, vary, suspend
or revoke a condition of a licence. They lead to the conclusion that the
relevant public interest
is not limited to matters pertaining to the sale and
supply of liquor, the live music industry, tourism and the hospitality industry
and that it extends to matters of safety and preventing and detecting unlawful
activities and offensive or disorderly conduct within
licensed premises,
irrespective of whether it involves persons affected by alcohol or whether it
relates to the sale and supply of
I am comfortably satisfied that it was within the power of the delegate to
impose the condition that is the subject of this
to whether a condition is ‘necessary’, in respect of a change to the
state of affairs within licensed premises, I think
it is unarguable that the
mere possibility for that change to cause harm or ill-health to people within
the licensed premises, be
they patrons or staff or others, irrespective of
whether the harm or ill‑health is proved on a balance of probabilities,
be a powerful public interest consideration that might enliven the Liquor
Commissioner’s discretion under s 43(2)(g) of the
this was said in a different context, the observations made by this Court in
Liquorland McLaren Vale (No.
in respect of concerns about
harm minimisation in connection with alcohol availability are apposite to the
situation here. It said:
‘Once there are circumstances prevailing which give the
decision‑maker pause, or ring alarm bells, a conservative approach
compelled’.
That is not to say that if there is the slightest doubt about the potential for
harm minimisation an application must be rejected.
If that were so, no
application would be granted. But if there is a proper evidentiary basis that
raises a legitimate concern, a
licensing authority might conclude that caution
is required, and it is in the community interest or the public interest, to at
for the time being, refuse the
application.
(Footnotes omitted)
to the facts in this case, the Liquor Commissioner in deciding to invoke s
43(2)(g) of the Act, and this Court when reviewing
a decision of the Liquor
Commissioner made pursuant to that provision, are entitled to act upon their
accumulated knowledge.
Executive Director of Public Health v Lily Creek International Pty Ltd,
Wheeler J stressed the importance in connection with an assessment of
alcohol related harm, to focus on the particular community in
which the proposed
licensed premises was to operate. He said:
... where there is already a very high and serious level of alcohol related harm
in a community, it may be that the Court would find
a relatively small risk of
increase in that level of harm to be unacceptable. In other words, it is not the
harm in some abstract sense which is relevant, but rather
the risk having regard to the proved circumstances
of the particular area in
relation to which the application is
(Emphasis mine)
same principle applies in respect of changes to the activities to be conducted
within license premises that may impact upon matters
of safety and offensive or
disorderly conduct within those premises.
licensing authorities are permitted to know that the Hindley Street
entertainment precinct is a well-known party precinct where
people gather to
consume alcohol, and that some also consume illicit drugs. They are permitted to
know that from time to time it
is a place where there are issues with breaches
of public order, assaults and sadly, occasionally, serious injury and death.
are entitled to assume that even within the trading hours of 11.00 pm,
there is a reasonable possibility that there will be persons
applicant’s premises, who will be under the influence of alcohol or
illicit drugs, who may behave badly or unpredictably.
the fact that axe throwing is conducted in other licensed venues in South
Australia and elsewhere in Australia, is not particularly
to the point. The
delegate was, and on review, this Court is, entitled to take into consideration
that the applicant’s premises
are within an area of Adelaide associated
with a greater than normal number of safety issues and offensive or disorderly
within licensed premises.
is all very well for the applicant to contend that the risk of injury from axe
throwing at its premises is remote. The fact is
it is not qualified to make that
statement. Indeed, the facts of this case demonstrate that the applicant has
been developing its
strategy to ameliorate the risk of injury on the fly. It
started with a proposal that the entry to the axe throwing would be secured
rope. It changed this proposal to enhance the security of entry to that area. It
now indicates a willingness to move the cabinet
containing the axes into the axe
throwing area and to fortify its control over entry to that area. It begs that
question as to whether
further measures are required to make the axe throwing in
the premises safe.
evidence from a suitably qualified expert who has conducted a proper risk
appraisal, the Court is not able to know whether
the current proposal reflects
the implementation of all reasonably practicable measures to ameliorate any
potential harm that the
introduction of axe throwing at the applicant’s
premises might cause to patrons and staff.
my opinion, having regard to these matters and the catastrophic injuries that an
axe might inflict, the delegate was entitled to
have a legitimate concern about
the safety of the applicant’s proposal and she was entitled to exercise
caution and think that
even a relatively small risk of increased potential harm
was unacceptable. It is a concern and an approach that is shared by this
whilst I accept that the delegate based her decision on an incorrect factual
basis, I think she came to the right conclusion.
The application for review is
See: s 3(1)(d) of the Act.
Kruger v The Commonwealth
[1997] HCA 27
(1997) 190 CLR 1
at 36, per Brennan J.
Hogan v Hinch
(2011) 243 CLR 506
Woolworths Ltd v Director of
Liquor Licensing
[2012] WASC 384
Wigmans v AMP Ltd
(2021) 270 CLR 623
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
(1998) 194 CLR 355
Executive Director of Health
v Lily Creek International Pty Ltd & Ors
[2000] WASCA 258
(2000) 22 WAR
Liquorland (Australia) Pty Ltd v Executive Director of
Public Health
[2013] WASC 51
[2022] SALC 53
, [157]-[158].
Ibid at [157]-[158].
[2001] WASCA 410
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (230 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter