URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAHPT/2019/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Sandra Garie [2019] SAHPT 4 (24 January 2019)
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Sandra Garie
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL OF SOUTH
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY BOARD OF
Complainant
GARIE, Sandra
Health Practitioners
1923 of 2018
HEARING DATE:
28 November
DECISION OF SA HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL:
constituted
by: President M Ardlie
Dr Karleen Thornton
Ms Anne Milln
DELIVERED ON:
28 November 2018
REASONS FOR
DECISION PUBLISHED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Complainant alleges that the respondent
behaved in a way that constitutes professional misconduct – respondent was
or otherwise engaged to work as a nurse at Hampstead Rehabilitation
Centre – SW was a patient at Hampstead having been admitted
to Hampstead
Spinal Injuries Unit following a motor vehicle collision – respondent was
involved in SW’s care or was part
of his treatment team during his
admission at Hampstead – SW had issues as regards his mental health and
was a vulnerable person
– respondent was aware SW was a vulnerable person
– respondent accessed SW’s medical record at Hampstead to obtain
private details including his mobile telephone number – respondent made
part of his treatment or otherwise authorised by Hampstead and occurred on the
respondent’s day off
from work at Hampstead – the respondent and SW
exchanged text messages of a personal nature – subsequently the respondent
attended SW’s house on which occasion the respondent and SW engaged in
consensual sexual behaviour – the respondent was
bound by the Code of
Professional Conduct for Nurses 2008 (Code of Conduct) – alleged the
respondent breached the code of conduct
by using the personal information for
other than professional purposes – further alleged that the respondent
breached the code
of conduct by failing to maintain a professional boundary
between herself and SW – respondent in a statement of agreed facts
admitted that her conduct constitutes professional misconduct as defined by
section 5, Schedule 2 of the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (South
Australia) Act 2010 ( National Law) –
– The conduct set
out in the complaint constitutes professional misconduct – the respondent
is reprimanded – the
respondent’s registration as a health
practitioner is suspended for a period of 12 months – conditions are
imposed upon
the respondent’s registration – the respondent is to
pay the complainant’s costs in the agreed sum of $1200 –
Schedule 2,
ss 5, 193, 195, 196 of the National Law.
NMBA v Barnes
NMBA v Stephenson
[2016] SAHPT 6
NMBA v McMahon
[2011] SAHPT 22
NMBA v Makoni
[2017] VCAT 2065
[2014] QCAT 161
HCC v Watson
[2015] NSWCATOD
Craig v Medical Board of South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
(2001) 79 SASR
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant: Mr A
Respondent: Ms G Hannon
Solicitors:
Complainant: Lander
& Rogers Lawyers
Respondent: Union Legal SA
Introduction
complainant pursuant to the provisions of s 193 of Schedule 2 to the
Practitioner Regulation National Law (South Australia) Act 2010
Law) referred the matter concerning the respondent to the Tribunal on the basis
that it believed the respondent had behaved
in a way that constitutes
professional misconduct.
respondent first obtained general registration on 12 January 1998. Between about
April 2002 and June 2017 the respondent held
unconditional registration as a
registered nurse and was employed in the capacity of a registered nurse at
Hampstead Rehabilitation
Centre (Hampstead).
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (AHPRA) received a notification
on 29 March 2016 from the respondent’s
employer concerning the conduct the
subject of the complaint in these proceedings.
26 April 2017 the respondent attended an interview conducted by AHPRA in which
she made frank admissions regarding the conduct.
notification to the respondent’s employer, the respondent during the
course of the investigation was removed from
Hampstead and placed in the quality
and safety department at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital. Her employment was
terminated by letter
dated 13 June 2017. She remains unemployed.
Professional
misconduct is defined as follows:
unprofessional
conduct by the practitioner that amounts to conduct that is substantially below
the standard reasonably expected of
a registered health practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience; and
more than one
instance of unprofessional conduct that, when considered together, amounts to
conduct that is substantially below the
standard reasonably expected of a
registered health practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience;
conduct of the
practitioner, whether occurring in connection with the practice of the health
practitioner’s profession or not,
that is inconsistent with the
practitioner being a fit and proper person to hold registration in the
profession.
complaint alleges that the respondent breached the Code of Professional Conduct
for Nurses 2008 (Code of Conduct). The alleged
breaches arose due to the
respondent accessing SW’s private details including his mobile telephone
number and making contact
by telephone with SW (Conduct Statement 5). The
telephone contact followed by an exchange of text messages of a personal nature
the attendance by the respondent at SW’s house where consensual sexual
behaviour was engaged in were further breaches of the
Code of Conduct, namely
the requirement that nurses promote and preserve the trust and privilege
inherent in a relationship between
nurses and patients, and nurses having the
responsibility to maintain a professional boundary between themselves and the
(Conduct Statement 8).
Complainant’s Submissions
for the complainant provided written
submissions
and addressed the
was noted that the respondent has admitted all key factual matters. The
statement of agreed facts filed on 20 July 2018 captures
admissions.
respondent admits that she has breached the Code of Professional Conduct for
Nurses 2008. In particular Conduct Statement 5 which
requires nurses to treat
personal information obtained in their professional capacity as private and
confidential, in particular,
that they use the information gathered for
professional purposes only. Further, she admits that she breached Conduct
Statement 8
which requires nurses to promote and preserve the trust and
privilege inherent in a relationship between nurses and people receiving
Under this conduct, nurses have a responsibility to maintain a professional
boundary between themselves and the person being
cared for, and sexual
relationships between nurses and persons with whom they have previously entered
into a professional relationship
are inappropriate in most circumstances.
is also noted that the respondent admits that her conduct amounted to
professional misconduct as defined by the National Law.
made reference to a number of decisions by way of assistance to the Tribunal
when considering the appropriate sanctions to
Counsel said that a review
of the authorities referred to and the sanctions imposed are demonstrative of
the seriousness of professional
boundary transgressions between nurses and
patients. The various Tribunals each separately held that the impugned conduct
to professional misconduct. The range of sanctions varied between a
suspension of three months and cancellation for up to 4 years.
On occasions
conditions were also imposed.
submitted that a number of points may be noted from the above authorities which
may be of assistance in determining sanction,
the penalty is
likely to be more significant when the relationship was over an extended period,
or there were relationships with more
than one patient;
the penalty is
more significant where the patient’s vulnerability is greater;
a significant
penalty may still be imposed where the practitioner has met the patient outside
the confines of the hospital or health
remorse and
insight will be a significant mitigating factor;
an aggravating
feature will include dishonest responses during the course of the investigation,
and possibly contesting the proceeding;
an aggravating
feature will also include accessing hospital records to obtain the
patient’s contact details;
an aggravating
feature will include whether the practitioner pursued or attempted to maintain
the relationship.
relevant to sanction include that the respondent has admitted:
there was a
power imbalance between her and SW;
vulnerable patient;
she knew, or
ought to have known, that SW was a vulnerable patient; and
the respondent
accessed SW’s patient records to obtain his private details, including his
mobile number.
submitted that it was not clear on the material that is before the Tribunal that
the respondent has understood every aspect
of the boundary violation from first
getting the telephone number to making the first call and then to attending upon
SW at his home.
made mention of factors in the respondent’s favour namely:
the respondent
made early admissions;
the respondent
appears to have shown genuine remorse for her behaviour;
transgression was relatively brief and was an isolated incident;
it is possible
the respondent did not pursue a physical relationship with the respondent (even
though she transgressed boundaries
in other ways);
the respondent
sought to end the relationship and contact with the patient; and
respondent’s employment was terminated.
Respondent’s Submissions
confirmed that the respondent agrees that the conduct admitted to amounts to
professional misconduct. Further, the respondent
was aware that SW was a
vulnerable patient.
respondent understands that her motivation for trying to help SW and be a friend
to him was absolutely the wrong motivation, and
it obscured her thinking in
relation to the professional boundaries.
respondent did try and distance herself as soon as she had made contact with SW
and the text messages continued. She realised
that her behaviour was not
appropriate and that she had in fact crossed the professional boundary. At the
time she did not seek help
from her employer or anyone else. It was a situation
that she did not really understand how to extricate herself from other than
distancing herself from SW.
respondent was employed at Hampstead for almost 14 years. The majority of
patients at Hampstead are there for a long period of
time and relationships are
formed in the context of the workplace. The respondent now understands that in
that situation she needs
to take absolute care in the way in which she interacts
with patients in this situation and now better understands their
vulnerability.
R Hewlett, the executive at Hampstead, who took the complaint from the patient
with regards to the respondent’s conduct,
provided to the Tribunal a
In that reference she
states that the respondent ‘had no performance issues and I would have
categorised her as one of the
better nurses... I was very surprised by the
allegations that came to light as it was so out of character.’ She goes on
say ‘apart for (sic) the one serious lapse of judgement... I have never
been given cause to doubt her character or professionalism
opportunity arose I would not hesitate to employ her.’
respondent has undertaken a course entitled ‘Professional Boundaries in
The documentation
in relation to this course states ‘professional boundaries in nursing will
that contribute to boundary issues and
then implement preventive strategies. You will consider the difference between
boundary crossings,
boundary violations and professional sexual misconduct,
while forming strategies to prevent these in your nurse – client
relationships.’
respondent also tendered a report from a
psychologist
who had seen her on
five occasions to treat anxiety, stress and marital difficulties. This contact
had occurred since August 2017.
The psychologist indicates that the respondent
no longer meets diagnostic criteria for a psychological disorder and is keen to
to employment in her chosen profession of nursing.
psychologist in her report makes mention of the fact that the respondent was
under investigation for inappropriate contact with
a patient. She states,
[the respondent] displayed a level of guilt and remorse consistent
with someone genuinely struggling to understand her own behaviour
in a difficult
set of circumstances. It is my clinical opinion that [the respondent] suffered a
lapse of judgement due to low self-esteem,
a need to ‘people please’
and emotional estrangement from her husband at the time.
I do not believe that [the respondent] would engage in such behaviour again,
as she has worked hard in therapy to reduce her reactivity
to triggers and is no
longer symptomatic. In addition, [the respondent] and her husband have been
attending marriage counselling
and she reports the quality of their relationship
has improved markedly.
said at the time of the incident the respondent was experiencing significant
marital difficulties and was working through
these. Also at the time her
daughter had issues in school and her son had some emotional issues. The
respondent was being bullied
at work and felt very much on the outer with other
staff. The respondent says that these issues do not excuse her behaviour in any
way. She expresses deep regret and remorse for her actions to her employer, the
Board and also to the Tribunal.
indicated that the respondent was in agreement as regards the imposition of a
reprimand. Counsel said she had been instructed
to advise the Tribunal that the
respondent would be agreeable should the Tribunal see fit to a suspension for up
to 12 months. The
respondent understands the gravity of her conduct and that
there must be a sanction imposed. The respondent accepts the conditions
as regards education amounting to 10 hours in various areas. In relation to
costs the respondent would be prepared to make
a payment of $1200. She remains
in a difficult situation financially since her employment was terminated in June
Purpose of disciplinary proceedings
purpose of disciplinary proceedings is to protect the public, to maintain proper
professional standards, and to assure the public
that proper standards are being
maintained in the profession and thereby to uphold public trust and confidence
in the profession.
Craig v Medical Board of South Australia,
The purpose of
disciplinary proceedings is to protect the public, not to punish a practitioner
in the sense in which punishment is
administered pursuant to the criminal law. A
disciplinary Tribunal protects the public by making orders which will secure the
maintenance
of proper professional standards. A disciplinary tribunal will also
consider the protection of the public, and of the relevant profession,
orders which will assure the public that appropriate standards are being
maintained within the relevant profession.
Discipline and order
is the unanimous view of the Tribunal that the conduct set out in the complaint
constitutes professional misconduct. The respondent
to her credit admitted that
the conduct as alleged in the complaint is true, and that the conduct amounted
to professional misconduct.
respondent is a registered nurse and has been practising nursing since 1998. The
respondent was employed at Hampstead for 14 years.
The notification relating to
the conduct is the only notification ever made in respect of the respondent. At
the time of the conduct
the respondent was having personal issues, including
with her marriage and relationship with her husband. The respondent was
concerned about SW’s welfare.
to the conduct the respondent consulted a psychologist to assist her in gaining
insight into her behaviour. The respondent
has demonstrated insight, remorse and
contrition, and an understanding of the error of her ways. The respondent has
fully cooperated
and assisted with the investigation of the conduct and made
full admissions during her interview with AHPRA.
Tribunal notes that the imposition of disciplinary action on a health
practitioner is to protect the public. As has been noted
in previous decisions,
the imposition of discipline may serve one or all of the following purposes:
practitioners who are unfit to practice from practising;
maintenance of professional standards;
assuring members
of the public and the profession that appropriate standards are being maintained
and that professional misconduct
(or unprofessional conduct) will not be
bringing home to
the practitioner the seriousness of their conduct;
deterring the
practitioner from any future departures from appropriate standards;
deterring other
members of the profession who might be minded to act in a similar way; and
restrictions on the practitioner’s right to practice so as to ensure that
the public is protected.
Tribunal notes that the respondent undertook a course entitled
‘Professional Boundaries in
The conditions
attached to the orders made herein include the requirement that the respondent
must undertake a program of education
relating to ethical obligations and
professional boundaries. The course undertaken previously by the respondent was
an American course
and the Tribunal expressed its preference that the respondent
undertake a course from within Australia.
unanimous view of the Tribunal is that appropriate public protection and
discipline would be achieved by the terms of the orders
set out below.
Tribunal makes the following orders:
Upon our finding that the
respondent’s conduct, as admitted in the statement of agreed facts, is
professional misconduct within
the meaning of Schedule 2 of the
Practitioner Regulation National Law (South Australia) Act 2010
Act), in accordance with s 195 and s 196 of Schedule 2 of the Act, the South
Australian Health Practitioners Tribunal orders
respondent is reprimanded.
Respondent's registration as a health practitioner is suspended for a period of
twelve (12) months from the date of this order;
following conditions are imposed upon the Respondent's registration (in which
the Respondent is called the Practitioner and the
Complainant is called the
Practitioner must undertake and successfully complete a program of education,
approved by the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia
and including a
reflective practice report, in relation to ethical obligations and professional
boundaries.
28 days of the notice of the imposition of these conditions, the Practitioner
must, on the approved form (HPN24), nominate
for approval by the Board an
education course, assessment or program (the education) addressing the topics
required. The Practitioner
must ensure:
nomination includes a copy of the curriculum of the education.
education consists of a minimum of 10 hours including ethical obligations and
professional boundaries.
Practitioner must complete the education within 6 months of the notice of the
Board's approval of the education.
28 days of the completion of the education, the Practitioner is to
of successful completion of the education.
report demonstrating, to the satisfaction of the Board, that the Practitioner
has reflected on the issues that gave rise to this
condition requiring they
undertake education and how the Practitioner has incorporated the lessons learnt
in the education into the
Practitioner’s practice.
21 days’ notice of the imposition of these conditions the Practitioner
must provide to AHPRA, on the approved form (HPC),
the contact details of a
senior person, such as the Director of Nursing, Senior Practice Manager,
Senior Manager, Senior Partner,
Proprietor, Owner, or equivalent (the
senior person) at each a current place of practice. In providing this form, the
practitioner
acknowledges that:
will contact the senior person and provide them with a copy of the conditions on
the Practitioners registration or confirm that
the senior person has received a
copy of the conditions from the Practitioner, and
Practitioner will be required to provide the same form:
seven days of the commencement of practice at each and every subsequent place of
practice, and
seven days of each and every notice of any subsequent alteration of these
conditions.
costs associated with compliance with the conditions on their registration are
at the Practitioner’s own expense.
Respondent pay the Complainant's costs in the agreed sum of $1,200.
suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person using material in the
judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any
such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed to the Registrar of
the Health Practitioners Tribunal.
National Law s 5.
Ex C1 pp 203-212.
NMBA v Barnes
NMBA v Stephenson
[2016] SAHPT 6
NMBA v McMahon
NMBA v Makoni
[2017] VCAT 2065
NMBA v Tainton
HCC v Watson
[2015] NSWCATOD 148.
[2001] SASC 169
(2001) 79 SASR 545
Craig v Medical Board of South
[2001] SASC 169
(2001) 79 SASR 545
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (187 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter