URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCRP/1995/395.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:09:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Plunkett & Plunkett v WorkCover (SEAS Sapfor) [1995] SAWCRP 395 (25 July 1995)
[1995] SAWCRP 395
Review Officer
Catchwords:
Arising from employment — journey
injury — spouses travelling to same workplace together discussing official
whether excluded journey — place of employment —
required or authorised duties — decision to reject claim
RE: PLUNKETT and PLUNKETT AND WORKCOVER (SEAS SAPFOR LTD)
(1995) 8 WCRP Determination 95-0395
Determination No. 95-0379
Workers’ Compensation Review
PLUNKETT and PLUNKETT v. WORKCOVER
(SEAS Sapfor
(07272291/01/01 and 07272919/01/01)
Determination of
Review Panel made on 25th July 1995
Review Officer Mason
Mr and Mrs Plunkett live in Mount Gambier.
Both work at the SEAS
Sapfor timber plant at Tarpeena.
At the relevant time, Mr Plunkett was
Corporate Accountant and Mrs Plunkett was an occupational health nurse (now
Occupational Health
and Safety Services Manager). Mr Plunkett’s official
starting time was 8.17 am, and Mrs Plunkett’s was 8 am. Their regular
practice was to drive to and from work together in their family car, a 1990 Ford
Falcon. They would leave home about 7.30 am, leaving
plenty of time for the
20-minute drive to get to Tarpeena by 8 am.
On 7th October 1994, about
7.45 am, 10 km north of Mt Gambier, while Mr Plunkett (driving) was attempting
to overtake a semi-trailer
in heavy rain, the car left the road and both workers
sustained mild injuries. The semi-trailer, by coincidence, was a chip truck
returning empty from Portland after delivering wood chips for the same employer.
There was no impact with the semi-trailer.
Both lodged claims under the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
(“the Act”).
Both claims were rejected (each by notice dated 25th October 1994) by the
WorkCover Corporation of South
Australia (“WorkCover”) on the basis
that the worker was engaged in an unprotected “journey” at the time
of the accident. Each has sought a review of that decision pursuant to the
Section 30 of the Act, which was re-cast by amendments operating
from 1st July 1994, provides in these terms—
Compensability of disabilities
(1) Subject to this Act, a disability is compensable if it
arises from employment.
(2) Subject to this section, a disability arises from employment
in the case of a disability that is not a secondary disability or a
disease—it arises out of or in the course of employment;
in the case of a disability that is a secondary disability or a
(i) the disability arises out of employment; or
(ii) the disability arises in the course of employment and the employment
contributed to the disability.
(3) A worker’s employment includes—
attendance at the worker’s place of employment on a working day
but before the day’s work begins in order to prepare,
or be ready, for
attendance at the worker’s place of employment during an
authorised break from work; and
attendance at the worker’s place of employment but after work
ends for the day while the worker is preparing to leave, or in
the process of
leaving, the place; and
attendance at an educational institution under the terms of an
apprenticeship or other legal obligation, or at the employer’s
with the employer’s approval; and
attendance at a place to receive a medical service, to obtain a
medical report or certificate (or to be examined for the purpose),
participate in a rehabilitation program, or to apply for, or receive,
compensation for a compensable disability.
(4) However, a disability does not arise from employment if it arises out
of, or in the course of, the worker’s involvement
in a social or sporting
activity, except where the activity forms part of the worker’s employment
or is undertaken at the direction
or request of the employer.
(5) A disability that arises out of, or in the course of, a journey arises
from employment only if—
the journey is undertaken in the course of carrying out duties of
employment; or
the journey is between—
(i) the worker’s place of residence and place of employment; or
(ii) the worker’s place of residence or place of employment and—
an educational
institution the worker attends under the terms of an apprenticeship or other
legal obligation, or at the employer’s
request or with the
employer’s approval; or
a place the
worker attends to receive a medical service, to obtain a medical report or
certificate (or to be examined for that purpose),
to participate in a
rehabilitation program, or to apply for or receive compensation for a
compensable disability,
and there is a real and substantial connection between the employment and the
accident out of which the disability arises.
(6) However, the fact that a worker has an accident in the course of a
journey to or from work does not in itself establish a sufficient
between the accident and the employment for the purposes of subsection
(7) The journey between places mentioned in subsection (5)
a journey by a reasonably direct route but may include an interruption or
deviation if it is not, in the circumstances of
the case, substantial, and does
not materially increase the risk of injury to the worker.
The case was
presented to me as one involving the interpretation of subsections (5)
and (6) of section 30. I have also considered whether the disabilities of both
or either of the workers could be said to arise out
of or in the course of
employment on ordinary principles within the meaning of subsection (2). The
“course of employment”
on ordinary principles includes intervals
when a worker is engaged in activity required, authorised or encouraged by the
see, for example,
Hatzimanolis v. ANI
(1992) 173 CLR 473
[1992] HCA 21.
This was a point I made in my recent decision in
Karanicos v.
TransAdelaide
(1995) 8 WCRP Determination 95-0144;
[1995] SAWCRP
However, on reflection, I am doubtful whether it is sufficient for a
worker to show that he/she was engaged in the “course of
employment”
in this way when an excluded journey is involved. Of course, if the worker is
performing duties of the kind referred
to in the authorities as “actual
duties”, then subsection (5)
will often (but not always) be
applicable. However, a worker who is merely doing things authorised or
encouraged by the employer
during an excluded journey faces the problem that,
whatever else is the case, the opening words of subsection (5) provide in clear
words that the disability “arises from employment
...”. The words “arises from employment” themselves refer
conclusion,
therefore, is that subsection (5), far from being a deeming provision extending
the meaning of compensability like its
predecessors in the old section 30,
operates as a qualification on the whole section, excluding disabilities that
might have been
covered if subsections (1) and (2) stood alone.
hearing of this matter at Mount Gambier, both workers gave sworn evidence on
their own and each other’s behalf, and were
cross-examined by Mr Luke of
counsel for WorkCover. Of its nature, their evidence was largely unverifiable,
but all of it was uncontradicted,
it was put convincingly, and I see no reason
not to accept it at face value.
Mr Plunkett, as corporate accountant, was
a salaried officer, working a nominal 38 hour week, but required to work
(without overtime
payments) the hours necessary to perform his tasks. His
normal starting time was 8.17 am, his normal finishing time was 4.45 pm,
normal lunch break was 12–12.45 pm. His place of work was at his
discretion, with papers sometimes being delivered
to his home when he was
working from there. He was essentially unsupervised, with his immediate line of
accountability being to
the company secretary, who was frequently away (cf.
WorkCover v. Duff-Tytler
(1993) 173 LSJS 390
5 WCATR 456
[1993] SAWCAT
Mrs Plunkett’s hours at the relevant time were 8 am to 4 pm.
She was entitled to overtime when asked to stay back, but not
when she just
happened or chose to leave work late. She rarely sought it.
related, it was the habit of the couple to travel to work together in the family
car. They usually discussed work on the
way. They occasionally had other
company employees in the car with them, including several times, the company
secretary to whom
Mr Plunkett was immediately responsible. On these occasions
too, work was talked. On the evidence, it seems that the subject was
not mere office gossip, but matters of substance constructively involving the
operations of the employer and discussed to
the employer’s
On 6th October 1994, the afternoon before the subject accident,
Mrs Plunkett had an appointment at the rooms of Dr Serge Humen in
Mount Gambier
to discuss new arrangements for pre-employment medical examinations that were
being planned by the employer. Full
functional capacity assessments were being
considered in lieu of more superficial, but cheaper, examinations already in
place. Cost
was clearly an issue in these deliberations, as was the workload of
the company’s existing occupational nursing staff, because
in theory they
could have done some of the additional work to relieve the cost, but they were
fully occupied already. If the whole
assessment procedure was to be done
externally by Dr Humen, the existing cost of $75 would rise by $100, obviously a
significant
sum from the point of view of both Plunketts’ areas of
responsibility.
The meeting was due to commence at 3.30 pm, but because
of the lateness of other participants, finished well after 5 pm—more
an hour after Mrs Plunkett’s usual finishing time. She went directly home
from there, bringing with her the notes of
the meeting and other documents
relating to the project. She did not seek and was not paid any overtime or
other compensation for
the additional time.
The following morning in the
car, Mrs Plunkett had the folder on the pre-employment assessments open on her
knees in the car, and
was discussing the question with her husband in an active
way. In his rôle as corporate accountant (not his rôle as
husband) he had been asked by the company secretary to be available as a
“sounding board” as required. This request
had been made at the
same time that the company secretary had asked Mrs Plunkett (as occupational
health nurse) to review the existing
arrangements. Indeed, by the time the
motor accident occurred, some 10 km into the journey, Mr Plunkett had ventured
the view that
the greater detail in examinations was not, on cost grounds,
justified. Clearly that opinion, ventured by the corporate accountant
occupational health nurse, would have been a significant statement influencing
the course of decision-making within the company.
I would conclude that it
amounted to the transacting of significant intra-company business in the car in
the course of the journey.
The evidence was that no other topics were
discussed on the journey to the time of the accident.
On the other hand,
there is no evidence (and the inference must be adverse) that the employer had
the two workers to discuss that or any other
work-related matters in the car on the way to work, even though it was (on my
their habit to do so, and even though the company secretary was an
occasional passenger and must be taken to have been aware that
it was their
habit to discuss work matters and transact intra-company business (when there
was such business to transact between
their two areas of responsibility) in the
car. I have little doubt that it could be inferred that such business was
authorised or
even encouraged, however, and the particular discussion is one
they had to have at some stage in some location.
Where do these
conclusions get the workers in terms of subsections (5) and (6)?
Luke pointed out in his careful and thorough submissions, the link required by
the final words of subsection (5)
is between the employment and the
, not the employment and the
. Subsection
is free of the requirement of that link, but paragraph
deals with journeys undertaken in the course of carrying out duties, not duties
carried out in the course of a journey.
I am inclined to think that if
the two applicant workers had carried on their discussion on literally any other
occasion, other than
on a journey, they would have been protected by the Act
Hatzimanolis
)—even in a
vehicle. On the
evidence, as I have said, the discussion they were having in the car was one
they were required by their employer
to have, and had they not been husband and
wife, presumably would have had to have the discussion at the office at
Tarpeena. On
ordinary principles, both workers were performing tasks required,
authorised or required by their common employer, and would have
been protected
in any circumstances not excluded by the mandatory operation of subsection
To suggest that the employment and the accident were connected by
the fact that the vehicle Mr Plunkett was trying to pass in the
rain was one
that carried wood chips produced by the employer would, I think, be fanciful.
That connection, which was sheer coincidence,
could not be viewed as a
“real and substantial” one. Nor did the workers contend otherwise.
However, the only other
connection between the employment and the accident is
the connection forbidden from consideration by subsection (6).
considered whether the family car was, at the relevant time, a place of
employment. Given that they were engaged in a discussion
they were required to
have at some stage, the discussion qualifies in my opinion as “actual
duties” for both of them.
The definition of “place of
employment” in section 3(1) of the Act reads as follows—
“place of employment”
means a place where a worker is
required to carry out duties of employment and, if the place is a building,
includes land within the
external boundaries of the land on which the building
is situated.
The employer did not, in terms, “require” them
to carry out the discussion in the car, but given that each of them was
permitted to carry out duties in a variety of places and, on the evidence, it
can be inferred that the employer did know that they
were accustomed to having
such discussions in the car and did not forbid the practice—indeed, can
probably be taken to have
encouraged it (by virtue of the company secretary at
times entering into such discussions himself)—it is arguable that the
may be regarded as a place of employment. Mr Plunkett at least, and probably
Mrs Plunkett by inference, seem to have been authorised
by the employer to set
their own “requirements” on behalf of the employer as to where they
would carry out such duties
as those in question.
But even if that were
assumed, subsection (5) requires that as long as the disabilities arose out of,
or in the course of, a journey,
the disabilities can only be compensable if
“Journey” is not
itself defined in the Act, apart from the qualifications introduced by
subsection (7) which operate to
further limit the applicability of paragraph
of subsection (5). The
Shorter Oxford Dictionary
“journey” most relevantly as—
A spell of going or travelling, viewed as a distinct whole; a round of
The Macquarie Dictionary
defines “journey”
A course of travel from one place to another, esp. by land.
no room to deny that the workers were indeed on a journey out of which, and in
the course of which, their disabilities arose.
Given that subsection (5)
over-rides sub-section (2), the other merits of their claim do not assist: their
disabilities cannot be
compensable unless the conditions of paragraph
of section 30(5) are met. They are not.
The result, as I
see it, is that both applications must fail and be dismissed.
This result
may seem harsh to the workers. However, in the business of statutory
interpretation, my task clearly is to seek to discover
and give effect to the
intention of Parliament:
Cooper Brookes v. FCT
(1981) 35 ALR 151
See also section 2 of the Act and section 22 of the
Interpretation Act 1915
Further, there is little ambiguity in the
provisions under consideration here. It is abundantly clear that the
Parliamentary intention
in enacting the new section 30—and particularly
subsections (5) and (6)—was to reduce the categories of claim that would
attract compensation under the Act.
It is also abundantly clear that it
is my duty to give effect to that
DETERMINATION
Pursuant to section
96(2) of the Act, I confirm the decision made by WorkCover dated 25th October
1994 in each of the within matters.
Pursuant to section 92a of the Act, I
award the workers their costs of these proceedings, including their costs of
travelling and
other reasonable expenditure incidentally incurred. If there is
any dispute as to the quantum of costs, I will hear the parties
Any appeal against this determination must be lodged with the
Workers Compensation Appeal Tribunal within one month of the receipt
determination. Enquiries about appeals may be directed to the Registrar of the
Tribunal, 8th Floor, Riverside Centre, North
Terrace (phone: 207.0999) and forms
for appeal are available from the same address.
Review Officer
Appearance for the worker Rodney
John Plunkett: In person
Appearance for the worker Christine
Ann Plunkett: In person
Counsel for WorkCover: Mr K A
Solicitors for WorkCover: Stratford &
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (63.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter