URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAHPT/2019/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Elekwachi v Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia [2019] SAHPT 17 (18 June 2019)
Elekwachi v Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia
[2019] SAHPT
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL OF SOUTH
ELEKWACHI, Maria-Goretti
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY BOARD OF
Application for Directions seeking an extension of
time in which to bring the Appeal
5504 of 2018
HEARING DATE:
DECISION OF SA HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL:
constituted
by: President M Ardlie
DELIVERED ON:
REASONS FOR DECISION PUBLISHED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Appellant seeks an extension of time
to appeal – Issue as to when notice of decision given – Content of
appeal document
discussed –
The appellant’s application
to extend the time within which to institute the appeal is refused – The
appellant is to
pay the respondents costs to be agreed or adjudicated –
Ss 6A, 18(4) Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (South Australia)
Spurway v Police
[2011] SASC
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: Mr F
Respondent: Mr S Hurburgh
Solicitors:
Appellant: FNE
Respondent: Minter Ellison
Introduction - Background
respondent, by letter dated 17 August 2018 addressed to the appellant care of Ms
Franchesca Patient, Australian Nursing and Midwifery
Federation (SA Branch)
(ANMF), indicated that it had considered the appellant’s submission and
decided under ss 178 and 179
Health Practitioner Regulation National
Law (South Australia) Act 2010
(National Law) to caution the appellant and
impose the enclosed conditions on her registration, which imposed restrictions
practice and required her to complete further education and mentoring
within a specified period.
Patient is an industrial officer at the ANMF. She advised the
complainant’s solicitors in an email of 5 March 2019 that from
August 2017
until October 2018 she represented the appellant with her Australian Health
Practitioner Regulation Agency (AHPRA) and
employment matters.
Patient in her email of 5 March 2019 states:
It is my understanding that Ms Elekwachi (the appellant)
was posted a copy of the notice advising her of the Board’s decision.
According to my notes on file, I spoke with Ms Elekwachi on 21 August 2018 and
she advised that she had read the letter. It is my
standard practice to advise
members of their appeal rights and the timeframe to lodge said
Witness Summons was issued by the respondent directed to Ms Patient to disclose,
inter alia, ‘notes and/or and other documents
regarding a telephone
conversation between Ms Franchesca Patient and Maria-Goretti Elekwachi (the
Appellant) on or about 21 August
answer to the Witness Summons Ms Patient disclosed a file note of 21 August
2018 bearing her initials, which indicates that it
relates to a phone
conversation with Maria Elekwachi the details of which were:
Read the letter from AHPRA.
Qu re mentoring-thought it was like professional development.
Advised her that the mentoring would be specific to the concerns raised by
Appeal was filed on 27 November 2018. Section 6A of the National Law provides
that for the purposes of s 199 of the National Law,
an appeal to the Tribunal
must be instituted within 28 days after the person making the appeal was given
notice of the decision being
appealed against, or the person making the appeal
was given reasons for the decision being appealed against, whichever is the
It is further provided that the Tribunal may in its discretion extend the
time fixed for instituting the appeal even if the time
for instituting the
appeal has ended.
The Hearing
appellant was called. She confirmed that up until late October or early November
2018 she was represented by Ms Patient of the
told the Tribunal that she went overseas in July 2018 returning on
17 August 2018. Before she went overseas she had contact with
Ms Patient by
telephone about her annual leave and also about AHPRA’s proposed
conditions and mentoring.
appellant denied that she had a telephone conversation with Ms Patient on
21 August 2018 and further that the letter of 17 August
2018 was not divulged to
her either by telephone or otherwise in August 2018.
was asked if during the time she was represented by Ms Patient whether she
supplied to AHPRA a signed HP7 form regarding undertaking
education in respect
of the conditions imposed. After a long convoluted
explanation
she agreed that such a
form was completed and sent in and she did one of the courses.
questioned by her counsel the appellant said she sent an email to
Ms Patient on 20 August 2018 on her return from overseas. She
stated again
that she did not have any telephone communication with Ms Patient on 21 August
denied ever receiving any letter regarding a decision made by
appellant was asked when she first saw the letter of 17 August 2018 from AHPRA.
She said the first time she saw it was when her
file was transferred to her
for the appellant provided written submissions and spoke to those submissions.
He said that the evidence of the appellant
should be preferred namely that she
did not receive the decision letter of 17 August 2018 from the respondent or
from Ms Patient.
Ms Patient has not provided any email record of forwarding the
letter of 17 August 2018 to the appellant nor has she provided any
evidence of
posting the said letter. The email from Ms Patient of 5 March 2019 wherein
she says that it is her understanding that
the appellant was posted a copy of
the notice advising her of the board’s decision is not enough.
said the file note of 21 August 2018 does not say what letter and does not in
any way go to the issue of a decision having been
made or that advice has been
given regarding appeal rights and the timelines to appeal.
contended that in the absence of any proof of the decision having been brought
to the attention of the appellant the exercise
of the discretion to grant the
extension of time to appeal should be made. The appellant’s position is
that she first saw the
letter upon her lawyer receiving her files from the union
and she proceeded to file an appeal.
further contended that the Tribunal should exercise its discretion to grant the
extension of time where a refusal would result
in injustice to the appellant and
where the appellant has a reasonable chance of success in the appeal
for the respondent commenced by referring to the principles applying to an
application for extension of time. He referred
to a decision of His Honour
Justice Blue in the Supreme Court namely
wherein His Honour set
out the principles as being:
question whether or not an extension of time should be granted involves an
exercise of discretion, which should not be circumscribed
by fixed and binding
applicant for an extension must bring forward material to show why the appeal
was not filed within the time and why the application
for an extension ought to
be granted.
suffered by the other party by reason of the delay is a factor tending against
exercise of the discretion to extend time.
the delay is substantial, the applicant must give a detailed explanation for the
the delay is substantial, the applicant must establish either:
(a) that the
delay was caused through exceptional circumstances or some untoward vicissitude
of life which prevented the applicant
from applying his or her mind to the
question of appeal; or
(b) otherwise,
that on the merits the appeal would be likely to succeed.
overriding question is whether, if an extension is not granted, there will be a
miscarriage of
said that the respondent’s position is that the appellant had received and
read by 21 August 2018 the letter from AHPRA
dated 17 August 2018. The
appellant’s credit therefore is in issue.
referred to the fact that the appellant in her affidavit material says that upon
her return from overseas she telephoned and
sent emails to Ms Patient. The
point is made that there was every reason for Ms Patient to call the appellant
as recorded in her
note of 21 August 2018.
referred to the appellant’s affidavit of 18 February 2019. At page 7
of 8 of the annexures appears a letter of 7 September
2018 from AHPRA to the
appellant sent to her both by email and post. That letter refers to the fact
that her matter has now been
transferred to the compliance section of AHPRA. It
enclosed for her reference a copy of the conditions imposed on her registration
on 17 August 2018. Counsel pointed out that this was about three weeks after the
decision. The letter clearly refers to the date
conditions were imposed upon her
registration namely 17 August 2018. It also indicates that the appellant was
required to provide
acknowledgement outlined in condition 3 by Friday, 14
September 2018 using the enclosed HP7 form. Further it referred to the need
provide details of the proposed education for approval by the board by Friday
September 2018 using the enclosed HPN24 form.
then referred to paragraph 7 of the appellant’s affidavit of
18 February 2019 wherein she states that Ms Patient returned
her call on 13
September 2018 and stated to her that she had received the appellant’s
email. That all the appellant had to
do is to get on board the training AHPRA
asked her to do, to find the place of training herself and pay for the training
the earlier she completed the training the better for her as that would
enable her to get back to work. In other words the appellant
was complying with
the conditions imposed on her registration. Counsel said the appellant returned
the HP7 form.
then referred to an affidavit he filed, sworn on 29 March 2019 which had annexed
to it an email from Ms Patient of 5 March
2019. Ms Patient in the email of
5 March 2019 says:
It is my understanding that Ms Elekwachi was posted a
copy of the notice advising her of the Board’s decision. According to
notes on file, I spoke with Ms Elekwachi on 21 August 2018 and she advised
that she had read the letter. It is my standard practice
to advise members of
their appeal rights and the timeframe to lodge the said
submitted that the logical alternative is what played out herein, namely that
the appellant receives the letter before 21
August 2018, speaks to Ms Patient
went on to say that the appellant then subsequently instructed a lawyer and the
appeal is lodged but it is out of time. This
may be due to a change of mind on
the part of the appellant now wishing to appeal and not comply with the
conditions imposed. This
does not amount to an adequate explanation for the
regards prejudice to the appellant if an extension of time is not granted,
Counsel pointed out that she still has the ability to
apply at the time of the
review of conditions for a change or removal of conditions. The review period is
up on 17 October 2019.
referred to the appeal document in relation to the merits of the appeal. The
caution imposed is not appealable. The appeal
really deals with the basis on
which the Board can take action and not with the decision of the Board. Counsel
said the appeal document
fundamentally misconceives the nature of the
Consideration - Order
commence by saying that the appeal document is misconceived. It does not relate
to the decision made by the board on 17 August 2018.
The stated grounds referred
to the contention that the allegations which constitute the notifications are
not proven or established,
and the Board failed to accord the appellant
procedural fairness and natural justice in the process of investigation of the
notifications,
resulting in the Board making its decision on the basis of
unproven allegations.
is my opinion that the appeal document, as presently drafted, is without merit
and fails to address the actual decision made herein.
It would require extensive
also consider that the explanation for the delay in instituting the appeal is
contrary to the evidence. I am satisfied that Ms Patient
did have a telephone
conversation with the appellant on 21 August 2018 and discussed the decision
letter of 17 August 2018 which
had been sent to the appellant. This arises from
the file note which I consider to be a contemporaneous note of the telephone
conversation.
is also the letter of 7 September 2018 sent to the appellant by email and post
which refers to conditions imposed on her registration
by the Board on 17 August
2018. The inference I draw is that she then proceeded to comply with the
requirements by completing the
forms referred to in that letter and on her own
evidence she did ‘one of the
delay is substantial and the appellant has not advanced any persuasive material
to show why the appeal was not filed within time
(having had notice of it via
her representative as I have found), and further no compelling reasons have been
advanced as to why
the application for an extension of time should be
appellant’s application to extend the time within which to institute the
appeal is refused.
(2) The appellant is to pay the
respondent’s costs of and incidental to the application to extend the
time within which to
institute the appeal, such costs to be agreed or
adjudicated.
or statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registrar of the Health Practitioners
Tr p 15-17.
[2011] SASC 177
Footnotes omitted.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (147 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter