URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWPRP/2013/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:11:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Palace Gallery v WorkCover [2013] SAWPRP 3 (25 June 2013)
[2013] SAWPRP 3
WORKCOVER PREMIUM REVIEW PANEL
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
THE PALACE GALLERY PTY LTD
No. E18671108 — file reference 200503261)
(Applicant)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION
OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
Member P.G. Eblen
Member R. Donnelly
Member E.R. Pecorelli
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED 25 JUNE
Application for review — basis for levy assessments — deemed
workers — performers in entertainment premises —
whether to be
treated as workers under deemed contracts of service and remuneration included
in levy calculations or independent
contractors (and remuneration not to be so
included) — items supplied by performers for use in their performances
plant or equipment” — “materials”
— whether one expression included in the other or whether used
disjunctively
— approach to statutory construction — purposive
approach — observations on deduction of agents’ fees —
approach to fine imposed on default —
(repealed),
(repealed),
(repealed),
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1986
regulation 5
, Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
(Claims and Registration) Regulations 1999 (repealed); regulation 5,
Rehabilitation and Compensation Regulations 2010
Cases referred to:
Finnigan v. Magistrates Court of SA
[2013] SASCFC 1
Bermingham v. Corrective Services Commission
Wentworth Securities v. Jones
[1980] AC 74
WorkCover v. Rossi
[2007] SAWCT 8
Rossi v. N&MR Salandra Family Trust
[2006] SAWCT
Pollitt v. Blackwattle Bay Marine Operatives
Pasalic v. Technometal
[2012] FWA 8136
Pasalic v. Technometal
[2012] FWA 3291
Corke-Cox v. Crocker Builders
[2012] FMCA 677
Legtrap Hotel v. Rebbeck
(1979) 46 SAIR 739
Zuijs v. Wirth Brothers
[1955] HCA 73
(1955) 93 CLR
Handrail & Balustrade v. WorkCover
[2008] SAWLRP 6
A-G Security Group v. WorkCover
[2008] SAWLRP 14
Manpower Services v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP 7
Manpower Services v. WorkCover
[2011] SASC 107
Australian Independent Contractors & Ors v. WorkCover
[2012] SAWLRP 1
Appearances:
Mr A. Rossi of counsel, accompanied by Mr A. Tropeano, manager, for the
applicant employer.
Mr S.C. Cole of counsel, with him Ms T.A. Kerrigan, for the respondent
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
is the meaning of “materials supplied” in
regulation 5(1)(f)(iv)
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Regulations 2010
particular, does the expression include items brought to the job, used, and
taken away again, intact for further use?
questions arise from an application for review dated 14 June 2011, lodged by the
applicant employer pursuant to section 72 (as
it then stood) of the
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
(“the Act”), which
seeks a review of a decision of the respondent WorkCover Corporation of South
Australia (“WorkCover”)
dated 3 March 2011, assessing levy for the
financial years 2006-2007, 2007-2008, and 2008-2009, and imposing a fine
pursuant to section
70(3) of the Act (as it then stood).
72, at the relevant time, provided as
(1) Where an employer considers that a decision of the Corporation as
(aa) the estimate of remuneration that is to be used for the calculation of a
(a) the fixing or assessment of a levy; or
(b) the imposition of penalty interest or a fine; or
(c) the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead to the
imposition of a supplementary levy,
is unreasonable, the board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a levy,
penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined
by the board, by the board itself, or by a committee or
person to whom the board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the board has an
absolute discretion as to whether
it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the board may—
(aa) alter an estimate;
(a) alter a levy or an assessment;
(b) quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
(c) direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
(d) quash or vary a condition imposed by the Corporation. ...
72 was repealed with effect from 1 July 2012 and replaced by new section 72M,
which is in substantially similar terms. This
Panel is the Board’s
delegate for the purpose of a review under either version of the provision: see
WorkCover Premium Review Panel Determination 2012
South Australian
Government Gazette
, 10 May 2012, p.1617). These proceedings had been
commenced before 1 July 2012 and involve levy assessments for even earlier
so fall to be determined under the older provisions: see Part 9 clause 1
of the 2012 Determination.
5, on which the application focuses, provides (so far as is
of service and other terms (section 3 of Act)
(1) For the purposes of
the definition of contract of service in section 3(1) of the Act (but
subject to this regulation and
regulation 6
following classes of work under a contract, arrangement or understanding are
prescribed classes of work:
(f) performing as a singer, dancer, musician, ventriloquist, acrobat,
juggler, comedian or other entertainer at a hotel, discotheque,
restaurant,
dance hall, club, reception house or other similar venue, but excluding work as
an actor, model or mannequin, or as any
other type of entertainer, in performing
as part of a circus, concert recital, opera, operetta, mime, play or other
similar performance,
(i) the work is performed by 1 person to the contract, arrangement or
understanding (the worker) in the course of or for the purposes
of a trade or
business carried on by another person to the contract, arrangement or
understanding (the employer); and
(ii) the work is performed personally by the worker (whether or not the
worker supplies any tools, plant or equipment); and
(iii) the worker does not employ any other person to carry out any part of
the work; and
(iv) the value of any materials supplied, or reasonably expected to be
supplied, by the worker does not exceed $50;
(2) For the purposes of
subregulation (1)
(a) the value of any tool, plant or equipment owned or leased by a worker is
the price that, at the time that the worker enters into
the relevant contract,
arrangement or understanding, the worker would reasonably be expected to pay if
the worker were to purchase
an equivalent, unused, tool or item of plant or
equipment; and
(b) a vehicle will not be taken to be used for work purposes if its sole or
principal use is to transport the worker, and any tools,
plant or equipment, to
any work site.
is not controversial that the WorkCover levy (now premium) is based on a
percentage of an employer’s total remuneration (as
defined) to workers
employed by it. Therefore, who is or is not a worker has direct implications for
the amount of levy payable by
an employer. “Worker” for this purpose
has the same definition as elsewhere in the Act. However, section 3(1) of the
Act defines “worker” to include by regulation certain groups that
might not otherwise come within the definition by virtue
of not being employed
under a common law contract of service, or groups that might be
contentious.
5 is such a regulation. It must be noted that the
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Regulations 2010
were gazetted on 24 June 2010, and were in
force at the time the reviewable decision was made on 3 March 2011. However, as
the reviewable
decision refers to the levy years 2006-2007, 2007-2008 and
2008-2009, when the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation (Claims and
Registration) Regulations 1999
were still in force, those are strictly the
governing regulations. Fortunately, regulation 5(1)(f) of the 1999 regulations
identical terms to regulation 5(1)(f) of the 2010 regulations. In fact,
there is no noticeable variation in the equivalent regulations
right back to
1987 — including the $50 amount in sub-paragraph (iv), the significance of
which presumably has changed greatly
with 26 years of inflation.
convenience, we will continue to refer to the text of the 2010 regulations set
proceedings before us focus on two broad groups of entertainers, if we may use
that term, working in premises conducted by the
applicant. The first group
comprises DJs (the full term “disc jockeys” for persons choosing and
playing music in night
clubs seems to have fallen into disuse in recent
decades), and the second group comprises showgirls providing patrons with
entertainment
in abbreviated costumes. WorkCover does not assert that those
entertainers are workers under contracts of service on ordinary principles.
asserts they are deemed to be workers by virtue of regulation 5. The applicant
asserts that they are exempt, primarily on the
basis of their alleged supply of
materials exceeding the value of $50.
facts are little disputed. For clarity, Mr Antony Tropeano, who had made an
extensive written statement that is contained in the
book of documents before
us, gave sworn evidence and was cross-examined.
note that no issue was argued as to whether the applicant’s premises
comprise a venue of the sort contemplated by paragraph
(f), or as to whether
each group of entertainers comprised entertainers of the sort contemplated by
paragraph (f). We therefore proceed
on the basis that the answer in each case is
affirmative, which we think, without necessarily deciding, is
Background facts
5 August 2010, WorkCover conducted a levy audit of the applicant employer
covering the period 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2009. After
some time, the WorkCover
auditor wrote to Mr Tropeano by letter dated 3 March 2011 in the following
“Dear Antony
“Further to the levy audit conducted by WorkCoverSA on 05/08/2010
covering the period 01/07/2006 to 30/06/2009, that levy audit
resulted in the
“For the financial year(s) 2006/07 – 2008/09 an examination of
the aggregate remuneration paid to workers (or in the use
of the advised rate in
the calculation of the levy payable) identified a variance in the levy amount
payable ...
“As discussed at the levy audit,
Regulation 5
Rehabilitation and Compensation (Claims and Registration) Regulations 1999
in particular
Regulation 5(1)(f)
in certain instances deems
‘entertainers’ to be ‘workers’ for the purpose of the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
(the Act). Payments made
to ‘entertainers’ deemed ‘workers’ must be included as
remuneration for the purpose
of the calculation of the levy payable.
“Entertainers are considered to be working under a contract of service
and have the corresponding status of a worker where the
entertainer is engaged
to perform individually or as a group (unless they are registered company) [sic]
work carried out by the person (worker) is for the trade or business of the
other party (employer), eg DJ performing for a hotel.
work is performed personally by the worker ie the worker does not employ any
other person to carry out any part of the work.
value of materials supplied (or reasonably expected to be supplied) does not
exceed $50 (Musical instruments, props equipment,
etc are not
materials).
“From the information obtained at audit, WorkCover
has determined that the entertainers – DJs and Dancers engaged by the
Palace Gallery meet the above criteria and are therefore deemed workers under
“Pursuant to
section 70(3)
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1986
(the Act), WorkCover will impose a fine on employers
where a levy audit identifies an employer’s failure to pay a levy or the
full amount of levy, required by or under the Act.
“Where a discrepancy is identified at audit, the following fine policy
will apply: –
for a first
default, a fine of 25% of the assessed levy up to a maximum fine of $10,000.00
per financial year
for a second and
subsequent default, a fine of 100% of the assessed levy up to a maximum fine of
$10,000.00 per financial year.
“WorkCover is entitled to
impose fines of up to three times the amount of the assessed levy.
“In this instance a fine totalling [amount] has been imposed.
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
(the Act) provides that penalty interest at the prescribed rate is
payable on levy not paid as and when required by the Act, unless
determines otherwise.
“In this instance penalty interest totalling [amount] has been
The total amount outstanding as per the Tax Invoice of [amount] is
due by 18/03/2011
“As a result of this audit, please be advised that the 2009/10
financial year and future financial years, must have remuneration
adjusted to include entertainers – deemed workers. ...” [All
emphasis as in original.]
tax invoice making assessments in line with the letter was attached. There was
some subsequent correspondence between the parties
that is, for present
purposes, unnecessary to set out. The present application for review, and
consequently these proceedings, were
the result.
Tropeano’s evidence
Tropeano gave evidence partly by way of a written statement and partly by way of
sworn evidence, during which he adopted the written
statement. For the most
part, his evidence was not contentious. He often used the word “we”,
which we took to mean the
applicant organisation generally, including but not
necessarily entailing his personal involvement. It seems to us that when he was
referring to an action or understanding that was first-hand, he used the first
person singular (“I”). In our summary,
we will often use “the
applicant” or “the company” where he has said “we”
in his statement or
in his oral evidence.
Tropeano described himself as Managing Director of QBA Pacific Pty Ltd, which he
said is a management company that manages a number
of venues and business
ventures for the Tropeano Group of Companies. One such venue comprises the
Hindley Street premises in question,
operated by the applicant. Mr Tropeano said
he had been working there since it opened in June 2002, although the capacity he
at that time was not made clear.
said he had been managing that venue since approximately April 2007, and is
ultimately responsible for the employment of staff
and entering into
arrangements for independent contractors to work at the venue. Indirect as that
sounds, we accept that he is authorised
to speak for the applicant company and
that no issue arises from the fact that one of the years in dispute commenced
before Mr Tropeano’s
management role commenced.
Tropeano said that since the commencement of that role in 2007, he has been
directly involved in the appointment of many of the
DJs and some of the
showgirls. A number of members of both groups have their own managers who, Mr
Tropeano said, are under his direction.
He said, in general, DJs have been
appointed at the venue under terms that he considered to mean they have been
running their own
businesses rather than being employees of the applicant. He
said that in one case, a DJ had been offered and had accepted a position
employee of the applicant. Mr Tropeano said he had wanted to ensure that the
particular DJ worked exclusively for the applicant
and so offered him employment
on the basis that he make himself available exclusively to the applicant when
required. In addition,
set hours were then made available for him. He said
income tax is now deducted, superannuation contributions are made, and WorkCover
premiums are paid on his wage. This DJ had previously been
“employed” by a promoter who would render a tax invoice to
applicant for services rendered by the DJ. The same promoter had provided
several DJs to the applicant on the same basis.
Tropeano said his father (Mr Antonio Tropeano), who at that time was the owner
of the business and more actively involved in its
day to day, had terminated the
arrangement with the promoter in about late 2004, and the applicant started to
enter into arrangements
directly with DJs. All those arrangements were oral. The
applicant would make enquiries as to when the various DJs could make themselves
available, and an hourly rate would be negotiated. Each DJ had an Australian
Business Number (ABN), and no income tax was deducted
from the gross amount paid
to the DJ for each session. Different DJs were paid at different rates according
to their popularity with
patrons. There was a rough guide per hour, and the
amount negotiated depended only on bargaining according to popularity.
response to questioning from his counsel, Mr Rossi, he said that currently the
applicant negotiates direct with about 50-60% of
the DJs, and the others through
agencies, which are paid direct. He said WorkCover also included these DJs in
its assessment because,
WorkCover said, the agents did not “control”
the DJs. (We understood WorkCover to agree that that is its position.) He
that all international DJs come through agencies, but it was “pot
luck” on the others, as to whether they had agents
said the time or day of the week did not affect the rate, and the DJs never wore
clothing identifying themselves with the venue.
They were permitted to wear what
they chose. No sick leave or annual leave was paid. The DJs would render a tax
invoice to the applicant
referring to the hours worked. It was up to each DJ how
frequently tax invoices were submitted for payment: typically it was weekly.
his sworn evidence before us, he specified typical ranges DJs were paid for a
set (extending between 90 minutes and 2 hours);
we do not think the actual
amounts are relevant for our purposes.
said in each instance it was agreed that if a DJ was unwell or for other reasons
could not or did not wish to attend at a particular
time that had been agreed,
the DJ could put forward the name of another DJ to substitute for him. The
applicant’s consent was
required in those circumstances, but there were
occasions (rare, we infer) when a DJ became unavailable at the last minute and
else turned up in his place. Effectively, Mr Tropeano said, the other DJ
was just allowed to perform and the previously agreed rate
was paid. He said he
did not know in those circumstances whether the original DJ made a profit from
that arrangement.
said there were times when the applicant negotiated with a DJ to perform on a
particular night and he became unavailable at the
last minute and another DJ
turned up. In some instances where the second DJ did not have an ABN and was
also not considered to be
an employee of the applicant, the first DJ would
provide a tax invoice and receive payment and then, in turn, pay the second
Tropeano said the DJs provided the following items which he considered to be
Headphones;
Records, DVDs
controller;
Cerato Box;
connection;
A bag to carry
everything in.
Tropeano explained that a MIDI controller controls inputs from two sources,
while a Cerato box is a form of mixing software installed
on the DJ’s
laptop. In fact, a quick internet search suggests that the word is spelt
“Serato”, after its New Zealand-based
developer (Serato Audio
Research), and although it is indeed software (described by Wikipedia as
“vinyl emulation software”),
it is often run in a separate piece of
computer equipment (the “box”), rather than the DJ’s laptop.
think there is likely to be any controversy about our internet
research on this point, and in any event, nothing turns on the functioning
the “Cerato Box”.)
think the functions of the other items are well enough known to require no
further elaboration.
his evidence, Mr Tropeano mentioned the use of T-shirt guns (which shoot out
branded T-shirts to the audience) and a CO
cannon. The guns and
cannon, T-shirts and gas were supplied by the interstate DJs concerned. They
were only used about once per annum
during the relevant period.
Tropeano said he was unable to provide an exact figure for the value of the
“materials” (presumably referring to the
list above) provided by the
DJs, but he would estimate the value to be in excess of $10 000.00. He said
the value would vary from
DJ to DJ. Some DJs had a far more extensive playing
list than others and some DJs had more expensive equipment than others. However,
he said, it was always many thousands of dollars’ worth.
we think, may be accepted at face value. The aggregate value of the items on the
list provided by Mr Tropeano is so obviously
in excess of $50 that a precise
valuation is irrelevant. The real question is whether all the items on the list,
or any of them,
are properly described as “materials” for the
purpose of the regulation, a question to which we will return.
Tropeano also said that he expected that the items listed above were used by DJs
at other venues at which they worked, but that
there were some disposable items
used, such as wiping cloths for DVDs and records, and sprays to clean DVDs and
records. Some of
the more durable items would occasionally wear out and have to
be replaced. This was always at the expense of the DJ.
said no guarantee was ever given to any of these DJs that ongoing regular work
would be available. It was a matter of reviewing,
on a week by week basis, the
needs of the venue, the popularity of a particular DJ and whether agreement
could be reached with each
DJ for any particular hours.
Tropeano also spoke of how the music played was organised. Much of this is
entirely hearsay, we consider, but we take it for what
it is worth as there was
no real dispute about it and it mostly seems inherently likely in any
said that the applicant would always discuss and agree with the DJ the genre of
music to be played but it was then a matter for
the DJ to decide, on the night,
which specific records, CDs, DVDs and so on would be played. He said he was
aware from discussions
with DJs that there were regularly occasions when DJs
would prepare for a particular night at the venue by cutting or burning
collections
of songs onto a CD that was used just for that night. He said that
was done in the DJ’s own time and at the expense of the
Tropeano said it was his understanding that the DJs are not permitted simply to
download music from the internet for free and that
there is a requirement in law
that they purchase the music if they are going to play it in a public venue.
That corresponds with
our own understanding, except in cases where the owner of
the music may have deliberately placed it in the public domain. He said
such expense was always that of the DJ and, in response to comments from the
Panel, he had no idea of the size and extent
of performing rights fees. He gave
Apple’s iTunes Store as an example of a source for purchasing music
(although we think we
are allowed to observe that, in our experience, that
purchase is for private use only and we are unaware of any way the iTunes Store
can be paid for public performing rights). In addition, the venue is of the sort
where music tends to be expected by patrons to be
current and popular, and this
only lasts for a limited period in relation to any given piece of music. He said
it was a requirement
that DJs keep up to date with music trends and that, at
their expense, they supplied a current list of music.
said that it was always the DJ who provided the above-stated items. The
applicant never provided those items. We assume that by
“above-stated”, Mr Tropeano referred to the items mentioned in [
to the other category of performer, Mr Tropeano said that since the beginning of
the venue in about 2002, there have been
showgirls performing on stage at the
venue, providing entertainment by way of a striptease routine.
said the number of showgirls needed varies considerably. There are weeks when
six have been needed to cover the roster for the
week and there have been other
weeks where as many as 25 have been needed. They have always been considered to
be operating their
own businesses and not to be employees of the applicant. As
with the DJs, agreements have always been oral and the showgirls supply
and invoice for the work performed on a per-show basis. A fixed fee is
negotiated per show, the show typically lasting between
10 and 15 minutes,
depending on the music selected by the showgirl and the routine she wishes to
perform. The individual showgirl
decides what she thinks best suits her and
negotiates with the applicant according to the performance she proposes for the
of the showgirls, he said, are local, some tour the country, and some are from
overseas and develop an international reputation
for their striptease acts. The
amount a particular showgirl commands per performance varies according to the
popularity of the individual
Tropeano said that since he took over the managerial responsibilities in 2007 he
has continued to enter into oral agreements with
the showgirls but he has also
produced what he described as “a document setting out our understanding of
the arrangement”,
a copy of the current version of which is before us. We
would describe it as an information document setting out the applicant’s
expectations of the showgirls as to conduct on-stage and off-stage. It consists
of two pages and a third for the parties to sign,
which does add a contractual
flavour to it.
Tropeano said the showgirls provide the following:
An elaborate
dress forming clothing over the whole of the body in general (and which he
estimated to be valued in excess of $1 000);
underneath the elaborate outer dress, another outfit, which is often in the form
of lingerie (which he said was typically
expensive lingerie, which he estimated
to cost in the hundreds of dollars);
Makeup and hair
products, noting that stage makeup is different from ordinary
“basic” makeup (he estimated the cost of
purchasing the required
products in the hundreds of dollars);
Their own music,
typically on a CD containing music of their choice, which is played through the
venue’s sound system;
strawberries, which they place on their bodies during the course of their
Neon paint where
the showgirls will paint themselves on stage in neon paint;
In one case,
shaving cream that one showgirl places on her body and ignites with her own
cigarette lighter.
said each showgirl would require a range of fancy dresses and a range of
lingerie. We can readily accept that it would not be viable
to wear the same
outfit at each performance. Mr Tropeano, by way of example, said that an
interstate showgirl may perform at the
venue for a week, with a range of
different clothing necessary.
said all of the items referred to are provided by the showgirls and not the
applicant. He considered them to be expenses of the
businesses operated by the
showgirls. He said the showgirls were professional in the sense that they do not
confine themselves to
the applicant’s business. He said they go from state
to state and are well-known in the adult entertainment industry. He said
assurance was ever given by the applicant of ongoing sessions and no assurance
was expected of ongoing availability by the showgirls.
his sworn evidence, he said that if a showgirl became unavailable at a late
stage, she mostly found a replacement, especially the
responsible” showgirls. Sometimes it was necessary for the applicant to
find a replacement, usually only in the
case of a “no-show” (where
the showgirl had simply failed to appear).
Tropeano said that, in general, showgirls do not perform their craft for many
years. He said that, in his experience, a showgirl
would perform over a period
of about three to five years and, accordingly, new showgirls are constantly
encountered on the scene.
We accept that it is not a life-long career choice. He
said the same applies to DJs. Typically, they are popular for a few years
then lose popularity. He said most DJs are in their early twenties and after a
few years stop working as DJs.
said that no DJ or showgirl was ever paid by reference to any award or
industrial agreement. (We are aware that there is a
Live Performance Award
. We drew the attention of the parties to the fact that we had a copy of
it, but in the event, we have not found it necessary to refer
to it.) It was
always a market rate determined by negotiation and which could vary from
performance to performance according to the
popularity at the time of the DJ or
the showgirl. Time sheets were not required to be completed by either the DJs or
the showgirls,
and no income tax instalments were deducted in relation to
response to a question by Mr Cole, as to whether the engagement of the DJs and
showgirls could be described as intermittent, Mr
Tropeano said they may not be
needed or may not be available. He agreed that the items mentioned at [
] above could be used elsewhere, as could
the downloaded music and the costumes. He said some showgirls took their
costumes interstate
or overseas, if they had that sort of work. He agreed that
the use of strawberries, shaving cream and the like depended on the sort
performance the individual performer wanted to stage. There were no formal
roster documents, although there were internal schedules.
The showgirls
performed under their own names.
The parties’
Rossi referred to the recent case of
Finnigan v. Magistrates Court of
[2013] SASCFC 1
which the Chief Justice embarked on, if we may respectfully say so, a
on the subject of the purposive approach to statutory interpretation
from [8] to [35] of His Honour’s judgment. Although the
focus of that case
was certain sections of the
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Honour’s exposition is of general application and constitutes principles
to be kept steadily in mind. It would be futile,
and unnecessary, to attempt to
summarise His Honour’s exposition here.
Rossi also referred to section 22 of the
Acts Interpretation Act 1915
which was also referred to by His Honour in
. That section
22—Construction
that would promote purpose or object of an Act to be preferred
(1) Subject to
subsection (2)
where a provision of an Act is reasonably open to more than one construction, a
construction that would promote the purpose or object
of the Act (whether or not
that purpose or object is expressly stated in the Act) must be preferred to a
construction that would
not promote that purpose or object.
(2) This section does not
operate to create or extend any criminal
have no doubt that the purposive approach to the construction of legislation is
binding upon us.
Rossi asserted that WorkCover’s approach, as evidenced by its
correspondence set out at [
involved impermissibly inserting extra words into the regulation. Circumstances
permitting the reading of words into a legislative
provision were described by
McHugh J in
Bermingham v. Corrective Services Commission
at 302, applying Lord Diplock’s approach in
Securities v. Jones
[1980] AC 74
and did not arise in the present case.
Rossi argued that the circumstances of the DJs, in particular, militate against
a construction that would hold them as employees
of the applicant. In many
cases, their only actual contract is with an agency. It is not the case that
every performer is covered
by the Act and required to be paid for by a notional
“employer”.
also argued that WorkCover were incorrectly sweeping into the levy net the fee
paid by some performers to their agents. Mr Cole,
in reply, said that if an
agent is simply a means of contact, it makes no difference.
Cole argued that the purposive approach leads to the conclusion that Parliament
wanted these people to be covered unless they supply
materials exceeding $50.
Referring to regulation 5(f), set out above at [
], he noted that there is an express
reference in subparagraph (ii) to “tools, plant or equipment”, but
in (iv) only the
expression “materials” is used. That was clearly a
significant distinction, he argued. Materials, he said, are consumable.
plant and equipment are not. The items on which greatest reliance was placed by
the applicant, those set out at [
above in relation to DJs, are properly characterised as tools, plant or
equipment, because they do not have that consumable character.
The same argument
applies to the showgirls’ costumes, he said, ascribing to the costumes
some of the characteristics of a uniform.
He conceded that the strawberries,
cream and shaving cream may be materials, strictly so described.
Cole said that there was a new contract every night under the intermittent form
of engagement described by Mr Tropeano. Mr Cole
said that the value of materials
must relate to the period of engagement, not aggregated over a financial year.
We did not take Mr
Rossi to contend otherwise, although he did put it in
somewhat different terms, saying that there was a series of contracts over
relevant year, with re-negotiations through the year. The period over which the
$50 limit was to be measured was the contract
period. Perhaps this argument left
open the question of whether the contract period was a single performance or a
billing period
(typically weekly, as we understood it), or the period between
“re-negotiations”.
Cole contended that the various classes of deemed worker dealt with by
regulation 5 were deliberately dealt with in different terms.
For example,
building work has historically been a major issue of contention and is dealt
with in quite different terms from the
performers with whom we are dealing in
the present case. He pointed to the variations between regulation 5(f) and the
corresponding
provision for building work, where elaborate provision is made for
leased plant or equipment.
cases were raised by Mr Cole in argument. The first was
WorkCover v.
[2007] SAWCT 8
, an appeal decision with three separate judgments
from Judge Parsons DP, McCouaig DP, and Industrial Magistrate Lieschke DP. It
the following passage at [28] – [30] by Judge
“Furthermore, when reaching the conclusion that the
agreement did not include the supply of any material (judgment par 30),
learned Deputy President did not expressly discuss the meaning of
‘supply’ for the purposes of the regulation. Nevertheless,
implied from her reasoning (par 21) that it is her view that supply under or
pursuant to a contract arrangement or understanding
for the purposes of the
regulation requires an all inclusive contract for the supply of labour and
materials, or at least the charging
of a mark up or GST to the cost of the
materials, and that because there was no all inclusive quote for the job or no
additional GST the respondent did not supply materials under or
pursuant to a contract, arrangement, or understanding.
“However the words of the regulation do not suggest any such
limitation. Supply for the purposes of the regulation does not
element of profit on the part of the supplier. Furthermore, the fact that the
other party to the contract bears the ultimate
cost of the materials is not
relevant to whether the materials were supplied. In a commercial arrangement it
will usually be the
case that the person who is obtaining the benefit of the
materials will pay for them.
“The respondent supplied the materials when undertaking the work
pursuant to the contract with Salandra Family Trust simply
because he acquired
them and used them when undertaking the work which he performed pursuant to the
contract. He had previously acquired
property in the goods. The materials in the
ute belonged to him as did the materials which he purchased from Reece Plumbing
cash, on his account, or with his credit card.”
of the judgments itemises the materials in question, nor does the original
judgment of Judge Farrell DP in
Rossi v. N&MR Salandra Family
[2006] SAWCT 57.
The best description is “plumbing
materials”. A short reference to the work performed in Judge
Farrell’s judgment
suggests they may have included such things as pipes,
attached in the course of the job to the alleged employer’s land and
reply, Mr Rossi drew attention to a passage from the judgment of McCouaig DP at
[82] and urged us to adopt the same approach:
“The concept of
‘supply’ in regulation 5 is not complex and simply means supply as
that word is understood in general
usage. The respondent’s purchases of
the materials and his use of same in the job comprised his supply of those
Such purchases may have been ‘for and on behalf of Mr
Salandra’, but neither that fact nor the fact that it may have
‘convenient’ for the respondent to make the purchases can alter the
fact that it was the respondent who supplied
the materials.”
next case referred to by Mr Cole was
Pollitt v. Blackwattle Bay Marine
[2012] FWA 8758
, an unfair dismissal case involving a person
managing and maintaining a marina. The issue was whether he was an employee or
an independent
contractor on ordinary principles — the very issue the
extended definition of “worker” in regulation 5 is designed
avoid. Duties “included painting, putting in safety rails, checking and
repairing moorings, moving steel around, removing
rubbish and assisting”
another employee. The worker (as the learned Deputy President found him to be)
was provided with “tools
and raw materials” and he was given a
credit card for purchasing “necessary work items”. As Mr Rossi
quickly pointed
out, “materials” in the regulation with which we are
concerned is not qualified by the word “raw”, nor did
next case to which we were referred was
Pasalic v. Technometal
[2012] FWA 8136
, another unfair dismissal case where the status of the applicant
as a worker or an independent contractor had been at issue. In fact,
had been resolved at an earlier stage:
Pasalic v. Technometal
[2012] FWA 3291
, by Watson VP. Again, it was the common law test of employment
that was in issue. The applicant was a mechanical engineer who worked
draftsman. All tools and equipment were supplied by the respondent, and petrol
was reimbursed on an invoice basis if the applicant
used his vehicle for the
business and other expenses were also reimbursed as appropriate. The learned
Vice President found the applicant
to be an employee.
were also referred to
Corke-Cox v. Crocker Builders
[2012] FMCA
, also an unfair dismissal case, with workers compensation (Queensland)
aspects. Again, the common law test of employment was in issue.
The applicant
was a painter engaged on what was described as “a sessional contract
basis”. The learned magistrate set
out the position regarding supply of
“materials” as follows:
“[The] Director of Crocker
Builders, deposed that Corke-Cox would submit fortnightly invoices to Crocker
Builders for payment.
In addition, he stated that Corke-Cox would supply his own
tools as a subcontractor and that from time to time Crocker Builders would
purchase tools on his behalf, although when that occurred Crocker Builders would
then invoice Corke-Cox for the costs incurred and
deduct them from invoices as
instructed. By way of illustration [was] a copy of a tax invoice evidencing such
an instance. In respect
of that matter it appears that four drop sheets were
ordered to a value of $152.23. The cost was debited to an account maintained
behalf of Crocker Builders Pty Ltd. However, the purchase order in support of
the tax invoice from Dulux Australia, which is on
a Crocker Builder’s
purchase order form, shows that the delivery address was ‘Perry Drop
Sheets - Personal to Bill.’
It is not entirely plain that the drop sheets
were being purchased by Corke-Cox on the Crocker Builders account with a charge
to Corke-Cox, although I accept that the inference is open. However with
that exception most other materials, particularly paint,
were supplied by
Crocker Builders. It was with these facts in mind that WorkCover Queensland
later assessed the arrangement as an
employee/employer arrangement. I do not
disagree with its characterisation of the arrangement ...”
his response, Mr Rossi advocated recourse to the
Macquarie Dictionary
citing McCouaig DP’s reference to “general usage” in the
passage set out at [
] above. He said
that what one judge described as a tool and another judge described as a
material should not distract us, and there
was no need to confine either term.
The fact that another label can be put on an object does not change what it is.
There was no
reason, he argued, to depart from the approach of the Full Bench in
Discussion and findings
find the facts of the arrangement between the parties to be broadly as outlined
by Mr Tropeano. While we might be more sceptical
than he about the DJs’
purchasing of rights for the public performance of downloaded music, we do not
think anything in the
end turns on that.
also think that the contract period, over which the $50 materials limit is to be
measured, must be each individual engagement.
The evidence does not justify any
other conclusion. The “re-negotiations” referred to by Mr Rossi
probably extend to
negotiations about the availability of the performers for
particular engagements, and the evidence does not show how frequent this
but we doubt it was less frequent than weekly, and possibly more frequent.
Negotiations about availability seem to have taken
place with respect to each
individual performance. Mr Tropeano referred to internal documents in the nature
of rosters, but we do
not know how often these were prepared and have not seen
them. We also do not know how many times a week a particular performer might
have appeared, or how variable that might be. The need for contractual certainty
points back to each engagement being a separate
Panel raised the question whether any guidance on the question of the period of
engagement could be gained from
Legtrap Hotel v. Rebbeck
, but it seems on reflection that the evidence of regularity in the
roster is lacking that would enable any other conclusion to be
central issue in this case is whether the performers were workers for the
purposes of the Act. This arises from the definitions
in section 3(1) of the
Act, which defines a “worker”,
, as a person by
whom work is done under a contract of service, and relevantly defines a
“contract of service” as follows:
contract of
(a) a contract under which one person (the worker) is employed by another
(the employer);
(b) a contract, arrangement or understanding under which one person (the
worker) works for another in prescribed work or work of a
prescribed class
did not assert that the performers were workers on common law principles, as
contemplated by paragraph (a). We must not
be taken to indicate, either way,
whether this would have been an impossible task, but it was not attempted.
Exclusive reliance was
placed on paragraph (b), which is the foundation for
regulation 5.
noted, subregulation (1) of regulation 5 contains a number of paragraphs, (a) to
(g), prescribing various classes of work, of which
the parties seem agreed that
paragraph (f) is relevant to the work of the DJs and showgirls performing at the
applicant’s venue.
Neither counsel nor the Panel is aware of any previous
analysis by the Workers Compensation Tribunal or any court of paragraph (f),
its drafting is not free from ambiguity. Approximately halfway through the
opening paragraph appear the words “but excluding
Grammatically, it is not easy to discern where that exclusion ends. The
expression is, in effect, parenthetical, but
without actual parentheses to
delimit it, it is hard to see where the notional second parenthesis should be.
Is the exclusion “work
as an actor, model or mannequin”? Is it
“work as an actor, model or mannequin, or as any other type of
entertainer, in
performing as part of a circus, concert recital, opera,
operetta, mime, play or other similar performance”? Does the exclusion
actually include the numbered subparagraphs (i) to (iv)? Each could legitimately
be argued from a grammatical point of view.
purposive approach does not yield an obvious answer. It is of course clear from
the definition of “contract of service”
that there is a
parliamentary intention that the scope of “worker” is to be extended
beyond the scope it might have on
ordinary common law principles. A reading of
the general categories (a) to (g) in regulation 5(1) suggests an intention to
technical argument in categories that have given rise to problems in the
past. But the words “but excluding” appearing
halfway through one of
the extensions only indicates that there is a limit to the extension intended by
paragraph (f) of the regulation.
The reference to “performing as part of a
circus” puts one in mind of
Zuijs v. Wirth Brothers
(1955) 93 CLR 561
, in which the work injury case of a trapeze artist in
a circus, also described as an acrobat, went as far as the High Court for
(eventually, that he was a worker under a contract of service under
ordinary principles).
is hard to see what the point would be of confining singers and dancers
performing at hotels, discotheques and clubs to those performing
as part of a
circus, concert recital, opera, operetta, mime, play or similar performance, so
we think those last words are part of
the exclusion. It seems unlikely that the
numbered qualifications (i) to (iv) are intended to be part of the exclusion,
format of the other paragraphs of regulation 5(1). Our opinion,
therefore, and the parties certainly seemed to share it, is that
the intention
is for the exclusion to be read as though the words “but excluding work as
an actor, model or mannequin, or as
any other type of entertainer, in performing
as part of a circus, concert recital, opera, operetta, mime, play or other
similar performance”
were placed in parentheses to delimit the extent of
the exclusion.
qualifications (i) to (iv) therefore need to be satisfied for the DJs and
showgirls to be deemed as workers. This was also common
ground between the
the material before us, we have no doubt that subparagraph (i) is satisfied. We
also consider that subparagraphs (ii) and (iii)
are satisfied. For reasons we
will set out shortly, we have concluded the performers “supply” some
“tools, plant
or equipment”, but subparagraph (ii) says that
doesn’t matter. There is evidence from Mr Tropeano that there may have
been occasions where a performer became unavailable at the last moment and,
particularly in the case of the DJs, the absent DJ had
procured a replacement.
However, our impression from his evidence was that just as often, the applicant
procured the replacement.
We think this was just a matter of convenience, a
matter of who knew of a person who might be suitable as a replacement. The
does not go anywhere near satisfying us that the replacement was, in
any sense, an employee of the absent performer, employed by
him or her “to
carry out any part of the work”. We do not overlook what Mr Tropeano said
he thought might have been the
situation as to payment on some of the occasions
when an absent DJ introduced a replacement, but on such a potentially crucial
if the applicant wanted a specific finding on this aspect from us,
clearer and more cogent evidence (probably in the form of documentary
would need to have been produced of when, how often, to whom and in exactly what
circumstances such payments were made.
Most likely, such imprecision is merely
an illustration of the informality of all the arrangements described in this
focus of argument was on subparagraph (iv) of regulation 5(1)(f). This
sub-paragraph in effect takes a person out of the category
worker” if the person supplies (or is reasonably expected to supply)
materials valued above $50. The applicant
employer contends that materials
supplied are as described by Mr Tropeano, set out by us at [
] above. WorkCover contends that most of
those items are tools of trade or equipment, not materials.
key words seem to be “supply” and “materials”. There is
an ever-growing wealth of case law on the concept
of “supply”, but
for the most part those authorities relate to special legislation like the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Trade Practices Act
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999
which specific definitions of “supply” are contained (although in
both of those cases, the specific definitions seem
aimed at expanding the
ordinary meaning of the word rather than limiting it).
think it is appropriate for our purposes to adopt McCouaig DP’s remark as
to “general usage” in
at [85] (set out by us
]). In that case, it was not
necessary actually to explore the content of that general usage; it was enough
to decide that profit
did not need to be a part of it. However, we note that the
Macquarie ABC Dictionary
(2003) relevantly defines “supply”
“1. to furnish (a person, establishment, place, etc.) with
what is lacking or requisite. 2. to furnish or provide (something
requisite):
to supply electricity to a community.
3. to make up (a
deficiency); make up for (a loss, lack, absence, etc.); satisfy (a need, demand,
etc.). ...”
Shorter Oxford English Dictionary
(1973) relevantly defines
“supply” (omitting obsolete uses) as:
fulfil, satisfy (a need or want) by furnishing what is wanted ... 6. To furnish,
provide, afford (something needed, desired,
or used); now usu. with impersonal
sub. ... 7. To furnish (a thing) with what is necessary or desirable
Merriam-Webster Unabridged Dictionary
(CD, Version 3.0, 2003) relevantly
defines “supply” as:
“2 a : to provide
satisfaction or compensation for (as a need or defect) : make good by providing
a substitute : fill adequately
<an age which
the lack of
moral habits by a system of moral attitudes and poses – T.S.Eliot>
<the laws by which the material wants
Bulletin of Bates College
> b : to satisfy a need or desire for :
provide or furnish with : bring up or make available a quantity of : YIELD
to poaching as a means of
fresh meat for the
table – H.D.Quillin> <the millrace built to
the mission’s sawmill –
American Guide Series: Tennessee
<the moral code of each generation ...
a norm or standard of
behavior – B.N.Cardozo> <a youngster in school
the answer – Bryan MacMahon> c (1) : to provide that which is required
or desired by : satisfy the needs or wishes of
: furnish with or as if with
supplies, provisions, or equipment <a contract to
the railroad
with fuel – D.L.Graham> <wells were drilled to
town’s water system –
American Guide Series: Arkansas
: to furnish (organs, tissues, or cells) with pathways for transmission or a
vital element (as a nerve impulse) – used
of nerves and blood
conclude that “supply”, in general usage, is a very wide expression
with a variety of connotations. Although it would
be tempting, from the
dictionaries, to think that a supply entails a degree of permanence (almost a
passing of property), that cannot
be so from the way the draftsman has used the
word in the regulation, because the word has also been used in subparagraph (ii)
relation to tools, plant or equipment, which one would think would usually be
taken away again at the end of a job (in this case,
a performance) and in
relation to which property certainly does not pass.
word “materials”, in general usage, is similarly wide in its
meaning. Leaving aside its adjectival usages (such as
fact”) and its connotations in relation to textiles,
defines “material”, in the singular:
substance or substances of which a thing is made or composed. 2. any constituent
element of a thing. 3. anything serving
as crude or raw matter for working upon
or developing. ... 7.
articles of any kind requisite for making
or doing something:
writing materials
offers (again, ignoring obsolete and irrelevant usages):
The matter from which anything is made. ... b. The elements, constituent parts,
or substance of something ... 4. Tools,
apparatus, etc. for performing an
action. ...”
Merriam-Webster
a (1) : the basic matter (as metal, wood, plastic, fiber) from which the whole
or the greater part of something physical
(as a machine, tool, building, fabric)
is made <had a good supply of all necessary
used in making linen> (2) : the finished stuff of which
something physical (as an article of clothing) is made;
CLOTH b (1) : the whole or a notable part of the elements or constituents or
substance of something physical <the solid
of the mixture
will settle to the bottom of the container> or not physical <the
of his character was basically good> (2) : something (as
data, observations, perceptions, ideas) that may through intellectual
be synthesized or further elaborated or otherwise reworked into a more finished
form or a new form or that may serve as
the basis for arriving at fresh
interpretations or judgments or conclusions <found rich
definitive biography> <an experience that provided stimulating
for new evaluation of the theory> (3) : something (as a group
of specimens) used for or made the object of study and investigation
> c : matter viewed as the relatively formless basis of
reality2 a : apparatus (as tools or other articles) necessary for doing
making something – usually used in plural <needed writing
is immediately apparent that the dictionaries are not at pains to draw any great
distinction between materials and tools. Two of
them use the word
“tools” in their definition of “material”. There was
discussion during submissions of the
distinction between
“consumables” and tools of trade used during work and taken away
again at the end. Disregard of any
such distinction was the course urged upon us
by Mr Rossi in his submissions. He suggested that “materials” in
subparagraph
(iv) was an expression capable of embracing “tools, plant or
equipment” in subparagraph (ii). However, we do not consider
the draftsman
approached the regulation this way.
our respectful opinion, the expressions “tools, plant or equipment”
in subparagraph (ii) and “materials”
in subparagraph (iv) are used
disjunctively. If “materials” was intended to include tools, plant
and equipment, the draftsman
would have said so. The drafting of the regulations
shows no inclination to the sort of economy with words that would be illustrated
by using one word as a form of shorthand for a more compendious expression used
a few lines before with no indication (such as a
definition that could easily
have been included in subregulation (8)). Moreover, many of the other paragraphs
of regulation 5(1)
follow the same format and make the same apparent
distinction.
think some of the flavour of the distinction is that “materials”,
which are used up on the job, involve a direct cost
to the performer
attributable to the individual contract, or performance, whereas tools, plant
and equipment are used (but not used
up) in the performance of the job and can
be taken away at the end of the job (performance), more or less intact, and
performer’s property. Taking the purposive approach, we think
this distinction is consistent with the provision of tools, plant
and equipment
being disregarded as a disqualifying factor, whereas the supply of materials,
after a threshold is met, does bring
a performer back into the category of an
independent contractor.
further aspect is how the supply of items that are brought to the workplace,
used, and taken away again without significant degradation,
would be valued if
they were to be considered materials. This would be a matter for evidence, of
course, but the value of the supply
could hardly be, as implicitly suggested by
Mr Tropeano’s evidence, the full retail prices of the items. Would it be
the depreciation
amount allowed by the tax authorities? Would it be the cost of
a commercial hire of such items, if, indeed, all of them are available
commercial hire? We are doubtful that regulation 5(2)(a) provides an obvious
answer. If such equipment was to be included in
“materials” for an
engagement where the equipment is used for just a few hours, it could only
sensibly be the value of
that use that could be included. To count the thousands
of dollars the full price of the equipment represented over and over again
successive contractual engagements would be ludicrous; perhaps suggesting
another reason for concluding that such inclusion is
not what the regulation
contemplates. In view of the conclusion we have reached as to the extent of
materials supplied, we need not
explore the issue of valuation further.
our view, all of the items referred to in [
] above come within the description of
“tools, plant or equipment” and are not to be regarded as materials,
one caveat. While commercially produced records, CDs and DVDs are not
materials, CDs and DVDs cut by a DJ for a single performance
and not intended to
be used again, whether in work for the applicant or elsewhere, may be. We refer
to the blank CDs and DVDs (with,
in our experience, a retail cost of $1 or
less), not the downloaded content cut to them. If content is cut to a CD or DVD
for a single
performance and that content (or the order of its appearance for
playing) is so specialised that it will not be used again, we would
accept that
the blank CD or DVD was a material. The downloaded content might well be usable
again, perhaps in a different context
or in different order in a playlist, and
remains an asset of the downloading DJ. This we think is more aptly
characterised as a tool
or equipment than a material. If downloaded material was
truly so eccentric that it was inconceivable that it could ever be re-used,
would be a matter for evidence and there was no such evidence before us in this
T-shirt gun equipment referred to in [
] above was, in the same way, a tool or
equipment. The T-shirts themselves, however, are different. From Mr
Tropeano’s evidence,
the T-shirts were randomly shot out to the audience,
and an audience member fortunate enough to grab one, we assume, kept it. We
not know precisely how many T-shirts were shot into the crowd (Mr Tropeano
thought 30 or 40) or at what cost to the DJ. Mr Tropeano
seemed to suggest this
only happened once over the relevant period.
have struggled somewhat with the T-shirts. There is an attraction to
categorising them as materials because they were supplied,
Tropeano’s evidence, by the relevant DJ and left behind (to be taken away
by the lucky patrons concerned). However, this
categorisation seems to strain
the word “materials” unduly. In truth, we think, they are best
categorised as a marketing
promotion. It is impossible to know for whom the
T-shirts were a marketing promotion (the venue or the relevant DJ) without
what was printed on them, and that would not necessarily be conclusive
in any event. It may even be that they were promotional items
provided to the DJ
by a third party (such as a liquor distributor) to promote some product
illustrated on the T-shirt. (Such provision
by a third party might even be
cost-free to the DJ.) But it is not necessary to reach a conclusion as to who
was being promoted by
the distribution of the T-shirts. We do not think the
T-shirts fall into either the category of “tools, plant or
or “materials”. There is nothing in the regulation
that suggests that everything supplied by a performer must fall into
other category. The T-shirts, in our respectful opinion, are neither. We
acknowledge that if we did classify the T-shirts
as materials and if, as Mr
Tropeano deposed, the relevant DJ paid for them, it probably would not take too
many shots of the gun
for the cost of T-shirts to add up to $50. A distribution
of 30 or 40 T-shirts would likely do it, unless the T-shirts were given
the DJ by a third-party advertiser. However, that would be a matter for
evidence, and none was offered apart from Mr Tropeano’s
statements. The implications of regulation 5(2)(a) would have to be considered
carefully if it turned out the DJ had in fact
received the T-shirts free, a
situation perhaps not contemplated by the draftsman. But as we are of the
opinion that the T-shirts
were not materials, it is not necessary to dwell
further on that aspect.
disposable items referred to in [
above, the wipes and sprays, are clearly, in our opinion, materials, as is the
gas used (but only the quantity actually used, not the entire
contents of the gas bottle or other container). We doubt that the cost
than nominal and, again, it would be a matter for evidence in a particular case.
There was no such evidence.
items referred to by Mr Tropeano in relation to the showgirls are set out in [
] above. In our opinion, the costumes are
clearly tools, plant or equipment. It may sound awkward to speak of clothing in
such terms,
but we think it is part of the equipment of the showgirls’
profession. (It would be equally awkward to speak of the costumes
as materials,
other than in the textile sense.)
consider the showgirls’ music CDs referred to by Mr Tropeano as tools,
subject to the same qualifications as in the case
of the DJs’ music CDs.
If they are specially cut for use on a unique specific occasion, the blank disc
may qualify as materials.
We would imagine that discs, even specially cut ones,
are used by the showgirls in their acts on repeated (not necessarily successive)
occasions, in which case they would be equipment. There is no evidence before us
to show the preponderance of either (or any other)
arrangement.
hair products and make-up referred to in evidence introduce other
considerations. We were told, and we accept, that the make-up
is stage make-up
that is presumably of little use to the showgirls outside work. It is used up in
the course of performances, although
probably (again, there is simply no
evidence) not on a single occasion. A container of stage make-up probably lasts
some time but
is eventually used up. With some hesitation, we consider the stage
make-up does qualify as materials, although its cost would need
to be divided by
the approximate number of performances it lasts. We are not informed whether the
hair products are specific to the
performances, or whether they are products
suitable for ordinary use. If the latter is the case, we doubt that the products
either category; many workers in a diversity of industries need their
hair to hold a neat and tidy appearance, and hair products
used to achieve that
result are neither considered tools of trade nor materials bought for work.
would regard cream, strawberries, neon paint and shaving cream used in
performances by the showgirls as materials, subject to the
same qualifications
in the case of the neon paint and shaving cream as the stage make-up: namely, it
is likely to be bought in a
quantity that would not be used up on a single
occasion. The cigarette lighter used to ignite the shaving cream, however, is in
view an item of equipment which, if used only for that purpose, could be
expected to last for quite a while.
result is that the more expensive items described in evidence before us fall, in
our opinion, into the category of tools, plant
or equipment rather than
materials. Items we regarded as consumable or disposable are materials, but
evidence is lacking as to whether
in any particular case the value amounts to
$50. Intuitively, it does not seem likely, but it simply was not attempted.
final conclusion, therefore, is that the DJs and showgirls must be regarded as
workers under contracts of service by virtue of
the deeming provisions of
section 3(1) and regulation 5(1)(f).
add that, in general, if a performer directs the remuneration payable to him or
her be paid through an agent and that agent deducts
a fee, we would be inclined
to think that is a matter between the performer and the agent (and perhaps the
Australian Taxation Office)
but does not involve the employer or WorkCover. Mr
Tropeano’s evidence suggests that his only dealings are with the
themselves, even if payment is sent to an agent. Without having heard
specific argument on this point, we would tentatively incline
to the view that
the employer’s total payment remains the leviable remuneration amount even
if the employer makes the deduction
and remits it separately to the agent,
similar to the situation often encountered with deductions made for medical fund
instalments,
union fees, or superannuation contributions. We cannot readily
imagine circumstances in which an agent’s fee could be paid
in such a way
as to be excluded from the employer’s leviable remuneration under the Act,
but if such circumstances are asserted,
detailed evidence of the circumstances
of the payment, and the circumstances said to take it outside leviable
remuneration, should
be produced.
made that observation, we do not overlook the fact that we intimated to the
parties at the hearing that we would extend an
opportunity to make further
submissions on the agency point if our decision was against the employer on the
main point based on materials.
Accordingly, we invite the applicant to make a
written submission confined to this point, which may include further documentary
within 28 days, and WorkCover to respond in writing within a further
28 days, and we will call the matter back on for further argument
after that if
requested. Perhaps we can be dissuaded from the view we have tentatively
Inconvenience
are conscious that the analysis we have set out may have some inconvenient
results. The fact that the same DJ may be deemed to
be a worker for one
contracted performance and not another, simply because of a variation in the
value of wipes, cleaning sprays
or blank discs may be considered odd. Any need
(for evidentiary purposes) to require DJs and showgirls to produce to the
their receipts for those items, stage make-up, cream, strawberries,
neon paint, shaving cream and so on, record those numbers and
analyse them to
see if the totals add up to $50 for any occasion, just to determine whether the
performer was a deemed worker for
that contracted performance, may seem onerous
by comparison with the benefit the employer may derive. The calculation may
finer as prices of the relevant materials increase, while the $50
threshold has remained non-indexed since 1987 and becomes more
and more nominal
every year.
purposive approach suggests such results should lead us to look again at our
conclusions as to the meaning of the regulation.
We have done so. However, the
meaning of the regulation seems to us to be unambiguous and we are bound to give
effect to it.
notice dated 3 March 2011 that constitutes the reviewable decision in this case
sets out amounts for each of the years audited,
which we assume represent the
shortfalls (not the employer’s total levies for those years) and adds
penalty interest at the
prescribed rate under section 71(1)(a) as well as a fine
pursuant to section 70(3). In its application for review, the employer has
sought a review of the fine.
70 and 71, at the relevant times, provided:
70—Recovery on
(1) Where an employer—
(a) fails or neglects duly to furnish a return when required by or under this
(b) furnishes a return that the Corporation has reasonable grounds to believe
to be defective in any respect,
the Corporation may make an assessment of levy on the basis of estimates made
by the Corporation.
(2) Where an employer fails to pay a levy, or the full amount of a levy,
required by or under this Act, the Corporation will make
an assessment of the
amount payable by the employer.
(3) The Corporation may, by assessment under subsection (1) or (2), impose
on the employer a fine of an amount (not exceeding 3
times the amount assessed)
fixed by the Corporation.
(4) The Corporation may for any proper reason remit a fine imposed under
subsection (3) wholly or in part.
(5) An employer to whom a notice of an assessment or a fine under this
section is given shall pay the amount of the assessment or
fine within the time
allowed in the notice.
Penalty: $10 000.
71—Penalty for late payment
(1) Where an employer fails to pay a levy as and when required by or under
(a) the amount in arrears will unless the Corporation determines otherwise,
be increased by penalty interest at the prescribed rate;
(b) the Corporation may impose on the employer a fine of an amount (not
exceeding 3 times the amount assessed) fixed by the Corporation.
(2) The Corporation may for any proper reason remit penalty interest or a
fine imposed under subsection (1) wholly or in part.
(3) An employer to whom notice of an assessment or a fine under this
section is given shall pay the amount of the assessment or
fine within the time
allowed in the notice.
Penalty: $10 000.
Panel has analysed the provisions for the imposition of fines under sections 70
and 71 of the Act (now replaced by sections 72J
and 72K) in such earlier cases
Handrail & Balustrade v. WorkCover
[2008] SAWLRP 6
A-G Security Group v. WorkCover
[2008] SAWLRP 14
Services v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP
Australian Independent
Contractors & Ors v. WorkCover
[2012] SAWLRP 1.
It is not necessary
to repeat those discussions in detail, except to emphasise that the decision to
impose a fine is a matter for
discretion. The discretion is not at large but
must be exercised in accordance with proper principle. The decision-maker
(identified
in the Act as “the Corporation”) must take into account
the subject-matter, scope and purpose of the discretion and give
consideration to any relevant matter (whether aggravating or mitigating) and
exclude consideration of any irrelevant matters
in the exercise of the
discretion. This includes all relevant material in the possession of the
decision-maker and any relevant further
material the employer seeks to place in
front of the decision-maker. In a high-volume decision-making environment where
the designated
decision-maker necessarily acts in the exercise of a discretion
through servants or agents, it is proper and to be expected that
guidelines will be provided to assist in the task, but not in such a way as to
fetter the ability to give fair consideration
to each individual case on its
. WorkCover’s letter of 3 March 2011 set out at [
examination of the legislative provisions shows that the purpose of the
discretion to impose a fine in this case is to penalise
the furnishing of
wilfully false or negligently inaccurate returns by registered employers, and,
by the provision of that deterrent,
to encourage all employers to take seriously
the requirements of section 70 and conscientiously comply with those
requirements.
Australian Independent Contractors
, the Panel
“It is difficult to see that this purpose is furthered
by imposing fines on the applicants in this case. Neither wilful falsity
negligent inaccuracy is involved. WorkCover and the applicants have been in
discussions (even, as we have seen, litigation) for
many years on these matters.
The applicants and their Odco affiliates have been in both discussions and
litigation with various authorities
throughout Australia for many years and, it
must be said, with some success. The case of
, which in many
ways can be seen to have triggered the current bout of activity culminating in
these proceedings, was the first definitive
litigation on the Odco system in
South Australia and we do not doubt the applicants’ sincerity in thinking
it was wrongly decided.
“When registered employers have been open about their position and have
an arguable case, as we respectfully consider the applicants
did, we should be
slow to impose fines on them for seeking to exercise their rights as they see
them, even if they turn out to be
are some parallels in the present case. There is no evidence that the applicant
set out to defraud the Compensation Fund. Wilful
falsity does not seem to be
involved. The applicant did not consult WorkCover about the matter, and even if
it had it might not have
accepted WorkCover’s advice, but at least the
present dispute would have been resolved very much sooner. Was negligent
the result? Evidently, the applicant was confident enough of its
reading of regulation 5(1)(f) that it did not feel the need to consult
WorkCover, but we do not know when, if ever, Mr Tropeano turned his mind to the
question, or indeed whether he ever read the regulation
at all prior to the
WorkCover audit in 2010, nor when he first sought legal advice on it. However,
there was an arguable case, ably
argued by Mr Rossi, which has succeeded in some
limited respects, although not on the main point. Moreover, the main issue was
free of authority
notwithstanding the regulation being in substantially the same form for a
quarter of a century. It is up to Mr Tropeano to decide
whether the
record-keeping in regard to the performers’ expenses for materials in the
future, which would be necessary to show
whether the materials input had
exceeded $50 on any given occasion, will be worth the effort.
think the justice of this case will best be served by a fairly nominal fine of
Determination
Pursuant to our delegated powers under section 72M of the Act, and subject to
the opportunity to make further submissions on the
topic of the agents’
fees as detailed in paragraph [
above, we vary the reviewable decision, being the assessment of levy dated 3
March 2011. We confirm the assessment itself and the
imposition of the penalty
interest amount, but we reduce the fine to $750.
Bob Donnelly
Elisa Pecorelli
Also published as
B.V. v Magistrates Court of
This decision was
later overturned by the Supreme Court, but on other grounds, and without comment
on this topic:
Manpower Services v. WorkCover
[2011] SASC
We note the Panel had
occasion to consider deemed workers under regulation 5(1)(f) in
Group of Hotels v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2002] SAWLRP 4
, but not in the
context of the supply of materials.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (276 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter