URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCRP/1995/522.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:09:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jones v SA Health Commission (Tregenza Ave Aged Care) (No.2) [1995] SAWCRP 522 (10 October 1995)
[1995] SAWCRP 522
Review Officer
Catchwords:
Lump sum compensation for
non-economic loss — assessed at nil — credibility of worker —
medical evidence —
whether lumbar condition congenital and compensable
aggravations resolved — decision to reject claim confirmed.
RE: JONES AND SOUTH AUSTRALIAN HEALTH COMMISSION (TREGENZA AVENUE AGED
CARE CENTRE)
(1995) 8 WCRP Determination 95-0522
See further,
Jones v. Tregenza Avenue Aged Care Centre
SAWCAT 88 (McCusker
Determination No. 95-0522
Compensation Review Panel
JONES AND SA HEALTH
(TREGENZA AVENUE AGED CARE CENTRE)
(06705539/01/03)
Determination of Review Officer made
on 10th October, 1995
(Hearings 6th September, 3rd November,
13th December, 1994, 8th February, 28th April, 1st May and 8th May,
Final Submission received 11th July,
Review Officer LePoidevin
This is the determination of an application for review
lodged on 13th July, 1994 by Christine Jones as worker under a contract of
service with Tregenza Avenue Aged Care Centre as employer. The application
seeks a review pursuant to the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
(“the Act”) of a decision made on 7th July, 1994 by the Lyell McEwin
Health Service to assess the worker’s claim
for non-economic loss pursuant
of the Act at nil.
The worker was
represented by Ms Ingrid Condon of counsel from Duncan & Hannon, solicitors.
The exempt employer was represented
by Mr Wayne Lines of counsel, from the Crown
Solicitors Office.
Pursuant to
Section 96(1a)
of the Act, the parties
produced and placed in evidence before me the following relevant
Medical report
of Dr Trbovic dated 7th October, 1994 together with his handwritten notes.
Medical reports
of Dr Hoole dated 13th January, 1993 and 11th January, 1995.
Medical report
of Mr Wickham dated 25th February, 1993.
Medical reports
of Mr R Bauze dated 9th September, 1992, 16th November and 20th December,
Medical reports
of Mr A R Girgis dated 25th August, 1992 and 11th May, 1994.
Diagnositic
reports of Dr Benson & Partners dated 22nd November, 1991 and Dr Jones &
Partners dated 12th April, 1994.
In response to a request for
further information from me by letter dated 3rd July, 1995, the decision
maker’s solicitors provided
the following extra materials:
Disability and Claim for Compensation dated 28th March, 1991, together with
letter of acceptance dated 24th April, 1990.
Disability and Claim for Compensation dated 24th September, 1991, together with
letter of acceptance dated 4th October,
Disability and Claim for Compensation dated 11th November, 1991, together with
letter of acceptance dated 11th November,
Disability and Claim for Compensation dated 28th July, 1992, together with
letter from SGIC advising that the claim had
been received.
response to the same request the worker’s solicitors provided a copy of a
letter of acceptance from SGIC dated 8th February,
information that I sought was to determine the history of the worker’s
compensable disabilities. It was unclear as
the evidence had stood, whether,
for example, the claim for compensation dated 26th January, 1990 was accepted as
a compensable disability.
The claim form was never provided to me, however an
acceptance letter dated 8th February, 1990 discloses it was a compensable
disability.
I set out below the decision dated 7th July, 1994 that is the
subject of the application for review:
“Dear Mrs Jones
Re: Your worker’s compensation claim
I refer to the letter of your solicitors, Duncan and Hannon, requesting that
your employer, Tregenza Aged Care, assess that you have
a disability of the
lower back and lumbar spine in accordance with
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Take notice that pursuant to
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act
it is determined by your employer that you have a NIL
entitlement.
The facts upon which this determination is made are as follows:
a) the contents of and the opinion expressed in the report of Mr Peter Wickham
dated 25 February, 1993;
b) the contents of and the opinion expressed in the report of Mr Robert J Bauze
dated 9 September, 1992
c) the contents of and the opinion expressed in the report of Dr Luban Trbovic
dated 7 October, 1992;
d) the determination of Review Officer Pnevmatikos dated 22 July, 1993 and in
particular her finding that you are “suffering
from a degenerative disc
condition which I note is no longer compensable as the aggravations experienced
by (you) in (your) employment
is of a temporary nature”, and her
confirmation of the decision of the exempt employer that you ceased to be
incapacitated
by any injury sustained to your lumbar spine on 24 September,
The conclusions I have drawn from those facts are:
a) that any disability which you presently suffer of your lower back and lumbar
spine is not compensable;
b) that you have no entitlement pursuant to
of the said Act for any
disability of your lower back and lumbar spine.”
The usual and proper rights for review accompanied this
The worker’s back injury has been the subject of an
earlier determination by my colleague Review Officer Pnevmatikos. Review
Officer Pnevmatikos published a determination on 22nd July, 1993 (Determination
No 93-0475;
[1993] SAWCRP 475)
wherein she affirmed the decision of the Lyell
McEwin Hospital in regard to a discontinuance of weekly payments pursuant to
Section 36(1)(b)
of the Act. She also had cause to consider and determine an
application for review dealing with the rejection of a non-organic claim
compensation.
I have taken into consideration the findings of my
colleague, however as the worker gave her evidence before me
propose to make my own findings of fact, notwithstanding that they do not appear
to differ from those of my colleague.
I make the following findings of
In January, 1990, the worker tripped and fell over an industrial
cleaning hose and she sustained injuries. In particular, she sustained
her left buttock radiating to her left knee. She did not take time off work,
but did file a Notice of Disability or Claim
for Compensation. I make this
finding of fact based on upon the worker’s evidence and from an
examination of documents before
me and also the history given to various medical
experts. Before departing from this incident, it is of note the worker filed a
Claim for Compensation on 11th November, 1991 being a document produced in the
request by me in July, 1995. In that Claim for Compensation
the worker asserted
an injury on 7th November, 1991 being a recurrence of an earlier injury on 26th
January, 1990.
I find that the worker sustained a compensable disability
on 27th March, 1990 when her foot slipped whilst wringing out a mop in a
I find that she had two days off work. I make this finding based on the
worker’s evidence consistent with the findings
of my colleague and the
histories given to various medical practitioners.
I find the worker
sustained a compensable disability in the form of lower back injury whilst
lifting a washing basket on 24th September,
1991. This claim was accepted on
4th October, 1991 and I find the worker was incapacitated for approximately
three and a half weeks.
I make this finding based upon the worker’s
evidence, consistent with the earlier findings of my colleague Review Officer
Pnevmatikos, together with the history given to various medical
I find that the worker sustained a further compensable
disability to the lower back on 11th November, 1991 when she again sustained
back pain due to bending and lifting. This claim was accepted on 28th November,
1991. Following this compensable disability she
returned to work in about
February, 1992. I find this finding based on the worker’s evidence, which
is consistent with the
earlier finding of fact by my colleague.
November, 1991 a CT scan was taken of the worker’s lower back. The report
of Dr Benson & Partners provides,
“At L4-5, there was a diffuse annular bulge
posteriorly.”
The worker seeks assessment for non-economic loss for
the impairment of the function of her lower back and lumber spine.
Girgis and Bauze assess the disability at 25% and 10% respectively. Mr Bauze is
of the view that the worker’s lumbar disability
is consequent upon spinal
degeneration. He is of the view that the work incidents were of temporary
effect only and have not contributed
to the worker’s lumbar spinal
condition. He says in short, it is a degenerate condition not contributed to by
the work incidents
and, notwithstanding the worker’s back condition was
asymptomatic before the compensable disabilities, these have not materially
contributed to her condition, ie the disability is wholly attributable to her
degenerate condition. Mr Girgis on the other hand,
is of the view that the
worker suffers a disc injury in the lower lumbar spine which is caused by the
fall during work in January,
The differing views of Drs Girgis
and Bauze provides the hub of the dispute.
I accept Mr Bauze’s view
of the matter. I do so because the initial fall did not cause any time off and
there was only a short
time off in the March, 1990 incident. In my view those
incidents were both reflective and supportive of Dr Bauze’s view that
there was a pre-existing degenerate condition in the form of disc pathology. Mr
Bauze was of the view that disc bulges are usually
the result of a degenerate
process or a significant trauma. I accept that view and I accept also that a
disc bulge is the appropriate
pathology surrounding the worker’s
condition. I accept Mr Bauze’s view that the disc bulge is not consequent
upon significant
trauma as all the compensable disabilities were not traumatic.
Rather they were consistent with temporary aggravations of a degenerate
This opinion is supported by Mr Peter Wickham in a report dated 25th February,
1995 wherein he states:
“I believe that the diagnosis of the problem with Ms Jones is largely
the fact that she has degenerative changes in the low
lumbar spine, in
particular with minor degeneration in the remainder of the axial
Later in the same report Mr Wickham states:
“I believe that Ms Jones did suffer from exacerbations of back pain in
January 1990 and March 1990 and September 1991. These
incidents may have
involved additional muscular ligamentous strain or perhaps strain of the annulus
of the L4-5 disc. At the present
time she has a very good range of movement
........ Ms Jones will suffer from back pain of minor degree on a fairly
regular basis
relating to degenerative spondylosis ....... and I do not believe
that there is any significant permanent disability in relation
to the particular
incidents described.”
Finally, Mr Wickham agreed with the views of
of the Act includes secondary disabilities which
are defined in
of the Act as a “disability that is, or results
from, the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation, deterioration or recurrence
of a prior disability.”
If a worker suffering from a pre-existing
degenerate back suffers a worsening of that condition, then it falls within the
of secondary disability. The threshold of what constitutes an
aggravation etc for the purposes of a secondary disability was considered
Tribunal in
Cumming -v- The Corporation (Fasson Pty Ltd)
Honour Judge McCusker presiding) A12/1990;
[1990] SAWCAT 12
where the Tribunal
adopted the test of material contribution. It has more recently been adopted by
the Tribunal in
Monroe Australia -v- Campbell
(His Honour Judge
Cawthorne presiding) A46/1995;
[1995] SAWCAT 46
where the Tribunal adopted the
observations of Lord Reid in
Bonnington Castings Ltd -v-
(1956) Appeal Cases 613;
[1956] UKHL 1
where it said;
“a contribution which comes within the exception
de minimis non curat
is not material, but I think that any contribution which does not fall
within that exception must be material.”
At the end of the day
this is a question of causation, and common sense. In this instance the worker
was not doing heavy work, had
not been working for the employer long and the
compensable disability did not arise from traumatic incidents. It is clear that
condition pre-existed and that these events were not in any way contributory
to any pathology or state of affairs, ie it does not
satisfy the test of
material contribution, and is similar to the situation in
Commonwealth -v-
(1981) 35 ALR 369
[1981] FCA 88.
Mr Lines earnestly
submitted to me that I am estopped from making discrete findings from my
colleague Review Officer Pnevmatikos.
He did so because he sought to raise an
estoppel argument, barring me from forming a view contrary to my colleague. He
did so because
my colleague in her determination at page 5 said:
“I consider that the medical evidence before me over whelming supports
the position of the exempt employer that the worker has
ceased to be
incapacitated as a result of the compensable disability sustained by her on 24th
September, 1991...... Consequently,
does the view of both Mr Wickham and Mr
Bauze that the injury sustained by the worker in her employment were temporary
aggravations
and exacerbations, and that any incapacity to the worker is
currently suffering from of an organic nature relates back to the degenerate
disc condition and not the consequence temporary aggravation suffered by the
worker in the course of her employment.”
At page 6 of her
determination, my colleague said:
“I find that the worker is suffering from a degenerative disc condition
which I note is no longer compensable as the aggravations
experienced by the
worker in her employment were of a temporary nature.”
My colleague
confirmed the decision of the Lyell McEwin Hospital to cease weekly payments
based on a cessation of the incapacitating
disability.
It is trite law
and Ms Condon correctly pointed to this, namely that there is a distinct
difference between a cessation of incapacity
and the co-existence of an ongoing
disability. That is quite so, however I find favour with the opinions of Messrs
Bauze and Wickham
and also with the views of my colleague. I do not feel
compelled to rule on the question of an estoppel for I have come to the same
conclusion as my colleague independently of her.
Finally, when preferring
the views of Mr Bauze in preference to Mr Girgis, I find favour in his evidence
that the disc condition is
due to a degenerate state rather than the fall, and
the various periods of incapacity were reflective of the degeneration and not
causative of it.
Mr Girguis was of the view that the fall at work in
January, 1990 was the precipitating cause of the worker’s lumbar back
disability.
Mr Bauze was of the view that that could not be the cause of the
disc bulge as the worker kept working for at least a further six
prefer Mr Bauze’s view of the subject.
In the event that I am
wrong, I feel compelled to comment upon Mr Girgis’ assessment. He was of
the view that as there are
five lumbar discs and one is affected, the worker
should receive 20% assessment together with a further 5% for her loss of
to work as a cleaner. In my view Mr Girgis’ assessment method is
errant. It follows then that even if I were to have accepted
views as to causation of the worker’s lumbar back condition, I would be
compelled to assess to at no greater
than 20%. In any event that issue is of no
moment given my preference to the views of Messrs Wickham and
DETERMINATION
I affirm the decision of the
exempt employer.
Any appeal against this determination must be lodged
with the Workers’ Compensation Appeal Tribunal within one month of the
receipt of this determination. Enquiries about appeals may be directed to the
Registrar of the Tribunal, Riverside Centre, North
Terrace, Adelaide (Phone:
207 0999) and forms for appeal are available from the same
G LePoidevin
Review Officer
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (68.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter