URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACorC/2025/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:54:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
RJR ([2025] SACC 23) [2025] SACorC 23 (28 August 2025)
CORONERS COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
[2025] SACC 23
Inquest Findings of her Honour Deputy State Coroner
28 August 2025
CORONIAL INQUEST
Examination of the cause and circumstances of the death of a 65-year-old man
who was serving a sentence of imprisonment for serious
offences when he was
diagnosed with metastatic rectal cancer. The inquest examined the standard of
medical care provided and whether
there was an undue delay in diagnosis.
aged 65 years of Northfield, died at The Queen Elizabeth Hospital on
10 November 2022. The cause of his death was metastatic
rectal cancer with
extensive lung metastases.
Circumstances
of death as set out in these findings.
No recommendations made.
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
[2025] SACC 23
Introduction and reason for inquest
(Mr R) was 65 years of age when he died on 10 November 2022. At the time of his
death, Mr R was a parolee receiving palliative
care at The Queen Elizabeth
Hospital. His death was expected following a diagnosis of metastatic rectal
cancer in August 2021.
R was lawfully incarcerated from 12 October 2013 until 9
2022 as he had been sentenced to imprisonment following a plea of guilty to a
serious sexual offence.
R’s full name has not been published in this Finding to protect the
identity of the victim of his sexual offending in accordance
Evidence Act 1929
R’s death was the subject of an inquest as there was reason to believe
that the cause of his death, or a possible cause of
his death, arose, or may
have arisen, during his incarceration. His death is therefore a death in custody
pursuant to
Coroners Act 2003
and an inquest into the
cause and circumstances of his death is mandatory.
are the findings of that inquest.
R was born on 26 November 1956 in
He was the eldest of six
siblings and spent his early life in the Riverland area. He did not enjoy
school and consequently entered
the workforce at a young age. He was a builder
by trade and gained employment on commercial fishing charters and at the local
1996, Mr R married and went on to have three children with his spouse, one of
whom was stillborn.
In 1997, he
sustained a back injury at work and retired on a disability support
R often expressed concern to his spouse in relation to his bowel
However, the medical
records received into evidence indicate that Mr R did not convey this ongoing
concern to the general practitioner
he attended from 27 May 2011 until
11 October 2013. Interrogation of the general practitioner’s medical
records indicated
that there was only one complaint made relating to bowel
function, which was a complaint of constipation with associated bleeding
October 2011.
late 2013, a young person alleged that Mr R had committed sexual offences
against them.
Mr R was arrested on
12 October 2013 and, after the matter had been listed for trial, entered a plea
of guilty. On 5 June 2015
he was sentenced to imprisonment for 12 years
and 7 months, with a non-parole period of 8 years, commencing from the date of
He was released on
parole on 9 November 2022. Mr R’s spouse ended their marriage during his
incarceration.
medical history was obtained from Mr R shortly after he was taken into custody
by staff at the South Australian Prison Health Service
(SAPHS). No bowel
related conditions or complaints were documented at that time.
R’s general medical history included paroxysmal supraventricular
tachycardia, type 2 diabetes mellitus, gastro-oesophageal
disease, osteoarthritis, depression, iron deficiency and
There is no evidence
before the Court that any malignancy of the bowel had been identified or
suspected prior to Mr R’s incarceration.
Cause of death
R’s death was reported to the State Coroner by way of a medical deposition
signed by Dr David Tong.
Dr Tong opined that Mr R’s death occurred as a result of metastatic rectal
cancer with extensive lung metastases. The medical
documentation tendered
during this inquest is consistent with the stated cause of death. I accept the
opinion of Dr Tong and find
that the cause of Mr R’s death was
metastatic rectal cancer with extensive lung metastases.
treatment while incarcerated
is generally accepted that prisoners are entitled to a standard of medical care
in custody that is equivalent to that available
in the community. The advanced
stage of Mr R’s cancer at diagnosis necessitates consideration of whether
the delay in diagnosis
was attributable to any deficiency in the medical care
provided, or whether there were missed opportunities for an earlier diagnosis.
Thomas Turnbull, then Medical Director of the SAPHS, provided an affidavit to
the Court wherein he detailed the medical care provided
to Mr R during his
incarceration, irrespective of whether he was housed within a public or private
correctional facility.
Court has also received into evidence, and I have had regard to, the original
records of the SAPHS.
first significant medical event during Mr R’s incarceration was a
myocardial infarction in 2014. Subsequently, he presented
to hospital with
cardiac-related issues on several occasions. As these presentations are not
pertinent to the cause or circumstances
of death they will not be detailed
Relevantly,
however, Mr R underwent a faecal occult blood test in March 2015 while housed in
the Mount Gambier Prison.
specimens were collected and submitted to SA Pathology for analysis, one dated
28 March 2015 and the other dated 29 March 2015.
The 28 March 2015 specimen
returned a positive result, whereas the 29 March 2015 specimen returned a
negative result.
pathology report read:
‘This positive result is consistent
with bleeding from the large bowel and/or rectum. A positive test should be
followed by
a definitive investigation, preferably colonoscopy.’
results were considered by Dr Kavanagh on 5 May 2015, who noted that the result
was ‘positive/negative’ and ordered
that a repeat test be performed.
repeat test was performed which returned a negative result in August
The pathology report
included a comment that a negative result does not rule out intermittent or very
low amounts of bleeding, or
bleeding from the upper GI tract.
does not appear that any further investigations were recommended or conducted
following this negative result. While Mr R continued
to consult with Dr
Kavanagh after this date, and prior to his transfer to the Port August Prison,
there is no record of any complaints
of gastrointestinal symptoms or rectal
bleeding to Dr Kavanagh.
January 2018, Mr R was transferred to the Port August Prison, a custodial
facility managed by the Department for Correctional
August 2018, Mr R was clinically assessed following an unconscious collapse
preceded by dizziness. It was noted on examination
that he was experiencing
abdominal pain and right iliac fossa tenderness. Blood tests revealed raised
inflammatory markers. These
symptoms were further investigated with a CT scan
of the abdomen and pelvis which demonstrated thickening of the appendix and
inflammatory
change adjacent to this in keeping with appendicitis.
decision was made to manage Mr R’s suspected appendicitis conservatively
with intravenous antibiotics as his atrial fibrillation
was being treated with
the anticoagulant medication apixaban. Surgical intervention would have
required temporary cessation of anticoagulation.
R consented to a colonoscopy, which was ordered to exclude appendiceal orifice
obstruction as a cause of the
appendicitis.
colonoscopy was arranged for 4 October 2018. However, this procedure was
postponed as Mr R reported that the kitchen did not provide
him with appropriate
meals and as such, his bowel preparation was incomplete. The colonoscopy was
instead performed on 25 October
2018 at the Port Lincoln Hospital.
Unfortunately, this procedure was deemed incomplete due to poor bowel
preparation, resulting
in the colonoscope only being advanced to the descending
colon. A repeat colonoscopy was recommended, but declined by Mr R, who
documentation to acknowledge his decision to refuse the procedure contrary to
medical advice. Mr R’s symptoms reportedly
resolved, and he was
discharged to the Port Lincoln Prison.
April 2019, Mr R was again offered an appendectomy due to reports of right iliac
fossa pain. He declined, stating that he did
not feel his symptoms were
sufficiently severe as to warrant surgical
intervention.
June 2020, routine investigations revealed blood in Mr R’s urine and
faeces. Appointments were made for Mr R to undergo
a renal ultrasound and a
repeat colonoscopy.
underwent the ultrasound, but declined the
colonoscopy.
Mr R is noted
to have declined the colonoscopy in the hope that a reduction in his apixaban
dosage might alleviate his symptoms.
A note recorded by Dr Dhaliwal dated 10
August 2020 stated that Mr R:
‘...decided NOT to pursue any
investigations. ALL RISKS explained!’
CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis was performed on 26 August 2020 in lieu of the
recommended colonoscopy. The clinical information
section of the report
included reference to the positive faecal blood test and that the patient was
‘not keen on colonoscopy’.
This investigation did not result in the
detection of any abnormality relating to the bowel.
May 2021, Mr R reported rectal bleeding, which he stated had occurred
intermittently for years but was worsening. On 17 June 2021,
colonoscopy was
again recommended. On this occasion, Mr R advised that he would now be willing
to undergo the procedure.
17 August 2021, Mr R underwent a colonoscopy which revealed a large necrotic
rectal mass.
Histological
examination of the tissue obtained by biopsy confirmed that the mass was
adenocarcinoma. A CT scan was performed which
demonstrated liver and lung
metastases. The investigations conclusively established a diagnosis of
metastatic rectal carcinoma.
R was housed at the Adelaide Remand
from 16 September 2021 to
facilitate his medical treatment at the Royal Adelaide
21 September 2021, Mr R’s case was discussed at the Royal Adelaide
Hospital’s colorectal multidisciplinary team meeting
and a treatment plan
was developed which commenced with induction chemotherapy followed by re-staging
scans to evaluate the progression
of the malignancy and the response to
R completed six cycles of induction chemotherapy. A CT scan performed in
February 2022 showed a partial response to treatment
including a significant
reduction in the size of the lung and liver
metastases.
Mr R’s case
was revisited at a colorectal multidisciplinary team meeting on 22 February 2022
and decision was made to switch
to radiotherapy with adjuvant capecitabine, an
oral chemotherapy
medication.
24 April 2022, Mr R presented to the Royal Adelaide Hospital following a
witnessed fall in which he hit his head and fractured
the base of the fifth
metatarsal and cuboid bone of his left
Upon his return to the
Adelaide Remand Centre, he was seen by
During this
consultation, Mr R advised that he did not wish to undergo further radiotherapy,
citing difficulty with the prison transport
arrangements. Specifically, he
reported that getting on and off the bus caused him difficulty due to his
fractured foot. Mr R’s
chemoradiation medication was ceased in accordance
with his wishes.
R was reviewed by an oncologist on 10 May 2022. He reported that he had
cancelled his final two radiotherapy sessions because
of the pain caused by his
fractured foot and his concerns regarding
transportation.
Enquires were
directed as to whether alternative transport could be arranged to facilitate
completion of his radiotherapy. There
is no documentation in relation to
whether these enquiries were in fact made, or whether any alternative transport
options were made
available. However, there is no evidence to suggest that his
radiotherapy was discontinued prematurely due to a lack of access to
R underwent a flexible sigmoidoscopy to inspect his cancer in June
On 1 July 2022, his case
was revisited at the colorectal multidisciplinary team meeting and a
recommendation was made to commence
second line
chemotherapy.
29 July 2022, after a further CT and MRI scan, Mr R discussed his goals of care
with the Central Adelaide Palliative Care
He indicated that he
did not consent to cardiopulmonary resuscitation or an intensive care admission,
and that he wished to focus
on comfort care. He also expressed a desire to be
transferred to the Port Lincoln Prison where his friends were
This request was
granted, and he was transferred on 19 August 2022.
8 September 2022, a blood test revealed an infection and Mr R was administered
antibiotics.
12 September 2022, Mr R was reviewed by a medical practitioner who described him
as cachectic. The second line chemotherapy recommended
by the multidisciplinary
team was not able to be progressed due to his poor health and
further medical review occurred on 13 October 2022. It was noted that Mr
R’s condition had massively deteriorated and that
A medical request for
transfer to Adelaide was made,
and Mr R was transferred to Yatala Labour Prison the following
On 15 October 2022,
he was taken to the Royal Adelaide Hospital where he reiterated his earlier
directive that he wished to receive
ward-based measures
He was noted to be
tachycardic, hypotensive and hypoxic. The impression was of symptomatic anaemia
from metastatic rectal cancer.
Mr R was administered a blood transfusion and
then discharged to Yatala Labour
R reported a fever on 27 October 2022 and an x-ray was performed to rule out any
new serious issues.
4 November 2022, Mr R was taken to The Queen Elizabeth Hospital after
experiencing chest pain and
breathlessness.
A CT angiogram
revealed significant progression of pulmonary metastases, and a chest x-ray
showed progression of pulmonary lesions.
New hypoxia was identified, which was
thought to be secondary to the progression of the
Mr R was immediately
admitted under the palliative care team and administered medications to ease his
was noted by hospital personnel that Mr R had verbalised a desire to die as a
free man. Mr R had filed an application for release
on parole on 12 September
2022, stating that he knew what he did was wrong, and he was ‘so
sorry’. Following advice
in relation to Mr R’s medical
condition, the Parole Board granted the order for release on 9 November
10 November 2022, Mr R was noted to be unresponsive and comfort care was
commenced to ensure that he was not in distress. Mr R
was certified life
extinct at 6:30pm on 10 November 2022.
death was reported to the State Coroner and police attended The Queen Elizabeth
Hospital. An examination of the body was conducted,
and no signs or violence or
injury were noted. Mr R was identified via fingerprints and visual
identification.
Timeliness of diagnosis
Brevet Sergeant Tiss of South Australia Police was appointed as the
investigating officer in relation to the coronial investigation
of the death of
Mr R. She provided a detailed report to the State Coroner in which she
interrogated the medical records and comprehensively
outlined the medical
treatment received by Mr R while in custody. She described the care and
treatment provided to Mr R by the Department
for Correctional Services and SAPHS
as optimal, and perhaps of a higher standard than he would have received had he
been residing
in the community.
R’s malignancy was advanced at diagnosis. This indicated that the disease
was present and potentially detectable at an earlier
stage. It cannot be
determined with certainty when he first developed rectal cancer, or at what
point in time it could have been
detected. The first report of rectal bleeding
was made in 2011. In March 2015, Mr R returned a positive faecal blood test
was documented to be consistent with, although not diagnostic of, bleeding
from the large bowel and/or rectum. By May 2021, Mr R
reported that he had been
experiencing rectal bleeding for years. However, the CT scan of his chest,
abdomen and pelvis on 26 August
2020 did not provide evidence of any bowel
abnormality.
colonoscopy was recommended by the pathologist reporting on the March 2015
faecal blood test results; colonoscopy being a definitive
investigation to
determine the source of rectal bleeding. However, it appears that Dr Kavanagh
made a clinical decision to order
a repeat blood test instead of a colonoscopy.
The notes of that consultation refer to the blood test results as being
positive/negative,
likely due to the positive result on one day and a negative
result on the next. I make no criticism of the decision of Dr Kavanagh
commence with a non-invasive investigation in these circumstances.
incomplete colonoscopy was performed in 2018. The evidence does not permit any
inference to be drawn as to the reason for Mr R’s
poor bowel preparation
on that occasion. As Mr R declined a repeat procedure, no finding can be made
as to the presence or absence
of rectal cancer at that time. Mr R again refused
a colonoscopy in 2020 and did not provide his verbal consent until 17 June 2021.
Mr R’s rectal cancer was present and capable of detection via colonoscopy
prior to 17 June 2021, any delay in diagnosis was
attributable to Mr R
declining the recommended investigations.
his verbal consent, Mr R waited two months for his colonoscopy. This timeframe
does not differ significantly from what
would typically be expected in a
community setting.
my opinion Mr R’s care and treatment was appropriate.
Conclusions
R was sentenced by the District Court to a period of imprisonment in respect of
a serious offence and was therefore lawfully in
custody from 12 October 2013
until his release on parole on 9 November 2022.
find that Mr R’s cause of death was as Dr Tong declared; that is,
metastatic rectal cancer with extensive lung metastases.
find that Mr R’s cause of death is likely to have arisen during his period
of lawful incarceration.
investigation did not establish any issues that contributed to the death of Mr
R, other than his refusal to undergo investigations
that may have resulted in
earlier diagnosis.
have no recommendations to make.
Keywords: Death in Custody; Prison; Natural Causes
Channel Seven Adelaide
Pty Ltd & Anor v Stockdale-Hall
[2005] SASC
Coroners Act 2003
Exhibit C1a at
Exhibit C1a at
Exhibit C1a at
Exhibit C1a at
Exhibit C1a at
Exhibit C6b at
Exhibit C2 at
This correctional
facility is privately managed and operated by G4S Custodial Services Pty Ltd:
Exhibit C4 at [4]
C9, Volume 1
Exhibit C9,
Exhibit C4 at
Letter of Mr Quentin
Ralph, 8 April 2019
of Mr Quentin Ralph, 8 April
Exhibit C9, 4 June
Exhibit C9, 8 July
Exhibit C9, 8 May 2021
& 17 June 2021
This facility is
privately managed and operated by SERCO: Exhibit C4 at
Exhibit C4 at
Exhibit C4 at
Exhibit C2 at
Exhibit C2 at
Exhibit C2 at
Exhibit C2 at
Exhibit C4 at
Exhibit C4 at
Exhibit C2 at
Exhibit C9, Volume
Exhibit C2 at [11];
Exhibit C4 at [18]
Exhibit C4 at
Exhibit C4 at
Exhibit C2 at
Exhibit C4 at
Exhibit C4 at
Exhibit C2 at
Exhibit C4 at
Exhibit C4 at
Exhibit C2 at
Exhibit C2 at
Exhibit C3 at
Exhibit C6, p19
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (336 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (308 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter