URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCT/2016/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:09:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Martin v Viterra Ltd [2016] SAWCT 4 (12 February 2016)
Martin v Viterra Ltd
[2016] SAWCT 4
COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL (SA)
MARTIN, William
Judicial Determination
4440 of 2014 and 774 of 2015
HEARING DATES:
8, 9 and 10 July, 28
and 29 October 2015
JUDGMENT OF:
Deputy President SM
DELIVERED ON:
12 February
CATCHWORDS:
Whether applicant suffered compensable
back injury and psychological sequel - If so, what duration of incapacity -
Disputed facts
: Entitlement established to weekly payments for a
closed period - S 30 Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr S
Respondent: Mr M Griffin QC
Solicitors:
Applicant: Palios Meegan
& Nicholson
Respondent: DW Fox Tucker
Martin, the applicant, claims to have suffered a back injury with psychological
sequel arising from performing his duties
of employment with the respondent on
27 May 2014. He claims weekly payments of compensation and treatment expenses
from then until
14 September 2015 when he had recovered sufficiently to secure
alternate employment.
Ltd, the respondent, rejected the claim on the primary ground that the claimed
injuries did not arise from employment. This
ground was based on information
received by the respondent to suggest a GP appointment was sought for the
applicant prior to the
alleged time of work injury. If, contrary to this ground,
causation and incapacity is established by the applicant, the respondent
maintains its opposition based on the applicant’s alleged lack of
credibility in part due to secret surveillance observations
made on 30 August
resolving this dispute the Tribunal has received evidentiary material in the
form of written statements and oral evidence from
eight lay witnesses and from
six doctors. A summary of the relevant evidence follows.
applicant had worked on a casual basis for the respondent for about 2½
years at its Wallaroo plant, after completing a previous
stint at its Mount
Gambier plant. He was then 23 years of age. At the time of alleged injury his
duties included sampling grain every
ten minutes for the presence of insects and
cleaning build-ups of chaff around an enclosed conveyor system.
the day before the alleged incident the applicant completed a 12½ hour
shift with no apparent ill effects. He commenced work
7.30 or 8.00am, and then probably attended a Toolbox meeting before attending
his station to perform his duties.
the middle of the day but before the lunch break, and while bending beneath a
low conveyor and using a broom with a 200mm handle
to sweep chaff towards a
vacuum point, he felt a sudden pain and pinching sensation in his lower back. By
then he had performed the
same bending motion at least 20 times that day. After
walking around for about 10 minutes to see if it would come good he realised
would probably need to see a doctor, and so contacted his girlfriend Shawna by
text message at 11.51am asking her to organise
a doctor’s appointment for
him after 4.00pm. By then the applicant was experiencing pain in his low back,
across his hips and
into his right leg. Until his phone records were obtained
shortly before the hearing, the applicant was unsure whether he telephoned
texted Shawna. The applicant sent a further text message to Shawna at 12:38pm
but cannot recall its content.
pain did not settle during his lunch break and by afternoon smoko at about
2:30pm the pain was a lot worse. As a result the applicant
was unable to
continue bending to sweep the chaff. He did not immediately report the injury
because he was a casual employee and
was concerned about adverse
repercussions.
as the applicant was leaving work he saw Roger Trembath, a Leading Hand in
charge of rostering, and approached him to report
the injury. They returned to
Mr Trembath’s office where the applicant gave sufficient details for Mr
Trembath to complete an
incident report form. The applicant also told Mr
Trembath that he had asked his girlfriend to make an appointment for him, but
not heard back from her. Mr Trembath then arranged for Darren Besselaar
to take the applicant to the Wallaroo Hospital to be checked
Trembath’s witness statement confirms the applicant approached him and
told him of the injury, and that he observed him to
appear “to be in
serious pain as he was walking quite slowly and as though he favoured one
Mr Trembath inserted an
injury time of about 2:15pm in the incident report form, on the basis the
applicant had told him at about
4.00pm the injury had happened a “few
hours” earlier. Mr Trembath’s witness statement was not
challenged.
applicant’s evidence is that he did not contact the GP’s clinic
himself and that he did not tell Shawna the nature
of his problem. He used his
mobile phone to contact her, and based on his phone records he sent her a text
message instead of speaking
with her. He said this was due to the poor coverage
in the grain bunker he was working in. He did not use a landline available in
supervisor’s office as he was not aware he could do so. There is no
evidence from the respondent to suggest he did use one
of their office
telephones.
attending at the hospital the applicant was taken to the GP's clinic following a
phone call between the hospital and the clinic.
While in the clinic’s
waiting area the applicant was approached by the clinic’s practice
manager, Ms Clayson who made
a comment to the effect of apologising for not
being able to give him an earlier appointment. This took place within the
of Mr Besselaar who immediately became suspicious of the
applicant’s reported timing of the incident.
applicant saw Dr Das, and was given a certificate advising him to rest from work
for one week.
28 May the applicant spoke with Gary Elefsen who suggested he go back to Dr Das
to request a certificate for light duties instead
of for rest. The
applicant’s evidence is that he felt pressured to do so but due to concern
for his job he agreed. In addition
he was told the purpose of the request was to
avoid a lost time report and that if he obtained a light duties certificate he
not have to work for the first two or three days.
on this understanding the applicant returned to Dr Das and obtained a light
duties certificate but did not attend work and was
not required to attend work
at least on 28 and 29 May. As it turned out he never returned to work, no
rehabilitation plan was put
to him and no alternate or light duties were ever
offered to him.
applicant claims he continued to be troubled by ongoing pain and restriction of
movement of his back. A CT scan found evidence
of some degeneration and
abnormality but no nerve impingement from disc material. He was prescribed
opioid medications until they
were later restricted, and later was prescribed
antidepressants.
the reports of high pain levels the applicant’s condition varied. He said
he still tried to go about his daily activities
and do as much as he could. Some
activities he chose not to do out of concern that he would hurt his back
further, such as using
a lawn mower. He ceased some car repair or maintenance
work although there were simple things he continued to do.
applicant had two private physiotherapy sessions but ceased after finding out
the respondent was not paying the accounts, as he
could not personally afford
the service.
applicant sold assets including his car and fishing boat due to a lack of income
and delay in receiving Centrelink benefits. He
stopped going fishing every day
or whenever he had the chance, due to the injury although he had been out a
couple of times with
Surveillance
observations were made of the applicant in his front yard on 30 August 2014.
These showed him assisting another man performing
some activities to reattach
part of a mudguard to a small car. Part way through these observations the
applicant attempted to cover
much of his face. Later observations that same
morning show the applicant assisting in washing the car in a commercial car wash
first questioned about the identity of one of the people in the video the
applicant confirmed that it did look like him. When
asked the same question two
more times the applicant gave the same answer. When asked this question a fourth
time the applicant said
it could be him. When asked again later, he said he had
a memory of it being him. When the conceded identity point was further laboured
the applicant gave equivocal answers and was unwilling to confirm the image was
of him. But during closing submissions he readily
conceded he was the object of
the observations.
surveillance shows the applicant crouching, squatting or bending near the front
passenger side wheel arch and using a small hand
drill. At one point they show
him flexing forward to pick up an object from the ground. The applicant appears
to be moving without
any apparent restriction although towards the end of the
observations at his home he appears to be slightly limping while walking.
car wash the applicant is again seen performing light activities including
vacuuming, but is leaning against or holding parts
of the car while doing so.
The limping is clearly apparent and more pronounced than earlier.
are four time gaps in the observations at the car wash. After the first gap the
applicant is seen limping. The second gap of
a few seconds is while he is
walking. After the third gap he is shown centre screen rubbing his low lack with
his left hand, then
walking with a limp. This vision only lasts for six seconds
before it cuts out again. The applicant accepts the respondent’s
explanation for the final gap, as being due to the operator moving position
because the applicant briefly looked in his direction.
The discontinuous
observations from a time when the applicant was performing minor physical
activities and obviously limping, indicate
the recorded observations present an
incomplete impression of the applicant’s movements that morning. The
surveillance does
not demonstrate to me an absence of any functional
restriction, as submitted by the respondent.
Hornhardt lived with the applicant on 27 May. Her evidence is that she only made
phone calls to the GP’s clinic after
12 noon because of a recent request
from the applicant to do so. Ms Hornhardt said she did not know why Mr Martin
wanted the appointment
as he did not let her know. She was told by the clinic he
could have an appointment at 1.45pm but not one after 4.00pm. She declined
offer. She used her own phone for this call, as confirmed by her tendered
telephone records. Because she was not able to secure
a suitable appointment she
did not respond to Mr Martin. She denied making any call to the surgery in
the morning and specifically
just before 8:30am.
Clayson took a phone call from a person at the hospital at about 4.30pm on the
and was told that a ‘work injury’ would attend. She
was told the person’s name was William Martin. Ms Clayson mentioned
to one of the receptionists, Melissa Turner. Another receptionist questioned
whether that was the patient that had been trying
to have an appointment all
he had been unable to secure an appointment earlier in the day Ms Clayson became
concerned because he had a work injury and
the clinic had a strict policy of
seeing work injuries promptly. The receptionists assured her there had been no
mention of work
injury prior to that point. Ms Turner then told her that the
patient’s partner had called earlier in the day and that he had
called himself before lunch. As a result Ms Clayson spoke to Mr Martin in the
waiting room when he arrived regarding the previous
calls, to which he responded
that he did not know who had been calling.
Turner’s evidence was reliant on some partial notes she took soon after
the incident and more fully some days later after
the respondent’s
officers had been in contact with the clinic. Her evidence is that an
unidentified woman rang just before
8:30am requesting an appointment for her
partner after 4.00pm. Ms Turner later took Ms Hornhardt’s call at 12.09pm
Mr Martin’s name was given together with a request for an
appointment after 4.30pm. In the later discussion with Ms Clayson
4.30pm, Ms Turner said she recognised Ms Hornhardt as the 8.30am caller from her
voice in the latter call. In response to
a leading question from Mr Griffin she
agreed she was good at recognising voices.
Ms Turner’s oral evidence she initially said Ms Hornhardt specifically
confirmed to her at 12.09pm that she was the person
who rang before 8.30am. When
asked this question a second time, Ms Turner said she “assumed” that
was what Ms Hornhardt
was saying. The first version was then put in a leading
question, to which she simply answered yes, without any explanation for her
admitted assumption.
Turner’s evidence is that five to ten minutes after Ms Hornhardt’s
12.09pm call a man rang to say his partner had tried
to make an appointment for
him, that he wanted an appointment after 4.30pm, that his name was William
Martin and the problem was
a back injury. She put him on hold while she
discussed the request with a nurse. She came back to Mr Martin and offered him a
appointment. As this was unsuitable because he had to work, she suggested
he instead go to the hospital after work.
cross examination Ms Turner agreed the 12.09pm caller did not make any reference
to an earlier phone call that day, and agreed
that she wasn’t very clear
when first interviewed about linking the 8.30am call to the 12.09pm call.
Collins, the respondent’s workers compensation manager, confirmed the
respondent’s general business policy of making
modified duties available
but that no offer of alternate duties was made to the applicant because the
claim was promptly rejected.
Elefsen’s relevant evidence is of regularly observing the applicant in
Wallaroo walking hunched over and limping a bit.
Besselaar confirmed his role in conveying the applicant to the local hospital
and then to the GP’s clinic. His recollection
is of Ms Clayson
apologising for not being able to offer an earlier appointment to the applicant.
Mr Besselaar’s evidence is
that while driving the applicant home he said
he didn’t know why his partner had called on his behalf but that the
appointment
requests had been for
Das saw the applicant for the first time on 27 May. Based on the history and
symptoms presented by the applicant he recommended
a week off work initially.
When the applicant returned the next day to seek an altered certificate Dr Das
complied. The applicant
next saw him on 29 May and told him he could not do
the light duties. As Dr Das thought the applicant had attempted the light duties
he certified him unfit for all duties.
Das said the applicant got a bit better over the months subsequent to the
incident, in that the range of movement improved, walking
was better and
functionality improved, but not to the extent he had expected.
Das had prescribed significant pain relieving medication, and only discontinued
these after external notification from the appropriate
authority. In rejecting
the respondent’s suggestion the applicant had been actively or
inappropriately seeking opioid medication,
Dr Das said Mr Martin had no
argument with him over reducing this type of medication although he was not
happy about it. The applicant
continued to see Dr Das, and there is no
evidence he consulted any other GP.
14 July 2014 Dr Das noted the applicant as being scared of workers compensation,
thinking he was being watched, and him being scared
of “everything”
at that stage. Dr Das observed the applicant to appear angry and frustrated at
not getting relief and
from financial pressure.
28 July Dr Das noted a report of constant issues with the applicant’s
girlfriend, and that the applicant reported he was
crying all the time. He had
sold most of his assets and could not then cope with life. The applicant felt
his relationship was also
at stake due to the pain and pressure he was under. At
most appointments the applicant appeared very upset and agitated, and was
complaining of financial stress and relationship stress. I add the
applicant’s evidence was that Shawna was doing the crying,
response to the surveillance observations Dr Das said many of the observed
movements were inconsistent with reports made to him.
In particular he agreed
the demonstrated bending and squatting indicated no restriction from back pain,
especially for example picking
a tool up from the ground with full forward
flexion. The demonstrated range of motion was much greater than at
examinations.
Dr Das noted the inconsistencies, he thought there could still be some mild
problem. Dr Das noted the applicant appeared to
be limping at times and noted
the occasion when he was seen rubbing his low back. These observations could be
consistent with back
pain and the observed activity having aggravated him.
Blakemore, psychiatrist, provided a medico-legal assessment of the
applicant’s mental state. Dr Blakemore’s opinion
applicant suffering an adjustment disorder with depressed mood, likely
attributed to the injury, lack of treatment, having
to sell possessions and the
adverse effect on his relationship. When he examined the applicant in February
2015 Dr Blakemore thought
the applicant was still too emotionally distressed to
perform any duties for the respondent.
M Clarke, psychiatrist, examined the applicant on 1 June 2015 for a medico-legal
assessment. He also formed an opinion the applicant
was suffering an adjustment
disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood. Dr Clarke obtained a history of
contributing circumstances
as including the injury, the applicant having to sell
possessions he had worked hard for, and a loss of physical abilities such as
being able to stand in a boat in rough weather fishing.
Clarke noted an improvement over the preceding months, with the
applicant’s main complaint then being of mild anxiety, anger
irritability. He recorded that Mr Martin did not describe more than minimal
impairment, and thought he was not incapacitated
for employment by these
residual symptoms.
Potter, orthopaedic surgeon, examined the worker on 10 and 22 July on referral
from Dr Das. His initial opinion was of acute spasmodic
low back pain, noting
this was a symptom only. He was concerned at the extent of symptoms without
objective findings, strong verbalisation
of pain, very restricted range of
motion, and a commentary of some of the applicant’s belief systems around
the nature of pain
and a display of fear of pain. He thought the applicant
needed psychological support.
relation to the surveillance material Dr Potter noted a clearly marked
improvement of activity between 22 July and 30 August.
D’Onise, occupational physician, provided a medico-legal assessment
following an examination on 29 August 2014. Dr D’Onise
obtained a history
of moderate but not disabling pain, and conducted two separate objective
clinical tests (thoroughly described)
to establish a lumbar spine problem. He
diagnosed a partially incapacitating mechanical low back pain likely secondary
to disc pathology,
with left sacroiliac joint dysfunction and significant
deconditioning.
D’Onise later viewed the surveillance material taken the day after his
examination. He noted observations of much more flexion
than he had observed,
greater mobility than in the examination, and some activities which the
applicant told him he could not do.
However he also observed postures that were
protective of the back, such as bending by lifting one leg, perching and
leaning. The
doctor also noticed the applicant limping after the observed
activity and some apparent restriction on the left side which corresponded
his clinical findings. He thought use of the hand tool for a short time was not
significant. Nor were the CT scan results significant
either way, although the
findings were less common in 23 year-olds.
Kapur, pain medicine physician, also provided a medico-legal assessment after
examining the applicant on 30 January 2015. He had
also noted fear avoidance
behaviours, but thought these were not valid due to the high level of
inconsistency shown in the surveillance
material compared to what he observed on
examination. The applicant gave a history of constant pain with worsening on
activity, although
he could regularly walk his dog about 3km.
Kapur was initially equivocal about the surveillance showing the applicant with
an apparent limp, but later acknowledged there
was some abnormality with his
walking that might have been a limp.
Consideration of the evidence
of the disputed factual issues of whether any injury was suffered at work, and
if so its duration, requires consideration
of the evidence regarding phone calls
to the GP clinic and of the applicant’s credibility, and to a lesser
degree the credibility
of Ms Hornhardt.
there was in fact an attempt by Ms Hornhardt to secure an appointment prior to
8.30am for the applicant, that would have been directly
inconsistent with his
claim of suffering injury around the middle of the work day. The evidence in
support of this submission is
from Ms Turner, namely her assertion of
recognising Ms Hornhardt’s voice during the 12.09pm phone call, her claim
at recognising voices, and her evidence of Ms Hornhardt
specifically acknowledging she had been the early caller.
the other hand the phone records indicate no such call was made on Ms
Hornhardt’s mobile phone, although it was used frequently
morning, and was used for the 12.07pm and 12.09pm calls. While a different phone
could have been used there is no evidence
to suggest this happened.
respondent’s submission that data downloads just prior to 8.00am were
consistent with searching for the GP's phone number,
is misconceived. The
download is far better explained by automatic data downloads for active roaming
applications on the smart phone,
as downloads consistently happened two hourly
throughout the night including at about 8.00am on every day covered by the
from 21 May to 20 June.
Turner’s evidence of Ms Hornhardt confirming she was the earlier caller is
simply unreliable based on her admission it was
instead her assumption. While I
accept Ms Turner was doing her best to recall the events in their correct
sequence, I am concerned
that she appeared unaware of the difference between
actual recall and assumption of this fact. Nor is her claimed ability to
Ms Hornhardt’s ordinary unaccented voice persuasive, especially
as she was unclear about any link between the two callers when
first interviewed
and thought the early caller was rushed.
Hornhardt openly said she rang at 12.09pm and gave Mr Martin’s name with
the request for an appointment after work. She received
a text message from him
just before noon, which they both say was the request for an appointment to be
made for after work, but without
identifying the nature of the problem. The
applicant told Mr Trembath at about 4.00pm that in the middle of the day he had
Shawna to secure an appointment for him for after work. These
circumstances do not support the respondent’s suspicion.
respondent submitted the applicant’s failure to keep the actual wording of
the messages exchanged between him and Ms Hornhardt
was deliberate, and implies
their content was not as described. As the injured worker, he should have
realised the importance of
retaining the messages once questions were raised
reject this submission. The applicant appears relatively unsophisticated, and is
not presumed to know the level of future forensic
enquiry. The potential
importance of the actual communications was however known to the respondent, but
there is no evidence it took
steps to further investigate these by seeking phone
records or inspecting the phones before it rejected the claim or for many months
thereafter. Nor did the applicant’s solicitors make similar investigations
at a time more complete records were still available.
In this context the
respondent’s criticism is unfair.
respondent’s submission that Ms Hornhardt’s frequent text messages
to the applicant that morning indicate the planning
of a conspiracy is not
consistent with her phone records, which reveal equally frequent texting to him
on prior work days and a very
high level of phone usage generally. Nor does her
evidence as a whole, including the absence of the nature of the problem from the
applicant’s appointment request text message, reveal any sound reason to
reject her testimony.
Turner gave more definite evidence of the applicant ringing just before 12.30pm
for an appointment, including that he then gave
his name and address. This was
denied by the applicant.
respondent submits Ms Turner must be correct as it is more than coincidence that
she suggested he go to the hospital after work,
and he did just that. In my
opinion this coincidence is not significant. To the contrary it was to be
expected on the basis that
Ms Hornhardt had been unable to secure an after-work
appointment, there was no other doctor choice, and the hospital was the only
alternative.
is no record of any call being made from the applicant’s phone around this
time, and no evidence he used the landline
in the supervisor’s office. His
evidence of poor mobile coverage in the grain bunker was not challenged. He
worked alone and
did not have an opportunity to use a colleague’s phone.
Ms Turner was sure the call was before she closed the switchboard for
12.30pm, which was just before the start of the applicant’s lunch
different versions may be explained by Ms Turner mixing up the sequence of
events of a period in which she had been given the
applicant’s name by Ms
Hornhardt and while under pressure to come up with a clear sequence, or by the
applicant forgetting
or lying about making the call. There is no apparent reason
for him to lie about it, as it was consistent with not hearing back from
Hornhardt after his request, and with his report to Mr Trembath of about when he
felt the onset of symptoms. He may of course
have lied in the mistaken belief
the call had some negative significance.
does Mr Besselaar’s evidence determine the issue. While I accept he spoke
to the applicant about the comment of Ms Clayson,
the reported response of not
knowing why Ms Hornhardt rang but also saying the requested appointment was for
him, is likely to be
inaccurate or incomplete as it is so obviously
contradictory it would likely have prompted clarification.
my opinion it is not necessary to resolve this difference as neither version
supports the respondent’s submission the applicant
faked an injury at work
respondent criticises the applicant for not immediately reporting the incident
in accordance with known company policy. However
I accept his explanation of
concern for his casual status as an employee. This type of subjective concern is
commonly expressed by
insecure casual workers in this tribunal. It is likely
that the applicant’s concern over worsening symptoms and his inability
do the job during the afternoon had overborne his fear of reporting by the time
he approached Mr Trembath.
respondent says the applicant’s likely plan was to see a doctor after work
and to then falsely assert injury at work. It
submits his plan unravelled by
chance after he said something to Mr Trembath while leaving work. This
unexpectedly resulted in him
being taken to the GP’s clinic, where the
earlier phone calls came to the respondent’s attention through Ms
my opinion this submission is not supported by the evidence. Firstly because I
have found that Ms Hornhardt did not make the 8.30am
call, and secondly because
the applicant did not get called in after making some passing comment while
leaving work.
applicant in fact approached Mr Trembath and told him of the injury. Mr Trembath
observed him to appear to be in pain. Mr Trembath
was the appropriate person to
approach for someone unable to continue doing the job and claiming work injury.
Mr Trembath’s
responsibilities included rostering and receiving injury
reports in the absence of a supervisor. The applicant’s actions and
Trembath’s observations are consistent with injury at work that day.
respondent submits the applicant lied to some of the doctors about giving up
fishing, yet he readily admitted in evidence going
out twice since the injury.
In my opinion the context of the applicant’s fishing hobby demonstrates
the comments to the doctors
were more likely imprecise than a lie. Dr Clarke
obtained a history of a loss of ability to stand in his boat in rough seas to
and a need to sell his boat. The applicant lives next to productive
recreational fishing grounds, and his hobby was to go out whenever
Being reduced to losing his boat and only going out twice in well over a year is
a loss of his fishing hobby. This loss
could be crudely but correctly described
by an inarticulate young man as giving up fishing.
respondent criticised the applicant’s belligerence while being
cross-examined. I agree he at times sparred with Mr Griffin
QC, but this
appeared to be in response to the style and tone of cross examination, and which
necessarily featured allegations of
fraudulent conduct. In my opinion it would
be unfair to adversely judge this unsophisticated and inarticulate young witness
way he defended himself from a powerful cross examiner.
respondent submitted that three other factual conflicts tell against the
applicant’s credibility. The first is Dr Das’
evidence of being told
by the applicant had actually tried alternate duties, whereas he denies saying
this. The second is a note
of Dr D’Onise that the applicant did not drink
alcohol, whereas he denies saying this as he has always been a drinker. In my
opinion these are more likely errors of communication. Even if the
doctors’ versions were correct the applicant’s alcohol
intake is not
a confounding factor in his psychological presentation and assessment.
third is Dr D’Onise noting a driving tolerance of twenty minutes earlier
on the same day the applicant drove home to Wallaroo
from that appointment
stopping only once. While this may be explained by a lack of precision in the
question being answered, it does
demonstrate a lack of unreliability.
final factual issue requires comment. The applicant’s denial of Dr
Das’ understanding that it was him and not Ms Hornhardt
who was frequently
crying is not likely to be correct, based on Dr Das’ explanation that he
was careful to check this report
with the applicant, and on the doctor’s
evidence of ongoing significant emotional distress by the applicant. While this
against self-interest, is more likely the product of pride, it further
demonstrates the applicant’s unreliability.
respondent submitted that the demonstrated inconsistencies of movements, as
described by Dr Das, Dr D’Onise and Dr Kapur,
establish both unreliability
and a lack of credibility of the applicant. The attack is based on a submission
of deliberate or conscious
exaggeration of symptoms and restrictions when
presenting to doctors.
the basis of my viewing of the surveillance observations, and accepting the
evidence of the three doctors regarding their own observed
inconsistencies, I
agree that the applicant’s evidence is unreliable. But I am unable to
determine the reason for the exaggerations,
due to the psychological disorder.
However I accept the unreliability means the applicant’s reports of
symptoms of pain and
physical restrictions given to the doctors is not a sound
basis upon which to determine this dispute.
respondent submitted the applicant’s lack of credibility in this regard
should result in none of his evidence being accepted,
including his report of
any injury at work.
I agree the applicant’s evidence is not a sound basis for findings,
consideration must also be given to the available
corroborative evidence. In
this regard and with no disrespect, I place very little weight on
Ms Hornhardt’s evidence due to
her lack of independence. But I do
accept the respective observations of the senior Viterra officers,
Mr Trembath and Mr Basselaar
that the applicant appeared to be in serious
pain, or appeared to be in discomfort and having trouble getting in and out of
evidence of Dr Das and Dr D’Onise is of more significance. Both doctors
identified occasions of increased limping after
activities in the surveillance
material, as I did. Dr Kapur’s equivocation on this point does not weaken
this other evidence,
as it was based on his need for near certainty.
accept Dr Das’ evidence that the limping and the observed rubbing of the
low back could be consistent with the claimed back
injury. I also take into
account Dr Das’ unwillingness to say there was no injury at all.
accept Dr D’Onise’s evidence that the limping could be consistent
with back injury. I also accept Dr D’Onise’s
evidence of thorough
clinical examination on 29 August which used two independent tests to identify
the presence of objective signs
consistent with a pain producing back
on this corroborative evidence I conclude the applicant was experiencing
disabling symptoms of pain and restriction of movement
after work on 27 May, but
none before work that day; and that by 29 August he had improved
substantially so that he could move freely
but with sufficient pain to cause
limping after light activity and bending.
a result I conclude that the applicant did experience the onset of back pain at
work on 27 May 2014 and that this gave rise to
at least partial incapacity for
work. I accept the uncontroversial evidence that the applicant was not offered
light duties and was
not required to attend work on 28 and 29 May in accordance
with Dr Das’ second medical certificate.
29 May the accepted evidence establishes partial incapacity. In the absence of
any offer of duties after then the applicant
is entitled to weekly payments of
compensation until 30 August 2014 by reason of the back injury. However due to a
lack of reliable
evidence I am unable to determine for how long after then the
back injury continued to cause incapacity for work prior to the applicant
securing new employment in September 2015. It follows that I am unable to find
an entitlement to weekly payments for the back injury
after 30 August 2014. I am
also unable to determine a positive entitlement to medical expenses for the back
after 30 August.
the basis of my finding that a genuine physical injury was experienced at work
and that some limiting symptoms continued until
at least 30 August, I reject the
respondent’s submission of the adjustment disorder being the sole product
of frustration over
being caught out pursuing a false claim. Instead I accept
the evidence of both psychiatrists that there is a valid basis for the
secondary adjustment disorder, and that it gave rise to some partial incapacity
for work. The factual basis underpinning the psychiatrists’
includes the clinical observations of Dr Das regarding emotional upset, anger
and agitation, and the objective facts of
loss of income and sale of significant
personal assets. The diagnosis is also objectively supported by the
applicant’s frustration
and anger over the incorrect, albeit
understandable, accusation he had tried to secure a doctor’s appointment
by 8.30am on
next issue is whether the adjustment disorder gave rise to any incapacity for
this work beyond 30 August 2014. In this regard
I accept the evidence of both Dr
Blakemore and Dr Clarke. I find that in February 2015 the applicant was still
too emotionally disturbed
to return to work with the respondent, but that by 1
June 2015 he had improved sufficiently that the residual symptoms were no longer
incapacitating. As a result I find the applicant is entitled to weekly payments
by reason of the adjustment disorder from 27 May
2014 until 1 June 2015. I also
find that the entitlement to medical expenses for the adjustment disorder ceased
on 1 June 2015.
set aside the two determinations under review and substitute them with
determinations accepting the back injury from 27 May until
30 August 2014, and
accepting the adjustment disorder from 27 May 2014 until 1 June 2015. I
will hear from the parties as to the
terms of final orders regarding weekly
payments, medical expenses, interest and costs.
Parties are advised that if a party wishes to appeal against any part of this
decision which is appealable pursuant to s 86(1) of
the Act such appeal must be
filed with the Registrar in accordance with the form titled Notice of Appeal
within 14 days of the delivery
of this decision and must be served on all
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
practice of this Tribunal to publish its reasons for decision in full on the
Internet. If any party or person contends that
these reasons for decision should
not be published in full the party or person must make an application within
seven days of the
delivery of these reasons. The application shall be by an
Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should be addressed
to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within the time
specified these reasons will be published in accordance
Tribunal’s usual practice.
Para 9, p 48 TB.
Para 23, p41 TB.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (175 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter