URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCFC/2022/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
LEGAL PROFESSION CONDUCT COMMISSIONER v MOORE [2022] SASCFC 2 (11 November 2022)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Full Court)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
LEGAL PROFESSION CONDUCT COMMISSIONER v MOORE
[2022] SASCFC 2
Judgment of The Full Court
(The Honourable President Livesey, the Honourable Justice Doyle
and the Honourable Justice S David)
11 November 2022
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES - LAWYERS - COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE -
PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT AND UNSATISFACTORY PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT - TRUST
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES - LAWYERS - COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE -
PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT AND UNSATISFACTORY PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT
The Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner applied for orders that the
practitioner’s name be struck from the roll of legal practitioners
that the practitioner pay the Commissioner’s costs of the application.
The practitioner’s misconduct concerned two retainers concerning the
administration of two estates.
In relation to the first, the practitioner intermingled trust monies with the
practitioner’s own funds in the practitioner’s
personal accounts.
The Tribunal found that the practitioner misappropriated thousands of dollars of
trust monies. In relation to
the second retainer, the Tribunal found that the
practitioner was guilty of gross, unexplained delay.
The evidence before the Court was that the practitioner suffered from mental
illness. There was no certainty as to when, if ever,
the practitioner might
Held (the Court):
the circumstances, suspension would not be appropriate and an order should be
made striking the practitioner’s name from
the roll; and
practitioner should pay the Commissioner’s costs of the application fixed
in the amount of $2,000.
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
Legal Practitioners Regulations 2009
Legal Practitioners Regulations 2014
(SA) r 19 and 40, referred to.
Barwick v Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2004] NSWCA
In re a practitioner
[1941] SAStRp 11
[1941] SASR 48
Law Society of New South
Wales v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
Law Society of South Australia v
[1999] SASC 83
(1999) 201 LSJS 456
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Cleland
[2021] SASCA 10
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board
[2012] SASCFC 43
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v Dudek
[2006] SASC 255
; (2006) 245 LSJS 346;
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v
[2005] SASC 382
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v
[2021] SASCFC 39
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v
[2015] SASCFC 37
Legal Practitioners Complaints Committee v
[2006] WASC 211
New South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
(2001) 52 NSWLR 279
Wentworth v The New South Wales Bar
Association
(1992) 176 CLR 239
, considered.
LEGAL PROFESSION CONDUCT COMMISSIONER v
[2022] SASCFC 2
Full Court: Livesey P, Doyle and David JJA
Introduction
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner applies for orders that the
practitioner’s name be struck from the roll of legal
practitioners and
that the practitioner pay the Commissioner’s costs of the
application.
Commissioner’s application is made pursuant to
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
) and, to the
extent necessary, pursuant to this Court’s inherent jurisdiction which is
recognised by
of the Act.
the reasons that follow, an order should be made striking the
practitioner’s name from the roll.
The proceedings in
practitioner’s misconduct concerns two retainers. Both retainers
concerned the administration of estates. In the first,
the practitioner
represented Ms Cassoudakis in connection with the administration of her
parents’ estates. Monies due to Ms
Cassoudakis which were found to be
trust monies were not paid into a trust account. Instead, they were
intermingled with the practitioner’s
own funds in the practitioner’s
personal accounts. The Tribunal found that the practitioner misappropriated
thousands of dollars
relation to the second retainer, the practitioner represented Ms Lucia in
connection with seeking probate for her father’s
estate. The Tribunal
found that the practitioner was guilty of gross, unexplained delay in connection
with this retainer.
complaints were made, the Commissioner commenced investigation. Both the
investigation and the conduct of the proceedings
before the Tribunal were
protracted because the practitioner was unable to provide prompt responses and,
on a number of occasions,
he failed to provide any responses at all. The
practitioner was only sporadically represented by a legal practitioner.
the time of the hearing before the Tribunal in February and April 2019, the
practitioner was not represented and, following the
first day of the hearing, he
did not participate at all. Nonetheless, his mother remained in the courtroom.
Tribunal found that the practitioner generally failed to participate in any
meaningful way in the proceedings before it, ultimately
failing to file any
written response or submission.
The Tribunal found that the practitioner had engaged in serious
misconduct.
After the Tribunal
published its reasons for decision, the practitioner appealed to this Court.
Ultimately, that appeal was taken
to be discontinued.
its determination on penalty, the Tribunal found that the disciplinary powers
available to it did not adequately reflect the seriousness
practitioner’s misconduct or the appropriate penalty and, accordingly,
pursuant to
s 82(6)(a)(v)
of the Act it recommended that disciplinary
proceedings be commenced against the practitioner in the Supreme
proceedings in this Court have taken an unusual course. The practitioner
appears to have been plagued by mental and other illness
for some years. It may
be that the practitioner was affected by illness at the time of the two
retainers. When the Commissioner
filed his application in this Court, he did so
seeking orders for substituted service because of difficulties encountered
the practitioner. Ultimately, orders were made permitting service on
the practitioner’s mother and uncle who had been in contact
Commissioner and who had provided information about the practitioner from time
substituted service and orders that the practitioner respond to the
Commissioner’s application and
no appearance was ever
made by the practitioner and no written response has been received. This
hearing proceeds in the absence
practitioner.
practitioner’s circumstances
addressing the conduct the subject of the Tribunal’s misconduct findings,
it is necessary to address the practitioner’s
personal circumstances.
practitioner was born on 7 August 1979 and he is currently 43 years. He was
admitted to practice on 8 October 2002 and was employed
as a solicitor by the
law firm Donaldson Walsh until mid-2013. Between mid-2013 and mid-2015, the
practitioner traded in sole practice
under the name KFM Legal, an incorporated
legal practice, from premises in the city and later from his home.
mid-2015, the practitioner has ceased to hold a practising certificate. The
practitioner did not renew his practising certificate
after the complaints the
subject of these proceedings commenced to be investigated by the
Commissioner.
various times, the Commissioner received information from the
practitioner’s mother and uncle that the practitioner was
unable to assist
with providing documents or other responses because of what appeared to be
mental illness.
the Tribunal hearing commenced on 12 February 2019, on 8 February 2019 the
Commissioner provided a written opening. This
set out in considerable detail
the information available to the Commissioner regarding the practitioner’s
mental and other
Tribunal had the benefit of a number of medical reports concerning the
practitioner. Without being exhaustive, these included
a medical report from
Dr Chris Gillis referring to the development of a depressive illness four
years earlier. The practitioner
had thereafter consulted a psychologist, Dr
Chris Hamilton, “on and off”. Dr Gillis’ report recorded that
practitioner was not keen to take medication. The practitioner had been
referred to a psychiatrist, Dr Ivan Siklich.
addition, the practitioner had been treated for Multiple Sclerosis.
of these issues, the Tribunal afforded the practitioner considerable latitude
with respect to attending directions hearings
and filing responses. From time
to time the practitioner also mentioned problems with post-traumatic stress
disorder. That diagnosis
did not, however, feature in any of the medical
the time of the Tribunal hearing in April 2019, the practitioner’s mother
advised the Tribunal that the practitioner had
been threatened by a person with
a gun and, as a result, he had fled South Australia and was in New South Wales.
the practitioner filed his appeal in this Court, the Commissioner arranged for
independent psychiatric examination. The practitioner
attended for assessment
and Dr Michael Clarke, psychiatrist, provided a report dated 12 July 2021. It
was Dr Clarke’s opinion
that the practitioner had suffered significant
depressive illness since early 2015 and that this appeared to have developed in
with a relationship breakdown. Dr Clarke recommended ongoing
psychological and psychiatric treatment, but he noted that the practitioner
reluctant to engage in treatment.
Clarke recorded that the practitioner had acknowledged to him that he was not
fit to practise the profession of the law and Dr
Clarke agreed with that
assessment. Dr Clarke expressed the opinion that improvement in the
practitioner’s mood and function
was only likely in the medium to
long-term and he could not express any review as to precisely when the
practitioner would, if ever,
likely regain fitness to practise the profession of
a result of the practitioner’s failure to participate in these
proceedings, this Court does not have the benefit of any
current medical,
psychiatric or other evidence concerning the practitioner’s whereabouts,
present functioning or activities.
The Tribunal’s
misconduct findings
Commissioner has invited this Court to accept and act on the findings of the
Tribunal without further inquiry in accordance with
of the Act. Given
the way in which these proceedings have been conducted, it is appropriate to
proceed on that basis.
20 March 2017, the Commissioner laid a charge against the practitioner alleging
unprofessional conduct concerning conduct before
1 July 2014 and professional
misconduct concerning conduct on or after 1 July 2014. The difference in
terminology reflects the changes
made to the Act as a result of amendments that
came into effect on 1 July 2014. This charge concerned the retainer with Ms
Cassoudakis.
16 November 2017, the Commissioner laid a further charge against the
practitioner in the Tribunal concerning professional misconduct
in connection
with the retainer with Ms Lucia in connection with the administration of the
estate of her father, Mr Pearson.
broad terms, the first charge alleged breaches of ss 31(1) and 31(6)(a) of the
Act (prior to the 1 July 2014 amendments) concerning
the failure to deposit
trust monies into a trust account and causing or permitting trust monies to be
intermixed with other monies.
In addition, it was alleged that the practitioner
misappropriated trust monies belonging to Ms Cassoudakis.
was also alleged that there were various breaches of the obligations to keep
detailed accounts, provide trust account receipts
and trust account statements
as required by s 31(4)(b) of the Act (as it was prior to 1 July 2014) and in
accordance with the
Legal Practitioners Regulations 2009
(SA). It was
alleged that after 1 July 2014 there were various breaches of the
requirements of
of Schedule 2 of the Act and
regulations 19
(6)(b) of the
Legal Practitioners Regulations 2014
(SA) concerning
similar conduct.
complaint concerning the retainer with Ms Cassoudakis was made by an accountant,
Mr Con Markou, of CMA Chartered Accountants.
The practitioner had accepted a
retainer to assist Ms Cassoudakis concerning the estates of her late parents.
These estates had
not been administered for many years and a number of
properties in these estates had accrued debts. A significant aspect of the
retainer was to assist in arranging finance to meet these debts. The
practitioner arranged finance and, on 21 March 2014 just over
$141,000 was
received on behalf of Ms Cassoudakis and paid into one of the
practitioner’s personal accounts.
Commissioner contended that these monies were trust monies within the meaning of
of the Act because they were monies to which the practitioner was not wholly
entitled both at law and in equity and, in addition,
they did not include monies
received in the course of mortgage financing. At times, the practitioner
appeared to dispute this contention
but it was ultimately upheld by the
practitioner
disbursed certain of these funds on
behalf of Ms Cassoudakis. However, other funds were disbursed to the
benefit of the practitioner
at a time when he had insufficient of his own funds
in the relevant account. In very broad terms, those amounts exceeded $30,000.
May 2014 and January 2015, a large number of enquiries and requests were made of
the practitioner by Mr Markou’s firm
which were, largely, not addressed.
Mr Markou made his complaint in January 2015. Ultimately, no accounting was
ever provided by
the practitioner. Later, it was determined that the
practitioner was probably entitled to fees in the order of $25,000.
Tribunal found the charge concerning the Cassoudakis retainer proved on the
basis that the practitioner’s misappropriation
of trust monies was
committed either ignorantly or
deliberately.
The Tribunal
rejected the practitioner’s assertion that he had been engaged in mortgage
The Tribunal found
that, even if it had been established that the practitioner was engaged in
mortgage financing, he had failed
to render any account to Ms Cassoudakis and,
in consequence, he had no entitlement to apply or retain trust monies for his
own purposes.
Tribunal found that the amounts retained by the practitioner exceeded
“considerably” his reasonable charges.
Tribunal held that it had no confidence that the practitioner was aware of the
nature and extent of his duties and obligations
as a solicitor when dealing with
client funds, but it did not overlook the practitioner’s serious and
significant mental and
physical health
Whilst these provided
some explanation for the practitioner’s misconduct, they did not
ameliorate the seriousness of the practitioner’s
failure to discharge his
duties as a legal
practitioner.
relation to the charge concerning the Lucia retainer, the practitioner and Ms
Lucia had been appointed by Mr Peter Pearson as
the executors and trustees of
his 2014 will. The practitioner had prepared that will on the instructions of
Mr Pearson.
Mr Pearson’s death, it was necessary to obtain probate and administer the
estate which included a farming property occupied
by a grandson of the deceased
which was subject to a “reverse” mortgage.
March 2015, the practitioner accepted instructions from Ms Lucia to obtain a
grant of probate and to administer the estate. However,
in the year between
March 2015 and March 2016, the practitioner simply failed to comply with any
instructions or requests received
from Ms Lucia. This included failing to deal
with a final notice concerning the deceased’s funeral account in an amount
February 2016, Ms Lucia warned the practitioner that she would seek assistance
with his removal as executor and to have all original
documents returned to her.
At the same time, she made a complaint to the Commissioner. In March 2016, the
practitioner attended
on the Commissioner and provided original documents
concerning the estate. It was necessary for Ms Lucia to instruct different
solicitors,
Brown & Associates, to obtain probate in August 2016. It was
not until December 2016 that the practitioner took the steps necessary
himself removed as an executor and trustee.
to this charge, the Tribunal found that the practitioner’s gross delay in
connection with the Lucia retainer was not
4 August 2021, in the course of its determination on penalty, the Tribunal found
that the practitioner had shown limited insight
into the seriousness of his
misconduct.
determination of this application
is not necessary for the purposes of determining this application to address in
any detail the relevant and applicable principles.
These have been recently
addressed by this Court.
are three features of importance in connection with the findings of misconduct
made in this case.
first concerns the serious breach of trust involved in failing properly to
administer trust monies and in permitting their
misappropriation.
Because trust
monies and a trust account should, speaking generally, be managed with
particular care by legal practitioners, where
it is demonstrated that a
practitioner has misused trust monies for the practitioner’s own benefit
this Court will regard the
breach of trust as particularly serious. That kind
of breach usually entails a serious failure to adhere to the high standards
of legal practitioners.
though the evidence regarding the practitioner’s mental illness and ill
health more generally cannot be regarded
as complete, it is sufficient to
demonstrate that mental illness alone renders the practitioner unfit to practise
the profession
of the law. On the current state of the evidence, it cannot be
determined when, if ever, the practitioner will regain the mental
capacity to
practise the profession of the law. Whilst the practitioner has seen fit to
cease practice and not apply for any further
practising certificate, for so long
as he remains on the roll of legal practitioners he is effectively being held
out by this Court
as someone who is fit and proper to practise the profession of
and finally, the practitioner’s conduct during the course of the
Commissioner’s investigations, as well as during
the course of the
proceedings before the Tribunal and before this Court, demonstrates two matters
of some importance. The first
is that the practitioner has generally been
unable to participate meaningfully in the investigation or the proceedings and,
in addition,
he appears to lack insight into the importance and seriousness of
his misconduct and the need for it to be effectively investigated
Commissioner and properly inquired into by the Tribunal. The
practitioner’s poor participation and lack of insight
may or may not be
the product of his mental illness. The precise cause is probably immaterial in
the sense that, whatever the cause,
the practitioner’s poor participation
and inability to recognise and adhere to his obligations as a legal practitioner
both serious and of longstanding.
might be said about these matters taken in isolation, when they are considered
in combination they demonstrate that no order
short of strike off would, in the
circumstances of this case, be appropriate.
purpose of this Court exercising disciplinary powers in relation to a
practitioner is to protect the public rather than to punish
practitioner.
In order to
protect the public, this Court must consider both the specific deterrence of the
legal practitioner concerned, as well
as the general deterrence of other members
of the legal profession. The orders made by the Court must demonstrate that
of the kind which was found to have occurred in this case will not be
tolerated by the Court.
deterring misconduct, this Court maintains professional standards and public
confidence in the legal profession. That is also
achieved by establishing and
enforcing appropriate professional
regulation.
this case, it is particularly important that the public be protected from a
legal practitioner who is ignorant of the basic rules
concerning proper
professional practice and the minimum requirements for handling trust monies and
client instructions, matters which
are indispensable to the proper practice of
the profession of the law.
the evidence available to the Tribunal and to this Court, it cannot be said that
the practitioner’s integrity has not been
undermined or that his
misconduct is merely temporary and likely to be appropriately addressed by
proper medical or psychiatric
circumstances, suspension would not be appropriate, particularly given the
uncertainty as to when, if ever, the practitioner
might recover from mental
illness. That latter consideration is underscored by the practitioner’s
unwillingness to actively
engage in appropriate
these circumstances, it is clear that the practitioner is not fit to remain a
member of the legal profession. His misconduct
concerning trust monies and his
failure to appropriately use a trust account is particularly serious. Even if
that were not so,
the practitioner’s mental illness renders him unable to
properly practise the profession of the law.
all of these circumstances, it is necessary to conclude that no sanction short
of striking off would be appropriate.
Accordingly,
an order must be made striking the practitioner’s name from the roll of
legal practitioners kept by this Court.
heard from the Commissioner, there will be an order that the practitioner pay
the Commissioner’s costs of the application,
fixed in an amount of
Reasons for decision of the
Tribunal (comprising Ms Pyke QC, Professor Davis and Ms Hastwell), [55], [77]
delivered 14 January 2021
and see also the determination on penalty delivered 4
August 2021.
Reasons for decision,
Determination on penalty,
Reasons for decision,
[136]-[137].
Determination on penalty, 11.
The order for substituted
service was made on 8 July 2022, it also permitted service at the
practitioner’s last known place
of practice and by informing the
practitioner by telephone message that a copy of the originating documents were
available for collection
at the Commissioner’s offices. Substituted
service was proved by the affidavit of Sharon Hurren, a solicitor employed by
Commissioner, sworn on 31 August 2022 and the affidavit of Timothy
Chambers, a process server engaged by the Commissioner, sworn
on 31 August 2022.
Orders for the practitioner to
file a response to the charges were made throughout the proceeding: see Reasons
for decision, [164],
[174], [178].
The Court, and the
Commissioner have taken steps to notify the practitioner of this hearing. The
Commissioner sent the practitioner
four letters between 6 September 2022 and 4
November 2022 in connection with this hearing as well as emailing the
practitioner’s
uncle to advise the date and time of the hearing. The
Court sent an express post letter to the practitioner on 8 November 2022,
letter was delivered on 9 November 2022. The Court also sent emails to the
practitioner’s mother and uncle on 8 November
2022 notifying them of this
Reasons for decision,
Reasons for decision, [52],
[55], [58]; the Tribunal found that the practitioner brought the onus of
establishing that monies were
used for client purposes and that he had failed to
meet that onus.
Reasons for decision,
Reasons for decision,
Reasons for decision,
Reasons for decision,
[130]-[133].
Determination on penalty,
9. See also, Reasons for decision at [99].
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Cleland
[2021] SASCA 10
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Kaminski
[2021] SASCFC 39.
In re a practitioner
[1941] SAStRp 11
[1941] SASR 48
Barwick v Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2004] NSWCA 32
, [118] (Ipp J).
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Kaminski
[2021] SASCFC 39
Wentworth v The New
South Wales Bar Association
(1992) 176 CLR 239
, 250 – 251 (Deane,
Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ);
Law Society of South Australia v Murphy
[1999] SASC 83
(1999) 201 LSJS 456
, 460 – 461 (Doyle CJ, with
whom Milhouse and Prior JJ agreed);
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v
[2005] SASC 382
(Debelle J, with whom Besanko and Vanstone
JJ agreed).
Law Society of New South
Wales v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
, 471 (Giles AJA).
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Clisby
[2012] SASCFC 43
, [9] (Doyle CJ and Stanley J, with
whom Anderson J agreed);
New South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
(2001) 52 NSWLR 279
, [22] (Spigelman CJ, with whom Mason P and
Handley JA agreed).
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Clisby
[2012] SASCFC 43
, [8] (Doyle CJ and Stanley J, with
whom Anderson J agreed).
Practitioners Conduct Board v Dudek
[2006] SASC 255
; (2006) 245 LSJS 346,
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Kassapis
[2015] SASCFC 37
Legal Practitioners
Complaints Committee v Tomlinson
[2006] WASC 211
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (354 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter