URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASC/2025/181.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:05:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ROLLINS v CITY OF PLAYFORD COUNCIL [2025] SASC 181 (23 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Appeal to a Single Judge)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
ROLLINS v CITY OF PLAYFORD COUNCIL
[2025] SASC 181
Judgment of the Honourable
Justice Gray
(ex tempore)
23 October 2025
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS - SOUTH AUSTRALIAN CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ANIMALS - LIABILITY OF OWNERS AND KEEPERS IN RESPECT OF INJURIES BY
ANIMALS - STATUTORY PROVISIONS - SOUTH AUSTRALIA
COURTS AND JUDGES - JUDGES - POWERS AND DUTIES IN RESPECT OF UNREPRESENTED
This matter concerns an application for leave to appeal against a decision of
a senior member of the South Australian Civil and Administrative
(‘the Tribunal’) which affirmed a decision of the respondent, the
City of Playford Council, to issue a destruction
order in respect of a French
Mastiff cross American Bulldog named ‘Hulk’, pursuant to
ss 50(1)(a)
Dog and Cat Management Act 1995
The applicant’s contention on appeal was that targeted assistance was
not provided to her as a self-represented litigant before
the Tribunal and that
she was denied procedural fairness.
The respondent submitted that the level of assistance provided by the
Tribunal to the self-represented litigant was sufficient to
satisfy the duties
of the Tribunal with respect to self-represented litigants and that procedural
fairness was not denied.
This appeal was filed a few days out of time.
After the appeal had been filed in this Court but prior to the notice of
appeal being served on the respondent the dog was euthanised.
Held, refusing leave to appeal:
applicant’s case on appeal, namely that procedural fairness was denied, is
reasonably arguable. It is however not in the
interests of justice to grant
leave to appeal as there is no utility in the appeal as the dog has been
euthanised: at [53]-[56].
Dog and Cat Management Act 1995
South Australian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
, referred to.
Wilson v City of Onkaparinga
Aldridge v Registrar of Firearms (SA)
[2022] SASC 5
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency
[2023] SASCA 36
[2023] SASCA 90
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
Jackson v Lepp Investments Pty Ltd
[2016] SASC 62
Kemp v Health and Community Services Complaints Commissioner
[2025] SASC 56
Pix v South Australian Housing Trust
[2016] SASCFC
(2016) 125 SASR 10
Varricchio v Wentzel
[2016] SASC 86
, considered.
ROLLINS v CITY OF PLAYFORD COUNCIL
[2025] SASC 181
Civil: Single Judge Appeal
Introduction
matter concerns an application by Ms Rollins, the applicant, for leave to appeal
against a decision of a senior member of the
South Australian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (‘SACAT’ or ‘the Tribunal’) made
on 26 June 2025 (‘the
Tribunal decision’). The applicant also seeks
an extension of time to bring the appeal.
decision against which the appeal is sought concerns a review by a senior member
of SACAT of a decision dated 28 February 2025
(‘the Council
decision’) of the respondent, the City of Playford Council (‘the
Council’). The Council decision
concerned the making of a Destruction
Order (‘the destruction order’), pursuant to
ss 50(1)(a)
Dog and Cat Management Act 1995
(SA) (‘the Act’), in
respect of a French Mastiff cross American Bulldog named ‘Hulk’
destruction order is made by reference to the grounds set out in
Act, which in part provide as follows:
A council or the Board may
make an order in relation to a dog under this Division if satisfied that—
(a) in the case of a Destruction Order—
(i) the dog is unduly dangerous; and
(ii) the dog has attacked, harassed or chased a person or an animal or bird
owned by or in the charge of a person in circumstances
that would constitute an
offence against this Act...
respondent issued reasons on 12 June 2025. The reasons record that the
respondent was satisfied on the basis of two incidents
that the destruction
order was an appropriate and reasonable response. Other matters were also taken
into account, including prior
non-compliance with dog laws by the applicant.
The applicant had at that stage of the proceedings been identified as someone
whom Hulk could be rehomed.
learned Senior Member affirmed the decision under review as the correct and
preferable decision.
expiry of the time to appeal the Tribunal decision was 25 July 2025. The notice
of appeal was filed in this Court on 28 July
2025. The respondent was served
with the notice of appeal to this Court on 29 July 2025. The respondent states
that prior to receiving
the notice of appeal, the destruction order had been
carried out, and the dog was
euthanised.
The dog was euthanised
on 29 July 2025, shortly before the notice of appeal was served on the
respondent.
Background and nature of the appeal
matter first came before SACAT on 2 May 2025. The matter was adjourned on that
occasion as the applicant was not at that time
the registered owner of the dog.
The matter was then listed before the Tribunal on 9 May 2025 for further
directions and by that
time the applicant was the registered owner of the
owner of the dog at the time of the destruction order was, as I have indicated,
not the applicant. On 7 May 2025, the applicant
became the registered owner of
Hulk. Prior to that, the registered owner of Hulk, as recorded by the Council,
was Ms Michelle Crack
(Davies). Another person, Ms Rebecca Majchrak, also
identified herself to the Council as the owner of
The Council issued the
destruction order to both Ms Davies and Ms Majchrak.
statement of reasons for the Council decision was issued following the appeal to
SACAT, on 12 June 2025. Those reasons stated
that the Council decision was made
on the basis of two allegations concerning the dog as
August 2024, the dog was wandering at large, contrary to s 43(1) of the Act,
along Stonehaven Street, Pennington. It is alleged
that the dog approached two
other dogs being walked on a lead when the dog attacked one of those dogs by
grabbing them with his mouth.
No injury resulted and no formal action was taken
following investigation by the City of Charles Sturt; and,
January 2025 the dog, whilst residing at 28 Dolphin Street, Elizabeth, is
alleged to have jumped the fence of the property and
attacked a German Shepherd
on the neighbouring property, where the dog had bitten at the throat of the
German Shepherd. The German
Shepherd required veterinary treatment, including
surgery. This incident is alleged to have given rise to contraventions of ss
and 44(2) of the Act.
notice of the appeal does not identify in the usual way by reference to
enumerated grounds the manner in which the decision is
challenged. The
applicant, being a self-represented litigant, did, however, in her notice of
appeal rely upon the decision in
Wilson v City of Onkaparinga
The notice of appeal,
[T]he Member ought to have
given Ms Rollins ‘targeted’ assistance by inviting her to obtain
evidence to support her position.
notice then implies that a failure to provide such assistance meant that the
applicant was denied procedural fairness. The notice
also raises that the
production of such evidence may have resulted in a different outcome.
the applicant is self-represented, and having regard to the obvious importance
of this matter to her, I have considered for
myself, having regard to the notice
of appeal, whether although not precisely articulated or developed by the
applicant, there are
arguable grounds upon which to complain either about the
process before the Tribunal or the essential steps in its reasoning and
outcome of the Tribunal
respondent contends on appeal that the applicant was not denied procedural
fairness and that the assistance that the Tribunal
provided to the applicant in
the course of the proceedings was consistent with the principles outlined by B
respondent contends that to the extent that the applicant seeks to have the
destruction order ‘downgraded, presumably to
have Hulk (the dog the
subject of the order) rehomed with her’, there is no utility in the
respondent initially submitted that ‘an appeal may still be appropriate in
circumstances that the operation of the Act
is such that whilst the order
relates to the dog in most instances, the order is a relevant consideration in
making a prohibition
order pursuant to section 59A(3)(b)(ii) of the
The respondent goes
on to state that ‘if the appellant is successful on appeal, the noting of
a destruction order ‘on
her record’ will be
However, that
submission was withdrawn at the hearing of this
10 0ctober 2025, orders were made indicating that the applicant should file
written submissions as soon as practicable and in
any event prior to the hearing
of the appeal, noting that such submissions had not been filed within the
timeframe provided for in
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
applicant being self-represented in this matter, the matter was called on for
directions on 14 October 2025 to address matters
that the applicant had raised
in correspondence and to ascertain whether the applicant was in a position for
the matter to proceed
to hearing on 20 October 2025. The Court had not received
any written submissions from the applicant and the applicant had not filed
evidentiary material. The applicant appeared via telephone on 14 October 2025
and was informed that should she wish to produce
any evidence in support of her
appeal, she should do so prior to the hearing of the appeal. The applicant was
also informed that
should she wish to obtain further legal advice she should so
before the hearing.
respondent indicated at the directions hearing of this matter that, the
applicant being self-represented, the respondent would
file the appeal
the hearing of this matter on 20 October 2025, the applicant did not appear. An
explanation for the non-appearance was provided
by email part way through the
hearing. Whilst the respondent had initially contended that the matter should
be dismissed for want
of prosecution, ultimately the matter was adjourned for
further hearing on 23 October 2025.
the hearing of this matter on 23 October 2025, the respondent submitted that the
Court should dismiss the matter for want of prosecution,
without a determination
of the application for leave to appeal on its merits. I determined, given that
the Court was in a position
to deal with the matter today, it was in the
interests of finality to proceed with the hearing and determine the application
leave to appeal in the absence of the
have summarised above the central contentions advanced by each party. I have,
however, had regard to all of the submissions of
the parties put forward, both
in writing and orally, at the hearing of this appeal. I have also considered
the documents contained
in the appeal book, which I am informed constituted all
of the substantive material before the
extension of time
to this Court must be made within one month of the decision under
That requirement may be
dispensed with where it is just and reasonable in the circumstances to do
In this case, there was no
opposition to the extension of time being granted and an order granting the
extension of time was
basis of the appeal and relevant principles
appeal under
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(SA) is by way of
appeal to this Court from a decision of a Senior Member requires
This Court should only
grant leave to appeal from a SACAT internal review decision where the appeal is
reasonably arguable, and
the subject matter is of sufficient substance to
justify consideration.
is important that leave is not granted as a matter of routine. SACAT is a
specialist tribunal, and the granting of leave too
readily would undermine the
legislative intention to establish SACAT as a specialist
It is also relevant
to consider the Court’s function on appeal if leave is granted noting that
this is an appeal by way of
overarching consideration is the interests of
Consideration
in respect of ground of appeal
The Tribunal decision
Tribunal found that the statutory preconditions to the making of a Destruction
Order were established. The Tribunal
A Destruction
Order can be made on the grounds set out in
section 51(a)
Dog and Cat
Management Act 1995
, namely (i) the dog is unduly dangerous; and (ii) the
dog has attacked, harassed or chased a person or an animal or bird owned by
in the charge of a person in circumstances that would constitute an offence
against the
Dog and Cat Management Act
‘Unduly dangerous’ is not defined in the
Dog and Cat
Management Act
. The usual authority on the meaning of ‘unduly
dangerous’ as that term is used in that Act is to be found in the District
Court decision of
Clare & Gilbert Valleys Council v Crawford
Millsteed J found that an unduly dangerous dog exposes
“the public, or other animals, to an appreciable risk of serious
It is also necessary to consider the context in which that risk of
harm arises, for example if the dog is being mistreated, provoked
or used in the
reasonable defence of a person or property:
In this matter Hulk attacked the other dog when he escaped from the property
where he was being housed. No more than that is reliably
known about the
incident. There is no evidence that Hulk was provoked or being used to defend
anyone or anything, and I find that
he was not. Ms Rollins submitted that Hulk
had not been fed for 2 days but I am not satisfied on the balance of
probabilities that
that is correct, nor that hunger would justify the attack
that Hulk launched on the other dog’s throat.
I bear in mind that Hulk had previously been involved in an incident on 8
August 2024 where he escaped from another property and by
his behaviour caused a
passerby to believe that he was about to attack her dog. Hulk did not inflict
injury although he grabbed the
other dog with his mouth. No action was taken by
the council in whose area this incident occurred.
learned Senior Member went on to
regard to the material that was before the City of Playford Council and to the
additional written and oral evidence put
before the Tribunal on review. I am
satisfied that Hulk is an unduly dangerous dog with a history of escaping from
properties where
he has been housed, and behaving aggressively towards other
dogs. The injuries he inflicted on another dog on 30 January 2025 were
serious. I am satisfied that Hulk has attacked or harassed other dogs in
circumstances that could constitute an offence
against the
Dog and Cat
Management Act
in both August 2024 and January 2025. I am not satisfied that
Ms Rollins is able to manage Hulk effectively to reduce the risk he
presents if
he were to escape once again. Although Ms Rollins submitted that she had spoken
to 2 persons with apparent expertise
in canine behaviour about the possibility
of Hulk undergoing training to alleviate anxiety, she did not provide the
Tribunal with
any written evidence from those persons who had not in any event
assessed Hulk.
I have indicated above, the Tribunal affirmed the decision of the Council as
being the correct and preferable
Consideration
matters raised by the applicant are clearly of significance to her, and it is
clear from the materials that the applicant held
a genuine and deep affection
for Hulk. The applicant was also, based on the papers, concerned to see that
what she perceived as
the right thing was done, notwithstanding that the
destruction order had been carried out prior to the hearing of the application
for leave to appeal.
I have indicated above,
this Court should only grant
leave to appeal from a SACAT internal review decision where the appeal is
reasonably arguable, and the
subject matter is of sufficient substance to
justify consideration.
overarching consideration is the interests of
the case of the making of a Destruction Order, such an order cannot be made
unless the statutory criteria in s 51(a) are made
out. B Doyle J held in
in the context of
s 59A(3) of the Act,
that the question of whether mandatory statutory
criteria are made out on appeal raises the correctness standard, whereas his
held in respect of the making of a decision about whether and in what
form orders should be made, the deferential standard applies
I accept the reasoning in
and I find that it applies in
respect of a decision made pursuant to s 51(a) of the Act.
question of whether or not a Destruction Order should be made following a
finding that the statutory criteria to enliven the
discretion are made out is a
question in relation to which the principles in
House v The
follows that the applicant needs to demonstrate a miscarriage in the exercise of
the discretion, either in the manner in
which, or reasoning by which, it was
exercised (a process error) or in the outcome of its exercise (an outcome
do have some significant concerns about the hearing that occurred in SACAT.
The relevant principles that are applicable in dealing with self-represented
litigants were referred to in
case, as B Doyle J
Dealing with
self-represented litigants can require the striking of a difficult balance. A
court or tribunal should ensure that the
litigant’s lack of legal
representation does not compromise the fairness of the hearing by providing
appropriate assistance
where necessary – particularly in order to ensure
that the proceeding is kept free from error or misunderstanding. However,
court or tribunal ought not conduct the case for the litigant, advise them, or
otherwise detract from the neutrality of the court
or tribunal so as to create a
legitimate sense of grievance on the part of the other party.
Considering the proceeding in the Tribunal as a whole, I consider that the
applicant was given appropriate, albeit general, assistance
in encouraging and
facilitating the presentation by him of his arguments. To conclude that the
Tribunal was required in effect to
identify and guide the applicant as to the
specific matters he should address, in order to best advance the broader
contentions he
was making, would impose an unrealistic burden on a busy Tribunal
and risk detracting from the neutrality of the Tribunal’s
role. It may
also carry some risks. A court or tribunal will usually be unaware of the
complete evidential and forensic landscape
that might inform the choices
litigants, including unrepresented litigants, make, and it should therefore be
careful about being
overly prescriptive in the identification of relevant
matters about which evidence or submissions should be made. Fundamentally,
was said in
Gassy v The King
, it remains for the parties to define the
issues and to select the evidence and arguments on which they rely.
(citations omitted)
Gassy v The King
it was held that:
A litigant has a
fundamental right to self-representation. Despite the prevalence of
unrepresented litigants, it remains for the
parties to define the issues and to
select the evidence and arguments on which they rely.
(citations omitted)
have concerns about the findings that are expressed in paragraph [10] of
SACAT’s decision in which the learned Senior Member
17 September 2024, 2 of her dogs escaped from her property and one of them
attacked and bit another dog. This incident is relevant
to the Tribunal’s
decision in 2 ways. Firstly, it detracts from Ms Rollins’ submission that
it would not be possible
for Hulk to escape from her property due to the height
of the fence and that fact that she is ‘always there’ except for
‘2 hours per week’. Secondly, it detracts from Ms Rollins’
submission that she is able to manage dogs, and that
Hulk would be calm and not
aggressive if put into her care.
respondent’s evidence before the Tribunal consisted of evidence from Ms
Cheryl Doudle, a Senior Community Inspector with
the Council,
concerns. In terms of housing, I understand that Ms Rollins already has three
large dogs that she is the owner of. During
conversations she has advised that
if she were to take Hulk, she would re-home her three dogs. I question whether
that would be the
case. If that wasn’t the case, I would be concerned
given the behaviour displayed by Hulk is highly dog-aggressive, I’m
concerned that he would be housed at a property with four other dogs. Also
concerned that Ms Rollins has talked about how secure
her property is. But, on
17 September 2024, two of her dogs escaped her property and were involved in a
dog attack, resulting in
a single bite wound to the victim dog.
evidence before the Tribunal concerning that incident from the applicant was as
Also, can I
add that when my two dogs did get out, there was no brutal attack or anything
like that. As a matter of fact, I went
and saw the Council, my Council Marion,
it was just a report made. It was an accident and it wasn’t my fault. My
get out of my yard. The fellow that was repairing my fence came with
me and owned up to the fact that he didn’t shut the gate
properly while he
was welding up the bars there to allow for a padlock. I could have strangled
him, but, yeah. Because my dogs
just never get out. And, he just had not shut
the gate properly. Lucky I was in the front yard. One of the dogs jumped on
gate and bang, open she come. But, yeah, it was really a nothing
occurrence. But still, two of them did get out. But, I was on
top of it pretty
well straight away. Yeah, it doesn’t happen. It never, ever, ever
happens. I keep my gates padlocked at
further questioning by the learned Senior Member, the following evidence was
did, yeah. But, of course, yes she panicked and so did I. You know, you
don’t know what dogs are going to do.
But, my dogs are not vicious at
all. I’m grateful that they didn’t actually attack. One of them
was just jumping around
like a lunatic and the other one was just wagging its
tail. It was a non-event, but they shouldn’t have got out and I take
ownership of that.
respondent on appeal accepted that the difficulty in terms of the findings of
the Tribunal is that the learned Senior Member
does not identify the basis for
preferring the evidence of the respondent on this topic over the evidence of the
learned Senior Member also makes no mention in the reasons for decision of the
applicant’s unchallenged evidence that Hulk
had resided with her for a
couple of years, there were no reported incidents in that time, and that he had
been fine with other dogs.
learned Senior Member made the following factual findings in respect of the 8
August 2024
mind that Hulk had previously been involved in an incident on 8 August 2024
where he escaped from another property and by
his behaviour caused a passerby to
believe that he was about to attack her dog. Hulk did not inflict injury
although he grabbed
the other dog with his mouth. No action was taken by the
council in whose area this incident occurred.
evidence led from the respondent upon which the finding at paragraph [8], that a
passerby believed that Hulk was about to attack
her dog, was as
notes that were written by Charles Sturt Council, have said that:
Hulk and his mate dog Prada were wandering about.
The allegation that was made was that:
Hulk rushed over and grabbed the victim dog with his mouth, but didn’t
The notes were:
He was mouthy, no injuries, victims think the dog was just being playful or
interested but not aggressive. Female dog was not involved.
respondent accepted on appeal that there was a distinction between the evidence
before the Tribunal and the finding concerning
I have some difficulty
in accepting that the evidence supported a finding that Hulk by his behaviour on
8 August 2024 caused a passerby
to believe that he was about to attack her
learned Senior Member also referred at paragraph [13] of the reasons to
‘Hulk’s history of attacks.’ It is
difficult to characterise
the 8 August 2024 incident as supportive of a finding that there was a history
of attacks, although the
respondent on this appeal characterised that reference
as a reference by SACAT to both the 8 August 2024 incident together with the
January 2025 incident.
learned Senior Member held:
The respondent submitted
that with Ms Rollins already owning 3 dogs, she would not be permitted a
dog and that in order to have Hulk she would need to give up one
of her other dogs. Ms Rollins agreed that her local council will
not permit her
to have 4 dogs. She said that she intends to surrender one of her dogs to her
partner who lives in a different property.
However that surrender has not yet
occurred and no steps have been taken to transfer the registered ownership of
any of Ms Rollins’
existing dogs. Ms Rollins submitted that she wanted
to ‘wait and see’ what the outcome of this Tribunal proceeding
before undertaking the transfer process. However that ‘wait and
see’ approach means that the Tribunal cannot be confident
that Hulk could
lawfully be put in Ms Rollins’ care even if the Destruction order were to
be revoked.
evidence before the Tribunal on that topic was as
MEMBER D’ARCY: Is your partner is he now the registered owner of Bailey?
GAIL ROLLINS: No, not yet. We’re just waiting to see, I’m just
waiting to see what happens here. Everything will be finalised.
There is no
point spending money to do all those things if I am not successful, you know.
But, yes, it is going to happen, it can
be done and there’s no problems
SENIOR MEMBER D’ARCY: Well, the difficulty with not having done it, Ms
Rollins, is that it puts me in a position of needing
to trust that it will
GAIL ROLLINS: Okay, well, you can trust that. You can speak to my partner if
you like, there’s no problems there too. I could
make a phone call.
SENIOR MEMBER D’ARCY: Well, I don't know what evidence you expect me to
take from him that would be relevant.
GAIL ROLLINS: Okay. Well, you know, I’m on my own here, I’ve been
on my own the whole way through this. You know, I don't
know what else to do. It
is not something that I’m accustomed to, having to deal with this it has
not been easy. And, but some
things just I know that will have to be done if
I’m successful, but it has just been something that I’m unaccustomed
to, you know.
is difficult to ascertain how corroborative evidence from the applicant’s
partner as to his willingness to accept the transfer
of ownership of Bailey
would not have been relevant to the finding the Tribunal ultimately made, namely
that, the ‘Tribunal
cannot be confident that Hulk could lawfully be put in
Ms Rollins’ care even if the destruction order were to be
any event, as the respondent properly conceded on the appeal, orders could have
been made by the Tribunal which made the revocation
of the destruction order
consequent upon the applicant transferring the ownership of her other dog,
Bailey, to her partner.
am mindful that, as B Doyle J held in
an unrealistic
burden should not be imposed upon a tribunal concerning the extent to which a
tribunal should identify and guide the
applicant as to the specific matters a
self-represented litigant should address. However, the difficulty with the
manner in which
the Tribunal dealt with the evidence concerning the number of
dogs to be owned by the applicant is that the comments made by the
Tribunal on
this topic may have dissuaded the applicant from calling additional supportive
evidence on this topic. To the extent
that the applicant seeks to raise a
ground of procedural fairness, I consider this ground is reasonably
addition, as I have identified above, it is reasonably arguable that the
Tribunal’s reasoning at paragraphs [8] and [13]
contain the making of
factual findings which are arguably not supported by the evidence before the
Tribunal. The factual findings,
in paragraphs [8] and [13], concern adverse
findings about a prior incident involving Hulk on 8 August 2024. This factual
arguably formed an essential step in the Tribunal’s reasoning.
The factual finding at paragraph [10] concerns an incident
including two other
dogs which occurred on 17 September 2024. It is difficult to ascertain whether
that factual finding was made
after assessment of the differing versions of the
incident before the Tribunal.
however to the question of leave to appeal, although, for the reasons I have
outlined above, there are reasonably arguable
grounds, in order for there to be
a grant of leave, the subject matter of the appeal must be of sufficient
substance to justify
consideration,
overarching consideration is the interests of
A matter which weighs
heavily against the grant of leave being in the interests of justice in this
case is the question of the utility
am unable to identify any utility in the grant of leave in circumstances where
the dog has been euthanised.
do not accept the submission initially advanced by the respondent that there is
utility in the appeal by the operation of s 59A.
Section 59A(3) only has
operation if the applicant had owned or was responsible for the control of Hulk
in the circumstances described
in that section. On the evidence, the applicant
was not responsible for the control of Hulk when the incident leading to the
of the destruction order occurred. The applicant’s ownership did
not occur until after Hulk had been detained at an animal
holding facility.
would refuse leave to appeal as there is no utility in the appeal. Whilst it
may be of little comfort to the parties, it is important
to consider that even
if there had been utility in the appeal and a grant of leave to appeal, this
would not necessarily have altered
the outcome for Hulk. The severity of the
attack which occurred on 30 January 2025 would have been a significant matter
for consideration
on any rehearing before this Court or should the matter have
been remitted for rehearing before the Tribunal. As I have determined
is not in the interests of justice to grant leave to appeal, I do not address
that issue further.
Conclusion and orders
order of this Court is that the application for leave to appeal is dismissed.
The destruction order of 28
February 2025 identifies the order being made pursuant to section 50(2) of the
Act. Notice of the intention
to make that order had been given on 7 February
2025 to the then owner of Hulk: see Appeal Book (FDN 7) at 196 (Statement of
dated 12 June 2025 at 4, [23]) (‘AB’).
South Australian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
s 37(1)(a).
Respondent’s Written
Submissions dated 13 October 2025 (FDN 4) at 1, [4] (‘RWS’).
Appeal Transcript dated 20
October 2025 & 23 October 2025 at T5.18-24 (‘AT’); Affidavit of
Paul St Leger Kelly sworn
23 October 2025 (FDN 12).
RWS at 2, [9]; AB at 193
(Statement of Reasons dated 12 June 2025 at 1, [3]).
AB at 194 (Statement of
Reasons dated 12 June 2025 at 2, [12]-[15]).
Wilson v City of
Onkaparinga
[2024] SASC 139
(B Doyle J).
Notice of Appeal (FDN 1).
Wilson v City of
Onkaparinga
[2024] SASC 139
(B Doyle J).
RWS at 6, [31].
RWS at 2, [5].
RWS at 6, [31].
RWS at 6, [31].
AT at T30.1-7.
Appeal Transcript dated 14
October 2025 at T4.2-11.
See AT at T19.1-9.
Book of Documents (as
lodged before the South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal and
provided to this Court pursuant to
r 214.3(1) of the
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
South Australian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
South Australian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
AT at T20.3-5.
South Australian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
South Australian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
See, as to being reasonably
Jackson v Lepp Investments Pty Ltd
[2016] SASC 62
(Parker J);
Pix v South Australian Housing Trust
[2016] SASCFC 57
(2016) 125 SASR 10
(Kourakis CJ, with Bampton
and S Doyle JJ agreeing). See, as to substance:
Aldridge v Registrar of
Firearms (SA)
[2022] SASC 5
(Parker J).
Varricchio v Wentzel
[2016] SASC 86
(2016) 125 SASR 191
(S Doyle J).
RWS at 5, [27].
Jackson v Lepp Investments Pty Ltd
(2016) 125 SASR 1
(Parker J);
Pix v South Australian
Housing Trust
[2016] SASCFC 57
(2016) 125 SASR 10
(Kourakis CJ,
with Bampton and S Doyle JJ agreeing).
AB at 9 (Order of the
Tribunal dated 26 June 2025 at 2, [5]-[8]).
AB at 9 (Order of the
Tribunal dated 26 June 2025 at 2, [12]).
AB at 10 (Order of the
Tribunal dated 26 June 2025 at 3, ‘Order of the Tribunal’).
See, as to being reasonably
Jackson v Lepp Investments Pty Ltd
[2016] SASC 62
(Parker J);
Pix v South Australian Housing Trust
[2016] SASCFC 57
(2016) 125 SASR 10
(Kourakis CJ, with Bampton
and S Doyle JJ agreeing). See, as to substance:
Aldridge v Registrar of
Firearms (SA)
[2022] SASC 5
(Parker J).
Jackson v Lepp
Investments Pty Ltd
[2016] SASC 62
(2016) 125 SASR 1
(Parker J);
Pix v South Australian Housing Trust
[2016] SASCFC 57
(2016) 125 SASR 10
(Kourakis CJ, with Bampton and S Doyle JJ agreeing).
Wilson v City of
Onkaparinga
[2024] SASC 139
(B Doyle J).
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
(1936) 55 CLR 499.
Wilson v City of
Onkaparinga
[2024] SASC 139
(B Doyle J).
Wilson v City of
Onkaparinga
[2024] SASC 139
(B Doyle J).
Wilson v City of
Onkaparinga
[2024] SASC 139
(B Doyle J).
Gassy v The King
[2023] SASCA 90
(Livesey P, David JA and Stein AJA).
AB at 37 (Transcript of
Proceedings,
Rollins v City of Playford Council
(South Australian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal, D’Arcy SM, 20 June 2025) at 14 (‘SACAT
Transcript’)).
AB at 40 (SACAT Transcript
AB at 40 (SACAT Transcript
AT at T22.34-8-23.1-6.
AB at 41 (SACAT Transcript
AB at 9 (Order of the
Tribunal dated 26 June 2025 at 2, [8]).
AB at 37 (SACAT Transcript
AT at T25.30.
AB at 9 (Order of the
Tribunal dated 26 June 2025 at 2, [11]).
AB at 42 (SACAT Transcript
AB at 9 (Order of the
Tribunal dated 26 June 2025 at 2, [11]).
AT at T26.12-23.
See, as to being reasonably
Jackson v Lepp Investments Pty Ltd
[2016] SASC 62
(Parker J);
Pix v South Australian Housing Trust
[2016] SASCFC 57
(2016) 125 SASR 10
(Kourakis CJ, with Bampton
and S Doyle JJ agreeing). See, as to substance:
Aldridge v Registrar of
Firearms (SA)
[2022] SASC 5
(Parker J).
Jackson v Lepp
Investments Pty Ltd
[2016] SASC 62
(2016) 125 SASR 1
(Parker J);
Pix v South Australian Housing Trust
[2016] SASCFC 57
(2016) 125 SASR 10
(Kourakis CJ, with Bampton and S Doyle JJ agreeing).
Kemp v Health and
Community Services Complaints Commissioner
[2025] SASC 56
J). See also
Fletcher v Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency
[2023] SASCA 36 (Livesey
P and Lovell JA).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (405 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter