URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAOmbFOI/2022/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:02:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Department of the Premier and Cabinet 2021/07312 [2022] SAOmbFOI 23 (2 March 2022)
Department of the Premier and Cabinet 2021/07312 [2022] SAOmbFOI 23 (2 March 2022)
Determination
External review - section 39
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Mr Peter Malinauskas MP
Department of the Premier and Cabinet
Ombudsman reference:
Agency reference:
Determination:
The determination of the agency is varied.
Date of Ombudsman’s determination:
2 March 2022
Issues considered:
Whether disclosure constitutes an offence
Exemption clauses relied upon:
Legislation considered:
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Ombudsman Act 1972
Terms of the original application:
All emails, letters, memos, text messages, notes and any other documents
that relate to correspondence between the Department of Premier
and Cabinet and
the Ombudsman in relation to the use of data, website redirections, facebook
advertising, NationBuilder, promotions
on Steven Marshall’s facebook page
by the Government or the Office of the Premier.
Application for access
1. By application under the
Freedom of Information Act 1991
) the applicant requested access from the agency
All emails, letters, memos, text messages, notes and any other documents that
relate to correspondence between the Department of Premier
and Cabinet and the
Ombudsman in relation to the use of data, website redirections, facebook
advertising, NationBuilder, promotions
on Steven Marshall’s facebook page
by the Government or the Office of the Premier.
2. For ease of reference, procedural steps relating to the application and
the external review are set out in Appendix
3. This external review is within the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman as a
relevant review authority under section 39 of the FOI Act.
Provisional
determination
4. I provided my tentative view about the agency’s determination to the
parties, by my provisional determination dated 8 February
2022. I informed the
parties that subject to my receipt and consideration of submissions from the
parties I proposed to vary the
agency’s determination.
5. By emails dated 8 February 2022 and 22 February 2022, the applicant and
agency respectively advised that they had no further submissions
Accordingly, this determination is in the same terms as my provisional
determination.
Relevant law
6. A person has a legally enforceable right to be given access to an
agency’s documents in accordance with the FOI
7. The FOI Act provides that upon receipt of an access application, an agency
may make a determination to refuse access where the
documents are
‘exempt’. Schedule 1 lists various exemption clauses which may be
claimed by an agency as a basis for refusing
8. The following clause of Schedule 1 of the FOI Act is relevant to my
external review:
12—Documents the subject of secrecy provisions
(1) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter the disclosure of
which would constitute an offence against an Act.
Section 29A(3)
Ombudsman Act 1972
is also relevant to my
29A—Confidentiality
(3) A person who receives information knowing that the information is
connected with a matter that forms or is the subject of a complaint,
assessment, investigation, referral or evaluation under this Act must not
disclose that information unless—
(a) the person is authorised in writing by the Ombudsman or by a person
approved by the Ombudsman under this section to give an authorisation;
(b) the disclosure of that information is for the purpose of—
(i) dealing with a matter under this Act; or
(ii) a criminal proceeding, a proceeding for the imposition of a penalty or
disciplinary action; or
(iii) a person obtaining legal advice or legal representation or for the
purposes of determining whether a person is entitled to an
indemnity for legal
(iv) a person obtaining medical or psychological assistance from a medical
practitioner or psychologist; or
(v) a person advising their employer; or
(vi) a person advising their business partners or others with whom a relevant
fiduciary relationship exists; or
(vii) the management of a workers compensation claim; or
(c) the information relates to the person and is disclosed by the person to a
close family member of the person.
Maximum penalty: $2 500 or imprisonment for 6 months.
10. Under section 48, the onus is on the agency to justify its determination
‘in any proceedings’. This includes the external
11. Section 39(11) provides that the Ombudsman may confirm, vary or reverse
the agency’s determination in an external review,
based on the
circumstances existing at the time of review.
Documents in
12. The agency identified 38 documents within the scope of the application
and submits that all 38 documents are fully exempt.
Issues in this
13. Having regard to the agency’s submissions and the exemption clauses
provided in Schedule 1 of the FOI Act, it is for me
to determine whether to
confirm, vary or reverse the agency’s determination in regard to the
documents in issue in this external
Consideration
14. Clause 12(1) of the FOI Act provides that a document is an exempt
document if it contains matter the disclosure of which would
constitute an
offence against an Act. As outlined in the agency’s determination, the
documents in issue relate to matters dealt
with by my Office under the
Ombudsman Act 1972
Section 29A(3)
Ombudsman Act 1972
provides that it is an
offence for a person who receives information connected with a matter that forms
or is the subject of a complaint,
report, assessment, investigation, referral or
evaluation under the Act to disclose the information.
16. Many of the documents in issue were clearly received by the agency and
relate to a matter dealt with under the
Ombudsman Act 1972
17. Although several of the documents were not received, but were in fact
created by the agency. I am satisfied that those documents
contain information
which was received by the agency. Additionally, it is my view that
is intended to have a broad application such that it should apply to
information which reveals even the existence or nature of a
complaint, report,
assessment, investigation, referral or evaluation. The reference to information
‘connected’ with such
a matter supports a broad interpretation of
the section.
18. I have also given consideration to the extent to which the information
contained in the documents might be within the public domain,
particularly
noting the applicant’s reference to media involvement in their application
for external review.
19. In my view, regardless of whether or not the information is known to a
person, or whether certain information has already been
revealed, in the
circumstances of this matter, I consider that any disclosure of information
would be an offence under the
Ombudsman Act 1972
20. In reaching this view, I have given regard to the matter of
Courts Administration
In that matter, the District Court considered clause 12(1) of the FOI Act and
the confidentiality provisions of the since repealed
Protection Act 1993
21. The repealed Act provided that under section 58, a person ‘must not
divulge’ information of a certain kind, and that
the act of divulging
information of that kind would be an offence.
22. The District Court made the following observation in relation to the
construction of what it meant to ‘divulge’ information
of the kind
captured by section 58 of the Children’s Protection Act:
In my view, the plain and ordinary meaning of “divulge” is to
disclose. It does not necessarily convey the imparting of
that which is
previously unknown.
23. The District Court also went on to the consider the principles underlying
the Children’s Protection Act.
24. I consider that the observation by the District Court in Ward is relevant
to the circumstances of this matter. As held by the
District Court, I consider
that to ‘divulge’ is to ‘disclose’. Further, having
regard to the principles of
Ombudsman Act 1972
, I consider that
‘disclose’ should be given a similarly broad interpretation in this
25. In my view, the meaning of ‘disclose’, in the context of this
matter, includes disclosure of information that may
already be known to certain
parties. Regardless of what information has already been released, disclosure of
the information is an
offence, and, on the information before me, none of the
relevant legislated exceptions are applicable.
26. I consider that, other than two exceptions, all of the documents in issue
contain information the disclosure of which would constitute
an offence, and are
therefore exempt.
27. I do however consider that Attachment A in document 18 and the entirety
of document 23 can be disclosed. Absent any further context
from the surrounding
documents, it is my view that these two documents do not contain any information
connected with a matter dealt
with by my Office.
Determination
28. In light of my views above, I vary the agency’s determination such
that Attachment A in document 18 and the entirety of
document 23 be released.
The remainder of the documents are exempt pursuant to clause
Wayne Lines
SA OMBUDSMAN
Procedural steps
30 September 2021
The agency received the FOI application dated 30 September 2021.
31 October 2021
The agency failed to determine the application within the 30 day period
required by the FOI Act,
deemed to have refused access to the
10 November 2021
The agency received the internal review application dated 10 November
23 November 2021
The agency confirmed the determination.
26 November 2021
The Ombudsman received the applicant’s request for external review
dated 26 November 2021.
29 November 2021
The Ombudsman advised the agency of the external review and requested
submissions and documentation.
20 December 2021
The agency provided the Ombudsman with its submissions and
documentation.
8 February 2022
The Ombudsman issued his provisional determination and invited submissions
from the parties.
8 February 2022
The applicant advised that he had no further submissions to make.
22 February 2022
The agency advised that it had no further submissions to make.
Freedom of Information Act
section 12.
Ward v Courts
Administration Authority
[2003] SADC 18.
Ward v Courts
Administration Authority
[2003] SADC 18
Freedom of Information Act
section 14(2).
Freedom of Information Act
section 19(2).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (994 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter