URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCRP/1994/502.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:09:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Clarke v State of SA (Dept Employment & TAFE) (No.2) [1994] SAWCRP 502 (13 September 1994)
[1994] SAWCRP 502
Review Officer
Player-Brown
Catchwords:
Arising from employment —
claim not accompanied by prescribed medical certificate — worker lodging
claim from original
allegedly sustaining injury — medical reports confirming injury but
describing history or indicating relationship with employment in South Australia
— Review Officer not satisfied that compensability
is established by the
material before her — decision to reject claim confirmed.
RE: CLARKE AND STATE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA (DEPARTMENT OF EMPLOYMENT AND
TECHNICAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION) (No.2)
(1994) 7 WCRP Determination 94-0502
Determination No. 94-0502
Workers’ Compensation Review
CLARKE AND STATE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(DEPARTMENT OF
EMPLOYMENT AND TECHNICAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION)(NO:
(06643214/01/01)
Determination of Review Officer
made on 13th September, 1994
(Hearings 17th December 1991, 6th
May, 7th July, 14th September, 29th October,
12th November and 8th
December 1993, 17th March, 29th April 1994
and further documentation
received dated 7th July 1994)
Review Officer Player-Brown
This is the determination of an application for review lodged on 25th
March, 1991 by Amanda Clarke, as worker under a contract of
service with the
Department of Employment and Technical and further Education, as employer. The
application seeks review of a decision
of the employer dated 10th September,
1990 rejecting the worker's claim for compensation dated 20th December,
The application was thus lodged outside the one month prescribed
time limit but, in exercising the discretion delegating to the Corporation
that time, an extension of time was granted on 22nd October, 1991 for the
application to be brought.
When the matter was called on for hearing the
worker did not appear, but dating from 6th May, 1993 was represented by officers
the WorkCover Employee Advocate's Unit, initially Ms Nadia Zivkovic and
latterly Ms Chris Matthews. The employer was represented
throughout by counsel
of Crown Solicitors Office, predominately Mr Brenton Illingworth.
of background I refer to my ruling made on 28th October, 1992 wherein I
determined that I had "jurisdiction to proceed to conduct
a review of the
decision to which the application relates":
[1992] SAWCRP 533.
procedural concerns expressed on behalf of the employer, I did not then proceed
to make any determination as to the merits
of the case or as to the adequacy or
otherwise of the "medical evidence" before me but, pursuant to Section 89 of the
Act, afforded
the parties a further opportunity to make submissions, "call or
give evidence and to examine or cross examine witnesses". Ultimately
party sought to call any witnesses and so the matter is to be determined on the
basis of the documents before me and the
written and oral submissions made by
the parties. Although possessing wide investigatory powers, Section 90 of the
Act could not
afford me power to summons the attendance of any person outside
the state. The unsworn evidence and submissions of the worker are
within letters written by her and dated 12th April, 1st June, 21st July and
despatched 15th September, 1990 and 2nd January,
1991, 7th January and 5th
April, 1992.
The worker normally resides in England but embarked on a
"working holiday" to Australia, arriving in Sydney on 21st April, 1989 and
departing on 10th March, 1990.
The visa document issued by the
Department of Immigration permitted the worker entry into Australia on 21st
April, 1989 as a temporary
resident and entitled her to take up employment
during the period of her stay.
Some short term employment was undertaken
prior to that with the Department of Employment and Further Education. In her
letter dated
7th January, 1992 the worker wrote:
"I had even worked as a secretary in Sydney for five weeks at the beginning
of my working holiday in April 1989."
There is no dispute between the
parties, and a "Public Service Board of South Australia - Authorisation of
appointment" evidences,
that the worker commenced temporary employment with the
employer on 23rd October, 1989 as a Clerical Officer (Class 1) performing
receptionist/typist duties. Initially the appointment was for the period from
23rd October, 1989 to 24th November, 1989 but in fact
continued up until around
February 1990.
By claim for compensation dated 20th December, 1989 the
worker alleged suffering a "repetitive strain injury - extensor tendon strain"
affecting her "lower right arm/hand/fingers" occurring "due to unusually high
workload whilst at word processor" on 15th December,
circumstances allegedly to have given rise to the claimed disability were
further elaborated upon in her letter dated 7th January,
1992 wherein she
concluded at page 2:
"therefore, I submit that the combination of working at poorly designed
equipment over some length of time and the pressure of work
during December 1989
was (sic) the direct cause of my injury."
That claim was not supported by
a certificate in the prescribed form completed by a recognised medical expert
but an undated report
of Dr C R Balkwill, General Practitioner, was received by
the employer on 17th January, 1990. Subsequent reports dated 28th July
August, 1990 were provided in the form of letters to Dr Dickens, the worker's
General Practitioner in England, from Miss
Janet Porter, Accident and Emergency
Consultant and certificates titled 'Doctor's Statement' tendered from Dr
Dickens, dated 20th
May, 19th June, 6th July and 6th September, 1990 and from Dr
Beverton, at the same practice, dated 18th April, 10th May, 26th July
August, 1990.
The claim was ultimately rejected by the employer by letter
to the worker dated 10th September, 1990 which advised as follows:
"I refer to previous correspondence in relation to the abovementioned matter
for a strained lower right arm/hand/fingers which you
allege is in consequence
of your duties with the Department of Employment and Technical and Further
Education on 15th December, 1989.
Pursuant to
Section 53(5)
and (6) of the
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act, 1986
, you are hereby notified that, on behalf of the
Department of Employment and Technical and Further Education of the State of
Australia, I have determined that your claim for compensation is
The grounds for rejection are that there is insufficient evidence that you
suffered a work related disability and there is no evidence
of a current
disability to work or that any such disability, if there were one, arose out of
your employment with the Department
of Employment and Technical and Further
Education."
As stated in my ruling of 28th October, 1992, the lack of
prescribed medical certificate supporting the worker's claim did not render
claim a nullity and having proceeded, as set out above, to determine the claim,
it is clear that the employer did not treat it
Act, in so far as is relevant for present purposes provides:
"(1) Subject to this section, a claim for compensation-
(a) must be made in a manner and form approved by the Corporation;
(b) must be made within the prescribed period;
(c) must be supported by a certificate in the prescribed form by a recognised
medical expert certifying-
(i) the nature of the disability;
(ii) the probable cause of the disability so far as that is ascertainable by
the medical expert;
(iii) where the claimant claims to be incapacitated for work - the extent and
probable duration of the incapacity.
The provisions of
Section 52(1)
the Act are expressed in mandatory terms and are procedural requirements which,
"if not adhered to may provide a proper basis
upon which the exempt employer can
decide to reject the claim" (
Arrowcrest Group Pty Ltd v Vo
Compensation Appeal Tribunal A24/1989;
(1989) 1 WCATR 215).
(supra) the Review Officer exercised his statutory power to
determine the worker's claim pursuant to Section 102 of the Act. That
worker had an entitlement to weekly payments of income maintenance, medical and
like expenses, was confirmed by the Workers Compensation
Appeal Tribunal despite
the medical report offered in support of the claim not strictly being in
compliance with the prescribed form.
Within its decision dated 10th
September, 1990 the employer does not specifically refer to the provisions of
Section 52(1)(c)
of the Act and the absence of any prescribed form as a basis
for rejecting the worker's claim. The cited grounds for rejection are
broadly stated referring to "insufficient evidence" of any compensable
disability having been sustained.
In my view the employer was not bound
to reject the worker's claim by virtue of any failure to comply with the
provisions of
Section 52(1)
of the Act but had a discretion to accept the claim
if supported by sufficient medical evidence provided in some other manner and
WorkCover v Mullaney
Workers Compensation Appeal Tribunal
A23/1993; (1993) 170 LSJS 191;
[1993] SAWCAT 23).
The decision of the
employer was to reject the claim on the basis that, having regard to all the
evidence, they were not satisfied
as the balance of probabilities as to the
matters contained in
Section 52(1)(c)(i)
, (ii) and (iii) ie. the nature and
cause of the disability, extent and probable duration of the
incapacity.
It was the worker's evidence that she sought treatment
shortly after sustaining injury and was advised to 'rest' her arms and
anti-inflammatory cream. She stated that she continued at work
undertaking 'reduced' duties for around one month before leaving
Adelaide to
continue her travels. She alleged that she had intended to work in Sydney for a
further month but was precluded by her
disability and on her return to England
was similarly unable to secure employment within her traditional
At home in England, the worker stated she sought treatment from
her General Practitioner, physiotherapy and was referred to a specialist
her arm in a splint for a fortnight to "complete the cure".
By the date
of her letter of 2nd January, 1991 the worker reported she was "no longer
undergoing any treatment for ..(her).. injury"
and that employment entered into
on 14th September, 1990 had "proved to be of a nature which has not brought
from ..(her).. injury".
However, in her
submissions dated 7th January, 1992 the worker stated she had ceased that
employment as accountancy had "proved too
difficult", and alleged an ongoing
incapacity for 'keyboard' work as a result of 'permanent stiffness and varying
degrees of pain
in ..(her).. right thumb'.
The undated report of Dr
Balkwill confirms that the worker first sought treatment from a locum at that
practice on 18th December,
1989 and notes the worker's complaints of pain
related to her right forearm and wrist soreness. Upon examination the locum
"minimal forearm tenderness" and upon review by Dr Hughes on 28th
December, 1989 tenderness 'over the dorsum of her right wrist'
and 'pain with
restricted extension of the wrist' were recorded.
Dr Balkwill reports
that 'Dr Hughes felt she had reversible fatigue syndrome - possibly tendonitis'
and Movelat was prescribed.
The worker first consulted Dr Balkwill on
17th January, 1990 and complained both forearms were 'still aching but improving
Dr Balkwill prescribed Feldene for pain relief but did not review
the worker's condition after that consultation.
The certificates
completed by Drs Beverton and Dickens, Essex Family Practitioner Committee, then
date from 18th April, 1990 to the
6th September, 1990 and advised that the
worker ought refrain from work from 9th April, 1990 to 30th September, 1990 and
the worker as suffering from 'tenosynovitis'.
That diagnosis is
further confirmed by Miss Janet E Porter, Accident and Emergency Consultant, to
whom the worker was referred by
Dr Dickens. In her letter to Dr Dickens dated
28th July, 1990 Miss Porter opines that the worker "appears on examination to
tenosynovitis of her flexor policis longus tendon' but goes on to state
"this is a diagnosis from first principles and not a condition
I have ever
encountered or heard of!". She treated the worker with immobilisation and
anti-inflammatory tablets but by in her later
report to Dr Dickens of 22nd
August, 1990 opined there was no longer 'any evidence of tenosynovitis' the
worker having developed
'more widespread shooting pains, now in both arms, which
do not seem to correspond to any anatomical structure and cannot be reproduced
by mechanical means'. Miss Porter went on to state her view that the pain was
'likely to be functional' and referred to the workers's
tearfulness and stress
level associated with the commencement of accountancy training.
a number of difficult aspects related to the diagnosis of the worker's
condition. No ongoing treatment was provided in
Australia and none of the
doctors consulted by the worker clearly express any opinion as to the nature,
causation or extent of the
worker's disability.
There is no record of any
history provided to medical practitioners the worker consulted in England.
Whilst they may be eminently
qualified, they are not 'recognised medical
experts' as defined by this Act and Miss Porter's field of expertise is unclear.
A diagnosis
is made by Miss Porter, Dr Dickens and Dr Beverton and periods of
incapacity for work certified, but any relationship between that
disability and
employment in Australia in December 1989 is not recorded.
Based on the
foregoing, there is some evidence of the worker's complaints of pain in respect
to her right forearm and wrist dating
proffered a possible diagnosis of tendonitis on 28th December, 1989 and whilst
there is no
medical evidence in respect to the period after 17th January, 1990
until 9th April, 1990 in the report of Miss Parker dated 28th
July, 1990 the
diagnosis of tenosynovitis is made.
Given the variable extent and level
of symptoms complained of by the worker to the various practitioners she had
consulted and the
dearth of evidence in respect to the period between 17th
January and 9th April, 1990 it is unclear whether Dr Hughes and Miss Porter
treating the same persisting condition. Even where that diagnosis is accepted
it is clear on all the evidence it is no longer
tenable by 22nd August,
In respect to any finding as to the probable cause of the
disability, the evidence is even more unsatisfactory. The worker relates
onset of her symptoms to the work she was undertaking prior to 15th December,
1989 and the report of Dr Balkwill notes the worker's
complaints of pain being
associated by her with 'typewriter usage' causing 'discomfort' but none of the
medical evidence addresses
that question. The question of causation is not
addressed within any of the reports or certificates provided and so, on that
I can not be satisfied that on the balance of probabilities as to any
connection between any alleged disability and her employment
Having found the evidence unsatisfactory in that respect, I
make no further findings in respect to compensability or incapacity for
The reports and certificates before me, in my view, do not satisfy
the requirements of the Act. They do not contain the information
required by
Section 52(1)(c)
of the Act. The evidence does not establish to the requisite
standard that the worker suffered a disability arising from
employment.
DETERMINATION
Pursuant to
I confirm the decision of the employer dated 20th December, 1989 to reject the
worker's claim.
Any appeal against this determination must be lodged with
the Workers' Compensation Appeal Tribunal within one month of the receipt
this determination. Enquiries about appeals may be directed to the Registrar of
the Tribunal, Riverside Centre, North Terrace,
Adelaide (50 metres west of train
station), (Phone: 207.0999) and forms for appeal are available from the same
M Player-Brown
REVIEW OFFICER
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (56.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter