URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAHPT/2019/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia v Newblack [2019] SAHPT 5 (29 January 2019)
Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia v Newblack
[2019] SAHPT
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL OF SOUTH
NURSING & MIDWIFERY BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
NEWBLACK, Leanne
Health Practitioners
5755 of 2017
HEARING DATE:
16 November
DECISION OF SA HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL:
constituted
by: President M Ardlie
Dr G Brideson
Dr K Thornton
DELIVERED ON:
16 November 2018
REASONS FOR
DECISION PUBLISHED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Complainant alleges that the respondent
behaved in a way that constitutes professional misconduct – Seven grounds
were pleaded
upon which the referral was made to the Tribunal – Respondent
administered intravenous morphine to the wrong patient –
The respondent
failed to comply with the clinical procedures and policies as to how to
administer an S8 drug such as morphine in
that she did not identify the patient
and she did not administer the drug in the presence of another appropriately
qualified practitioner
– The respondent failed to disclose the fact of the
wrongful administration in any of the records or in the systems that the
hospital had in place – The respondent falsified the S8 and S4 requisition
form which keeps control of and tracks the usage
of morphine which is a
controlled drug of dependence – The respondent encouraged or conspired
with two other staff members
to not report the fact of the wrongful
administration – The respondent gave a false explanation as to what
happened to the
investigator from AHPRA in a formal letter of response –
The respondent gave a knowingly false explanation to investigators
– The respondent admits that her conduct constitutes professional
misconduct –
: The conduct set out in the complaint constitutes
professional misconduct – The respondent is reprimanded – The
respondent’s
registration as a nurse be suspended for nine months –
Conditions are imposed upon the respondent’s registration –
review period for the conditions is 12 months – The respondent is to
pay the complainant’s costs of and incidental
to these proceedings to be
agreed or in default of agreement to be adjudicated – s5, Schedule 2 ss
193, 195, 196 Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (South Australia) Act
Craig v Medical Board of South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Rogers
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant: Mr S
Respondent: Ms G Hannon
Solicitors:
Complainant: Piper
Respondent: Union Legal SA
Introduction
complainant pursuant to the provisions of s 193 of Schedule 2 to the
Practitioner Regulation National Law (South Australia) Act 2010
Law) referred the matter concerning the respondent to the Tribunal on the basis
that it believed the respondent had behaved
in a way that constitutes
professional misconduct.
respondent was first registered in 1995 and commenced working at SA Health in
the Repatriation Hospital in the acute referral
unit. From there she went to
work at Flinders Medical Centre Emergency Department as a clinical nurse. Prior
to this incident she
had an exemplary record and had always received positive
professional development assessments.
Professional
misconduct is defined in s 5 of the National Law as
Professional misconduct, of a registered health
practitioner, includes –
(a) Unprofessional conduct by the practitioner that amounts to conduct that
is substantially below the standard reasonably expected
of a registered health
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience; and
(b) more than one instance of unprofessional conduct that, when considered
together, amounts to conduct that is substantially below
the standard reasonably
expected of a registered health practitioner of an equivalent level of training
or experience; and
(c) conduct of the practitioner, whether occurring in connection with the
practice of the health practitioner’s profession
or not, that is
inconsistent with the practitioner being a fit and proper person to hold
registration in the profession.
respondent admits that the conduct alleged against her in the complaint amounts
to professional misconduct.
complainant alleges seven grounds of professional misconduct as follows:
13 September 2015 at Flinders Medical Centre (‘FMC’), whilst in the
course of her duties as Clinical Nurse Consultant
in the Emergency Department
(‘ED’), the respondent administered intravenous morphine to the
wrong patient (‘Wrongful
Administration’).
13 September 2015 at FMC ED the respondent failed to comply with the Southern
Adelaide Local Health Network Clinical Procedure
Policy August 2014
‘Medication Administration’ by failing:
2.1 either adequately or at all to take proper and required measures to identify
the patient prior to the administration of the morphine;
2.2 to carry out the administration of the morphine in the presence of
another suitably qualified nurse or medical practitioner.
13 September 2015 at FMC ED in relation to the Wrongful Administration, the
respondent failed to disclose or in any way document
the Wrongful Administration
contrary to FMC’s policies and procedures and contrary to, and
substantially below, the nursing
practices reasonably expected of a Clinical
Nurse and registered nurse of the respondent’s experience and
13 September 2015 at FMC ED the respondent knowingly falsified the FMC
Controlled Drugs (S8 and S4) Requisition Form (hereafter
called ‘DDA
Register’) relating to a patient, BZ, to conceal the fact of the Wrongful
Administration.
13 September 2015 the respondent wrongfully requested; encouraged and/or
conspired with two other FMC staff (BS and SB) that they
not report, or in
any other way disclose to anyone at FMC, the Wrongful Administration.
formal response to the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency
(‘AHPRA’) dated 22 December 2015 (‘Respondent’s
Written Response’) the respondent knowingly gave to an AHPRA investigator
a false and misleading explanation.
24 February 2016 at AHPRA’s offices at level 11, 80 Grenfell Street
Adelaide SA 5000 at an interview (‘AHPRA Interview’)
pursuant to Schedule 5 to the National Law by duly authorised AHPRA
investigators, the respondent knowingly gave the said
AHPRA investigators a
false and misleading explanation.
Complainant’s submissions
response filed essentially admits everything (except some minor details), save
and except that the respondent says she was negligent
not reckless in not
identifying the patient and ensuring that the proper patient was given the
13 September 2015 the respondent was on duty in the emergency department as a
clinical nurse and agreed to look after one or more
patients of an enrolled
nurse who was going on a tea break. One of the duties that was allocated to her
was to administer morphine
to a patient BZ in cubicle 33.
respondent drew up an order for the morphine in the presence of another
registered nurse. At the time they drew the medication
from the medication room
details were completed on the form indicating that the dose had been
administered to the patient when all
that had been done is that the dose had
been drawn up ready for administration (the registered nurse has been
disciplined for this).
The other registered nurse went off to do something else
and did not stay when the respondent went to administer the morphine.
respondent went alone into cubicle 36 and not cubicle 33. She did not check the
patient’s name to ensure that she was dealing
with patient BZ. This was in
breach of the medical administration policy of SA Health as applied by Flinders
Medical Centre. The
policy required two qualified nurses to be present at the
time of the administration. There is the requirement to verify the
identity. The respondent did not do this, and assumed she had
the right patient, and proceeded to administer intravenously the morphine.
in the course of administering the morphine to the incorrect patient the
enrolled nurse returned from her tea break. The enrolled
nurse realised what was
going on and went and told the respondent to stop the administration as it was
not the correct patient.
respondent does not know how much morphine was given to the incorrect patient.
The respondent did not report this mistake to a
doctor or to management by
entering the matter into the Safety Learning System which is a mandatory
requirement at Flinders Medical
Centre for nurses. This requires the reporting
of any ‘incident’ which is defined as ‘any event or
circumstance
that resulted or could have resulted in unintended and/or
unnecessary harm to a person and/or or a complaint, loss or damage.’
the course of the investigation of the incident, the respondent for some time
claimed that she did report this mistake to a
doctor at the time. She maintained
this position until the day after her interview with AHPRA which was held on 24
February 2016.
continued to maintain that she had not wrongly altered and inserted false and
misleading information on the Flinders Medical Centre
Controlled Drugs (S8 and
S4) Requisition Form (DDA Register) relating to what morphine was administered
and to whom. It was not until
her response was filed on 23 May 2018 that she
admitted to the false entry.
respondent admitted that she inveigled the registered nurse and the enrolled
nurse on duty at the time not to report the incident.
Initially the enrolled
nurse agreed to do this but then thought better of it and notified her
supervisor’s which led to Flinders
Medical Centre carrying out their
internal investigation.
respondent made no entry in the patient’s clinical notes that the patient
had been erroneously administered morphine. The
patient was not told about this
conduct on the part of the respondent was substantially below the standard
reasonably expected of a nurse of her experience, training
and qualifications.
She initially started with an error in not identifying a patient. She then
proceeded to give the wrong patient
a dangerous drug. She compounded that by not
reporting the incident to management or the treating doctor, not entering the
in the patient’s records, not telling the patient of the error, and
not completing the SLS report. She then conspired with
the nurse to say nothing
to AHPRA. She was required
to act ethically and honestly. She has clearly not
done so. She was in breach of the code of professional conduct and the code of
conduct amounts to professional misconduct. The respondent by not being honest
compounded the original conduct. Disciplinary Tribunals
have taken a dim view of
that and have increased the period of suspension to reflect that
dishonesty.
handed up to the Tribunal draft minutes of order. The conduct set out in Grounds
1 and 2 of the complaint aggravated as it
was by Grounds 3 – 7 warrants a
reprimand, suspension from practice in the range of 6 – 12 months and
the imposition
of conditions upon registration as contained in the minutes of
Respondent’s Submissions
allegations are admitted. On the day of the incident it was extremely busy in
the FMC ED. The respondent received a text message
from her 15-year-old daughter
who had some mental health issues. In the message her daughter expressed
anxieties and feelings of
self-harm and harm to her siblings. Her daughter was
at home with her two siblings aged 14 and 11. The respondent became extremely
alarmed. She called both her mother and her husband who were 40 minutes away
from the house so any immediate help was not at hand.
She became extremely
distracted by that and with hindsight she should have reported to her manager
and gone home. It was in this
setting that she went on and made errors which she
now agrees are significant errors.
was suspended from duty during the period of the investigation and received her
base rate of pay. She returned to Flinders Medical
Centre following the
investigation and worked there for about seven months and was then on her
request transferred to the Noarlunga
Health Services. The respondent says that
the atmosphere in the FMC ED was extremely unsupportive. It was a fairly toxic
environment.
She had previously asked for a transfer which had been
the incident the respondent has engaged in extensive education. The respondent
tendered a book of documents containing information
has attended and about which she has written reflective practice
She has targeted
medication as an area which she needed to educate herself further. She has also
undertaken a course in relation
to telling the truth in care.
In the book of documents tendered
there are positive comments from her manager regarding her work performance.
There are also several supportive character references.
One referee states that
she has been a witness to the respondent’s acknowledgement and remorse
concerning her misconduct and
confirms that the respondent has completed many
courses for her own professional development and has become a role model and an
for safety since transferring to Noarlunga. She goes on to say that the
respondent has told people about what happened to her and
is helping to prevent
anyone from making the same mistakes.
respect to the issue of penalty the respondent agrees that a reprimand is
appropriate. As regards suspension, if the Tribunal
sees fit to suspend the
respondent, it is contended that it should be confined to a period of eight
weeks. Prior to the incident
she had an unblemished record. While she
understands that her misconduct is extremely serious she has made a huge effort
to rehabilitate
herself in the workplace by being very clear and honest with her
colleagues, by being a good mentor, by ensuring safety standards
are followed
and by adhering to policies and procedures. She has undertaken many education
courses with a view to remediate her behaviour
and to ensure that such behaviour
does not occur in the future. Her performance since she has been at Noarlunga
Health Services has
been without complaint.
the respondent agrees with the proposal for further education outlined in the
minutes of order provided to the Tribunal, she
disputes the proposed 12 hours
and asks that the Tribunal consider imposing a period of six hours of education,
being two hours in
each category.
respondent had a previously unblemished record. She is deeply remorseful for the
choices that she made. She attended counselling
after this incident because she
wished to identify the circumstances that led to the conduct and what her
thinking was at the time
in an attempt to identify situations that she could
avoid or could manage in a better way if any such crisis occurred in the
Purpose of disciplinary proceedings
purpose of disciplinary proceedings is to protect the public, to maintain proper
professional standards, and to assure the public
that proper standards are being
maintained in the profession and thereby to uphold public trust and confidence
in the profession.
Craig v Medical Board of South Australia
The purpose of
disciplinary proceedings is to protect the public, not to punish a practitioner
in the sense in which punishment is
administered pursuant to the criminal law. A
disciplinary tribunal protects the public by making orders which will secure the
maintenance
of proper professional standards. A disciplinary tribunal will also
consider the protection of the public, and of the relevant profession,
orders which will assure the public that appropriate standards are being
maintained within the relevant profession.
Discipline and order
is the unanimous view of the Tribunal that the conduct set out in the complaint
constitutes professional misconduct. The initial
conduct was further compounded
by the attempted covering up of the error and the failure on the part of the
respondent to admit in
correspondence and interviews to the extent of her
Tribunal notes that the respondent is an experienced health professional and
prior to the incident had an unblemished record.
The family crisis which
occurred at the time of the incident is also noted and provides an explanation
for the conduct which seems
to be completely out of character. Nevertheless the
nature and extent of the conduct and the respondent’s attempts to avoid
detection amount to serious departures from the standard expected of a nurse of
her experience.
Tribunal expresses concern that the patient who wrongly received the morphine
does not know what happened.
Tribunal notes that the imposition of disciplinary action on a health
practitioner is to protect the public. As has been noted
in previous decisions,
the imposition of discipline may serve one or all of the following purposes:
practitioners who are unfit to practice from practising;
maintenance of professional standards;
assuring members
of the public and the profession that appropriate standards are being maintained
and that professional misconduct
(or unprofessional conduct) will not be
bringing home to
the practitioner the seriousness of their conduct;
deterring the
practitioner from any future departures from appropriate standards;
deterring other
members of the profession who might be minded to act in a similar way; and
restrictions on the practitioner’s right to practice so as to ensure that
the public is protected.
Tribunal notes that the respondent has undertaken various education courses
since the incident. The Tribunal further notes that
the respondent seems to have
carried out her profession in a proper manner in her present location at
Tribunal does not accept that the period of suspension proposed by the
respondent is appropriate. Her conduct involving the actual
incident and
subsequent behaviour was a serious departure from the standard expected of a
nurse of her considerable experience and
the period of suspension must reflect
unanimous view of the Tribunal is that appropriate public protection and
discipline would be achieved by the terms of the orders
set out below, which
terms were conveyed to the respondent at the date of the hearing of this
matter(16 November 2018), and subsequently
confirmed by signed and sealed
Tribunal makes the following orders:
Upon our finding this day that
the respondent’s conduct as pleaded in Grounds 1-7 inclusive of the
complaint herein is professional
misconduct within the meaning of section 5 of
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (South Australia)
(‘National Law”) in accordance with
section 196 of the
National Law, the South Australian Health Practitioners Tribunal orders that:
Respondent is reprimanded;
Respondent’s registration as a nurse be suspended for nine (9) months
effective from the date of this Order.
to section 196(2)(b) Schedule 2 National Law, the conditions set out below be
imposed on the Respondent’s registration.
(In these conditions the
Respondent is called ‘
the practitioner
’ and the Complainant
is called ‘
to s 196(3) of the National Law, the review period for the conditions is 12
months from the date hereof;
Respondent is to pay the Complainant’s costs of and incidental to these
proceedings to be agreed or, in default of agreement,
adjudicated.
Practitioner must undertake and successfully complete a program of
education (‘Education’), approved by the Board
and including a
reflective practice report, in relation to:
responsibilities
and duties in respect of the administration, documentation and management of
medicines, including the management
of drugs classified by the Standard for
Uniform Scheduling of Medicines and Poisons as Schedule 8 drugs;
obligations of a nurse as a registered health practitioner in honestly dealing
with the Regulator in an investigation;
conduct in the practise of nursing.
60 days of the end of the period of suspension, the Practitioner must make a
nomination to undertake either one on one education
or a formal education course
in relation to each of the topics described in condition 1 as
Formal education
On the approved form (HPN24), nominate for approval by the Board an education
course, assessment or program addressing the topic/s
required. The Practitioner
must ensure:
nomination includes a copy of the curriculum of the education course, assessment
or program.
One on one education
On the approved form (HPN11):
a person(s) to be approved by the Board to act as educator, and
acknowledgement that AHPRA will obtain a report from the approved educator at
the conclusion of the education course, assessment
or program.
Practitioner must ensure that the nomination of an educator is accompanied by
acknowledgement, on the approved form (HPNA11),
from the nominated educator and
by an education plan outlining the form the education will take and how the
topic/s described in
condition 1 will be addressed.
Education should consist of a minimum number of 12 hours comprising
least 4 hours in relation to the responsibilities and duties in respect of the
administration, documentation and management of
medicines, including the
management of drugs classified by the Standard for Uniform Scheduling of
Medicines and Poisons as Schedule
least 2 hours in relation to the obligations of a nurse as a registered health
practitioner in honestly dealing with the Regulator
in an investigation;
least 6 hours in relation to ethical conduct in the practise of nursing.
Practitioner must complete the Education within 6 months of the notice of the
Board’s approval of the education.
30 days of the completion of the education, the Practitioner must to provide to
of successful completion of the education.
reflective practice report demonstrating, to the satisfaction of the Board, that
the Practitioner has reflected on the issues that
gave rise to this condition
and how the Practitioner has incorporated the lessons learnt in the education
into the Practitioner’s
21 days of the end of the period of suspension, the Practitioner must provide
to AHPRA, on the approved form (HPC), the contact
details of a senior person,
such as the Director of Nursing, Senior Manager, or equivalent (the senior
person) at each a current
place of practice. In providing this form, the
Practitioner acknowledges that:
will contact the senior person and provide them with a copy of the conditions on
the Practitioner’s registration or confirm
that the senior person has
received a copy of the conditions from the Practitioner, and
Practitioner will be required to provide the same form:
seven days of the commencement of practice at each and every subsequent place of
practice, and
seven days of each and every notice of any subsequent alteration of these
conditions.
costs associated with compliance with the conditions on their registration are
at the Practitioner’s own expense.
Other requirements
costs and expenses in relation to the terms set out in these conditions are to
be at the Practitioner's expense.
Practitioner will provide to the Board any documentary evidence required by
these conditions, within the timeframes specified.
to comply with these conditions may be a ground for health, conduct or
performance action against the Practitioner.
review period for these conditions is set out in paragraph 4 of the above
or statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registrar of the Health Practitioners
[2001] SASC 169
(2001) 79 SASR 545
Craig v Medical Board of
South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
(2001) 79 SASR 545
Nursing and Midwifery Board
of Australia v Rogers
[2011] SAHPT 21
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (178 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter