URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACorC/2025/26.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:55:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
KENNEDY, John Douglas ([2025] SACC 26) [2025] SACorC 26 (20 October 2025)
CORONERS COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
JOHN DOUGLAS
[2025] SACC 26
Inquest Findings of her Honour Deputy State Coroner
20 October 2025
CORONIAL INQUEST
Examination of the cause and circumstances of the death of John Kennedy who
died in April 2020 after experiencing cardiac failure.
The Inquest examined the
circumstances which led to a delay in dispatching an ambulance to
Mr Kennedy.
Douglas Kennedy, aged 65 years of Mount Barker, died at the Mount Barker
District Soldiers Memorial Hospital on 16 April 2020
as a result of ischaemic
heart disease on a background of hypertension.
Circumstances
of death as set out in these findings.
Recommendations made.
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
JOHN DOUGLAS
[2025] SACC 26
Introduction
Douglas Kennedy was 65 years old when he died at the Mount Barker District
Soldiers Memorial Hospital (Mount Barker Hospital)
on 16 April 2020.
the time of his death Mr Kennedy was living with his wife, Mrs Dianne
Kennedy, in their Mount Barker home. They had one adult
daughter who lived
Mr Kennedy’s
past medical history was of high blood pressure, for which he was prescribed
and Dapa-Tabs. A recent
blood test revealed elevated cholesterol, but Mr Kennedy had not been
medicated for this condition.
15 April 2020, Mr Kennedy told his wife he thought he might have COVID as
he had experienced a heaviness on his chest (‘
like a brick on his
night. The pain had passed after he took some
Mrs Kennedy stated
in her affidavit that, following this isolated complaint, they spent a normal
day together and went to bed on
the evening of 15 April 2020. Everything
appeared to be fine.
after midnight on the morning of 16 April 2020, Mrs Kennedy awoke to find
her husband sitting on the edge of their bed. She
noticed that he was wearing
his jeans and assumed that he had already been up and about. Their bedroom
light was on. Her husband
was breathing heavily in and out. Mrs Kennedy
asked him what was wrong and he told her that he had severe chest pains and to
an ambulance, otherwise he would ‘
have to go himself
(presumably to hospital). Mr Kennedy told his wife not to
Mrs Kennedy
00:19:22 on 16 April 2020
seeking urgent assistance for her husband. An ambulance did not arrive until
00:43. By that time, or shortly
thereafter, Mr Kennedy was in cardiac
arrest. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) efforts commenced at 00:52, and the
ECG monitor
was connected at 00:54. Mr Kennedy was taken to the Mount
Barker Hospital under CPR and MedStar was called. Unfortunately, despite
prolonged efforts, Mr Kennedy was pronounced life extinct at 2:08am. A
death certificate was signed.
Inquest explored the reason for the delay of the ambulance, the cause of
Mr Kennedy’s death, and whether his death could
have been prevented
had the ambulance arrived earlier.
Delay to the coronial
investigation into Mr Kennedy’s death
the signing of a death certificate, Mr Kennedy’s death was not
reported to the State Coroner. It was only when Mr Kennedy’s
wrote to the Coroners Court to raise their concerns about the delay in the
ambulance arriving, that a report of death was
received. This was on 25 March
2021, almost a year after his death and at a time after his remains had been
cremated. The family
were operating under the reasonable belief that
Mr Kennedy’s death had been reported to the State Coroner.
meant that a coronial investigation into Mr Kennedy’s death did not
begin in a conventional way.
further consequence of not reporting Mr Kennedy’s death was that it
not only delayed the coronial investigation, but limited
its scope, particularly
with respect to a precise cause of death and the issue of preventability. This
was because an autopsy was
not performed. Had this occurred, it is probable
that Mr Kennedy’s heart would have been examined to determine the
coronary artery disease, the affected coronary vessels and the level of
resultant damage to Mr Kennedy’s heart. This investigation
have revealed the timing of a myocardial infarction, with an examination of the
histological samples of any thrombus found.
death certificate was signed by Dr Erich S Heinzle at the Mount Barker Hospital
on 16 April 2020 in the early hours of the morning.
The certified cause of
death was ‘
Myocardial Infarction (1 Day), Ischaemic Heart Disease
(Years) and Hypertension (Years)
The certificate form
clearly instructed that it is not to be issued ‘
if the State Coroner or
a police officer is required to be notified of the death under the
Coroners Act
Coroners Act 2003
, the following obligation
(1) A person must, immediately after becoming
aware of a death that is or may be a reportable death, notify the State
or (except in the case of a death in custody) a police officer of
the death, unless the person believes on reasonable grounds that
the death has
already been reported, or that the State Coroner is otherwise aware of the
(2) A reportable death means the State death (other than a State death to
which subsection (2) or (2a) applies) of a person—
, unnatural,
, violent or
circumstances as they are detailed below, support a finding that
Mr Kennedy’s death met the criteria under the
Coroners Act
was summonsed to give evidence about his decision-making on the morning of
Mr Kennedy’s death. He also provided
Dr Heinzle is a
specialist general practitioner and a fellow of the Royal Australian College of
General Practitioners. He holds
a Master of Public Health, a Bachelor of
Science in Mathematics and a Graduate Diploma in Occupational Health and Safety
Management.
At the time of Mr Kennedy’s presentation,
Dr Heinzle was contracted to provide services to the Mount Barker Hospital
Department through Summit
had some memory of the morning of 16 April 2020 and Mr Kennedy, but was
unable to recall whether he was notified that
Mr Kennedy was on his way to
the hospital before he arrived. Assisted by the clinical records,
Dr Heinzle agreed that Mr Kennedy
arrived at 1:55am on 16 April 2020
in cardiac arrest and MedStar had been contacted and were on their way.
Dr Heinzle assisted the
paramedics, and then the MedStar team, in the
attempt to resuscitate Mr Kennedy. This was unsuccessful, despite their
best efforts.
is important to note that the evidence of Dr Heinzle was ancillary to the
issues explored during the Inquest. The Inquest focused
on the delay in the
ambulance from the call made by Mrs Kennedy to the arrival of the
paramedics at the Kennedy residence. The concern
of the delay was the reason
the report was received in March 2021 as described above.
delay in the provision of emergency response to Mr Kennedy in the early
hours of the morning, in my opinion, met the criteria
Mr Kennedy’s death was unusual. As was ultimately discovered,
SA Ambulance officers who attended to Mr Kennedy in cardiac
shared this view by submitting their own concerns by way of an internal
statement and a Safety Learning System (SLS) report
explained that he was not aware of the issue concerning a delayed ambulance at
the time Mr Kennedy presented to the Mount
Barker Hospital. I have
accepted Dr Heinzle’s evidence, and in doing so accept that he would
have had no basis to consider
Mr Kennedy’s death to be unusual.
his evidence Dr Heinzle did address whether Mr Kennedy’s cause
of death was unusual. He explained that Mr Kennedy had suffered
relatively straightforward myocardial infarction, he had a history of
hypertension (a risk factor for heart disease), he was male
and was 65 years
old. To Dr Heinzle, ‘
this was not an unusual mode of death for
someone with [Mr Kennedy
s] underlying risk factors and was
certainly not suspicious or
relation to whether it was an unexpected cause, Dr Heinzle was asked how he
reconciled the Kennedy family’s distress upon
their learning of his death,
with his death being expected, he explained his understanding in his oral
‘I would distinguish between unexpected to those
around the patient at the time of death, with unexpected in the eyes of a
examiner or practitioner, treating the patient. No-one usually knows the
exact time of someone’s passing, but it can be anticipated
or expected
based on premorbid conditions or circumstances, in which case it is not
unexpected to the medical practitioner, even
though a relative or a stander-by
might consider it unexpected. From my perspective he was at elevated cardiac
risk, which made a
myocardial infarction a quite foreseeable mode of death. In
that sense it was not unexpected that he might present with that as a
his affidavit, Dr Heinzle went on to extrapolate that given the history (as
he understood it to be) of chest pain spanning two
consecutive nights and his
symptoms suggestive of established heart failure (frothy sputum reported by
SA Ambulance), Mr Kennedy’s
death was unlikely to have been
prevented with or without a delay from the ambulance. This evidence was given
with the knowledge
of the delay which he learnt of later. He
‘Mr Kennedy appears to have undergone a fairly
routine course of medical management for his ventricular fibrillation, and the
die was likely cast by whatever underlying heart disease he had, which
progressed over the preceding twenty-four hours or so and
culminated in his
I accept that Dr Heinzle was entitled to form a belief as to a reasonable
cause of death based on his experience as a senior
medical practitioner, that
was a separate consideration to whether Mr Kennedy’s death was a
reportable one. In fact, other
than where a death occurs as a result of an
unknown cause, a doctor is required to form a view about the cause of all deaths
was aware that Mr Kennedy had presented in an Emergency Department, in
cardiac arrest (in ventricular fibrillation) with
a very recent history of chest
pain and had previously been prescribed the antihypertensive medication, Noten.
Dr Heinzle made it
clear that he did not consider this presentation to be
from either an unexpected or unknown cause. I have formed the view that,
irrespective of his knowledge or otherwise of the delay, Mr Kennedy’s
death also met the criteria for both an unexpected and
unknown cause.
respect to ‘
unexpected cause
’, Mr Kennedy had suffered
an out-of-hospital cardiac arrest and arrived at the hospital under active
resuscitation with MedStar
involvement. These attempts continued for over an
hour and a half in total, which Dr Heinzle noted were quite extended and
exceptional
efforts to restore cardiac
Efforts of this
magnitude would be highly unlikely if the cause of death was an expected one.
respect to ‘
unknown cause
’, Dr Heinzle was not
Mr Kennedy’s treating doctor. Beyond chest pain and blood pressure
medication, very little clinical
information was known to Dr Heinzle about
Mr Kennedy. While chest pain and the particular cardiac arrest rhythm
recorded on the
ECG was suggestive of a cardiac cause, Dr Heinzle did not
know at that time how long Mr Kennedy had been suffering from hypertension,
nor did he know how long (if ever) he had been diagnosed with ischaemic heart
disease, as he himself deposed to in his affidavit
underlying heart disease he
). This was at
odds with the declaration Mr Kennedy had ischaemic heart disease for years
in the death certificate. Dr Heinzle even
considered an alternative cause,
as evidenced in his consideration of a possible pulmonary embolus which could
have resulted in the
presentation.
submission made on behalf of Dr Heinzle was that he made an informed,
honest and reasonable decision based on a thorough consideration
of the facts.
Further, that there was no evidence before the Court of any different opinions;
and if there were, the decision in
the circumstances could only be one upon
which reasonable minds might
On this reasoning, it
must then follow that reasonable minds may differ as to the cause of death. In
which case there cannot be
actual knowledge as to the cause, only a belief.
was an earnest and straightforward witness who gave evidence honestly. He
appeared to have considered the issue of reportability
very carefully by the
time he came to give evidence. He was able to explain his process of reasoning
find that Dr Heinzle had turned his mind to the question of reportability
and genuinely believed he was not required to report Mr
death to the State Coroner.
find that in taking that approach, Dr Heinzle was operating under a belief
rather than knowledge as to the cause of death. Belief
is something short of
knowledge. Dr Heinzle made his own diagnosis of ischaemic heart disease
based on the outcome he had witnessed,
without having performed any cardiac
examinations or ever having spoken to Mr Kennedy. Dr Heinzle took
comfort from statistical
probabilities associated with Mr Kennedy’s
demographics, however in the end statistics do nothing to convert a belief to
The difficulty with Dr Heinzle’s approach is that the law
requires a doctor signing a death certificate to reach a degree
of certainty,
akin to knowledge, before doing so. Not only is an unknown cause a specific
limb of reportability, but this requirement
is also made clear by the obligation
that a death be reported whether it is or
reportable.
Where there is something short of knowledge, then the law sets out procedures
which enable the State Coroner to determine
the precise cause of death if that
can be achieved. Entering a cause of death on a death certificate on the basis
of a belief has
the effect of inhibiting the State Coroner from using those
procedures to try and reach a state of knowledge of the actual cause.
I accept Dr Heinzle’s evidence that he only became aware of the
ambulance delay in the period after Mr Kennedy’s
circumstances in which Mr Kennedy was received into his care gave rise to
consideration of whether the death was, or may
have been, reportable.
find that the circumstances which presented to Dr Heinzle on the night
meant that Dr Heinzle should have reported Mr Kennedy’s
the State Coroner rather than signing a death certificate. That is, a
previously unknown patient arriving in cardiac arrest
with no known cardiac
history and only one or potentially two days of chest pain, must lead to the
conclusion that his cause of death
is at least unknown, but also
unexpected.
wish to make it clear that I do not suggest in any way that Dr Heinzle did
not make a report to the State Coroner in order to frustrate
any proper process,
to prevent coronial investigation or achieve anything other than what he thought
was appropriate at the time.
That is, this was a carefully considered decision
made incorrectly but in good faith.
course as I have observed, once reported as unknown or unexpected, the
revelation of the ambulance delay also made Mr Kennedy’s
unusual in that it occurred without prompt emergency assistance as is the usual
course in the lead up to that cause.
Cause of death
delay in the coronial investigation has not prevented me from arriving at a
finding on the balance of probabilities in relation
to Mr Kennedy’s
cause of death.
circumstances leading up to his collapse are classic symptoms of myocardial
infarction, as described in oral evidence by expert
cardiologist, Professor
William Heddle.
This remains so
even in the absence of an ECG trace recording the elevation in the ST Wave, or
some other abnormality. Further,
and as correctly identified by
Dr Heinzle, the end stage arrythmia (ventricular
fibrillation)
recorded on the
cardiac monitor, once connected after the arrival of the paramedics, is
typically seen in a cardiac related episode.
was additionally informed by a pathology review conducted by Dr Erin
O’Connor of Forensic Science SA
O’Connor’s findings were discussed with senior forensic pathologist
Professor Roger Byard (also of FSSA) and a report
was completed on 12 July 2022.
A pathology review is a review of relevant medical history and case notes,
including ambulance Patient
Clinical Records (PCR). This review is usually
conducted in lieu of an autopsy after a person has died in hospital following
which is extensively documented. In this instance it was conducted
because Mr Kennedy had died on 16 April 2020, a death certificate
signed, and he was cremated. As detailed above, this was because
Mr Kennedy’s death was not reported to the State Coroner.
pathology review stated:
‘On the balance of probability, the
most likely cause of death given the symptoms prior to cardiac arrest and the
cardiac arrest
rhythm, is ischaemic heart disease, likely an acute myocardial
infarction. There does not appear to be any other preceding symptoms
the chest pain the night prior to his death.’
on the clinical information known and the past medical history, the
physiological circumstances which led to Mr Kennedy’s
ischaemic heart disease (damage to the heart muscle caused by lack of oxygenated
blood flow) which created circumstances
of electrical instability in the heart
which, in turn, triggered the fatal arrythmia when there was a blockage of blood
one or more of the coronary arteries, likely from a build-up of
plaque. Hypertension was the underlying comorbid condition.
Dr Heinzle’s
certified cause was ‘
myocardial infarction (1 day) due to ischaemic
heart disease (years) on a background of hypertension (years)
difficulty with this cause of death was that Dr Heinzle had based his
assessment of the presumed long-standing ischaemic
heart disease as having
caused the myocardial infarction. A history of ischaemic heart disease was not
known to Dr Heinzle,
anyone. This condition had not been diagnosed in Mr Kennedy’s
lifetime. Dr Heinzle himself conceded that the years
long history of
ischaemic heart disease was a ‘
am satisfied on balance that Mr Kennedy’s cause of death was
ischaemic heart disease on a background of hypertension. I so
Definition of relevant terms
are several SA Ambulance Service (SAAS) terms used throughout the Finding that
require clarification. For the sake of accuracy
and understanding, these terms
are defined below.
- This signifies that a triple zero dispatch involves an immediate
life-threatening emergency, such as cardiac or respiratory arrest,
requiring an
immediate, life-saving intervention.
- This signifies that a triple zero dispatch is an urgent, but not
immediately life-threatening, emergency that requires a quick
- This signifies that a triple zero dispatch is for a non-urgent
incident that does not require lights and sirens for transport.
- This is also known as a rest break or tea break, and is a
short, paid break for employees to eat a meal while remaining available
duty. Unlike standard meal breaks, employees may be required to stay
on-site and can be called back to work in emergencies.
(10Delta02) - This is a particular ‘determinant’ used in SA
Ambulance systems to categorise the nature of taskings, made
up of component
parts. The digit 10 signifies the category of chest pain or non-traumatic chest
discomfort. Delta indicates that
this is the most serious set of circumstances
within the category. The digits 02 signify the key component of the
presentation;
in the example of 10Delta, 02 indicates that the patient has
difficulty speaking between breaths.
Evidence at
documentary evidence at Inquest comprised 41 exhibits.
addition to the documentary evidence, oral evidence was heard from:
Tina Lynch,
Emergency Operation Centre Dispatcher, SA Ambulance
Kym MacDonald,
Emergency Operation Centre Team Leader, SA Ambulance
Dean Wilson,
Paramedic, SA Ambulance
Baulderstone, Intensive Care Paramedic, SA Ambulance
Susan Linn,
Intensive Care Paramedic, SA Ambulance
Heinzle, Specialist General Practitioner, formerly of Mount Barker Hospital
William Heddle, Cardiologist
Hindsight bias
warn myself concerning a vital consideration in the assessment of the evidence
and any potential criticisms of witnesses in this
Inquest, namely hindsight
description of ‘hindsight bias’ is given in the Australasian
Coroners Manual, namely:
'The tendency after the event to assume
that events are more predictable or foreseeable than they really were.
What is clear in hindsight
is rarely as clear before the fact. If it were,
there would be far fewer mistakes made. It is an obvious point, but one
that nonetheless
bears repeating, particularly when Coroners are considering
assigning blame or making adverse comments that might damage a person’s
reputation ...
Hindsight, of course, is a very useful tool for learning lessons from an
unfortunate event. It is not useful for understanding how
the involved
people comprehended the situation as it developed. The distinction needs
to be understood and rigorously applied.'
stated, I am very mindful of this warning when considering the evidence in this
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
of the findings that I have made are adverse to witnesses that gave evidence
during the Inquest. In coming to these conclusions,
I have been mindful of the
need to satisfy myself that such findings should only be made based on the
relevant evidence presented
as being reliable and compelling. In doing so, I
have applied the principles expressed by the High Court of Australia in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
I also refer to the recent Supreme Court of South Australia analysis of the
Briginshaw case in an appeal case of ‘
SJ Berry Pty Ltd
an affidavit provided to the Court, Mrs Kennedy remembered her husband of
40 years as growing up in Naracoorte with a large family
and moving to Adelaide
in his high school years due to his father’s ill health. Mr and
Mrs Kennedy married in 1981 and they
had a daughter, Kristen, in 1982.
was an art teacher at a local Mount Gambier high school for a period of time
before moving overseas on exchange and then
returning to teach in Adelaide. The
family then moved to Mount Barker and Mr Kennedy retired from teaching. He
turned his attention
to other endeavours, driving a community bus, operating a
signing business and engaging in further study to become a real estate
Mr Kennedy entered that profession and ran his own
was evident from the affidavit of his wife, and his daughter’s letters of
concern to the State Coroner, that Mr Kennedy was
a much-loved member of
his family.
Circumstances leading up to death
touched on above, Mr Kennedy had complained of a heaviness in his chest on
the morning of 15 April 2020, which he reported to have
experienced over the
preceding night. He attributed the pain to the possibility of having contracted
COVID-19. There was no suggestion
that Mr Kennedy had turned his mind to
the possibility that he was, or might have been, suffering an acute coronary
event. Mr Kennedy
did not complain of any other symptoms throughout the
day. From Mrs Kennedy’s perspective, it was a normal day and evening
with the couple retiring to bed at the end of the day, as was their usual
routine. It was shortly after midnight on 16 April 2020
that Mrs Kennedy
was awoken to her husband sitting on their bed and breathing heavily. He
complained of severe chest pain. Mr Kennedy
instructed his wife to call
triple zero and not to panic.
Mrs Kennedy
rang triple zero at 12:19am. She spoke to call-taker Ms Courtney Griffiths.
This call was recorded, and the audio recording
was played a number of times in
A transcript was also
prepared and tendered in
This call lasted 5
minutes and 53 seconds. It was reported by Mrs Kennedy in the call that
her husband was having difficulty speaking
between breaths, that his colour was
pale and he felt clammy. Towards the end of the call Mrs Kennedy conveyed
to Ms Griffiths that
her husband was feeling faint and was experiencing
dizziness. Mr Kennedy could be heard quietly at times in the background.
Ms Griffiths
gave oral evidence at the Inquest and explained in some detail the process in
which a triple zero call is received and
how the information entered into the
system then generates a code which is given a priority in terms of the ambulance
response time.
Ms Griffiths’ oral evidence was guided with reference
to the Event Chronology that was generated on the night for
Mr Kennedy’s
tasking. A portion of the Event Chronology is extracted
‘0: 2020-04-16 00:20:54: •• LOI search
completed at 16/04/20 00:20:54
0: 2020-04-16 00:20:54: ** CLI DATA 3213222
1: 2020-04-16 00:20:54: Problem: WOKEN UP WITH CHEST PAIN
2: 2020-04-16 00:20:54: Patient Number: 1
3: 2020-04-16 00:20:54: 65-year-old, Male, Conscious, Breathing.
4: 2020-04-16 00:20:54: Dispatch CAD Code: 10D02’
Ms Griffiths
explained that ‘
WOKEN UP WITH CHEST PAIN
’ was entered by her
as ‘free text’ at 00:20:54. With the information of
DIFFICULTY SPEAKING BETWEEN BREATHS
’ being chosen by her in
a drop-down box, the system interpreted the information and then chose the
determinant code 10D02.
Ms Griffiths explained that this particular code
was designed to inform those viewing the system of the level of seriousness.
information was displayed by the computer software to the SA Ambulance
dispatcher while Ms Griffiths remained on the phone with Mrs
dispatcher, Ms Tina Lynch, viewed the tasking at 00:21:00. This meant that it
took six seconds for the job to be coded and given
a priority and for the
dispatcher to view it. Ms Lynch’s role was to locate a nearby
resource and to task it to Mr Kennedy’s
address within the target
timeframe for a Priority 2 being 16 minutes from call receipt to ambulance
arrival. Ms Lynch gave oral
evidence at the Inquest. She told the Court
that she was an experienced dispatcher, having undertaken two years as a
metropolitan
dispatcher. She then moved to the role of regional dispatcher,
which she described as a more challenging
remaining on the phone with Mrs Kennedy, Ms Griffiths recorded further
information from Mrs Kennedy about her husband’s
condition. This was
displayed in the Event Chronology as extracted below:
2020-04-16 00:20:54: Determinant Level: DIFFICULTY SPEAKING BETWEEN BREATHS
6: 2020-04-16 00:20:54: --: He is completely alert (responding
appropriately).
7: 2020-04-16 00:20:54: --: He is not breathing normally.
8: 2020-04-16 00:20:54: --: He has difficulty speaking between breaths.
0: 2020-04-16 00:21:00: ** Event A003026660 was viewed at: 16/04/20
1: 2020-04-16 00:21:00: •• by: 3813 on terminal: saasdisp09
0: 2020-04-16 00:21:43: --: He is changing colour.
1: 2020-04-16 00:21:43: --: His colour change is pale.
2: 2020-04-16 00:21:43: --: He is clammy.
3: 2020-04-16 00:21:43: --: He has not had a heart attack or angina (heart
pains) before.
4: 2020-04-16 00:21:43: --: He took some drugs (medications) in the past
5: 2020-04-16 00:21:43: --: He took a prescribed medication in the past 12
hrs: REGULAR MEDICATION’
information was available to Ms Lynch while it was being recorded on the
system by Ms Griffiths as she spoke with Mrs Kennedy.
Ms Griffiths was required to end her call with Mrs Kennedy at 00:25:20
as there were other urgent calls that required attention.
Ms Griffiths
reassured Mrs Kennedy that:
‘we have an ambulance coming
out to you, lights and sirens okay’ and
‘there’s an ambulance organised, we are coming to you lights and
sirens there’ and
‘help has been arranged’
comments were the subject of cross-examination during the Inquest as at no time
during the duration of the call had an ambulance
been dispatched. In fact, it
would be another four minutes following the end of the call before an ambulance
was on its way to Mr
Ms Griffiths
described the language that was used when speaking to callers in emergencies.
This was prompted during the call by the
computer, but there existed a backup
document colloquially referred to as the ‘flip book’, to use in case
of a system
outage. This was tendered to the
document guided certain language to be conveyed to callers as
language used about what was happening was important as it potentially impacted
an opportunity for Mrs Kennedy, or her daughter
(when she arrived), to
drive Mr Kennedy to hospital, rather than waiting for the ambulance which
in reality had not been dispatched.
This possibility was raised in the
affidavit of Mr Kennedy’s daughter (Ms Kristen De Gilio) who
‘At that point I knew that we were only up the road
from the Mount Barker Hospital Emergency Department and I could have put
the car and got him there within 3 minutes maximum.
I can't remember which one of us rang the ambulance service but I think it
was me. I was questioning where they were and how far
away they were. The
operator was feeding me words like, 'lights and sirens are flashing'.’
they had been informed that an ambulance was still in the process of being
requested rather than ‘
we are coming to you lights and
’, they could have made their own decisions. Mrs Kennedy
described the guilt she felt following her husband’s death for
made the decision to take him to the hospital in her own vehicle. She
‘We have felt a lot of guilt dealing with that because
we could have taken him but we were told by the operator that the ambulance
on its way.’
Ms De Gilio
shared that sentiment:
‘My biggest emotion is anger because
they should have been there much quicker and the fact that what they
communicated with
us over the phone and what I have read from the documents we
got from SAAS is incorrect. They weren’t anywhere near coming
we were told lights and sirens are on. I could have moved my Dad to the car and
driven him to the hospital had I known
the ambulance was not on its way and was
going to take so long to get to us.’
Ms Griffiths
was asked if she agreed that the language she had used to calm Mrs Kennedy
on the morning of 16 April 2020 could have
falsely reassured Mrs Kennedy
that an ambulance was already on its way. To her credit, Ms Griffiths
candidly agreed that her language
implied that an ambulance was on its way, when
it had not in fact been dispatched at that time. She accepted that this could
been misleading to
Mrs Kennedy.
she had not been required to end the call due to high demand she would have
actively chased up where the ambulance was.
It was evident that
Ms Griffiths had a genuine concern for Mr Kennedy’s wellbeing,
as was captured in a further recorded conversation
with a nurse at the Mount
Barker Hospital. I will detail that below.
Court heard evidence from a number of witnesses that at this particular time the
Adelaide Hills area was experiencing a high demand
for emergency response and
was under-resourced by SA Ambulance. There were three separate crews in
the Adelaide Hills at this time;
one in Mount Barker, one in Stirling and one at
Woodside. When these crews were busy with taskings it was not uncommon to have
tasked from the metropolitan areas which required extended travel
The evidence at Inquest
established that this has since been addressed with the provision of a greater
number of ambulance crews
permanently stationed in the hills and witnesses
described the additional resourcing as having a positive effect.
resourcing was not the issue that impacted on the delay for Mr Kennedy. As
will be outlined below, there was an ambulance
on a ‘crib break’
which had no tasking during the relevant time period. This was ultimately the
ambulance that was tasked
to attend at Mr Kennedy’s home, but only
after a delay of almost 10 minutes. I will return to this topic later in the
The two crews
Court heard there were two ambulance crews in the Adelaide Hills area that
morning. The first was 181 Barker. This was staffed
by Intensive Care
Paramedic Dean Wilson and Paramedic Adam Banasiak. At the time of the first
call from Mrs Kennedy they were at
the Mount Barker Hospital, having
conveyed a patient there. This was an approximate six-minute drive from the
Kennedy residence.
The second crew was 181 Stirling, staffed by Intensive
Care Paramedic Susan Linn and Paramedic Scott Baulderstone. They were at
the Stirling station on a crib break from 00:20 to 00:25. Following that they
remained at the station without a tasking. The Stirling
station was
approximately 14 minutes from the Kennedy
00:21:46, Ms Lynch radioed the closest crew, being Barker 181. The
following exchange took place:
‘00:21:46 - Ms Lynch asked
any chance you would be able to clear a P2 in Mount
00:22:14 - Mr Banasiak radioed back to Ms Lynch stating -
ll be a few
00:22:21 - Ms Lynch responded stating - ‘
Thanks Barker 181,
it will be yours if you can clear
this exchange there was no communication between the Barker crew and
Ms Lynch for seven minutes. During her oral evidence Ms
questioned about her exchange with Mr Banasiak in the context of an urgent
tasking. In her evidence-in-chief, Ms Lynch
explained that she was expecting
the Barker crew to be unloading their current patient, making up a new stretcher
and getting in
their ambulance and calling her to say they had cleared and were
ready to attend Mr Kennedy’s house. Her expectation was that
would take between three to four minutes for this to
In cross-examination,
Ms Lynch was asked whether she should have asked for a more specific
‘Q. My question is when [Mr Banasiak] said
‘We’ll be a few minutes’, you should have asked for more
information
see what you’re saying, but to me, I’ve asked him and he’s
given me that. And I was happy with that at the
time. But I can see that
you’re saying definitively how long - what is a few minutes? Is it three,
is it five, is it seven?
do you agree that the task of dispatching ambulances in urgent and emergency
situations is something where time is critical.
job involves dealing with critical timeframes every day.
Absolutely.
particularly in these cases, P1s and P2s, the quicker you can get a resource,
the better.
so, when somebody tells you ‘We’ll be a few minutes’, you
should really dig into that further, shouldn’t
you, to find out exactly
what they mean so that then you can assess what other resources you may have at
your disposal.
my assessment on the few minutes though is that he’s also working while
he’s doing that. And my thought process behind
this is he knows it’s
there, there’s things that they’ll be going through to clear and
tidy up so that they can
go to the next job. I wouldn’t necessarily talk a
lot on the radio to them because I’m expecting them to be doing their
things they need to get onto the next
Ms Lynch was asked whether her statement ‘it will be yours if you can
clear’ meant that she thought she had assigned
the job or was waiting to
be informed that they had accepted it. She explained:
you say ‘It will be yours if you can clear’.
you accept that that is not a black-and-white statement.
reading it, it doesn’t appear like that, but that is just how I normally
speak with the crews. It’s just normal, sort
of, language that I use.
I’ve told them it’s theirs if they can clear. They’ve already
said they can clear in a
couple of minutes. And then they’ve followed it
up with the phone call that says there’s this other job going on, and
that’s that timeframe.
at the time that you said this on p.8, ‘It will be yours if you can
clear’, would you expect that Mr Wilson would
have understood that
the job was his.
assigned to him.
assigned, yes, I’ve told them it’s their job. They’ve said
they can do it, I’ve said ‘It’s
you said ‘verbally assign’, by that do you mean it wasn’t
assigned on the computer system.
hasn’t - yeah, it hasn’t set their pagers off or anything like
you intended by this and you would expect him to understand that nobody else was
going to be assigned to this case.
Lynch was asked whether she had made a conscious decision to wait for the Barker
crew to be clear as the Stirling crew were on
a crib break at this time. She
explained that with a Priority 1 or 2, she would interrupt a crib break and
dispatch that crew straight
away in accordance with the 2019 Tactical Deployment
Ms Lynch testified that
she had never decided against tasking a crew to a Priority 1 or Priority 2
emergency because they were on
I accept that the crib
break had no role in the decision making process.
explanation for the delay of seven minutes waiting for Barker 181 to clear was
two-fold. Firstly, that she was under
the impression that Barker 181 was
verbally assigned. Secondly, that the morning was busy and time passed quickly
in her role.
the language used by both Ms Lynch and Mr Banasiak was objectively vague in its
nature, I have accepted Ms Lynch’s explanation
that this was the language
used in her role and that she held a genuine belief that she had tasked the
Barker crew to Mr Kennedy.
I also accept the plausibility of time passing
quickly with the requirement to dispatch multiple vehicles to different tasks at
different priority levels, although I do observe that precautions should be
taken to guard against allowing an extended time to pass
without dispatch.
Ms Lynch’s demeanour in both the radio communications and then while
giving oral evidence, revealed a level of detachment.
Perhaps most tellingly
was her evidence that Mr Kennedy’s tasking was just a ‘
of the mill chest pain
’ event. This was both concerning and at odds
with the information recorded in the Event Chronology by Ms Griffiths. It
also inconsistent with the genuine level of concern that Ms Griffiths
had for Mr Kennedy. She explained what ‘
run of the mill chest
’ meant. She stated:
‘We do hundreds and
hundreds of chest pain dispatches, and there was nothing in this job that
alerted me to think this was any
more extreme than any other standard chest pain
case that we get.’
concerning observation was that the next communication between the dispatcher
and Barker 181 was initiated not by Ms Lynch,
but by a phone call from
Mr Wilson. This occurred at 00:29:16. That was 10 minutes after
Mrs Kennedy contacted triple zero and nine
minutes after Ms Lynch
viewed the event on her screen. All the while, the Stirling crew were at the
Stirling station without a tasking.
An inescapable question was how much longer
Ms Lynch would have waited before either receiving confirmation that Barker
on their way to the Kennedy residence or contacting them to follow up if
Mr Wilson had not made contact first.
audio recording of the contact from Mr Wilson revealed that, while dropping
a patient at Mount Barker Hospital, Mr Wilson said
he had been approached
by a doctor to transport a patient in the Emergency Department to the Royal
Adelaide Hospital (RAH). In his
oral evidence, Mr Wilson explained that
Hospital patient,
knowing that she had previously requested that his crew
(Barker 181) be tasked to attend Mr Kennedy.
was the evidence of both Ms Lynch and Mr Wilson that it was the
dispatcher who made formal decisions about where the ambulances
went. I accept
that this was the policy in principle, but for reasons I have detailed below,
this did not occur as it should have
on the night. The call began at
‘Operator Regent south, this is Tina
Crew Hi Tina, Dean here on the Barker track how are you going?
Operator Good, how are you?
Crew Good. Um there’s a lady here that ah I think was a job from the
Stirling [ward] So I’ve brought in we’ve got
a lady in the resus
room, she’s in um she’s quite crook she’s, they just rang up
they want someone as soon as possible
to transfer her
Operator Yep
Crew I know you’ve got that other two in Barker
Operator yep
Crew um one of the doctors was just talking to me I said do you want me to
ring and get us to do this one straight away, um cos we’re
here. um does
that work with you? Have you guys got that through yet? That job...
Operator ...no, we haven’t got it hang on, I’ll just look...
Crew ...okay cos I’ve just got one of the nurses ringing now....
Operator .......its alright, I’ll just drop Stirling onto the Barker
Operator ....that’s cool, um yeah no worries ummm
Crew ...alright we’ll get this one here sorted then if you can get that
Operator Yeah that’s alright I’ll just put Stirling onto the
other one that I’d asked you about..
Crew ..mha...
Operator ...and we’ll get them heading up that way for that..
Crew ...mhm...
Operator ....and then as soon as I get yours in I’ll drop it onto
Crew okay they’ve got a lady here it looks like she’s got a
systolic [unclear] she is in a separated AF and a
Operator ...... yeah she’s kind of in her forties....
Crew ...its almost sort of [unclear]....stage
Crew ...ah no this one’s seventy to eighty I think’
is difficult to convey in words the feeling of unease when listening to this
communication. The aspects of the call that invoked
this reaction included the
knowledge that nine minutes had already passed from Mrs Kennedy first
there was no mention of Mr Kennedy (other
than reference to ‘
the other 2 in Barker
’), or the severity
of his condition. Ms Lynch, who was aware of the time that
Mrs Kennedy’s call was initiated and that
Mr Kennedy was
experiencing a number of concerning symptoms, conveyed no urgency to
Mr Wilson. In fact, she appeared more interested
in other taskings coming
through. While it is accepted that Ms Lynch was not the call-taker and
therefore had not heard the distress
in Mrs Kennedy’s voice during
her triple zero call, she had available to her sufficient information to have
advocated the urgency
of the dispatch on Mr Kennedy’s behalf. At the
very least, she should have discussed Mr Kennedy’s case with
who at that time knew nothing more than that it was a Priority 2
in the community. That did not occur. Mr Wilson imparted a preference
the tasking he should take and Ms Lynch capitulated. While Mr Wilson and
Ms Lynch agreed that Ms Lynch (as the dispatcher) had
the ultimate say
on where an ambulance was to be tasked, the conversation appeared led by
Mr Wilson. Further, the exchange did not
contain the expected level of
seriousness that the situation objectively required.
was questioned about her level of dispassion by Mr Darren Evans of counsel
assisting. The passage of evidence is as follows:
agree that that’s quite a casual conversation.
no sense of urgency.
agree it comes across like that, doing the job that we do. If I panicked and got
het up and - I wouldn’t be able to do my
job. There’s a certain
level of - we receive a lot of jobs, a lot of - do a lot of multitasking at once
and it becomes to a
certain level that you just - I don’t get heightened,
I don’t get - you know, internally, I might be quite stressed or
het up and stressed and demanding and aggressive
and things like that with the
crews or with my fellow staff. It’s just a matter of just working through
processes and trying
to cover everything as best I can at the time. In talking
to him like that, at no point did that delay sending the Stirling crew.
Stirling crew was dispatched on it pretty much at the start of the phone call
with him. The chat after it didn’t have any
impact on the timeframe of
that ambulance being dispatched. It’s not like I had a casual phone call
and then thought ‘Now
I better get on and find someone else’. Like,
it’s all happening all at the same time in the background. There’s
- it’s sort of hard here because the printout of the times of the
chronology and the times of the phone call don’t
cross over; you
can’t see where the phone call is made to where the dispatch is done, but,
yes, Stirling was put on that job
as soon as - when actually said on the phone
‘I’m putting Stirling on it’, that is when they were put on
I accept that at 00:29:58 Ms Lynch did dispatch the Stirling crew and this
was done during her conversation with Mr Wilson,
I reject the remainder of
Ms Lynch’s explanation. Her evidence was simply nonsensical when
there was no mention of the patient
to which the communication related, and the
crew (Mr Wilson and partner) were closer in proximity to the Kennedy
residence than the
Stirling crew. When challenged, Ms Lynch did accept
that a sense of urgency can be conveyed without panic, stress or
aggression,
although I consider
this to be an inexorable concession. It is also important to highlight that the
patient Mr Wilson called about
(I will refer to this patient as
Mrs Q), had not yet been received by SA Ambulance for tasking.
Ultimately, this patient was allocated
a Priority 3 tasking, meaning
Mr Kennedy’s tasking would have taken precedence over
Mrs Q’s tasking. I will deal with
this issue below.
pause here to note that the heightened risk associated with chest pain taskings
over other Priority 2 taskings, was internally addressed
by SA Ambulance in
response to Mr Kennedy’s death among others. This came about as a
result of an SLS report initiated by
Ms Linn in the wake of
Mr Kennedy’s death.
The recommendation was for a statewide procedural document which was ultimately
put into place. The effect of this procedure was
to make chest pain taskings
the lowest of the Priority 1 cases - a 10 Delta
The directive was as
Determinant 10 Delta Dispatch Change
As a result of recent Adverse Events, a number of internal and external
reviews have commenced or been completed, most notably a report
from the Chief
Medical Officer Dr Michael Cusack, and the release of a number of
recommendations. SAAS as a result have commenced
a broader quality assurance
program to look at elements of these recommendations to continue to support
improved patient care in
the current environment.
In addition, all of the 10 D determinants (01-05) (Chest Pain Protocol) will
now be preferentially tasked over other pending Priority
2 events. Staff may
notice a number of changes in the dispatching of these events.
As highlighted, further work is underway, including reviewing response plans,
demand management as well as reviewing additional determinants
with a Delta code
that likewise could have the potential to deteriorate due to a delayed
change was implemented some time in 2022 in order to address the issue of chest
pain cases sharing priority with all manner of
other less-serious cases. I
consider that it adequately addresses the complacency that I detected in
communications relating to
Mr Kennedy’s case. I also consider that
it is a positive initiative that addresses the often-precarious clinical
faced by chest pain sufferers waiting for emergency help in the
case notes of Mrs Q reflected that she had been diagnosed with urosepsis
and was in rapid atrial fibrillation. The observation
chart recorded an
elevated heart and respiratory rate and low blood pressure. There can be no
disagreement that Mrs Q required a
higher level of care than the Mount
Barker Hospital was able to facilitate, and that a transfer to a major tertiary
hospital was
indicated. However, leaving aside formal priority levels for the
moment, Mrs Q was in a hospital, in a resuscitation room with a
monitor, and with an on-duty doctor and nurses. A defibrillator was also
on-site. In contrast, Mr Kennedy was at home in
the community with just
his very concerned wife and later his daughter who arrived before the ambulance.
As would be expected for
an average home in a suburban or regional area, there
was no defibrillator at the Kennedy residence. During cross-examination both
Ms Lynch and Mr Wilson accepted the disparity at play between the
situation of the two patients in the context of prioritising the
Barker crew for Mr Kennedy.
However, that did not appear to play a role in their decisions on the
the communication between Mr Wilson and Ms Lynch, an enrolled nurse
(EN) by the name of Dayna contacted the SA Ambulance
call centre at
00:31:34 to request an ambulance for Mrs Q. Ms Griffiths, who had
only recently ended the call with Mrs Kennedy (due
to a backlog of other
urgent calls), spoke with EN Dayna. A recording of the call from EN Dayna came
to light during the evidence
of Ms Griffiths, who recalled that she had
conveyed the seriousness of Mr Kennedy’s situation to EN Dayna at the
Mount Barker
Hospital. The recording was obtained and then played to
Ms Griffiths.
Mr Wilson was recalled to give further evidence about the contents of the
conversation.
was evident from the audio recording that Ms Griffiths’ memory was
correct. She was heard acknowledging the tasking for
Mrs Q but expressed
her unease to EN Dayna at the seriousness of Mr Kennedy’s condition,
referring to it being a ‘
very bad case
unconscious collapse
’. EN Dayna informed
Ms Griffiths that the Stirling
were now tasked for
Mr Kennedy and Ms Griffiths made the comment ‘
oh dear god,
they are going to take forever
[to arrive]’.
Ms Griffiths
asked what priority should be assigned to Mrs Q’s tasking and EN
Dayna, heard to be instructed by a voice in the
background, stated a priority 2
within 30 minutes
’. As was established during the
Inquest, a 30-minute response time is akin to a Priority 3, and not a Priority
2. The conversation
‘Operator: Thank you. And what
priority do you need this under?
Caller: Priority 2 please, within thirty minutes. We've actually got a crew
here, Dean has just spoken to comms.
Operator: Ok, I'm surprised they're not getting that crew out because I know
there's a very bad emergency out there at the moment.
Caller: Yeah, I think Woodside's going, I think Woodside's going to that
Operator: Oh dear god they're gonna take forever.
Caller: Oh okay, alright.
Operator: Yeah, there's, I literally just got off the phone with a very bad
case at the moment, umm ...
Caller: Yeah, do you know what it is?
Operator: Um chest pain, possible unconscious collapse ...
Caller: Oh okay.
Operator: Yeah.
Caller: Sure, alright. Well I'll leave it up to you guys to just ...
Operator: Yeah but um, but does this person need to be transferred lights and
sirens? ... or?
Caller: Umm, hang on just two seconds ...
(Caller speaking to third
Do you want lights and sirens? ... within thirty?
Caller: Within thirty minutes.
Operator: Within thirty, ok well maybe they can go get that patient [ie
Mr Kennedy] and then come back and quickly do this one ...
umm, and where
are we taking the patient to?’
the end of the call, EN Dayna could be heard conveying to Mr Wilson (in the
background) that the case in the community was
an unconscious collapse. As we
know, by that time, the Stirling crew had been dispatched and were on their way
to Mr Kennedy. However,
as remarked upon by Ms Griffiths, they were
geographically further away and would take longer to arrive.
Ms Griffiths had entered the information for Mrs Q into the system a
Priority 3 was allocated. This occurred at approximately
00:35:31 according to
the Event Chronology.
meant, as canvassed above, that Mr Kennedy’s tasking should have
taken priority over Mrs Q’s tasking, not just
as a matter of common
sense, but in accordance with SA Ambulance’s own priority allocation
policy. Instead, the plan formed
in the call between Mr Wilson and Ms
Lynch, continued against the now beyond doubt disparity in urgency.
was cross-examined on the system’s allocation of a Priority 3 to
Mrs Q. His evidence was, having viewed the observation
charts and having
discussed the matter with the doctor at the Mount Barker Hospital,
Mrs Q’s matter should have been allocated
a Priority 2, given the
seriousness of her situation.
That is, he disputed the correctness of the prioritisation process. This was his
evidence despite being present in the room when
a 30-minute response time was
requested by EN Dayna when she was speaking with Ms Griffiths.
Mr Wilson denied that he was the person
to request the 30-minute response
Irrespective of
Mr Wilson’s individual assessment of Mrs Q’s condition,
the fact remained that Mrs Q’s transfer
was allocated a lower acuity
priority level.
being recalled and played the recording of the conversation between
Ms Griffiths and EN Dayna, Mr Wilson accepted that he must
there was a concern, as expressed by Ms Griffiths and relayed to him by EN
Dayna. In particular, that there was information
available that Mr Kennedy
was now an unconscious collapse. Mr Wilson was asked whether he considered
to offer to go to the ‘unconscious
collapse’ patient. His response was that ‘
we don’t bid for
evidence was at odds with his call about Mrs Q’s tasking.
was an unimpressive and evasive witness, particularly when he spoke about his
call with Ms Lynch. He refused to acknowledge
the clear and obvious import of
what he had done; interfered with the dispatch
The evidence of this
was established by the mere fact that following his call he was assigned to a
Priority 3 case notwithstanding
being physically closer to a Priority 2 chest
pain case (than the other crew on shift) and available for dispatching. Of
before the call Ms Lynch had determined to send Mr Wilson to
Mr Kennedy’s case to the extent that she considered him dispatched,
albeit not formally in the system. I find that the objective reality is that
Mr Wilson’s purpose in calling was to alter the
ordinary dispatch
refused to acknowledge that if he was merely giving information about an
upcoming transfer case that he could have done
so after accepting
Mr Kennedy’s case and while travelling to Mr Kennedy’s
gave evidence that he had no knowledge of the nature of Mr Kennedy’s
After the recording of
the call between Ms Lynch and EN Dayna was uncovered, it was obvious that
Mr Wilson did in fact have information
as he was heard being advised about it. Importantly, he heard that it was an
‘unconscious collapse’
which is extremely serious. He gave evidence
no memory of the events relating to Mr Kennedy at all. That is, he
spoke of feeling concerned about not having been assigned to
the case even
though he had no memory of any of the events. In light of the content of the
call, he then remained reluctant to acknowledge
that he had any information
I find that
Mr Wilson had actual knowledge that Mr Kennedy’s case was
objectively more serious than Mrs Q’s.
gave evidence that he had questioned himself why he had not been assigned to the
unconscious patient, a query significant
enough that he says he would have
checked his pager to see if he had missed being assigned. I find that this
evidence was given
to distract from the seriousness of what he had done and to
reinforce his assertion that he had not intended Ms Lynch to assign him
Mrs Q. Mr Wilson had no plausible explanation for why,
notwithstanding having this concern and having earlier been willing to
Ms Lynch, he made no efforts to speak to Ms Lynch again to find out why he
was not being sent to deal with the more serious
I find that
Mr Wilson knew exactly why he had not been assigned to
Mr Kennedy’s case; it was by his design. In his evidence
that he had not called back asking to be assigned to Mr Kennedy’s
case because ‘
we don’t bid for our cases
’ because it
would cause ‘
’ and that he assumed that
Mr Kennedy’s case was ‘
Of course that
is not an acceptable explanation in light of what he had already done and what
he knew at that point.
difficulty in his evidence was that Mr Wilson had been requested by the
doctor at the hospital to convey Mrs Q to
The only doctor at
the hospital that evening was Dr Heinzle. Dr Heinzle was asked
whether he remembered Mr Wilson and the circumstances
around him being
tasked to Mrs Q’s transfer.
‘Q. Did you speak to
the paramedic who was present at hospital about Mrs Q's case.
memory, he wandered into the resus room while we were in there with Mrs Q, and I
remember a brief discussion, yes.
do you remember what the nature of that discussion was.
think he'd just delivered a patient, and he must have seen that there was a job
that had been booked, and I think that prompted
him to wander in and see whether
it would be sensible for him to take Mrs Q.
you recall whether that was something that you initially raised with him, or he
initially raised with you.
don't recall raising it with him. I think he'd wandered in, having seen the job
listed, so it was something that he'd seen as a
logical thing. But it's five
years ago. I'd struggle to recall with precision the onset of the
interaction.
if I ask this, do you have a habit or a routine of approaching paramedics and
suggesting that they do particular things, take
particular cases.
you generally leave it to the ambulance service to operate their own
quite inscrutable. We roll with it.
is it therefore likely that on this occasion, you wouldn't have raised the
request for this particular paramedic to take this
particular case.
my job was to simply point out what the patient's needs were and leave it up to
SAAS to decide how they were going to schedule
their transport. At the end of
the day, I would have accepted their decision either way; I have no control over
above passage of evidence painted a different picture to that described by
Mr Wilson in his earlier evidence.
In particular
Dr Heinzle’s assumption that Mr Wilson had seen the job in the
system, which of course had not occurred when
he contacted Ms Lynch.
Dr Heinzle was not challenged on this account.
vehemently denied any suggestion that he had interfered with the dispatching
process by proposing to transfer Mrs Q at the
Mount Barker Hospital, where
he had just delivered a patient, rather than attending to Mr Kennedy in the
The evidence as a
whole is more consistent with Mr Wilson inserting himself into the
dispatching process to transfer Mrs Q rather
than being approached by the
doctor due to the urgency. I find that his involvement in Mrs Q’s
case was at his instigation.
Mr Wilson knows why he suggested taking Mrs Q’s tasking that
evening. There are a number of possibilities, including that
it was simply more
convenient for him as he was physically at the hospital. I am unable to make a
finding about Mr Wilson’s
motivations, but I find that the
consequence of his phone call to Ms Lynch was an interference with the proper
tasking process, costing
valuable time to Mr Kennedy.
on the foregoing, there is an uncomfortable conclusion to be drawn that if
Mr Wilson had not contacted Ms Lynch requesting to
remain at the Mount
Barker Hospital, the Stirling crew would have been tasked to the Mount Barker
Hospital to transfer Mrs Q. Given
the distance between the two locations,
the Stirling crew, who had not been allocated a tasking prior to 00:29:00, could
have easily
reached Mrs Q in the requested 30-minute timeframe.
Further, with the Barker crew being available
(turned out) from 00:35:29 (as reflected in Mrs Q’s Event
Chronology), and being
six minutes from the Kennedy’s residence, their
arrival time would have been more in the vicinity of 00:41, at the latest.
Without Mr Wilson’s intervention that is what would have undoubtedly
occurred, with the system determining the priority level
and the dispatcher
prioritising the higher acuity patient, which was Mr Kennedy. This was
certainly Ms Lynch’s initial plan
before the call from
Mr Wilson. This would have seen the Barker crew dispatched to
Mr Kennedy (as was the original plan) and the
Stirling crew to Mrs Q.
accept that when conveying patients to hospital there may be approaches made to
paramedics by clinicians in a busy treatment setting
to discuss individual
cases. However, a phone call is required to be made to SA Ambulance to
formally create a tasking regardless
of arrangements between hospital staff and
paramedics. This allows the internationally recognised system to allocate an
appropriate
priority which then sits within the resources available at the time.
It must be respected and followed. However, as I have found,
unfortunately not what occurred on the morning of 16 April 2020.
The Stirling crew and the delay
Stirling crew, paramedics Ms Linn and Mr Baulderstone, gave oral evidence
at the Inquest and their statements provided to SA Ambulance
were tendered
to the Court.
They shared the
view that the delay may have impacted on the outcome (Mr Kennedy’s
death). Accordingly, Ms Linn lodged an
SLS incident with SA Health after
Mr Kennedy’s death. This document was tendered to the
Linn and Mr Baulderstone were dispatched at 00:29:00. Prior to being
dispatched they had travelled to the Stirling station for
a crib break. This
took place between 00:20 and 00:25. Following the end of the crib break they
remained at the base without a
tasking. When receiving the tasking to attend on
Mr Kennedy, they both immediately noted the delay between the initial call
received and their dispatch, nine minutes later.
Linn and Mr Baulderstone described discussing the delay between the call
being received and their crew being dispatched while on
their way to
Mr Kennedy. They had been on a crib break for five minutes of the delay,
but both gave evidence that a Priority 2 tasking
took precedence over a
crib break. In fact, both Ms
and Mr Baulderstone
shared the view that, notwithstanding the importance of having a break, they
would always want to be told of
a medical emergency that needed their
assistance. Mr Baulderstone emphatically stated:
never, ever, ever put my need getting a lunch ahead of saving somebody's life,
Ms Linn and Mr Baulderstone described their concern for the wellbeing of
the patient to whom they were tasked to attend while
This concern was
realised when they arrived. Their evidence was consistent that
Mr Kennedy’s daughter was standing in the
front yard of the home in a
distressed state.
ambulance PCR recorded the arrival time of the Stirling crew as
Both paramedics were
required to don personal protective equipment (PPE) as it was in the height of
the COVID-19 pandemic. They
both did so upon alighting the vehicle and
estimated that this added perhaps one or two minutes to their usual response
was an unavoidable consequence of the pandemic. They then grabbed
the equipment and made their way to the front door. Ms Linn remembered
just before she entered the house Mr Kennedy’s daughter, who had been
on the front lawn initially and then went inside,
came out again. In oral
evidence she could not remember exactly what was said. However, in her
statement (given at a time much
closer to the night) she
‘... as I was walking around the ambulance towards the
scene the patient’s daughter returned and said something to the
us to hurry because he had stopped breathing. She was clearly
distressed.’
It is difficult to timestamp Ms De Gilio’s comment with
absolute precision. However, the significance of this evidence was
family members of Mr Kennedy had identified his cardiac arrest, moments
before the paramedics entered the home. Ms Linn
‘I felt it was likely not because of what I saw but of the distress
when we arrived. I have a recollection once again of a
scream as we arrived.
To me, that was at the point where everything changed, say for the family.
Everything changed from he needs
from what I saw, it was more what I felt and what I heard if that makes
Linn and Mr Baulderstone both described in their evidence that when
attending on Mr Kennedy inside the house, it was evident he
was in cardiac
arrest. They moved him from a room and into the hallway in order to give
sufficient space to conduct effective CPR.
The commencement of CPR was recorded
in the PCR as 00:52.
trace recorded a commencement time of
It is not suggested
that Ms Linn and Mr Baulderstone did not undertake every urgent effort to
conduct lifesaving medical treatment.
They were both impressive witnesses who
clearly did their very best to revive Mr Kennedy under difficult
circumstances. They were
however operating at a handicap, as a result of the
nine-minute delay. This timeframe was extremely significant in light of
Heddle’s expert evidence about whether Mr Kennedy’s
life could be saved.
Professor William Heddle,
cardiologist
William Heddle is a senior consultant cardiologist and electrophysiologist,
having received his qualification of a Bachelor
of Medicine and Surgery from the
University of Adelaide in 1972. He received his MD from Flinders University in
1985. He became
a Fellow of the Royal Australian College of Physicians in 1980,
the Cardiac Society of Australia and New Zealand in 2004 and the
Heart Rhythm
Society in 2012.
Heddle has given evidence extensively in the Coroners Court of South Australia.
I consider him to be an expert in his field
and have accepted his opinions in
their entirety.
Heddle explained that when Mr Kennedy was attached to the cardiac monitor,
he was identified to be in a rhythm known as
ventricular fibrillation.
Professor Heddle described this as:
chaotic rhythm in the ventricle where the heart cells contract in a random way
so there's no effective muscle pumping
of the heart and blood flow immediately
is a ‘shockable’ rhythm for which an automated external
defibrillator (AED) can be successful to shock the heart
back into normal
rhythm. In total, Mr Kennedy received 25 defibrillator shocks before
being pronounced life extinct at 2:08am.
While this revealed the thorough
attempts to resuscitate Mr Kennedy, it was the period of five minutes after
he had gone into cardiac
arrest that would have seen the best chances of return
of spontaneous circulation, according to Professor Heddle. He
‘The five minutes in ventricular fibrillation is the
point you start to lose brain function if you have recovery after that.
know, if you get out to 10 minutes, you'll have no recovery to brain function if
you have ineffective resuscitation. Under
five minutes is the time we think is
critical for having had tried effective defibrillation. The other thing, beyond
five minutes,
your chance of having effective defibrillation goes down. This is
in the absence of effective bystander CPR.’
Heddle opined that after the period of five
those chances decrease
significantly. Due to the nine-minute delay in the Stirling crew being
dispatched, with their geographic
location being further away from the Kennedy
house, the first round of defibrillation fell outside this crucial five-minute
That was based on the evidence of Professor Heddle who listened to
the second triple zero recording between Mrs Kennedy and a
call‑taker.
the recording, at approximately 00:44, Mrs Kennedy reported that her
husband was choking and then
This could also be
heard on the audio recording. Professor Heddle explained that this was likely
the time of Mr Kennedy’s
cardiac arrest. This was further supported
by the time the ambulance arrived on scene (00:43), and Ms De Gilio
telling Ms Linn,
that her father had stopped breathing and to hurry, as well as
the paramedics’ observations of Mr Kennedy once inside the house.
Even with their best efforts, CPR did not commence until
and the earliest
defibrillation shock was at around
the latter being
approximately 10 minutes after Mr Kennedy suffered a cardiac arrest. The
time of the cardiac monitor (for defibrillator
shocks to be administered) was
precise as it was a time generated by the AED machine.
the Barker crew being available at the latest from 00:35:29 (as reflected in
Mrs Q’s Event Chronology), the drive to Mr
Kennedy’s house
would have taken, at the most, six minutes. This is based on a Google Maps
calculation.
Adding to the
equation a lights and sirens response, as a Priority 2 would require, this was
likely to have been sooner. Allowing
for two minutes to alight from the vehicle
and adorn PPE, it is conceivable that they would have been inside the house
shortly before
Mr Kennedy went into cardiac arrest at 00:44 as the evidence
as a whole established. With the prompt connection of the AED and knowing
Mr Kennedy was in a shockable rhythm for a period of time, attempts to
shock Mr Kennedy’s heart into a normal rhythm would
have taken place
within the crucial five-minute period. This would have provided Mr Kennedy
with the best possible chance of survival.
This chance was lost as a result of
the Mt Barker Crew taking Mrs Q’s transfer instead of
Mr Kennedy’s case.
Preventability
questions posed to Professor Heddle by counsel for the SA Ambulance
Service, Mr Ambrose, the pre-morbid condition of Mr Kennedy’s
heart was an important consideration in relation to the issue of preventability,
and that will never be known as an autopsy was not
On the one hand,
Mr Kennedy’s heart may have been extensively diseased with multiple
occluded coronary arteries, requiring
open heart surgery. On the other hand,
Mr Kennedy may have had just one occluded artery which could have been
stented with a minimally
invasive procedure. This unknown does impact the
ability to assess the preventability of Mr Kennedy’s death to a
the absence of the results of an autopsy, there was nevertheless compelling
evidence before the Inquest which informed the issue
of the preventability of
Mr Kennedy’s death. I assess the opportunities for prevention as
Before the chest pain
had not been diagnosed with heart disease of any kind. He had been diagnosed
with high blood pressure, which is of course
a risk factor for heart disease.
Mr Kennedy was prescribed Noten, a common antihypertensive medication. Two
years prior to his death,
Mr Kennedy had returned an elevated cholesterol
level of 6.3 mmol/L.
range is less than 4.0 mmol/L.
Heddle explained that an elevated cholesterol result is a risk factor for acute
coronary syndrome, and upon the receipt
of this result, an opportunity presented
itself for further tests. It is unclear what significance Mr Kennedy
attached to this result
and that was not a topic explored at the Inquest.
However, along with the prescription of statin medication to control cholesterol
levels, there is now also a non-invasive test which can illuminate patients at
risk of acute coronary events, the CT Calcium scan.
This was not readily
available in 2020. I will return to this when considering recommendations.
After the chest pain (the brick on the chest)
reported by Mrs Kennedy, on the morning of 15 April 2020 Mr Kennedy
complained of experiencing a heaviness in his chest the previous
evening. He
described it as like a ‘
brick on his chest
’. He queried
whether he might be coming down with the COVID-19 virus. This was at a time
when the pandemic was starting to
gain momentum in Australia.
Heddle opined that had Mr Kennedy acted on this pain in the 18 hours or so
following the discomfort, his chances of survival
would have been
The difficulty was that
Mr Kennedy did not connect the pain with something as sinister as a heart
attack. If he did consider it,
he did not articulate that to his wife.
this was an obvious opportunity to have received successful intervention, it was
contingent upon Mr Kennedy recognising the
symptoms and acting on them.
There was no evidence before the Court that he did. There was also a level of
fear and uncertainty
at the time about the COVID-19 virus and it is entirely
plausible that this preoccupied Mr Kennedy’s thoughts about the
pain he had experienced.
Following the triple zero
Mrs Kennedy
tasked with the case at 00:21:46 subject
to clearing. Had Ms Lynch decided not
to wait for Barker 181 to clear, the Stirling crew were available. With a
lights and sirens
response, and a 16-minute distance (at the most), Stirling
could have reached the Kennedy residence at or before 00:40. As we now
this would have been before Mr Kennedy arrested. There were standard
emergency treatments that could have been administered
for an acute coronary
event to improve oxygenated blood flow to Mr Kennedy’s heart, thereby
potentially preventing his
While I accept Ms
Lynch’s evidence that she believed Barker 181 had accepted the tasking,
this was a missed opportunity.
most compelling opportunity to have prevented Mr Kennedy’s death
following the triple zero call was if Mr Wilson had not
with the request to be tasked to Mrs Q’s case. Had Barker 181 taken
the tasking as originally allocated,
they would have arrived within the period
just before his cardiac arrest. This would have best placed the paramedics to
preventative treatment (as described above) or shock
Mr Kennedy’s heart back into a normal sinus rhythm and return
spontaneous
circulation. Based on the evidence of Professor Heddle,
Mr Kennedy’s best chance of survival after cardiac arrest was the
five minutes immediately following ventricular fibrillation.
is possible that had this occurred, Mr Kennedy’s death could have
been prevented, in that a return of spontaneous circulation
was more likely.
However, Mr Kennedy would then have required emergency transfer to Adelaide
in a critically unstable condition.
It is difficult to know whether he would
have survived this journey as, once again, his pre‑morbid cardiac
condition is not
summary there were clear opportunities to have potentially prevented
Mr Kennedy’s death. I am unable to elevate it beyond
Conclusions
findings I have made are set out in accordance with the issues above. I have
come to these conclusions on the basis that I am
comfortably satisfied each of
them were established on the evidence.
Ms Griffiths
should not have reassured Mrs Kennedy that an ambulance was ‘
’ before dispatch had occurred.
Lynch should have sought clarification of the specific delay to the availability
of the Barker crew so that she could make a sound
assessment of the best
approach to her dispatch task.
Notwithstanding
her busy role, Ms Lynch should not have allowed in excess of eight minutes to
pass without receiving confirmation
that the Barker crew were available.
interfered with the dispatch process. He imparted a preference to be assigned
to Mrs Q’s case instead of the Priority
(Mr Kennedy’s). Mr Wilson should not have intervened in the
dispatch process.
Lynch should not have entertained Mr Wilson’s request to be assigned
to Mrs Q’s case and should have advised him that
he would be assigned
to whichever case was most appropriate, particularly when Mrs Q’s
tasking had not been received.
arrival through either the dispatch of the Barker crew to
Mr Kennedy’s case, or the immediate dispatch of the Stirling
would have seen their arrival at a time before Mr Kennedy’s cardiac
arrest and his death would have potentially been
Recommendations
section 25(2)
Coroners Act 2003
I am empowered to make
recommendations that in the opinion of the Court might prevent, or reduce the
likelihood of, a recurrence
of an event similar to the event that was the
subject of the Inquest.
recent advancement in cardiology medicine has seen patients who have an elevated
cholesterol level, but are otherwise asymptomatic,
be referred for a coronary
calcium score. Professor Heddle explained:
‘...I would
like to make a comment that I understand that cardiology practice and management
of elevated cholesterol has changed
over the last five years. And that's
relevant because his death occurred in 2022 (sic) and these days if we - I mean,
patient with a cholesterol like that, I'd recommend if they have no
symptoms that the patient has what's called a coronary calcium
score, which is a
rapid CT scan that just looks at the calcium burden. And if it's high, that's a
surrogate marker of cholesterol
plaque in the heart arteries, and if you have
this cholesterol, it's a strong indication you need to be treating it. Now that
was not - I don't think was routine at the time of Mr Kennedy's
life and illness.’
is almost always at the general practice level that routine bloods will reveal
elevated cholesterol levels, particularly when there
are no other symptoms as
described by Professor Heddle. A non-invasive CT scan (without contrast)
is a simple and efficient way
of quantifying the amount of calcium (a component
of plaque) in the coronary artery walls.
make the following
recommendation
directed to the Royal Australian
College of General Practitioners and the Australian College of Rural and Remote
consideration be given by General Practitioners to routinely referring low to
medium risk patients who return elevated cholesterol
results, for a CT Calcium
score. Particularly those with known family history of coronary artery disease
and/or particular lifestyle
into account the systemic changes and improvements already implemented,
I make the following
recommendations
directed to the SA Ambulance
paramedics be discouraged from contacting the Operations Centre and advocating
for their assignment to particular cases.
dispatchers be reminded of their obligation to assign the most appropriate
resource to the most appropriate case, irrespective
of any preferences expressed
by individual
paramedics.
Acknowledgments
wish to acknowledge the excellence of the counsel work of Mr Darren Evans,
counsel assisting me.
would like to convey my sincere condolences to the family and loved ones of
Mr Kennedy.
acknowledge and understand the guilt Mrs Kennedy has expressed about not
choosing to take her husband the short distance to the
hospital in their private
vehicle. This forms part of the tragic circumstances surrounding Mr
Kennedy’s death. I feel it
is important to reassure Mrs Kennedy and her
family that their actions were entirely appropriate given the information they
provided by SA Ambulance Service. I hope that this reassurance provides
some comfort to the Kennedy family.
Keywords: Ambulance Delays; Cardiac Arrest
Antihypertensive tablets under
the brand name Noten
C2, paragraph 5
Exhibit C2, paragraph
Exhibit C2, paragraph 6
If Mr Kennedy’s
death had been reported to the State Coroner all powers of investigation under
Coroners Act 2003
were available to be exercised immediately concerning
Exhibit C8, page
Exhibit C24, paragraph
Exhibit C24, paragraphs
Exhibit C24, paragraph
Transcript, page
Exhibit, C24, paragraph
Section 28(2)(b)
Coroners Act 2003
C24, paragraph 24
C24, paragraph 23
Transcript, pages 431 and 454; Exhibit C8, paragraph
Written submissions of
counsel for Dr Erich Heinzle, paragraph
Transcript, pages
A life-threatening
arrhythmia where the heart's lower chambers (ventricles) quiver instead of
pumping blood, leading to cardiac arrest
and death without immediate
Exhibit C1a, page
Transcript, pages
Transcript, page
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
particular Dixon J at 362,
‘Briginshaw’
(2022) 142 SASR 31
Transcript, page
Exhibit, C10a,
Extract of Emergency Dispatch protocol guide for chest pain, chest discomfort
non-traumatic
Exhibit C2,
paragraph 12
Exhibit C3,
paragraph 11
Transcript,
Transcript, page
Exhibit C9, page
Exhibit C6a, page
Exhibit C6a, page 7,
emphasis added
Exhibit C6a,
page 8, emphasis added
Transcript, page 34
Transcript, page 45
Transcript, page 46
C11, page 12
Transcript,
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page 59
(Lynch), 125 (Wilson)
Exhibit C22 - the recording; Exhibit C22a - transcript of
Incorrectly
referred to as the Woodside Crew, based around the same distance from Mount
Barker as Stirling
C22a, pages 2-4
Transcript, pages
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, pages 381,
384 and 389
Transcript, page
Transcript, page 364 and
Transcript page
Transcript page
Transcript, page 369 and
Transcript, page 110,
104, 115, 128-129
Transcript, pages 451-452
Transcript, pages 121,
Transcript, pages
121 and 123
Exhibits C16 and
C14 respectively
Transcript, page
Transcript, page 161
(Baulderstone)
Transcript,
pages 187-188 (Linn), 143
(Baulderstone)
Exhibit C16 (signed on 6
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C6a, pages
Exhibit C20b, ECG
Exhibit C9, page
Transcript, pages 286-288,
Exhibit C20a, test
undertaken in November 2018
Transcript, page 273
Transcript, page 180 (Balderstone); page 269 and 278 (Heddle);
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (6.36 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (668 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter