URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRC/2017/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Maritime Union of Australia v Qube No 1 Pty Ltd [2017] SAIRC 5 (30 January 2017)
Maritime Union of Australia v Qube No 1 Pty Ltd
[2017] SAIRC
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF SOUTH
MARITIME UNION OF AUSTRALIA
QUBE NO 1 PTY
Fair Work Act 2009
6176 of 2015
HEARING DATES:
22 and 23 August
Final written
submissions 13 September 2016
JUDGMENT OF:
Magistrate Lieschke
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Redundancy pay – Whether
contraventions of
of Act by respondent short paying redundancy
pay on retrenchment of two employees - Whether employees’ entitlement is
on prior agreed industry service – Whether this agreement was made
with the employees’ former employer in 2000 and incorporated
as a term of
their contract of employment – If so, whether a 2004 Enterprise Agreement
invalidated this more beneficial term
– Whether respondent’s promise
to employ on terms no less favourable than under their former employment
satisfied the
2011 Enterprise Agreement’s service requirement –
: Respondent bound by its contractual promise to meet the
employees’ former contractual term of having prior industry service
recognised for redundancy purposes – Redundancy entitlements to be based
on 70 week’s pay – Interest
Hobart Ports South Australia Enterprise Agreement
Qube No. 1 and Maritime Union of Australia Enterprise Agreement
2011 (Port Pirie)
Pollitt v R
[1992] HCA 35
Ryan v Clothing
Textile & Footwear Union of Australia
Byrne & Frew v
Australian Airlines Ltd
(1995) 185 CLR
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr P
Respondent: Mr Y Shariff
Solicitors:
Applicant: Lieschke &
Respondent: Seyfarth Shaw
Introduction
applicant union alleges the respondent has contravened
Fair Work Act
by underpaying redundancy benefits to its members
Robin Jenkins and Robert Pearce following their retrenchment in August 2014. It
seeks compensation equal to the underpaid redundancy benefits plus interest, and
has applied for the imposition of pecuniary penalties.
This decision deals with
the primary underpayment claim.
claimed shortfall of redundancy entitlements for each member is the difference
between the monetary value of 44.76 weeks’
and 70 week’s pay.
claim is based on clause 18.4(d)i of the ‘Qube No. 1 and Maritime Union of
Australia Enterprise Agreement 2011 (Port Pirie)’,
and an assertion that
the respondent has previously agreed to include the employees’ prior
industry service for the purpose
of calculating their redundancy payments, but
capped at 70 weeks.
applicant asserts the respondent’s agreement to recognise prior industry
service arises from a combination of two events.
The first event was the former
employer Hobart Ports’ offer to recognise prior industry service for
redundancy purposes, when
it sought to employ the two employees in 2000, and
their acceptance of the term. The second event was the respondent’s
to employ Mr Jenkins and Mr Pearce on terms generally no less
favourable than which they enjoyed under Hobart Ports’
employment.
5. The respondent denies any agreement to recognise
prior industry service. It asserts the applicant has not proven any agreement
this effect with Hobart Ports due to a lack of admissible evidence and an
absence of agency with respect to both members. In the
alternative, it asserts a
subsequent 2004 Hobart Ports registered industrial instrument extinguished the
superior common law term
recognising prior industry service, despite it having
been relied upon by Mr Jenkins and Mr Pearce when accepting the offer of
with Hobart Ports. In the further alternative, it asserts that its
promise to employ on terms generally no less favourable than those
enjoyed under
Hobart Ports could not include the recognition of prior industry service because
it had no actual knowledge of that
term and could not reasonably have known
The evidence
Newlyn was the applicant’s State Secretary in 2000. Mr Newlyn’s
evidence outlined the applicant’s position
in the negotiations with Hobart
Ports in 2000 and the agreement reached.
starting point is correspondence from the applicant’s Assistant National
Secretary Michael O’Leary to Hobart Ports’
General Manager Kevin
Badcock on 20 March 2000. It relevantly stated: “In respect of Port Pirie,
the MUA seeks agreement that
any permanent P&O Ports employee, who transfers
their employment to Port Pirie Stevedores, will have their Industry Start Date
(ISD) or employment start date with P&O Ports, recognised by Port Pirie
Stevedores for the purpose of application of the Redundancy,
Agreement.” I add that ‘Port Pirie Stevedores’ was a trading
name of Hobart Ports, and P & O Ports
was the relevant employer of the
union’s member stevedores.
24 March 2000 Mr O’Leary received a reply from Chris Drinkwater, Hobart
Ports’ Chief Executive. After acknowledging
the MUA’s letter of 20
March and Mr Newlyn’s meeting with Hobart Ports’ representatives on
22 March, Mr Drinkwater
set out four points that Hobart Ports wanted agreement
with. He then said; “Given a favourable response to the above issues,
Pirie Stevedores would be prepared to become party to an agreement that allows
up to a maximum of 6 permanent ex-employees of
P&O to commence employment
with Port Pirie Stevedores including the recognition of industry service.”
the letter of 24 March 2000 to the MUA Mr Newlyn had further meetings with
Hobart Ports’ representatives, as it was
his responsibility to complete
the transmission process of behalf of the union’s members. He said he
clearly expressed the
applicant’s view that the issues were industry start
date and the number of permanent workers to transfer over from P&O
Ports. His assessment was that recognition of industry start date was not
problematic for Hobart Ports. He said Hobart
Ports was keen to secure the
services of the existing permanent stevedores, so the company could seamlessly
discharge their new contract
obligations of providing port services in Port
Pirie. He said Mr Badcock agreed that prior industry service would be recognised
the event of redundancy, as a term of the offer of employment.
the agreement had been secured Mr Newlyn reported this achievement to a meeting
of the rank and file in the presence of Mr Badcock.
The affected workers then
indicated to Mr Newlyn their agreement to the offer.
fax from Mr O’Leary to Mr Drinkwater on 27 March confirmed agreement to
the four conditions set out in the March 24 letter,
and that the six permanent
ex-employees and 12 casuals would resign from P&O from midnight on 2 April,
enabling their employment
with Hobart Ports to commence on Monday 3 April.
brief letter makes no reference to the agreement regarding recognition of prior
industry service. Despite this omission Mr Newlyn
believed that recognition of
industry start date was adequately acknowledged in the correspondence exchanged
at the time between
the applicant’s Assistant National Secretary Michael
O’Leary and Hobart Ports’ CEO Chris Drinkwater.
in 2000 Mr Newlyn took responsibility for consenting to an unregistered
Redundancy and Retirement Agreement with Hobart Ports.
This included recognition
of prior industry service in the event of redundancy, but only for employees of
Hobart Ports as of 1992.
It made no mention of the agreement reached for the six
transferring employees in 2000. The omission was not explained. There was
evidence of this agreement ever being approved of by Mr Pearce or Mr Jenkins,
although Mr Jenkins was aware of it at least generally.
Jenkins was the applicant’s Port Pirie delegate from at least 2000 until
2011. As such he was closely involved in discussions
with Hobart Ports at the
time they were taking over the contract to provide stevedoring services in Port
Pirie from P&O. He was
concerned as the union delegate, and personally, that
the new employer should agree to recognise their prior industry service in
event of redundancy. It was an important term to him, without which he would not
have accepted the job offer. Instead he would
have been retrenched by P&O
and would have pursued other employment options open to him as a diesel
Jenkins’ recollection is that at a meeting in March 2000 the Human
Resources Manager, Ms Adams categorically agreed on behalf
of Hobart Ports, in
the presence of Mr Badcock and Mr Newlyn, to recognise prior industry service as
a term of the offer of employment.
Ms Adams later repeated that confirmation
personally to him.
a result Mr Jenkins and Mr Pearce performed the same job on Monday 3 April 2000
for Hobart Ports as they had on the previous Friday
for P&O. On their first
day they received a brief letter from Mr Drinkwater confirming their appointment
as permanent employees
subject to a satisfactory health check. The letter
referred to their classification of Grade 6 and the Port Pirie Stevedores Bulk
and General Stevedoring Enterprise Agreement 2000.
2008 the respondent took over the contract to provide stevedoring services in
Port Pirie from Hobart Ports. Both Mr Jenkins and
Mr Pearce then still performed
the stevedoring work. As a result they both received a letter of offer of
employment from the respondent
on 16 April 2008. The letter relevantly stated:
“... CPOL offers you employment in the same position and on terms and
that are generally no less favourable than those to which you are
entitled as an employee of Tasports. ... If your employment is
covered by a
certified agreement, AWA or Award and you accept employment with CPOL then that
instrument will continue to apply to
your employment for a maximum period of one
year after the transmission of business to CPOL. You will receive more
information about
the continuing application of any industrial instrument that
currently applies to you after the joint venture takes effect. If you
employment with CPOL, CPOL has agreed with Tasports that it will assume
liability for any accrued annual leave, personal leave
and long service leave to
which you may be entitled when your current employment comes to an end. Further,
for the purpose of these
entitlements, to the extent that they depend upon
length and continuity of service, your period of continuous service will count
as service with CPOL.” I add that CPOL is a former name of the respondent,
and Tasports is a later name of Hobart Ports.
workers accepted the respondent’s job offer and worked for it until their
retrenchment in 2014.
Pearce’s evidence is that he was concerned to preserve recognition of his
prior industry service when considering Hobart
Ports’ offer to employ him.
As a member of the applicant, he relied on the union to represent this interest.
He was present
at the meeting in late March 2000 when Mr Newlyn reported to him
and the other workers that Hobart Ports had agreed to recognise
industry service as a condition of employing them. Mr Jenkins also separately
told him of Hobart Ports offer. That was
sufficient certainty of preservation of
his rights for him to then accept the offer, without which he would not have
Newlyn has been the applicant’s SA Secretary since 2003. He was not
involved in the negotiations with Hobart Ports in
2000 but was centrally
involved in the 2011 Enterprise Agreement negotiations with the respondent. His
relevant evidence was that
Steve Egel told him the respondent acknowledged there
was a document relating to length of service recognition for Mr Pearce and
Jenkins, and there were documents that would recognise Hobart Ports’
agreement to honour their prior service.
Newlyn said the union insisted on a redundancy payment cap of 70 weeks instead
of the respondent’s position of 52 weeks,
in the 2011 negotiations, and
that he specifically discussed Mr Pearce’s and Mr Jenkins’ prior
industry service in this
Egel has been employed as the respondent’s Regional Manager for SA, WA and
Portland since May 2008. He gave evidence of
his involvement in the 2011
enterprise agreement discussions with the applicant’s officers. While he
agreed the 70 week cap
arose from discussions specifically about Mr Pearce and
Mr Jenkins, he did not agree the respondent would recognise their prior industry
service up to this level of benefit in the event of redundancy. He expected to
receive some wording to this effect from the union,
but nothing was subsequently
provided. He did not recall saying to the union representative that there were
documents from Hobart
Ports that recognised the prior industry service of Mr
Pearce and Mr Jenkins.
Swift was employed as the respondent’s Workplace Relations Manager between
late 2010 and late 2011, and has again been
in this role since February 2016.
She was involved in some of the 2011 meetings with the applicant’s
officers, although it
was limited because she was based in Sydney. Her evidence
is that during her involvement she did not hear any discussion regarding
recognition of prior industry service for Mr Jenkins or Mr Pearce.
final relevant topic of evidence was the Hobart Ports South Australia Enterprise
Agreement 2004, which was registered under the
Workplace Relations
on 23 July 2004. Clause 5.5 relevantly states: “This Agreement
including any appendix attached thereto, shall: 5.5 Supersede
any other Award,
any agreement whether certified or not, (save and except the Stevedoring
Industry Retirement and Redundancy Agreement
as provided for in clause 33.1 of
this Agreement), memorandum of understanding, exchange of correspondence, work
practice(s), arrangement(s),
written or un-written which applied prior to the
introduction of this Agreement and which regulated the terms and conditions of
of employees covered by this Agreement.”
the 2004 Agreement nor the Stevedoring Industry Retirement and Redundancy
Agreement made any reference to the agreed recognition
of prior industry service
generally or specifically for Mr Pearce and Mr Jenkins.
accept the evidence of Rick Newlyn, Mr Jenkins and Mr Pearce. Their evidence was
clear, consistent and credible. However I do not
accept there is any more
correspondence not in evidence that records the recognition of prior service.
The difference in recollections
between Jamie Newlyn and Mr Egel do not need to
be resolved for reasons that follow. Ms Swift’s lack of awareness that the
2011 discussions included the topic of the industry service of Mr Jenkins and Mr
Pearce is not relevant as I accept both Mr Egel
and Mr Newlyn to the extent that
topic was in fact discussed.
Contentions
applicant contends a combination of the correspondence and the oral agreement
between it and Hobart Ports proves the creation
of the contractual term to
recognise prior industry service for redundancy purposes. It contends the 2004
Agreement did not remove
this superior contractual right. When in 2008 the
respondent promised to employ on terms no less favourable than those enjoyed
Hobart Ports, the previous term became incorporated into the new contracts
of employment.
applicant also sought to rely on the disputed statements of Mr Egel made during
negotiations for the 2011 Agreement to the effect
that he acknowledged the right
to recognition of prior industry service for redundancy purposes.
my opinion no reliance can be placed on this topic of evidence, even if Mr
Newlyn’s evidence was accepted in full. That is
because Mr Egel’s
view was his opinion only, and he did not purport to and could not create the
right as he was not involved
in the decision making process of the respondent
when it first hired Mr Jenkins and Mr Pearce in 2008.
respondent contends its former employees do not satisfy the cl 18.4(d)i criteria
of having “previous agreed industry service
where relevant,” and so
their redundancy is based on years of service under its employ only.
respondent’s first contention is that no initial term to this effect can
be proven by the applicant, on the basis that the
evidence of oral agreement
with Hobart Ports is hearsay. In particular it submitted that Rick
Newlyn’s and Mr Jenkins’
evidence that they received assurances from
Hobart Ports’ HR Manager and General Manager that all six transferring
employees would have their prior industry service recognised for
redundancy purposes if they accepted the offer of employment, was
inadmissible.
It asserted that as this was the only evidence on the topic, it should not be
admitted for the purpose of establishing
the truth of the employers’ offer
or agreement.
my opinion this is not hearsay because the HR manager and the General Manager
were relevant senior managers authorised to speak
on behalf of the employer and
to convey its intention. They both participated in various meetings with the MUA
the contract to perform stevedoring services at Port Pirie in
lieu of P&O. I infer they are the senior representatives of the
referred to in the letter of Mr Drinkwater of 24 March regarding the meeting of
22 March. On this basis I find they both
had ostensible and actual authority. As
they were speaking for Hobart Ports to convey an authorised expression of the
position, their out-of-court statements to Mr Newlyn and Mr
Jenkins are admissible to prove the company’s state of mind and
intentions.
the event I am wrong and the statements of Ms Adams and Mr Badcock are strictly
hearsay, I have determined to admit them into evidence
in the interests of
justice, not being bound by the strict rules of evidence. Any risk that their
statements did not accurately reflect
the views of Hobart Ports is outweighed by
the reliability and probative value of the impugned evidence. The evidence is
of the existence of the initial oral offer of a significant term of
the employment contract.
the term was agreed orally, and the applicant’s leadership did not take
steps to ensure the term was clearly expressed
in writing once it was agreed,
and no mention of the term was included in the later 2000 redundancy agreement
or in the 2004 registered
agreement, it is corroborated by the available
contemporaneous written evidence. The applicant’s letter of 20 March
the need for the term. Hobart Ports’ letter of 24 March referred
to a meeting of 22 March with its representatives about this
issue and others.
The 24 March letter also indicates a willingness to agree to the term if four
specified conditions of Hobart Ports
were met. The applicant’s letter of
27 March sets out agreement to the four conditions, and confirms the new
employment will
commence on 3 April as anticipated and required for the smooth
transition of port operator.
also accept the unchallenged evidence of both Mr Newlyn and Mr Jenkins that the
term was then an important industry standard, without
which Mr Jenkins and Mr
Pearce were unlikely to have accepted the job offer. In addition, the offer was
conveyed by both senior Hobart
Ports’ staff members to Mr Newlyn and Mr
Jenkins on more than one occasion and was openly conveyed to the six affected
by Mr Newlyn in the presence of Mr Badcock at a meeting of the workers.
this is the respondent’s expectation that a concluded agreement about such
an important term would have been simply
recorded by one of the union’s
officers in some correspondence to Hobart Ports, whereas it was not.
my opinion this is not a telling omission given the union’s apparent
reliance on and acceptance of oral promises about a
then important industry
standard given by senior representatives of Hobart Ports, and which were
entirely consistent with the limited
written correspondence. The
respondent’s assumption of necessary documentation of all terms is not apt
to this traditional
industrial context where a HR Manager’s and a General
Manager’s verbal promise was trusted by the union’s leadership.
There is also an element of Mr Newlyn mistakenly thinking, and probably
reporting back, that the correspondence accurately recorded
commitment.
these reasons I am satisfied the oral evidence is reliable and properly
admissible.
respondent next submitted that due to the absence of any evidence from officers
of Hobart Ports I should draw an adverse inference
that no such offer was made
by Hobart Ports.
my opinion this submission is unfounded. While neither party gave any
explanation for the absence of evidence from Hobart Ports’
current officers, neither party made any complaint of not being able to
investigate or check the assertion which was disclosed
in written statements
well before the hearing, and despite me squarely raising that issue with the
respondent’s counsel. In
addition such an adverse inference would be
unjustified as being inconsistent with the written evidence and the remainder of
oral evidence.
respondent also overstates the nature of the inference that could be drawn, were
one to be justified. The inference would be that
the evidence would not assist
the applicant’s case, rather than that no offer was made. It would remain
for me to determine
whether the proper inference should outweigh the body of
significant credible and consistent oral and written evidence of the formation
of the agreement. In my opinion, if an adverse inference does properly arise, my
finding would be the same due to the strength of
the supporting evidence.
the respondent submitted that Mr Newlyn and Mr Jenkins could not receive the
offer of Hobart Ports to recognise industry service
on behalf of Mr Pearce and
Mr Jenkins, nor could Mr Jenkins receive the offer as being made to him
personally.
argument regarding Mr Jenkins is that he was acting in his capacity as a union
delegate rather than in his personal capacity and
so he could not rely on any
promise made to him, as he had not given himself any authority to represent
himself as his own agent.
The submission of these supposed mental walls is
simply artifice. Nor is it backed by any evidence of Mr Jenkins disavowing his
capacity. The offer was also later repeated to him at interview by Ms
Adams. I reject the submission.
conclude that Mr Jenkins was told of Hobart Ports’ offer by its HR Manager
and he relied on it as both a union delegate and
as one of the six workers
directly affected.
respondent submitted that Mr Newlyn was not the agent of Mr Pearce or Mr Jenkins
and so he could not have received the offer of
Hobart Ports on their behalf and
he could not have conveyed the offer’s acceptance by Mr Pearce or Mr
I have just concluded, Mr Jenkins did not need to rely on the union’s
agency as the offer was communicated directly to him,
and he accepted it.
my opinion Mr Newlyn did act as agent for both gentlemen, in any event. There
were only six affected members of the union who could
benefit from the term, and
their identity was well known. The single issue was straight forward. It did not
suffer from any vagary
as to timing or scope. In the presence of Hobart
Ports’ General Manager, Mr Newlyn reported to the members and received
approval to accept the four conditions and convey the offer’s
acceptance. The process was an unambiguous negotiation about
a common term of
six proposed contracts of employment. The valuable legal consideration was Mr
Jenkins, Mr Pearce and the other four
permanent workers accepting the job offer.
I conclude that both Mr Jenkins and Mr Pearce were accurately and appropriately
Hobart Ports’ offer as was intended by Hobart Ports, and both
conveyed their acceptance both through Mr Newlyn and to the present
Mr Badcock,
as well as directly in Mr Jenkins’ case. The offer and acceptance were
also clearly made in contemplation of the
creation of legal relations in the
form of contracts of employment.
circumstances of this case are very different to the loose circumstances that
underpinned rejection of the unregistered collective
agreement in the decision
Ryan v Textile Clothing & Footwear Union of
which the respondent
incorrectly submitted should apply.
have also considered the significance of the absence of any reference to this
term in the subsequent 2000 Redundancy document agreed
between the applicant and
Hobart Ports. There is no evidence that Mr Pearce or Mr Jenkins specifically
approved the relevant clauses
of the collective agreement prior to accepting the
job or at all, or even that its final terms were produced to them prior to the
terms being accepted by Rick Newlyn. Further, by the time this document had been
agreed to by the applicant Hobart Ports’ offer
had been accepted, relied
on and incorporated into the individual contracts of employment. In my opinion
the absence does not negate
all the evidence in support of the formation of the
Accordingly
I find that a term of Mr Jenkins’ and Mr Pearce’s contracts of
employment provided for recognition of their
length of industry service in the
event of retrenchment by Hobart Ports.
next issue is whether the 2004 Agreement negated or cancelled this contractual
respondent submitted the wording of clause 5.5 had this effect as the common law
term fell within the ambit of the clause. The
2004 Agreement was said to cover
the field of all types of agreements including individual contractual terms.
That was because a
contract is a type of agreement.
applicant submits the clause did not have this effect. The plain and ordinary
meaning of the clause did not attempt to extinguish
any superior common law
contractual terms. It pointedly did not refer to contract(s). It described a
range of instruments and agreements
but the language fell well short of
contractual terms. This was likely to be intentional, given the statutory
limitation of a registered
industrial instrument to creating minimum terms and
conditions. While it replaced any inferior common law term by force of law, it
did not prohibit or supersede the more beneficial common law contractual term
for which valuable consideration had been
fact that one characteristic of a contract is that it is a type of agreement is
not to the point. In my opinion the wording of
the clause did not include the
common law term, and did not express any intention to prohibit a common law
contractual term with
more generous benefits than those set out in clause 33,
nor could it as a matter of law. I conclude the term continued in existence
until after the respondent sent its written offer of employment to Mr Jenkins
and Mr Pearce.
respondent then submitted that if the recognition of prior service term was
still part of the contract of employment of Mr Jenkins
and Mr Pearce in April
2008, it was not aware and could not reasonably have been aware of the term. As
a result the term could not
objectively be included within the
respondent’s offer to employ on terms generally no less favourable than
the Hobart Ports’
terms of employment. The scope of the respondent’s
offer was restricted to only matching the written terms of employment set
the 2004 Agreement.
the submission relies on a finding that the respondent did not know of the term
and could not reasonably have known of the term
when it made its offer, the
evidence does not support such a finding, in my opinion.
there is no evidence that Darrell Liddell, the respondent’s Operations
Manager Tasmania and author of the offer of
employment dated 16 April 2008, was
not aware of the term. This cannot be assumed, especially given the fact of some
agreements having
been reached between the respondent and Hobart Ports regarding
transferral of accrued leave entitlements, as was stated on the
respondent’s
letter of offer.
there is no evidence of any attempt by any of the respondent’s officers to
ask Mr Jenkins or Mr Pearce what oral or
written terms of employment they
thought they enjoyed in the employment of Hobart Ports. It is clear that the
gentlemen firmly believed
they had such a term, and it is therefore very likely
that this would have been disclosed on any direct enquiry. Not asking cannot
possible amount to could not reasonably have known.
the offer was made at a time the respondent wished to secure the services of the
existing experienced stevedores at Port
Pirie, in order for it to have suitable
staff to discharge its new contractual duties to manage the wharves. The breadth
of its offer
made the employment more attractive and was therefore likely to be
to the respondent’s ultimate commercial advantage. On the
assumption the
respondent had not made enquiries of Hobart Ports, its choice of not making
reasonable enquiry directly with its prospective
employees and making the offer
in general terms, unlimited to subject matter or type of entitlement, was more
likely than not to
be a considered commercial decision.
respondent also submitted Mr Pearce and Mr Jenkins had an obligation to tell the
respondent about the term. In my opinion this
is not correct, as they had no
such contractual obligation. The offer was formally made in writing in broad
terms, and was not limited
to written contractual terms, or expressed to be
subject to prior documentation and/or agreement. Nor did it assert the
respondent’s
claimed understanding that the redundancy rights were only
those minimum conditions set out in the 2004 instrument. Further, the
believed they had the benefit of a standard industry redundancy term, and at
least Mr Jenkins, like Mr Newlyn, thought
the term was reflected in
documentation. As the respondent was a former joint venture partner of Hobart
Ports, and had reached some
agreement regarding transfer of leave entitlements,
it would have been reasonable for them to assume the respondent knew about the
respondent next submitted that its offer to employ “on terms and
conditions that are generally no less favourable”
excluded, by inference,
any term that related to a period of continuous service. This inference
supposedly arose from the paragraph
of the letter of offer that referred to
recognition of continuous service for accrued leave purposes.
reject this submission. The reference to continuous service was expressly
limited to accrued leave entitlements, with this subject
arising from an
agreement with Hobart Ports. It was not an existing term of the employment
contract. Nor did it have any connection
to the topic of redundancy. And the
leave issue had little relevance in any event, as all leave entitlements were
paid out by Hobart
Ports at the end of that employment.
regard to all the above considerations and findings I conclude that the
respondent agreed to recognise the period of industry
service of Mr Jenkins and
Mr Pearce when it employed them on terms that specifically included recognition
of prior industry service
for redundancy purposes. The respondent remains bound
by its contractual obligation to pay the full redundancy entitlement as set
in cl 18 of the 2011 Enterprise Agreement.
invite the parties to make submissions as to the terms of final orders within 14
days. The application for pecuniary penalties will
be listed for a directions
PUBLICATION OF THESE
It is the practice of this Court to publish its reasons
for decision in full on the Internet. If any party or person contends that
reasons for decision should not be published in full the party or person must
make an application within seven days of the
delivery of these reasons. The
application shall be by an Application for Directions with a supporting
affidavit and should be addressed
to the presiding member(s). If no such
application is lodged within the time specified these reasons will be published
in accordance
with the Court’s usual practice.
Pollitt v R
, at [8] to [12].
Byrne & Frew v
Australian Airlines Ltd
(1995) 185 CLR 411, at 421.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (194 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter