URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAET/2025/111.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:57:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hamilton v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia [2025] SAET 111 (10 October 2025)
v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia
[2025] SAET 111
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNAL
HAMILTON, Faye
South Australian Employment Court
ET-24-04560
HEARING DATE:
1 October 2025
DECISION AND
DECISION OF:
His Honour Deputy
President Judge Rossi
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
The applicant sought a review of a
determination of the respondent that she has a nil entitlement to a lump sum
payment for non-economic
loss as a result of a work injury of noise induced
hearing loss and tinnitus – the assessor assessed the applicant as having
been left with a 4% Whole Person Impairment (WPI) as a result of noise induced
hearing loss and did not allow any percentage for
tinnitus with the result being
below the threshold of at least a 5% WPI to qualify for a lump sum payment
– in seeking a review
of the decision by the Tribunal, the applicant
claimed that the assessor had failed to provide an assessment of tinnitus in
with the relevant medical guidelines – following the referral
of the dispute for hearing and determination, a further report
was sought from
the assessor asking whether he had considered the content of two medical
certificates of treating doctors that had
been provided by the respondent for
his consideration but were not referred to in the permanent impairment
assessment report –
following the receipt of the further report of the
assessor which confirmed that he had considered the medical certificates, orders
were made by the Tribunal, with the consent of the parties, which confirmed the
decision of the respondent and which reserved the
question of costs – the
respondent then made application for adverse costs orders against the applicant
pursuant either to
s 106(7) of the Return to Work Act 2014 (the RTW Act) or s
106(3) – the applicant sought an order that she be entitled to recover
reasonable costs of representation in accordance with s 106(1) of the RTW Act
– the requirements of s 106(7) of the RTW Act were not
met as there had been no hearing of the dispute in the Tribunal (Return
Corporation of South Australia v Sweeney
[2025] SASCA 50
, [119] followed)
– the applicant had not acted unreasonably in the
conduct of the proceedings and there was no other basis for an adverse costs
order against the applicant pursuant to s 106(3) of the RTW Act –
‑– an order should be made that the applicant be entitled to her
reasonable costs of representation in accordance with
s 106(1) of the RTW Act.
Northern Territory v Sangare
[2019] HCA 25
Malthouse v
[2017] SAET 14
Local Government Workers Compensation Scheme (City of Unley) (No2)
Moretta v Return to Work SA (Bendigo and Adelaide Bank)
[2025] SASCA 50
Calderbank v Calderbank
(1975) 3 All ER
Hazeldene’s Chicken Farm v VWA (No2)
[2005] VSCA
Abraham v Return to Work SA
[2016] SAET 76
Shaun Luke v
Department of Primary Industries and Regions
[2025] SAET 24
v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia
[2025] SAET 47
Heinz Company Australia Ltd & Anor v Kotzman & Ors
[2009] VSC 311
Dallimore v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia
Mountain Pine Furniture Pty Ltd v Taylor
[2007] VSCA 146
(2007) 16 VR 659
Wingfoot Australia Partners Pty Ltd v Kocak
Paschalis v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia
[2021] SASCFC 44
South Australia Police v Morris
[2025] SAET
Wills v Chief Executive Officer of the Australia Skills Quality
Authority (costs)
[2022] FCAFC 43
SMEC Testing Services Pty Ltd v
Campbelltown City Council [
2000] NSWCA 323
Envirogen Industrial
Services (Aust) Pty Ltd v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia
[2020] SAET 101
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Ms A
Respondent: Mr I Colgrave
Solicitors:
Applicant: TGB
Respondent: Minter Ellison Lawyers
The applications
applicant sought a review of a determination of the respondent that she has a
nil entitlement to a lump sum payment for non-economic
loss as a result of a
work injury of noise induced hearing loss and tinnitus.
5 August 2025 the following orders were made upon application for consent
decision of the respondent dated 25 June 2024, determining the applicant’s
lump sum entitlements as nil made pursuant to
is confirmed.
question of costs is reserved.
respondent has since made application for adverse costs orders against the
applicant. By amended application for directions dated
3 September 2025 the
respondent sought the following orders:
, the applicant is only entitled to a
reduced amount of costs of the proceedings, to be adjudicated by the
the alternative, pursuant to
, the applicant is not entitled to
further orders that the Honourable Tribunal deems fit.
applicant has maintained that she should be entitled to an order for her costs
of representation in accordance with s 106(1) of
(the RTW Act).
the reasons that follow, an order should be made that the applicant is entitled
to recover from the respondent her reasonable
costs of representation, in
accordance with s 106(1) of the RTW Act, with the quantum of such costs to be
adjudicated by the Tribunal,
in default of agreement.
The legislative provision
106 of the RTW Act addresses the costs of proceedings relating to a decision
under Division 4 of Part 6 and provides:
(1) A party (other than the relevant compensating authority) is entitled,
subject to this Part and to limits prescribed by regulation,
to an award against
the relevant compensating authority for the party's reasonable costs of—
(a) any initial reconsideration of a decision under Division 4; and
(b) any subsequent proceedings for resolution of the matter before the
(2) Costs may only be awarded to cover—
(a) the cost of representation by a legal practitioner or an officer or
employee of an industrial association; and
(b) costs of a kind authorised by the regulations that were reasonably
(3) If the Tribunal is of the opinion that a party—
(a) has acted unreasonably—
(i) in bringing proceedings before the Tribunal; or
(ii) in view of an assessment or recommendation of a member of the
Tribunal under
section 43(13)
South Australian Employment Tribunal Act
(iii) without limiting subparagraph (ii)—in failing to discontinue or
settle any proceedings before the conclusion of the
hearing of a matter; or
(iv) in relation to any other aspect of the conduct of proceedings before
the Tribunal; or
(b) has acted frivolously or vexatiously in bringing or in relation to the
conduct of proceedings before the Tribunal,
the Tribunal may—
(c) decline to make an award of costs in favour of the party and may further
(if it thinks fit) make an award of costs against the
(d) reduce the amount of the award of costs to which the party would
otherwise have been entitled.
(4) Subject to subsection (5), an award of costs to cover professional advice
or assistance may, if the Tribunal considers appropriate,
be made in favour of
the person who provided the professional advice or assistance.
(5) An award of costs to cover the cost of representation by an officer or
employee of an industrial association are payable to the
industrial association.
(6) An award of legal costs cannot exceed 85% of the amount that would be
allowable under the relevant Supreme Court scale if the
proceedings were in the
Supreme Court.
(7) If the amount of permanent impairment compensation is disputed by a
worker and the amount the Tribunal awards is less than, or
the same as, or less
than 10% above, an amount offered by the relevant compensating authority to
settle the matter before the matter
proceeds to a hearing before the Tribunal,
the worker is not entitled to costs under this section (and evidence of an offer
in the course of a compulsory conference or mediation is admissible
(without the consent of all parties) in subsequent proceedings
for the purpose
of applying this provision).
South Australian Employment Tribunal Act 2014
does not apply to proceedings before the Tribunal under this Act.
Northern Territory v Sangare
the High Court stated that the power to award costs is a creature of
The Court went on to
observe that, subject to fetters upon the exercise of discretion provided by the
legislature, a successful party
is generally entitled to his or her costs by way
of indemnity against the expense of
litigation.
The Court added that
the formulation of principles to guide the exercise of any discretion conferred
avoids arbitrariness and serves
the need for consistency which is an essential
aspect of the exercise of judicial
106 of the RTW Act has been referred to as providing a more benevolent costs
regime for parties, other than the relevant compensating
authority, than would
normally apply in conventional civil
litigation.
circumstances of ordinarily in conventional civil litigation costs following the
event and s 106(1) providing that, ordinarily,
a party other than the relevant
compensating authority is entitled to an award of costs against the relevant
compensating authority
of the party’s reasonable costs, regardless of the
Sub-sections
106(3) and (7), sought to be relied upon by the respondent in this matter,
provide for exceptions in certain circumstances.
Sub-section 106(3) empowers the
Tribunal to make adverse costs orders against a party and, relevantly in this
case, where a party
acts unreasonably, frivolously or vexatiously in bringing
the proceedings, or in the conduct of the proceedings, before the Tribunal.
Where such a finding is made, the Tribunal may decline to make an award of costs
in favour of that party and may further make an
award of costs against the
party, or it may reduce the amount of the award of costs to which the party
would otherwise have been
entitled. It is for the party seeking to invoke s
106(3) to persuade the Tribunal that, firstly, the facts are within the scope of
the sub-section and, secondly, that the discretion should be exercised in the
manner sought.
Sub-section
106(7) may only apply in circumstances of a dispute as to the amount of
permanent impairment compensation claimed. If
the criteria set out in the
sub-section are satisfied, then the provision states that the worker is not
entitled to costs under the
section. Whilst sub-section 106(7) was construed by
the Court of Appeal in
the Court observed that whether there is no scope for the exercise of any
residual discretion where the criteria are satisfied, was
not argued on that
The Court identified what
sub-section 106(7) requires in order for it to be operative in any particular
119. It may be seen that s 106(7) requires:
1. A dispute concerning the amount of permanent impairment compensation
determined by the compensating authority to be due to a
2. An amount offered by the relevant compensating authority to settle the
matter before the matter proceeds to a hearing before
the Tribunal.
3. A hearing of that dispute in the Tribunal.
4. An award made by the Tribunal following the hearing of that dispute.
5. The award made by the Tribunal is “less than, or the same as, or less
than 10% above” the amount offered by the compensating
following background is obtained from the affidavits read and documents tendered
for the purpose of the Tribunal determining the
applications for costs.
the time the arrangements were made for the applicant to be assessed as to
permanent impairment in accordance with s 22 of the
RTW Act and relevant medical
guidelines, the respondent had accepted the applicant had a work injury of
noise-induced hearing loss
and tinnitus. Leading to the assessment of permanent
impairment to be undertaken by ear, nose, and throat surgeon Dr Garret Hunter,
the applicant requested, and had confirmed by the respondent’s nominated
compensating authority, that two medical certificates
would be provided to Dr
Hunter which were contended by the applicant to be relevant to the assessment of
permanent impairment for
the tinnitus.
first certificate was of Dr Gibe Jose dated 22 May 2025, which stated:
This is to certify that:
Ms Faye Hamilton Date Of Birth: 3/12/1962
Has been having headaches associated with tinnitus since ten years which is
worsening progressively.
This certificate was completed on 22/5/2024.
second certificate dated 28 May 2024 was of Dr Mark Harris and stated:
Re: Ms Faye Hamilton
Date of Birth 03 DE C 1962
This is to certify that the above has had headaches associated with tinnitus for
some years.
She has related high frequency hearing loss.
arrangements made for the applicant to be assessed by Dr Hunter were not made
directly with Dr Hunter or private rooms of Dr Hunter.
The arrangements were
made through an organisation called PIA Reporting which, in turn, appears to
have had a contractual arrangement
with Dr Hunter. Accordingly, the medical
certificates were provided by the respondent to PIA Reporting with the
understanding that
they would, in turn, be provided by PIA Reporting to Dr
Hunter provided a whole person impairment (WPI) assessment report dated 18 June
2024 (the first report). In the first report, he
stated that he examined the
applicant on 4 June 2024 for a WPI assessment and report. The first report is
divided into separate headings.
One such heading is titled “
Documentary
” under which the first report then sets out confirmation of
documents that were received by Dr Hunter. Neither of the two medical
certificates are identified either in that part or in any other part of the
first report.
the history section of the first report, Dr Hunter records:
There was no reported history of head trauma or other unrelated hearing loss.
She does suffer from headaches which worry her.
there was any association or causal link between the headaches and the tinnitus
experienced by the applicant was not addressed
in the first report.
Hunter utilised a separate heading titled “Tinnitus History”. There
he recorded:
Ms Hamilton suffers from intermittent tinnitus with modest effect on her sleep,
concentration, or speech discrimination. As I assessed
tinnitus symptoms to be
mild, I declined to provide a loading under paragraph 9.11 of the Impairment
Assessment Guidelines.
was no record of Dr Hunter asking the applicant about the history recorded in
the certificates of having experienced, for up
to ten years, headaches
associated with the tinnitus which had been worsening progressively. There was
no reference in the first
report whether he had taken this into account or any
reasoning associated with whatever conclusion may have been reached.
relation to the assessment of WPI for the noise-induced hearing loss, Dr Hunter
concluded that the relevant assessment was of 7.6%
binaural hearing impairment
(BHI) which translated to a 4% WPI by utilising Table 9.2 of the Impairment
Assessment Guidelines (IAG).
The assessment of BHI had to reach the range of 8.8
to 10.6 BHI to equate to a 5% WPI. Given the nil assessment for tinnitus, the
overall assessment of WPI remained at 4%. Chapter 9.11 of the IAG provides for
an additional percentage of up to 5% BHI in cases
of severe tinnitus.
58(2) of the RTW Act provides that there is no entitlement to a lump sum payment
under that section if the worker’s
degree of WPI from physical injury is
less than 5%.
reliance of the assessment of Dr Hunter, the respondent proceeded to determine,
by letter dated 25 June 2024, that the applicant’s
entitlement to
compensation for non-economic loss as a result of noise-induced hearing loss and
tinnitus is nil.
14 October 2024 the applicant applied to the Tribunal for it to review the
determination of the respondent. The applicant advanced
the following
The applicant asserts that the Whole Person Impairment report of Dr Garret
Hunter dated 18 June 2024 is flawed. The applicant suffers
from tinnitus, and in
addition of her compensable condition, should have been made in accordance with
the IAGs. The applicant produced
medical records to support her tinnitus
condition, which Dr Hunter does not appear to have considered.
matter failed to resolve at conciliation. In her Assessment and Recommendations,
dated 19 December 2024, Commissioner Byrt noted
the position of the applicant
that there should have been a joint request by the parties to Dr Hunter for him
to provide a further
report stating whether he considered the content of the two
medical certificates when exercising his judgement in relation to the
tinnitus. The Commissioner noted that the respondent would not agree to such an
approach. The Commissioner added:
The suggestion of seeking clarification from Dr Hunter is a most reasonable
course of action. It is certainly a more economical way
of getting clarity than
the cost of running a trial and allowing that information to come out via
examination/cross-examination.
Given the comments made by the applicant’s
representative, it could well lead to a quick resolution of the dispute ... and
I don’t consider there is such a dearth of evidence that the Applicant
could be put on notice as to costs for proceeding to
Assessment and Recommendations of the Commissioner was not provided to me until
it was annexed to an affidavit of solicitor Leanna
Marie Ferraro sworn on 29
September 2025. The record of the first directions hearing before me, which took
place on 16 January 2025,
upon referral for hearing and determination,
has been a discussion today as to whether there should be a letter sent to Dr
Hunter asking him to clarify whether or not he
considered the content of a
medical certificate dated 22 May 2024.
If he did, then the letter should seek
his reasoning as to why it was not sufficient to provide a loading for tinnitus
or, if he did
not consider it, whether it does cause him to vary the opinion
that he has expressed.
The matter is adjourned to a directions hearing at
10:50am on 30 January 2025
to allow the respondent an opportunity to
consider if it is prepared to consent to a letter being sent to Dr Hunter to
address those
matters in the light of the discussion today. [emphasis
the respondent caused a letter to be sent to PIA Reporting dated 21 February
2025 requesting a further report from Dr Hunter,
he was only asked whether the
two medical certificates were considered by him prior to writing the first
He replied that the
documents were received within an hour of the consultation and were considered
before the tinnitus loading was
determined. No reasoning was provided. The
further information was provided by letter dated 21 March 2025 (the second
report). It
is not clear as to whether the certificates were received and read
by Dr Hunter before or after the consultation, so that it is also
whether Dr Hunter had the benefit of the certificates when obtaining the history
from the applicant.
Thereafter,
there were exchanges of correspondence between the parties. The applicant
offered to concede the dispute upon the acceptance
by the respondent that she be
entitled to recover her costs of representation from the respondent. The
respondent rejected that offer.
Nevertheless, by email transmission forwarded on
8 July 2025, the respondent put forward an offer to pay an amount of $4,500
of GST and internal disbursements, to settle any claim for costs. That
was in response to a claim by the applicant of $7,735 inclusive
internal disbursements. Ultimately the orders recorded in paragraph 1 of these
reasons were made on 5 August 2025.
The submissions of the parties
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submitted that the Tribunal should order, in cascading order of
alternative:
the applicant pay the respondent’s costs to be agreed or adjudicated;
the Tribunal declines to make an order in the applicant’s favour with
respect to her costs of the proceedings; or
the Tribunal reduces the award of costs in favour of the applicant to a
percentage less than
respondent submitted that the consent orders made by the Tribunal constituted a
final order which resulted in “less than,
or the same as, or less than 10%
above” the amount that had been offered by the respondent which, in
accordance with s 106(7)
of the RTW Act, means that the applicant is not
entitled to costs under s 106. In the alternative, it was submitted that
the applicant
acted unreasonably in the course of the proceedings (including the
commencement or the continuation of the proceedings), and further
frivolous or vexatious conduct within the ambit of s 106(3) of the RTW
respondent submitted that the applicant either knew, or ought to have known from
the outset, given the state of the expert evidence,
that there was no prospect
of success and that the outcome should have been even more starkly apparent
after the applicant received
a letter from the respondent’s solicitors
dated 6 December 2024. That letter asserted that the first report of Dr Hunter
compliant and that Dr Hunter had been provided with the two medical
certificates. The respondent offered, at that time, to pay the
applicant’s
reasonable legal costs if the applicant effectively conceded the dispute by the
close of business on 10 December
2024. Otherwise, the applicant was put on
notice that the letter would be relied upon in support of an application for an
the applicant pay the respondent’s costs of the proceedings, on
an indemnity basis, from the date of the letter. That position
was expressed to
be in accordance with the principles set out in
Calderbank v Calderbank
Hazeldene’s Chicken Farm v VWA (No2)
characterising the applicant’s case, the respondent submitted:
applicant’s argument never had any evidentiary support, and was not worthy
of consideration – it did not prove unsuccessful
on balance;
applicant cannot, given the lack of supporting expert evidence, be found to have
had a “genuinely held belief” in
her version of events;
therefore prosecuted a hopeless case which was doomed to fail, and this was an
unreasonable act; and
cannot be said that pursuing a hopeless case is in any way “appropriate,
moderate, fair, and
proportionate”.
respondent further submitted that to institute the claim and continue with the
proceedings where the case was hopeless would constitute
a frivolous and
vexatious approach to the litigation.
relation to s 106(7), the respondent referred to the requirements for that
provision to operate, as set out by the Court of Appeal
paragraph 119. The respondent acknowledged, as arguable, that steps 3, 4, and 5
have not been met because the matter had not proceeded
to a hearing and
determination of an award by the Tribunal. It urged a broad construction of s
106(7), which is intended to operate
to reduce litigation by compromise, and the
respondent referred to the offer that had been made to pay reasonable costs to
10 December
The applicant’s submissions
applicant urged caution in evaluating the merit of her case, in the manner
raised by the respondent, where there had been no hearing
and determination by
the Tribunal. The applicant maintained that there was merit in continuing with
the application for review until
the consent orders were made. Reference was
made to the decision of the Tribunal in
Abraham v Return to Work SA
permanent impairment assessment report in accordance with s 22 of the RTW Act
must satisfy the test of admissibility that
applies to expert evidence. The
applicant also referred to the decision of the Full Bench of this Tribunal in
Luke v Department of Primary Industries and Regions
potential error, as opposed to actual error, by an assessor may provide a
sufficient basis for the Tribunal to make a referral
to an independent medical
adviser, in order to establish or allay concerns about perceived error.
applicant submitted that in this case, until Dr Hunter confirmed in his second
report that he had considered the two medical certificates,
the applicant had
acted reasonably in raising potential error in Dr Hunter not having considered
evidence which was forwarded by
the respondent for his consideration.
applicant noted that it was only after the obtaining of the second report from
Dr Hunter was raised by me that the respondent
agreed to do so. Reference was
made to the applicant’s consent to such an approach at the conciliation
conference.
applicant also referred to the decision of this Tribunal in
Van Loggem v
with respect to the
preparation of reports by experts associated with PIA Reporting.
applicant submitted that, in conceding the dispute when she did, the applicant
did not concede that her application for review
was without merit. Rather, the
applicant had to take into account the risk of proceeding to a hearing and
determination by the Tribunal,
and the potential consequences as to costs if the
Tribunal were to have confirmed the decision of the respondent in those
circumstances
by reference to the reasoning of the Court of Appeal in
applicant referred to the observation of the Court of Appeal in
that s 106(7) of the RTW Act is intended to encourage the resolution of disputes
concerning permanent impairment
compensation.
construction of s 106(7), the applicant submitted the Court of Appeal held in
, by reference to the requirements identified at paragraph 119 of
its judgment, that it is only where there has been an amount offered
relevant compensating authority to settle the matter before the matter proceeds
to a hearing before the Tribunal, that the
matter does proceed to a hearing of
the dispute in the Tribunal, and an award is subsequently made by the Tribunal
following the
hearing of the dispute, that the provision may operate. As, in
this case, there had been no hearing by the Tribunal nor an award
made by the
Tribunal following the hearing of that dispute, the applicant submitted that s
106(7) cannot operate so as to disentitle
the applicant from recovering from the
respondent, her reasonable costs of representation.
reply the respondent submitted that it would be erroneous to equate, without
evidence, the practice of Dr Hunter with the evidence
given by another ear,
nose, and throat surgeon in
Consideration
Sub-section
22(3) of the RTW Act provides that the Minister will publish IAG for the
purposes of assessment for permanent impairment.
Since the RTW Act came into
operation on 1 July 2015 there have been three editions of the IAG. The second
edition did not become
operative. The third edition commenced on 1 October 2025
but did not apply in this case as Chapter 1.4 provides:
impairment assessment guidelines in operation immediately before the
commencement date will continue to apply in relation
to the assessment of
permanent impairment of a worker’s injury if, before the commencement
date, the worker had attended an
appointment with an assessor selected in
accordance with those impairment assessment guidelines for the purpose of
assessment of
permanent impairment of that injury.
Accordingly,
it is the first edition of the IAG which continued to apply in this case. It is
the edition referred to below.
IAG adopt AMA5 in most cases but where there is a difference then the IAG are to
be used as the modifying
9 of the IAG addresses hearing loss and tinnitus. The preamble to the Chapter
states that the IAG are to take precedence over
AMA5. Chapter 9.11 addresses
tinnitus in the context of a BHI and states:
Binaural hearing impairment and severe tinnitus:
up to 5% may be
added to the work-related binaural hearing impairment for severe tinnitus caused
by work injury:
presbyacusis correction, if applicable, and
determining WPI.
The severity of tinnitus is determined by the
accredited assessor.
the severity of the impairment, as a question of fact, is to be determined by
the assessor, there is no definition or criteria
identified in Chapter 9 to
determine whether the threshold question of the establishment of severe tinnitus
has been satisfied. The
interpretation of the IAG is a question of
9.11 of the IAG varies from the cognate provision in AMA5. There, the ear, nose,
throat, and related structures are addressed
in Chapter 11. Chapter 11.2a sets
out the criteria for rating impairment due to hearing loss and, with respect to
tinnitus, states:
in the presence of unilateral or bilateral hearing impairment
may impair speech discrimination. Therefore, add up to 5% for tinnitus
presence of measurable hearing loss if the tinnitus impacts the ability to
perform activities of daily living.
9.11 of the IAG is accordingly different as the text before examples does not
refer to either the possible impairment upon
speech discrimination nor the
impact that tinnitus may have upon the ability to perform activities of daily
living, as criteria to
be taken into account.
IAG utilise examples to assist an assessor. Some of the examples in Chapter 9
address tinnitus. Example 9.1 refers to moderately
severe tinnitus which was
present on most days, interfering with concentration and occasionally
interfering with sleep, when it could
not be dampened with extraneous noise. 4%
binaural hearing impairment was added for severe tinnitus. The example suggests
the frequency of the experience of tinnitus and how the tinnitus may
affect functioning are matters appropriately to be taken into
account. Example
9.2 refers to mild tinnitus without impact upon the activities of daily living
with the result of no additional
allowance for the tinnitus experienced. Example
9.3 refers to an acceptance of severe tinnitus in circumstances of interference
sleep for 1 or 2 nights of the week, no effect during the day. 2% binaural
hearing impairment was added for that medically assessed
severe tinnitus. The
further examples are indicative of a similar approach.
the examples may provide some assistance, if there is any inconsistency between
the text in the IAG and an example intended
to be illustrative of what is stated
in the text then it is the text that will
Chapter 9.11 of the IAG does not identify the aspect or aspects of the
experience of tinnitus that is or are required to qualify
for a loading of
impairment, it was at least arguable that “severe tinnitus” in
Chapter 9.11 of the IAG is capable of
differing constructions. It was arguable
that it may refer to either the severity of the level of the ringing noise
experienced,
or individually the experience of how intrusive the noise
experience has been, or the frequency experienced, or the impact upon the
activities of daily living, or whether it gives rise to other symptoms such as
headaches, anxiety or depression, including the extent
to which those symptoms
may have an impact upon the activities of daily living, or a combination
the first report, Dr Hunter did not refer to the medical certificates which
provided evidence of ongoing tinnitus over a number
of years associated with
headaches. Whilst the second report stated that he had considered the medical
certificates before completing
the first report, there was no reasoning as to
why the tinnitus and associated headaches referred to in the medical
certificates,
either alone or in combination with his recorded “modest
effect on her sleep, concentration, or speech discrimination”,
amount to severe tinnitus. It is unclear as to whether Dr Hunter concluded that
the associated headaches could or could not
be relevant to the evaluation of
whether the claimed tinnitus was severe.
1.43 to 1.51 of the IAG set out requirements for the content of reports relating
to the assessment of WPI. Chapter 1.43 notes
that an assessor in general will be
requested to address issues including the reasoning as to how the assessor
decided to allocate
an injury to a particular class and selected a percentage
within a percentage range, if applicable. Chapter 1.44 states that whilst
report should contain the factual information based upon the assessor’s
own history-taking and clinical examination, if
other reports or investigations
are relied upon in arriving at an opinion, then they should be appropriately
referenced in the assessor’s
report. Chapter 1.45 provides that the report
should provide a rationale consistent with the methodology and content of the
guidelines.
this case, it was at least arguable that Dr Hunter failed to provide his
reasoning and rationale. He failed to appropriately reference
the two medical
certificates in the first report given his statement in the second report that
he did consider them before he prepared
the first report. He also failed to
provide any reasoning, either in the first report, or the second report, as to
why the experience
of tinnitus and associated headaches, as noted in the two
medical certificates, did not satisfy the requirement of “severe
tinnitus” in Chapter 9.11, either alone, or in combination with the other
effects of tinnitus as noted by Dr Hunter in the
first report.
a medical assessor is required to provide reasons, then the failure to provide
adequate reasons is an error of law and may amount
to jurisdictional error. In
Wingfoot Australia Partners Pty Ltd v
the High Court
addressed s 68 of the
Accident Compensation Act 1985
(Vic) which required
a Medical Panel to give an opinion on a medical question referred to it and a
written statement of its reasons
for that opinion. The appeal raised questions
as to the legal effect of an opinion of a Medical Panel, the standard required
written statement of reasons and whether such an opinion could be quashed
by an order in the nature of certiorari for breach of that
standard. The High
Court held that in Australia there is no free-standing common law duty to give
reasons for making a statutory
decision and that the duty is that imposed by the
text of the legislative provision itself. The content of the statutory duty
defines the statutory standard that the written statement of reasons
must meet to fulfil it.
construing the provision, the High Court identified two considerations as being
of particular significance in determining the standard
required of a written
statement of reasons in order to fulfil the duty imposed by the provision. The
two considerations identified
were, firstly, the nature of the function
performed by a Medical Panel informing and giving an opinion on a medical
question referred
to it, and the second was the objective within the scheme of
the Act of requiring the medical panel to give a written statement of
for that opinion.
observed that the function of a medical panel is to form and give its own
opinion on the medical question referred for
its opinion. The objective of
requiring the Medical Panel to give a written statement of reasons for the
opinion expressed was identified
as providing a written statement of reasons
adequate to enable a court to see whether the opinion does or does not involve
considerations apply equally to the provision of a permanent impairment
assessment report in accordance with s 22 of the RTW
Act and the IAG.
Court then stated the standard required of a written statement of reasons given
by a Medical Panel as follows:
The statement of reasons must explain the actual path of reasoning by which
the Medical Panel in fact arrived at the opinion of the
Medical Panel in fact
formed on the medical question referred to it. The statement of reasons must
explain that actual path of reasoning
in sufficient detail to enable a court to
see whether the opinion does
or does not involve any error of law.
a statement of reasons meeting that standard discloses an error of law in the
way the Medical Panel formed its opinion, the legal
effect of the opinion can be
removed by an order in the nature of certiorari for that error of law on the
face of the record of the
opinion. If a statement of reasons fails to meet that
standard, that failure is itself an error of law on the face of the record
the opinion, on the basis of which an order in the nature of certiorari can be
made removing the legal effect of that opinion.
[emphasis added]
requirements of the statement of reasons as emphasised in the passage apply to
the reasons disclosed in a permanent impairment
assessment report in accordance
with s 22 of the RTW Act and the IAG. There are differences in the relevant
provisions of the RTW
Act as to the practical consequences of a failure to
provide adequate reasons. A decision of a compensating authority based upon
permanent impairment assessment report is amenable to review by this
submitted by the applicant, the Tribunal held in
that a permanent
impairment assessment report must satisfy the test of admissibility that applies
to expert evidence and if it does
not, then the report is not binding either
upon the parties or the
In reaching that
conclusion, Gilchrist DPJ noted that had been the position with respect to the
opinion of a Medical Panel constituted
under the former
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
The approach in
has since been followed in this Tribunal and was cited with
approval by Livesey and Bleby JJ as the majority in
Paschalis v Return to
Work Corporation of South
submitted by the applicant, in
the Full Bench stated that potential
error, as opposed to actual error may provide a sufficient basis for the
Tribunal to refer a
medical question to an independent medical adviser with a
view to either establishing or allaying concerns about a perceived
follows that the applicant had an arguable case for the ground advanced by her
in her application for review and that the Tribunal
was empowered to review the
decision of the respondent which relied upon the assessment of permanent
impairment of Dr Hunter. In
filing the application for review, the applicant had
an arguable case that the Tribunal should exercise the power conferred to it
under Part 8 of the RTW Act and refer the assessment of permanent impairment
arising from tinnitus to an independent medical adviser.
was appropriate that the applicant review her position when the second report
was received. Until that time, the undisputed evidence
was that both parties
requested Dr Hunter to consider the two medical certificates. He failed to
identify those certificates in the
part of the first report that recorded the
documents he had received and considered, and there was no reference to the
these certificates in the reasoning for not allowing any additional
binaural hearing loss for the tinnitus experienced by the applicant.
accept the submission of the respondent that its letter dated 6 December 2024
had confirmed that Dr Hunter had received
the 2 medical certificates. At best,
it sought to confirm the certificates had been provided to PIA Reporting. That
Dr Hunter had
seen the certificates had not been confirmed in evidence to the
Tribunal until Dr Hunter provided the second report.
parties advanced submissions in relation to the possible relevance of the
evidence received by the Tribunal in
from Dr Corlette as to
the practice he and PIA Reporting adopted in relation to reports sent out under
the name of Dr Corlette. I
accept the submission of the respondent that is not
evidence of the practice adopted by Dr Hunter with PIA Reporting. However, I
also accept the submission of the applicant that given the combination of the
evidence given by Dr Corlette in
to the effect that medical
reports were initially prepared by others within PIA Reporting, reviewed by Dr
Corlette and then issued
by PIA Reporting with an electronic signature of Dr
Corlette affixed by others, and the absence of confirmation in the first report
that Dr Hunter himself had considered the two medical certificates provided by
the respondent to PIA Reporting reasonably gave rise
to further enquiry as to
whether the certificates had been received and considered by Dr Hunter.
significance of the second report is not confined to the confirmation that Dr
Hunter had considered the medical certificates at
the time of the preparation of
the first report. In
South Australia Police v
the Full Bench held
it is permissible for the parties, after receiving a permanent impairment
assessment report, to obtain a clarifying
report or reports from the assessor.
The Full Bench also held that the Tribunal is empowered to obtain further
evidence orally at
a hearing so that deficiencies or ambiguity in a report may
be addressed.
reviewing her position after receiving the second report of Dr Hunter, the
applicant also would have reasonably taken into account
the potential
application of s 106(7) of the RTW Act if, upon receiving further evidence from
Dr Hunter at a hearing, the Tribunal
determined to confirm the decision under
review. I generally accept the submissions of the applicant as to the
construction of s
106(7) of the RTW Act and its application in her
circumstances.
Court of Appeal in
stated that the provision is intended to
encourage the resolution of disputes concerning permanent impairment
compensation having
regard to the scheme for the assessment for WPI and the
potential entitlements under the RTW
The Court observed that
where no offer is made prior to a hearing then a worker will ordinarily be
entitled to costs under s 106(1)(a),
regardless of the
The Court then
The introduction of s 106(7) may be seen as an encouragement to compensating
authorities to make realistic offers, as well as an
incentive to workers to
accept them, if not a disincentive against rejecting them. Because the purpose
of the rule is to encourage
settlement, and to avoid the ordinary consequences
of s 106(1)(a), the reference to “settle” should be viewed as
with it some notion of
compromise.
Court went on to conclude that, in the circumstances of that case, an offer of
nil compensation but payment of costs could invoke
the operation of s 106(7)
where the matter had proceeded to a hearing and, on its merits, the Court
confirmed the decision of the
respondent of nil compensation on the basis that
the applicant had not proven a permanent impairment that reached the threshold
at least a 5% WPI. The Court held that the Full Bench of this Tribunal had
erred in construing s 106(7) of the RTW Act as requiring
that a positive amount
had to be offered by way of lump sum compensation for non-economic loss before s
106(7) could operate.
stated by the Court, at paragraph 119, for s 106(7) to operate, the requirements
include a hearing of the dispute in the Tribunal,
an award made by the Tribunal
following the hearing of that dispute, and that the award is “less than,
or the same as, or less
than 10% above” the amount that had been offered
by the compensating authority. In this case, there has been no hearing of
dispute in the Tribunal and, consequently, there has been no award made by the
following the hearing of that dispute.
considering whether the applicant has acted unreasonably in the conduct of the
proceedings, the respondent urged the Tribunal to
consider the offer of
compromise that was made and contended to be within the principles described in
and subsequent cases.
distinction is to be drawn between the approach to unreasonableness, when
considering the application of the principles in
context of s 106(7) of the RTW Act and unreasonableness for the purposes of s
, the Court stated that s 106(7) contains what amounts
to a formula or range against which an offer is to be assessed, and a
failure to accept an offer within that range is treated by the
provision effectively as being unreasonable and giving rise to a denial
to the worker.
expressed in the circumstances of that case, noting the Court’s earlier
statement that whether in some circumstances
there may be a residual discretion
to be exercised, was not argued.
Wills v Chief Executive Officer of the Australia Skills Quality Authority
the Full Court of
the Federal Court of Australia addressed the common law principles concerning
offers and stated they are:
Designed to encourage parties to give careful consideration to reasonable offers
of compromise and to encourage such offers of compromise
to be made...
ultimate question is whether the failure to accept the offer in all of the
circumstances warrants departure from the ordinary
rules as to
[emphasis added]
this case the respondent relied upon the judgment in
the judgment in
. In the latter case, the Court of Appeal
affirmed the statement of principle expressed by Giles J.A. in
SMEC Testing Services Pty Ltd v Campbelltown City
that the question to
be asked is whether the offeree’s failure to accept the offer, in all the
circumstances, warrants departure
from the ordinary rules as to
That is the approach to
be applied in determining whether, by reference to the offer made, there should
be a departure from the ordinary
order as to costs under s 106(1), in accordance
with s 106(3) of the RTW Act.
this case, the relevant offer was made on 6 December 2024. I have referred to
the deficiencies associated with the first report
and the remaining issues
following the second report. In determining whether the applicant acted
unreasonably in not accepting the
offer of the respondent, it is also relevant
to have regard to the recommendation of Commissioner Byrt that a further report
be obtained
from Dr Hunter. The compulsory conciliation conference that was
conducted by Commissioner Byrt was in accordance with s 104 of the
RTW Act and s
South Australian Employment Tribunal Act 2014
(the SAET Act).
Sub-section 43(13) of the SAET Act provides:
(13) If settlement of a matter is not reached at a compulsory conference, the
member of the Tribunal presiding at the conference—
(a) must give to the parties an assessment of the merits of the party's case;
(b) must seek to recommend ways to resolve any matter in dispute.
text of s 43(13) indicates that, in the absence of an agreed outcome at a
compulsory conciliation conference, the subsequent Assessment
Recommendations document is prepared with a view to assisting the parties in
their evaluation of the merits of their respective
cases and narrowing the
continuing issues in dispute. It is relevant to an assessment of whether a claim
is frivolous or vexatious
if a commissioner, in an Assessment and
Recommendations document indicates that there is merit in the claim being
pursued. Further,
it is relevant to an assessment of whether a party has acted
unreasonably in the conduct of proceedings if the applicant is pursuing
recommended by a commissioner to resolve a matter that is in dispute. These
statements of principle are subject to developments
that may occur following the
referral to hearing and determination and which may affect a continued reliance
upon the Assessment
and Recommendations document. In this case, upon referral
for hearing and determination and without knowledge of the recommendation
Commissioner that the second report be obtained, I too raised the obtaining of
the second report, and what it should address,
as a matter of law, if one were
to be obtained.
the receipt of the second report, the applicant did consent to an order
confirming the decision that she is not entitled
to a lump sum payment for
non-economic loss pursuant to s 58 of the RTW Act for noise induced hearing loss
and tinnitus. I reject
the submission of the respondent that the consent of the
applicant was an acknowledgment that her application for review was without
merit. For the reasons given, even after the second report there was an arguable
case for a referral to an independent medical adviser.
However, the end result
remained in doubt and the applicant reasonably reviewed her position. The
respondent referred to the period
of a few months between the receipt of the
supplementary report of Dr Hunter and the consent orders being approved by the
Much of that time was spent upon exchanges between the parties as to
the appropriate order as to costs.
the reasons given:
find that the requirements for the application of s 107(6) of the RTW Act
have not been met.
find that the application for review and the applicant’s conduct in the
proceedings was neither frivolous nor vexatious.
respondent has failed to persuade me that the applicant acted unreasonably,
either in bringing the proceedings before the Tribunal
or in any other aspect of
the conduct of the proceedings before the Tribunal.
in these Reasons I noted the respondent made an offer to the applicant on 8 July
2025 to pay a sum of $4,500 inclusive of
GST and internal disbursements for the
applicant’s costs of the proceedings. Whilst that offer does not deprive
the applicant
of an order in accordance with s 106(1) of the RTW Act, it
may be raised by the respondent in any adjudication of the quantum of
to be awarded to the applicant.
applicant is entitled to an award against the respondent for her reasonable
costs of representation in accordance with
with the quantum of such costs to be adjudicated by the Tribunal in
[2019] HCA 25.
Ibid [24]-[25].
See, for example,
Malthouse v Return to Work SA (Teagle
Contracting) (No2)
[2017] SAET 14
, [7] (Gilchrist DPJ);
Perre v Local
Government Workers Compensation Scheme (City of Unley) (No2)
[2017] SAET 43
[28] (Calligeros DP);
Moretta v Return to Work SA (Bendigo and Adelaide Bank)
[2017] SAET 139
, [8] (Gilchrist & Hannon DPJJ & Lieschke DP).
[2025] SASCA 50 (Livesey
P, S Doyle & Bleby
Ibid [119].
The second medical certificate
dated 28 May 2024 had not been raised at that directions hearing.
Dr Hunter was not requested
to set out his reasoning.
Paragraph [2] of the
respondent’s outline of submissions on costs application. As s 106(6) of
the RTW Act provides that an
award of legal costs cannot exceed 85% of the
amount that would be allowable under the Supreme Court scale if the proceedings
in the Supreme Court, the submission has been construed as a percentage
less than 100% of what otherwise could be allowed noting
the restriction in
(1975) 3 All ER 333.
[2005] VSCA 298.
Paragraph [13] of the
respondent’s outline of submissions on costs application.
[2016] SAET 76
[2025] SAET 24.
[2025] SAET 47.
Chapter 1.3 of the IAG.
HJ Heinz Company
Australia Ltd and Anor v Kotzman & Ors
[2009] VSC 311
[24] (Kyrou J) (followed in
Dallimore v Return to Work Corporation of South
[2020] SASCFC 115
[32] (Stanley J) (with whom Peek J and David AJ
Paschalis v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia &
[2021] SASCFC 44
[212] (Livesey & Bleby JJ).
and reference to
Mountain Pine Furniture Pty Ltd v Taylor
[2007 ] VSCA
[2007] VSCA 146
(2007) 16 VR 659
, 669 [33].
[2013] HCA 43.
Section 97(d) of the RTW Act
provides that a decision as to a permanent impairment matter under Part 2
Division 5 is a reviewable
decision. What may constitute a “permanent
impairment matter” is defined in s 4 to include the degree of whole person
impairment suffered by a worker.
and the cases there cited.
[2021] SASCFC 44
supra [112]
(Gilchrist, Kelly & Crawley DPJJ).
[2025] SAET 56.
[2022] FCAFC 43.
Ibid [22] (Logan, Griffiths,
& Perry JJ).
[2000] NSWCA 323
Hazeldene’s Chicken
supra [20].
Envirogen Industrial
Services (Aust) Pty Ltd v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia
[2020] SAET 101
, [53] (Rossi DPJ).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (283 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter