URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACorC/2025/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:54:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HALL, Robert Lloyd ([2025] SACC 25) [2025] SACorC 25 (17 October 2025)
CORONERS COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
ROBERT LLOYD
[2025] SACC 25
Inquest Findings of his Honour State Coroner
17 October 2025
CORONIAL INQUEST
Examination of the cause and circumstances of the death of a man who was hit
by a four-wheel drive vehicle while riding a bicycle
along the side of the
Horrocks Highway. The inquest explored the circumstances surrounding the driver
of the vehicle being unconditionally
licensed to drive, notwithstanding
suffering from an acquired permanent visual field defect which created a risk to
pedestrians and
road users.
Lloyd Hall, aged 66 years of Quorn, died at Quorn on 14 May 2018 as a result of
multiple injuries.
Circumstances
of death as set out in these findings.
Recommendations made.
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
ROBERT LLOYD HALL
[2025] SACC 25
Table of Contents
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
ROBERT LLOYD
[2025] SACC 25
Introduction
South Australia, was riding his bicycle on the
Horrocks Highway towards the town
when he was struck from behind by a Toyota Landcruiser, driven by John Charles
Robertson, who was
travelling the 40 kilometres from Wilmington to Quorn for a
medical appointment. The weather was fine. Mr Hall was wearing a hi-vis
vest, had a flashing rear taillight and was riding on the white edge line of the
roadway when Mr Robertson collided with him. Mr
Hall died at the
scene of multiple injuries. He was 66 years of age.
Hall’s widow, Helen, has provided the Court with some illuminating
information about her husband Robert. Mr Hall was an
ambulance volunteer for 27
years and was ‘
all about safety
’. In that capacity he
attended the scenes of many vehicle accidents, and assisted many injured
patients, some of whom did not
survive. In 1998, Mr Hall was diagnosed with
throat cancer and advised that he had a 5% chance of survival. After many
and three months in hospital, he was unable to drive for about 12
months and Mrs Hall became his eyes and his chauffeur until, after
physiotherapy, he regained enough movement to be able to drive again. Mr Hall
was very much a family man, was a wonderful
husband, great father and
grandfather and very proud of their children Megan, Rebecca, Tracy and Ben, and
his 13 grandchildren.
Against this background, Mrs Hall notes poignantly that
he was alone when he was killed. Mrs Hall described her husband Robert as
best friend, her soulmate and her lifelong partner until he was tragically taken
a result of an ischaemic stroke in 2013, Mr Robertson suffered from a
visual field defect known as left absolute homonymous hemianopia,
in which the
left field of vision of each eye is lost. A person with this condition, who is
looking straight ahead, has no vision
to the left of the centreline of where
they are looking and loses the ability to detect movement to the left-hand side.
words, if looking straight ahead, Mr Robertson had no capacity to
see a cyclist lawfully riding on the road. As was heard in this
inquest, vision
to the left-hand side and the ability to detect movement can only be established
by a left homonymous hemianope by
what is known as scanning, that is, repeatedly
and constantly turning the eyes to the left, usually aided by turning the head.
is a fatigue inducing activity.
is reasonable for me to conclude that at the time he struck Mr Hall with
his vehicle, Mr Robertson was not scanning to the left
to compensate for
his serious visual defect and therefore did not have Mr Hall within his
field of vision and could not see him at
all. It is also clear that a left
homonymous hemianope who is driving a motor vehicle, and is not scanning to
compensate for this
defect, presents a particular danger to cyclists. According
to Emeritus Professor Stephen Dain, who gave independent expert evidence
the inquest, absolute homonymous
hemianopia (which
can affect the right or the left hemifield) is the worst visual field defect
that can be present in any person seeking
a licence to drive.
way of brief background, after his stroke Mr Robertson’s
driver’s licence had been cancelled. As a result of the nationally
adopted rules relating to licensing of drivers, a person with the condition of
left homonymous hemianopia is not entitled to have
an unconditional
driver’s licence. Following a series of medical examinations and
practical tests Mr Robertson had been reissued
with a driver’s
licence, with conditions. By the time he struck and killed Mr Hall, he was
subject to only one condition,
he undergo an annual medical assessment.
the collision in which Mr Hall was killed, Mr Robertson was charged
with and convicted of the offence of aggravated causing
death by dangerous
driving and was sentenced to a period of imprisonment to be served on home
Cause of death
Cheryl Charlwood, a forensic pathologist, performed a postmortem examination of
Mr Hall on 16 May 201823. Dr Charlwood determined
the cause of
Mr Hall’s death to be multiple
postmortem toxicology demonstrated the presence of prescribed antihypertensive
medication only. No alcohol was
sample of blood taken from Mr Robertson was found to contain levels of
prescription medications tapentadol and citalopram, consistent
with use as
prescribed by Dr Lian-Lloyd, Mr Robertson’s general practitioner.
Expert evidence from Professor Jason
pharmacologist, was to the
effect that the concentrations of these drugs were consistent with normal
therapeutic use, with only mild
effects and very little or no impairment of
Mr Robertson’s driving ability, either individually or in
combination.
found in Mr Robertson’s blood was 2μg delta-9
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) per L.
This is the major psychoactive component of cannabis and may be detected in low
quantities up to a day after consumption of cannabis.
The presence of this
chemical in Mr Robertson’s blood while driving constituted an
aggravating feature of the offence of which
he was convicted. However,
Professor White’s opinion was that the level present was consistent with
what Mr Robertson said
after the fatal collision, namely that he had used
cannabis not less than 24 hours earlier and that it would have had no
effect on his capacity to drive.
have approached this inquiry on the assumption that Mr Robertson’s
use of cannabis and prescription medications did not causally
contribute to the
collision which caused the death of Mr Hall. For the sake of clarity, and
to address concerns of Mr Hall’s
loved ones, I shall elaborate upon
this conclusion and the basis for
Did adverse effects of
Mr Robertson’s prescription medication or other drugs contribute to
the collision?
Toxicological
analysis of a sample of Mr Robertson’s blood taken shortly after the
collision revealed the presence of:
tapentadol per L
citalopram per L
tetrahydrocannabinol per L
Lian-Lloyd gave evidence at Mr Robertson’s criminal trial that, to
assist with chronic pain from discogenic low back pain
and sciatica complicated
by repeated surgeries, Mr Robertson had an embedded intrathecal morphine
pump allowing an infusion of a
consistent amount of morphine of 5mg per day into
the intrathecal space [the space around the spinal
His pump had been in place
for two or three years. When he collided with Mr Hall, Mr Robertson
was on his way to an appointment
with Dr Lian-Lloyd to have the intrathecal
morphine pump refilled, but it was not yet empty.
Jason White, a pharmacologist, gave
at the criminal trial that
the reason morphine was not detected in the blood is that in that circumstance
morphine is delivered directly
into the spinal cord and very little of it
actually ever reaches the blood, which is partly because the amount of morphine
to be delivered directly in the spinal cord is very, very small
compared to the amount you would take if you swallow a tablet, for
Lian-Lloyd also stated
Mr Robertson was prescribed tapentadol, which was not initially prescribed
by him, but by a pain specialist. Dr Lian-Lloyd
would adjust
Mr Robertson’s dose from time to time, always trying to keep his
medication doses as low as possible whilst controlling
his pain. At the time of
the collision, he was prescribed 250mg twice a day and he had been prescribed
that for at least three years.
Lian-Lloyd had advised Mr Robertson that he would develop a tolerance to
the opioid medications and could reach a point where,
due to hyperalgesia, the
chronic use of opiates could in fact make his pain worse, so it was desirable in
his view to try to get
Mr Robertson off opiates to the extent possible.
However, Dr Lian-Lloyd said that Mr Robertson was being treated by three or
doctors and the common denominator amongst all the specialists, and
himself, was that these were drugs which were
Lian-Lloyd further stated
Mr Robertson had told him on a number of occasions that he was using
cannabis and felt it helped his pain. Dr Lian-Lloyd told
Mr Robertson, in
response, that he was not an advocate of the use of THC for medicinal
I have mentioned, Professor Jason White gave expert opinion evidence as to the
likely effect of the drugs being taken by Mr Robertson
at the time of the
to delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol, Professor White said that the quantity of
2µg found in the blood taken about an hour after
the collision would
indicate that Mr Robertson had not smoked cannabis within the few hours
leading up to the collision. It was
an amount of THC in the blood which was
consistent with what Mr Robertson said to police, namely that he had last
smoked cannabis
A day or two before probably
Yeah it was at least, at least 24 hours
White’s evidence was that the level of THC found would not have had a very
significant effect on the brain and body,
only possibly very subtle effects
which are not readily detectable. Professor White expressed the opinion that he
did not expect
there to be any impairment of Mr Robertson’s brain or
body functions, including impairment of his vision and the need to scan
left, at the time of the
find that Mr Robertson’s prior consumption of cannabis had either no,
or no significant, effect causing any impairment of
his brain or body functions,
including impairment of his vision and the need to scan to the left, at the time
of the collision.
I note that this was the position taken by the prosecution at
Mr Robertson’s criminal trial.
White gave evidence that the concentration of tapentadol in
Mr Robertson’s blood of 0.19mg/L was consistent with normal
therapeutic use and, in a person who had been taking it for several years such
as Mr Robertson, in terms of driving ability there
would be very little or
no impairment.
In light of that
evidence I cannot conclude, on the balance of probabilities, that there was any
causal link between tapentadol and
the collision. I find that
Mr Robertson’s consumption of tapentadol did not, or did not
significantly, impair his driving
ability at the time he collided with Mr Hall
and was not a contributing factor to the cause of that collision.
to morphine, Professor White gave evidence that, when administered in
Mr Robertson by an intrathecal pump, it would be unlikely
to be found in
the blood but, if it was possible to detect morphine by taking fluid from the
brain, it would have been found there.
However, the dose of 5mg per day was not
a very high dose for someone who has been using it for years and a lot of such
people would
be using twice that amount. Professor White expressed the opinion
that the morphine delivered to Mr Robertson’s spinal cord
intrathecal morphine pump would not have had any significant adverse effect on
his ability to drive at the time of the
and I so find.
White was also asked at Mr Robertson’s criminal trial about the
likely effect of tapentadol and morphine taken in
combination. He said that
adverse effects, such as the degree of sedation and impaired ability to
concentrate, become more likely
if you combine two drugs compared to either drug
alone. Again, much would depend on the level of tolerance built up from taking
them together. Professor White expressed the opinion that if he had a high
degree of tolerance, it is likely that he would be able
to scan in the normal
manner and that it would not be affected. If he had been taking those drugs
throughout the time when he was
told to scan, and taught to scan and assessed
for scanning, Professor White’s view was that this would probably decrease
likelihood that scanning would be affected by the drugs because he would
have essentially learned how to do it whilst affected by
the drugs, therefore
probably minimising any likelihood of the effects of the drugs on his scanning
regard to the pattern and duration of Mr Robertson’s use of
tapentadol and morphine in the process of learning to scan,
and scanning during
the several years prior to the fatal collision with Mr Hall, I cannot find,
on the balance of probabilities,
that the combined use of morphine and
tapentadol had any, or any significant, adverse effect on
Mr Robertson’s driving or scanning
to citalopram, a prescription antidepressant used in the treatment of major
depression, Professor White gave evidence that its
adverse effects are only mild
and usually only within the first week or two of taking the drug. Having regard
to Mr Robertson’s
history of having been prescribed this drug since
0.17mg/L of citalopram was, firstly, consistent with normal therapeutic use and,
secondly, in combination with tapentadol and morphine,
he would not expect there
to have been any adverse effects on Mr Robertson’s driving
conclusion on this point, the evidence establishes on the balance of
probabilities that neither prescription drugs nor illegal
drugs, either
individually or in combination, were factors which contributed to
Mr Robertson’s fatal collision with
Evidence at
witnesses were called to give evidence at the inquest and also provided
affidavits:
Professor Stephen Dain – Professor Dain was engaged by the Court as an
independent expert witness. He is a faculty
member of the School of Optometry
and Vision Science at the University of New South Wales, with more than 40 years
of combined clinical,
research and teaching experience. He is a widely
published authority within the field of optometry and has simultaneously
a career as an expert witness for the past two decades;
Gilbert – Mr Gilbert is the Director of Regulation for the Department
of Infrastructure and Transport (DIT). He has
been employed by DIT and its
predecessors for some 40 years;
Hayball – Ms Hayball is an occupational therapist who, in July 2015
when she conducted an occupational therapy (OT)
driving assessment for
Mr Robertson, was providing OT services to the Southern Adelaide Local
Health Network Occupational Therapist
Driving Assessment and Rehabilitation
Clinic located at the Repatriation General Hospital. In addition to her formal
qualifications
in OT obtained in 1993, Ms Hayball undertook a course in
advanced training and driver assessment and rehabilitation at the University
Sydney in 2003 and she established her own private business as an occupational
therapist driver assessor in 2013.
from the following people were also received into evidence:
Ms Tracey Toune,
Mr Hall’s daughter
Charlwood, Specialist Forensic Pathologist, Forensic Science SA (FSSA)
Heather Lindsay,
Senior Forensic Scientist, FSSA
Dr Danielle
Butzbach, Forensic Scientist, FSSA
Paul Rodgers,
civilian witness, first on scene
Jean Phillips,
License Regulation Manager, Road & Marine Services Division, DIT
Professor John
Crompton, ophthalmologist
Anastassiadis, rehabilitation physician
Lian-Lloyd, general practitioner, Quorn
Senior Constable
Timothy Schoemaker, SAPOL
Probationary
Constable Rachel Bagshaw, SAPOL
Constable Frank
Scrimshaw, SAPOL
Senior Sergeant
David Kuchenmeister, Reconstruction and Technical Examination Unit, Major Crash
Investigation Section, SAPOL
Elliot McDonald,
Vehicle Examiner, Major Crash Investigation Section, SAPOL
Brevet Sergeant
Kylie Peters, SAPOL
Brevet Sergeant
Jason Thiele, SAPOL
Roberts, Licence Examiner/Accreditation Audit Assessment Officer,
documentary exhibits were also received. These included the SAPOL Major Crash
Investigation Unit fatal collision report,
dashcam footage from
Mr Robertson’s vehicle, various medical and hospital notes of
Mr Robertson, DIT records, academic research
papers referred to by
Professor Dain, Assessing Fitness to Drive - Medical Standards for Licensing and
Clinical Management Guidelines,
2012, 2016 and 2022 versions, Occupational
Therapy Driving Test Assessment Manual (Vic) (2018), and a transcript of
evidence in the
criminal trial of Mr Robertson.
Mr Robertson’s criminal trial in the District Court at Port Augusta,
which commenced on 3 May 2021, oral evidence was given
by Brevet Sergeant
Thiele, Senior Constable Schoemaker, Senior Sergeant Kuchenmeister,
Dr Anastassiadis, Dr Lian-Lloyd, Professor
Crompton, Brevet Sergeant
Peters, and Professor Jason White. I have read and had regard to all of that
shall only refer to evidence received and heard at the inquest to the extent
that its forensic significance requires, and in the
interests of narrative
clarity. All of the evidence has been considered whether or not it is referred
civil standard of proof, the balance of probabilities, applies to the making of
coronial findings. If findings which imply or
express criticism of individuals
are to be considered, I shall not make such a finding unless the evidence leads
me to a comfortable
level of satisfaction that the finding should be
Mr Robertson’s
relevant medical history and loss of licence
a minor motorcycle accident in October 2013 Mr Robertson underwent a CT
scan of his brain which led to the discovery and confirmation
internal carotid artery aneurysm. In January 2014 he underwent an elective
craniotomy with clipping of the aneurysm.
The procedure was complicated by a
right sub-cortical ischaemic stroke, resulting in left-sided limb weakness and
complete left
visual field loss, known as left homonymous hemianopia.
20 January 2014 Mr Robertson commenced rehabilitation at the Memorial
Hospital which included physiotherapy, OT, speech pathology
and referral to the
Guide Dogs visual scanning training service. Dr Peter Anastassiadis,
rehabilitation consultant, informed Mr
Robertson that he was not permitted
to drive until medically cleared and a notification was made to DIT (as it later
became known)
that Mr Robertson was not medically fit to
23 January 2014 Mr Robertson was formally diagnosed with left absolute
homonymous hemianopia (AHH) by Professor John Crompton,
neuro-ophthalmologist.
Professor Dain
explains the effect of left absolute homonymous hemianopia
Dain described AHH, in the context of driving, as ‘
the greatest visual
field defect that you are likely to come across; it is a worst-case
field was explained as including everything that we can see around, both
vertical and horizontal. A person’s best detailed
vision, or visual
acuity, is at the centre of vision, but vision can extend to things in the
periphery. The normal total visual
field of each eye extends to about 50°
up, 70° down, 60° towards the nose and about 90° laterally, as
represented
by the figure below.
of the extent of the normal monocular visual fields. The vertical oval is the
blind spot in each eye.
Dain explained that in a person with two eyes, vision is mainly measured one eye
at a time, but some of the functional assessments,
particularly in visual
assessments for driving, take the natural situation of two eyes. In central
vision we have our most detailed
vision and our best colour vision. These both
deteriorate as you go out to the periphery, but what is maintained much better
the periphery is, firstly, blue-yellow colour vision but, more importantly, a
kind of non-colour vision, in particular, the ability
to detect change and the
ability to detect movement.
field of vision seen by both eyes normally extends 50° up, 70° down
and about 60° laterally each side (120°
in all) and then an area
extending to each side which is seen by one eye only, as represented by the
figure below.
Schematic of the extent of the normal monocular and binocular visual
Mr Robertson’s
condition known as left absolute homonymous hemianopia, in which the left field
of vision of each eye is lost,
is represented in the following
Schematic of the extent of the monocular and binocular visual fields
when there is a left absolute homonymous hemianopia
a person with this condition, who is looking straight ahead, has no vision to
the left of the centreline of the direction in which
they are looking, they also
have no ability to see and to detect movement to the left-hand side. Without
the ability to detect movement
in the peripheral vision, there is no cue to then
turn one’s eyes to examine in detail anything to which you have been
in your peripheral vision. As was heard in this inquest, vision to the
left-hand side, and the ability to detect movement, can only
be established by a
left homonymous hemianope by what is known as scanning, that is, repeatedly and
constantly turning the eyes to
the left, either with or without turning the
Dain explained that a person with normal vision is reliant on peripheral vision
for a sense of speed and to detect movement
of things to which detailed
attention is then
Rehabilitation
and medical consultations
the initial round of consultations at the Memorial Hospital in January 2014,
Mr Robertson had an assessment with Guide Dogs
who implemented a plan for a
structured scanning training
examination of Mr Robertson on 23 January 2014, Professor Crompton found
good visual acuity unaided (6/6) in each eye with good
colour vision. However,
there was no field of vision to the left half of centre in each eye. From
Professor Crompton’s letter
to rehabilitation consultant
Dr Anastassiadis, it may be seen that there was quickly a focus on
providing Mr Robertson with an opportunity,
with rehabilitation, to regain
his driving licence, which was clearly what Mr Robertson wanted. Professor
Crompton wrote:
‘Unfortunately I think it is unlikely that he
will get much recovery but he is having visual rehabilitation to learn to scan
to his blind hemifield. I will review him in six months’ time and if he
is doing well I will consider referring him for occupational
therapy-assisted
driver assessment. Of course, if he does pass that he will only get a licence
with a waiver. He knows he is able
to drive on private property unrestricted.
His wife will watch him
Suspension of licence
is recorded in hospital records that Mr Robertson underwent a craniotomy
for elective clipping of his right internal carotid artery
aneurysm on 7 January
2014 and was advised by his neurosurgeon that he was not to drive for a period
of six months following the
craniotomy.
This was quickly
followed up by formal advice required to be given to the Registrar of Motor
Motor Vehicles Act 1959
(SA) relevantly
148 – Duty of health professionals
(1) Where a health professional has reason to believe that –
(a) a person whom the health professional has examined holds a driver’s
licence or a learner’s permit; and
(b) that person is suffering from a physical or mental illness, disability or
deficiency such that, if the person drove a motor vehicle,
the person would be
likely to endanger the public,
the health professional is under a duty to inform the Registrar in writing of
the name and address of that person, and of the nature
of the illness,
disability or deficiency from which the person is believed to be
suffering.’
28 January 2014 Dr Anastassiadis, Mr Robertson’s rehabilitation
physician, completed a Certificate of Fitness – Light
Vehicle Drivers and
forwarded it to the Registrar, advising the Registrar that Mr Robertson had
undergone intracranial surgery complicated
by suffering an ischaemic stroke,
resulting in left-side limb weakness and a ‘
hemianopia.
Certificate was received soon afterwards by the DIT Customer Operations Group,
but was apparently incomplete and sent back to
Dr Anastassiadis, who
reviewed Mr Robertson again on 3 April 2014 and added further detail to the
Certificate. In that further detail
Dr Anastassiadis advised that
Mr Robertson was not considered medically fit to drive, that he could be
assessed in a further three
months for readiness to undergo a practical driving
assessment (PDA), and that his licence should be suspended until medically
and/or he was ophthalmologically assessed as fit for such an
assessment.
that review, Dr Anastassiadis noted that Mr Robertson was suffering
from decreased cognition, tiredness and sleep apnoea.
He recommended a sleep
study for Mr Robertson to confirm whether he had sleep apnoea.
Mr Robertson reported that he was driving
on private property and his wife
reported that Mr Robertson needed prompting with scanning.
Mr Robertson was reminded that he could
not drive on public roads.
Dr Anastassiadis referred Mr Robertson to an OT pre-driving assessment
at the Repatriation General Hospital
and scheduled him for clinical review in
three months.
amended Certificate was received by the DIT Customer Operations Group and
recorded in the TRUMPS database
on 17 April 2014.
Jean Phillips, Delegate of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, advised
Mr Robertson by letter dated 22 April 2014, that his licence
was suspended,
effective 28 April 2014, as he did not meet the medical standards required to
drive a motor vehicle.
23 April 2014 the Certificate of Fitness was stamped by DIT Licence Services, a
team for which Mr Stuart Gilbert is responsible,
which deals with matters
of greater complexity than the Customer Operations
Process to regain conditional
Reviews and first OT assessment – June
2014 to June 2015
3 June 2014 Mr Robertson underwent a pre-drive assessment with Mr Bradley
Williams, occupational therapist. That test was undertaken
at the Repatriation
General Hospital (RGH). The assessor noted that Mr Robertson ‘
tends to lead scanning with head movements and not his eyes with reduced
compensation strategies
His reaction time for scanning was
more than twice the ‘
sound reaction
Mr Robertson undertook the DriveSafe test, an off-road test, and missed
three objects (a truck and two pedestrians), all on his
occupational therapist recorded in his report to Dr Anastassiadis, the
‘... Mr Robertson is not at the compensatory
function stage to drive. He does not consistently compensate for his visual
loss to meet the safety levels required to move towards a practical
assessment.
Significant issues with fatigue were evident.
Review will be required if there is a significant change in
Mr Robertson’s symptoms and scanning abilities.’
observe that Mr Robertson’s address at the time was noted as Bulloo
Creek Station via Cockburn SA, which Google Maps shows
is in outback South
Australia, 428 kilometres from Adelaide. Under the heading ‘
driving needs
’ Mr Williams
‘Mr Robertson lives in a rural location with
limited access to alternative transport options. He would drive to and from
and other long-distance driving on regular occasions.’
on 3 June 2014, Mr Robertson was reviewed by Professor
Professor Crompton
wrote to Dr Anastassiadis on 4 June 2014. I am unaware which occurred
first between the
OT assessment and the appointment
with Professor Crompton, however it is clear that there is no reference in
Professor Crompton’s
letter to the OT assessment or its outcome.
Professor Crompton wrote:
‘Thank you for asking me to review
this chap with the left absolute homonymous hemianopia. His vision is 6/5 in
He is learning to scan to his blind side and is driving around the
property he manages outside Olary without any great difficulties.
I am happy to
see if he can get re-licensed in the first instance with a waiver restricting
him to a 50 km radius from Olary. He
is now living in the town itself so needs
to drive the 24kms to get to the property he is working on and others if he
fencing etc. He is very sensible and his wife is helping him in
the rehabilitation process. Of course, he needs to pass the driver
test. I have asked him to contact me in three months time and let me know how
he is getting on.’
Mr Robertson
saw Dr Anastassiadis at the Neuro-Rehab Clinic at the RGH on 5 June 2014.
Dr Anastassiadis wrote to Professor Crompton
that upon the assessment of
Mr Williams, the occupational therapist, Mr Robertson was not yet safe
for a PDA. Dr Anastassiadis referred
to Professor Crompton supporting a
limited licence within a 50 kilometre radius of Olary, subject to
satisfactory driving assessment,
and said that Mr Robertson was
not ready for driving assessment as has untreated sleep disorder and
poor scanning
made at the appointment included Mr Robertson continuing with Guide Dogs
visual impairment training and a rehab review in
three months.
4 September 2014 Mr Robertson was again reviewed by Dr Anastassiadis,
who noted that his hemianopia was likely to be permanent,
and also that he
wanted to return to driving eventually if he could. Dr Anastassiadis
recorded that he needed to await adequate
treatment of sleep apnoea for which he
had a follow-up with Dr Chia. Dr Anastassiadis scheduled a review in six
months and noted
Consider OT practical driving assessment
The following was also noted:
‘Left visual field loss
persists. Drives close to right side and misses left-hand turns when driving
with wife. Currently
wife not permitting him to
Mr Robertson
next saw Dr Anastassiadis on 5 February 2015. On this occasion, according
to the doctor’s statement,
several matters were noted. Mr Robertson was staying at
Wilmington,
but visiting both
Broken Hill and Mildura to see his children. I mention this because it makes
plain that the nature of Mr Robertson’s
driving tasks still included,
and would likely continue to include, driving on country roads, for long
distances, whether he lived
in Wilmington or further into the outback.
Dr Anastassiadis also noted that Mr Robertson was very keen to return
to driving and
reported that his sleep apnoea had been treated and fatigue
levels were much reduced. Dr Anastassiadis also noted that
Mr Robertson
had attended the New South Wales Guide Dogs for visual
scanning training, but this had subsequently ceased.
Dr Anastassiadis
completed and forwarded to the Registrar a Certificate of
in which the question
Does your patient meet the eyesight standards in the Assessing Fitness
to drive 2012?
’ was not answered ‘
’ but with the comment:
‘To be assessed
by OT (the name of Professor Crompton was also inserted here) cleared for
practical driving assessment.’
of the form, there is a Medical Practitioners Declaration in which
the medical practitioner is asked whether in their opinion the
subject of the report, ‘
Meets the relevant medical standard. If no,
please provide details below
Dr Anastassiadis appears
to have ticked the box ‘
’ and then crossed that out. He
then wrote:
‘– special case for assessment. But depends
on performance in OT pre-driving and practical.’
The question ‘
Requires a practical driving test
’. The question ‘
Should a licence be
issued subject to conditions?
’ is answered, ‘
to be assessed
subject to OT pre-driving and practical driving assessments
31 March 2015 Professor Crompton reviewed Mr Robertson and wrote to
neurosurgeon Dr Molloy,
with copies sent to Dr Anastassiadis and Dr Lian-Lloyd, advising
Mr Robertson was ‘
ready for driver assessment
‘if successful he will then need to be relicensed for a
license (sic) with a waiver because of his absolute right
) hemianopia.’
Professor Crompton reported that Mr Robertson:
‘Does admit to bumping into people occasionally in the crowded
supermarket but never has problems outdoors and has no trouble
driving vehicles
on private property and backing his caravan into a crowded caravan park
Professor Dain explained that Mr Robertson’s visual field test
results on that day
demonstrated
a field of peripheral vision of around 80° – 85°, which is well
short of the required field of 110°
to obtain an unconditional
I note, as confirmed
by Professor Dain, that a person with absolute homonymous hemianopia could never
demonstrate a field of vision
receipt of the Certificate of Fitness dated 5 February 2015, DIT made enquiries
with SA Health in relation to the provision
of visual field reports from
Professor Crompton, which were forwarded, together with documentary records of
the testing.
DIT sought an
independent medical adviser opinion in relation to whether Mr Robertson
ought to be granted a permit to undertake
assessment.
A report was
provided by Dr Thang Vuong, a specialist in occupational medicine, supporting
the granting of a permit for an OT
assessment.
conclusions were stated:
‘1. I note the reports of a CVA in
2013 resulting in a R (sic
homonymous hemianopia but retained independence with physical tasks.
note Professor Crompton’s support for a practical driver assessment based
on driving performance on private property.
would support the granting of a permit to allow for OT driver assessment, with
the provision of a conditional car class license
(sic) subject to the results of
the driver assessment. I would not support the granting of a conditional or
unconditional HR class
driver’s license.’
evidence Mr Gilbert explained that DIT may seek out independent medical advice,
but that they were reliant on clinical assessments
to scan in order to compensate for visual field
9 June 2015 DIT issued Mr Robertson a temporary driving permit, which was
restricted to driving only while accompanied by a Motor
Instructor.
There is no basis
upon which to criticise this
OT driving assessment - 14
Mr Robertson
underwent an OT driver assessment at the Southern Adelaide Local Health Network
Driving Assessment and Rehabilitation
Clinic, a public system clinic based at
the RGH, on 14 July 2014. This clinic assesses people with a broad range of
medical conditions,
disabilities, injuries or age-related functional
impairments.
OT driver assessment was conducted by Ms Nicola Hayball, who was providing
casual OT services for the Driving Assessment and Rehabilitation
Hayball’s qualifications include a Bachelor of Applied Science and
Occupational Therapy, University of South Australia, 1993;
advanced training in
Driver Assessment and Rehabilitation, University of Sydney, 2003; advanced
training in Heavy Vehicle Driver
Assessment and Rehabilitation, Flinders
University, 2018; Certificate IV Transport & Logistics: Road Transport Car
Driving Instruction,
Adelaide, 2018.
A section 4 of the Assessing Fitness to Drive guidelines is titled
General Considerations for Assessing Fitness to
Section 4.9 discusses practical driver assessments
This section states
that a PDA is to be distinguished from the tests of competency to drive that are
conducted for licensing purposes.
The section states:
practical driver assessment is designed to assess the impact of injury, illness
or the ageing process on driving skills including
judgement, decision making
skills observation and vehicle handling. The assessment may also be helpful in
determining the need for
vehicle modification to assist drivers with
musculoskeletal and other disabilities.’
assessment comprised a series of clinic-based screening tests for functional
vision, cognition and physical skills necessary
If the results of the
screening tests permit, a practical on-road assessment
Ms Hayball’s
evidence was that testing of Mr Robertson was based upon the Victorian
Occupational Therapy Driving Test: Assessment
Manual (the
which is considered to
represent ‘
best practice guidelines
’ in driver
assessment.
There is no
corresponding manual written in South Australia. I note the evidence of
Ms Hayball that in Victoria an occupational
therapist, if having dual
qualifications (as Ms Hayball does), can perform a dual function of
conducting an OT assessment and the
PDA for licensing purposes. In South
Australia, DIT conducts its own PDAs for licensing purposes.
described a number of techniques she looks for in a person with homonymous
hemianopia to determine whether they can compensate
for the vision loss,
including: scanning; driving a few kilometres below the speed limit to allow
extra scanning and reaction time;
maintaining at least three seconds from the
vehicle in front; braking early and slowing down to walking speed when
approaching intersections;
completing a full visual check at intersections
before proceeding; double scanning left and right before proceeding into an
intersection;
performing over shoulder blind spot checks or using compensatory
blind spot mirrors; subject to laws requiring a vehicle to move
to the left of
travelling at or above 80 km/h, travelling in the central or right lane to
reduce the need to pass parked vehicles
or vehicles turning left; placing the
right foot over the brake pedal to enable quick reaction if required when
approaching an intersection
or road hazard; always scanning for pedestrians on
the affected side when stationary; and looking far ahead and remaining conscious
of potential hazards on the affected side.
stated by Professor Dain, the primary consideration in assessing a person with
absolute homonymous hemianopia in a driving scenario
is to ascertain their
degree of compensatory scanning to make up for the loss of visual field.
Ms Hayball agreed with this proposition.
3 of the Manual sets out the requirements for a standard route for use in open
area licence tests. The guidelines state:
‘The use of
standard routes including a specified set of road environments and driving tasks
will help OTs to conduct valid,
reliable on road tests for
C of the Manual lists the standard driving tasks and location requirements to be
included in open area test
acknowledged that tasks involving high-speed driving were not necessarily
incorporated into the common tasks undertaken.
This could not be accommodated
in a one-hour assessment
conducted from the suburban clinic. She said that if an evaluation of
high-speed driving is required, recommendations to that effect
are made and that
such recommendations were common for drivers who live in the country and
encounter high­speed driving
frequently.
In making this
observation, Ms Hayball distinguished between a further referral to a
private occupational therapist driver assessor
to cover such issue more
specifically, with a significant cost to the client, and the other option, if
the cost is of concern, of
conducting the DIT test in a country
relation to those two options, I observe that the first option, although
probably involving a significant cost to the client, is
the only one of the two
options which is conducted by an occupational therapist as a ‘
driver assessment
designed to assess the impact of
injury, illness or the ageing process on driving skills including judgement,
decision making skills
observation and vehicle
second option is, as stated in Assessing Fitness to Drive, a test of competency
for licensing purposes. In my opinion, it became
apparent in this inquest that
a test of competency for licensing purposes is unlikely to lead to a proper
assessment of the ability
or likelihood of a person with left homonymous
hemianopia to be able to constantly scan to compensate for lack of vision to the
side of centre whilst driving for long distances on country roads
which, by their nature, tend to be relatively featureless on the
left-hand side
compared to driving in a city or suburban setting. One of the reasons is that
such a test will not normally involve
driving for long distances on country
roads. Indeed, I heard no evidence that this ever occurs. Other reasons are
that in South
Australia the PDA for licensing purposes is always undertaken by a
suitably qualified DIT employee, who is not an occupational therapist.
Additionally, the examiner might or might not know the nature or extent of the
unexamined driver’s disability.
told the Court that a PDA undertaken by an occupational therapist was
one of the gold standard assessments for determining
s ability to drive with a medical condition
She said that doctors will use an OT report including any recommendations to
guide their decisions about
was mindful of
section 10.3 of the Assessing Fitness to Drive guidelines which describes the
medical standards for licensing. In respect
to the drivers of cars, the
standard concerning visual fields states:
‘A person is not fit
to hold an unconditional licence:
if the binocular visual field does not have a horizontal extent of at least
110 degrees above and below the horizontal midline,
if there is any significant visual field loss (scotoma) within a central
radius of 20 degrees of the foveal fixation or other scotoma
likely to impede
driving performance
conditional licence
may be considered by the driver licensing
authority subject to
annual review
taking into account the nature of the
driving task and information provided by the
treating optometrist or
ophthalmologist
said that when conducting Mr Robertson’s assessment, she was not
aware of the extent of his hemianopia but assumed
In her statement,
Ms Hayball stated she noted, following the pre-drive screening
‘that Mr Robertson demonstrated sound visual
scanning techniques and was aware of the implications of his visual field loss
on his driving. I did note that I felt that Mr Robertson did not
necessarily correlate his visual field loss with potential difficulty
is pertinent to repeat from Ms Hayball’s statement the following
opinions and information about the pre-drive screening and
her impressions of
Mr Robertson:
‘Insight into driving risks is important.
Insight influences driving behaviours. It is not medical fitness. From my
recollection,
Mr Robertson was of the attitude “I know I have got a
vision impairment, but I’ve been driving for years and I’ll
fine”. He was compliant with the OT assessment, driving lessons and the
DIT practical driving assessment. I wrote that
I ‘felt’ there was
some discrepancy in Mr Robertson correlating his experience of vision
impairment with what he acknowledged
could be risk for driving. It was not a
definite demonstration of poor insight, rather ‘hunch’ or ‘gut
Signs of poor insight would more likely be a refusal to adjust
driving behaviours, derogatory comments, or refusal to complete components
the driving
assessment/training.’
on-road assessment was conducted with a driving instructor seated in the front
passenger seat, with dual foot controls. There
was also an additional rear-view
mirror to allow Ms Hayball, who was seated in the left rear passenger seat
towards the centre, to
observe Mr Robertson’s scanning and head
The route undertaken
was a standard (suburban-based) route, incorporating a specific range of driving
on-road driving assessment went for 60 minutes. Ms Hayball maintained a
contemporaneous log during the subsequent on-road
assessment.
Overall, minimal
issues with Mr Robertson’s driving were noted.
noted that on one occasion Mr Robertson made a wide left-hand
Ms Hayball did not
attribute that episode to Mr Robertson’s homonymous
hemianopia.
noted that Mr Robertson hit a kerb when pulling
Ms Hayball did not
consider this occurrence to be a cause for concern in the early stages of the
assessment.
noted one occasion when the driving instructor assisted steering when
Mr Robertson drove close to a parked car on the left
Ms Hayball said that
she did not think Mr Robertson was missing visual information. Rather, it
was probably reflective of his previous
Ms Hayball agreed
that such an episode would be consistent with inadequate scanning but, when
giving evidence, she said she was
able to say that she did not consider
Mr Robertson was dangerously close to the parked vehicle as she did not
mark the log with a
big cross, which she would have done if she thought it was
dangerously close.
noted that Mr Robertson needed to give himself extra time to scan by
slowing down his approach to, and exit from,
intersections.
noted that Mr Robertson did not perform an over the shoulder blind spot
check when changing lanes and that he relied on
his rearview
attributed this occurrence to Mr Robertson’s previous driving
experience which included driving heavy
noted that Mr Robertson needed to allow more gap behind cars in front of
his vehicle at traffic
summarised her assessment on page 9 of her
The summary included
the following statements:
‘The pre-driving screening
assessment identified that Mr Robertson was employing sound visual scanning
techniques. It was noted
however, that he was fairly dismissive of his vision
loss and the likely impact this could have on driving.
On-road Mr Robertson’s skills in observation, planning and
judgement, vehicle positioning, speed control and fiscal control
were assessed
and compared to the results of the pre-drive screen.
Overall, it was apparent that Mr Robertson’s medical condition
does impact on his driving performance. On-road performance
issues that are
related to his medical condition are:
control approaching/exiting intersections - while considered safe and legal for
people with normal vision - was too fast for
accommodating the extra time
required for visual scanning to overcome a complete visual field loss. This is
considered the necessary
precautionary technique. Mr Robertson was able to
apply the feedback to slow down, but his general conversation indicated that he
felt it unnecessary as he was driving safely and
competently.’
Assisting suggested to Ms Hayball that these were signs that
Mr Robertson was not listening to Ms Hayball and the driving
instructor.
‘They were probably the signs that made me want to
have him perform again, and to be checked further. His driving seemed to
a reasonable standard considering, but probably that behaviour which is depicted
there, I wanted to be checked again,
later explained in evidence:
‘So obviously there was no
at-risk driving for Mr Robertson. If somebody has a hemianopia and it is
significantly impacting
on their awareness of the visual environment, you will
know it straightaway. It will be very consistent. It will be consistently
driving up very close to cars, missing information, missing road signs, missing
a lot of information. It’s clear and we terminate
the assessment at that
point. For Mr Robertson, he did well for him to be able to get to this
point. There is only a small percentage
of people with this medical condition
that will get to this point, in my opinion, in what I’ve assessed, I
should say that,
was quite aware and open about the possibility that a person under assessment
will put their best foot forward, as passing
the OT PDA is an essential hurdle
to jump to have their licence reissued, as applied to
Mr Robertson.
Mr Robertson expressed his frustration with the delay in returning to
Following his
pre-driving screen, Ms Hayball felt that Mr Robertson had, or appeared
even though
Ms Hayball had made the following note, ‘
fairly dismissive of
vision loss/possible impact on
When asked if this raised a red flag, Ms Hayball responded that the
assessments she undertakes are ‘
very deficit focused
was something that raised her awareness, but it was not
conclusive.
noted that when she provided feedback about entering and exiting intersections
too quickly, not allowing sufficient time
to scan, he felt it was unnecessary to
slow down, as he was driving ‘
competently
giving evidence Ms Hayball was asked if Mr Robertson was being
’ of her feedback and gave the following
‘A. I suppose that’s how you could interpret
it, but it seemed to be that he required more persistent coaching. Dismissive
suppose is a strong word. We needed to encourage him to get to that point. I
suppose, of being able to adjust his technique.
It is my opinion that he was
fairly confident about his driving ability despite the vision impairment.
is that an observation that could be considered a red flag?
which is why I think why I’ve noted it here because there were people who
knew Mr Robertson a lot better than I did at
that point in time
who’ve had consistent dealings with him over that time who could read that
and made opinion about whether
that was accurate or not.’
was at some pains to emphasise that the attitude she perceived from
Mr Robertson was common in persons that she
This highlights an
inherent difficulty in assessing the attitude of the person being tested,
acknowledging that some persons will
put their best foot forward in order to
achieve the result they desire, when the assessor has no prior knowledge of
them. Ms Hayball
made four recommendations:
approval from his treating medical practitioner, Mr Robertson is
recommended to return to a Class C licence once he completes
2 x driving lessons
with a qualified Driving Instructor to reinforce the technique of slowing down
at intersections to allow for
adequate visual scanning and reaction time.
Recommended conditions for Mr Robertson's licence are - no night
driving, no towing vehicles;
Recommend Department of Transport practical test in local area following
Further medical review is required if Mr Robertson wishes to upgrade
these conditions following a three-month period of successful
car driving.’
relation to the first recommendation, Ms Hayball arranged for
Mr Robertson to have two driving lessons with the driving instructor
was in the vehicle for the
explained in oral evidence her reasons for the third recommendation. She
‘That I wanted them to have a test in their local
conditions to test the driving that they would be doing. The two options
be an OT on-road assessment which was going to be a ridiculous cost for
Mr Robertson, or the other option was the Department
of Transport test of
competency in his local area. The doctors have the capacity on their form to
write, you know, want to test
this or that. And I’m sure that the
Department of Transport comply as well as they can. I am aware that the
Department of
Transport have set criteria that they need to include in their
routes as well, so I suppose the test was the best possible option
testing Mr Robertson in his area to see whether he could actually
incorporate all of the things that we’d been teaching
him in the preceding
Ms Hayball expected that this test would involve driving on high-speed
in my opinion her
recommendation, ‘
Department of Transport practical test
’ did not adequately identify precisely what she was
recommending, and why, and whether Mr Robertson’s nearest standard
DIT testing arrangement at Port Augusta would satisfy that description from her
perspective. As will be seen, the doctor who then
saw Mr Robertson did not
specify that the test should occur in his local area.
conclude that if Ms Hayball had in mind that Mr Robertson’s
ability to scan to compensate for his visual field loss during
high-speed,
long-distance country driving needed to be assessed, then she would have known
that a standard Port Augusta based DIT
licensing test would not adequately
assess that, and that she should specifically recommend a further OT PDA, no
matter the cost
to the client. My sense, although she was not asked the
question directly, is that Ms Hayball’s preference would have been
recommend a further OT assessment, conducted in a significant part on country
roads, but that the likely high cost of that exercise
led her not to make that
recommendation.
should mention at this stage that foundational to the recommendations I intend
to make is that in the case of homonymous hemianopia,
practical testing should
be extended to clearly test and demonstrate competency in all conditions in
which a driver might intend
to drive and that, where not so demonstrated,
conditions should be imposed to limit the nature of driving which may be
undertaken.
Dr Anastassiadis on 14 July 2015 attaching a copy of her OT driver
assessment report for Mr Robertson.
was mindful of her role, and well aware that the task of assessing medical
fitness to drive and making licensing recommendations,
pursuant to the governing
scheme, was not hers, and rested with Dr Anastassiadis, as she made clear
in her letter to the rehabilitation
specialist:
As the treating medical officer who completed the Medical Fitness to Drive a
Light Vehicle – MR712 form for Mr Robertson, please
attached assessment results and recommendations to assist your decision making
regarding the clients current and future
drivers licence status.
consideration and action is required to notify the Department of Planning
Transport and Infrastructure (DPTI) of your licensing
recommendations following
review of this report
. It would be appreciated if you would notify the
Repatriation General Hospital Occupational Therapy Driver Assessment and
Rehabilitation
Clinic of your decisions following review of this
Follow-up rehabilitation specialist
appointment
the same day, Mr Robertson had an appointment with Dr Vaqas Farooqi, a
different rehabilitation medicine specialist at the RGH
Occupational Therapy
Services Driver Assessment and Rehabilitation Clinic. This is a public clinic,
and it is reasonable for me
to assume that Dr Farooqi was available on that day,
and Dr Anastassiadis was not. It is clear that Dr Farooqi had the
documentation
sent by Ms Hayball.
Farooqi wrote to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles by
dated 10 August 2015
advising that he reviewed Mr Robertson after the OT driving assessment.
The letter was presumably not sent
for a couple of days after it was dated
because, enclosed with the letter, was a fresh Certificate of Fitness with
section 4, the
Eyesight Certificate, completed on 14 July 2015 by Dr Farooqi and
Mr Robertson’s declaration dated 12 August 2015. I note
that the DIT
file, produced for the purpose of the inquest, did not contain the last page of
the Certificate of Fitness, Section
5: Medical Practitioner’s Declaration,
and the first page of that document had a handwritten note on it,
Awaiting Section 5 from
Accordingly, from the documents produced, it is not clear to me whether and, if
so, when, DIT received a fully completed Certificate
of Fitness from Dr
Certificate of Fitness included in ‘
Additional Notes
detail relevant to Mr Robertson’s stroke on 14 January 2014 and to
assessment of his fitness to drive:
‘Stroke following surgical
clipping of aneurysm causing L Homonymous Hemianopia which is unlikely to
improve. He has since
adapted with good scanning techniques and has been
cleared by Professor Crompton (neuro-ophthalmologist at RAH) to drive w/i 50 km
radius of Olary. He has been assessed by OT driving clinic for driving.
RECOMMENDATION FOR RESTRICTED DRIVING
(1) 2 Driving lessons to reinforce slowing at intersections to allow adequate
scanning and reaction times.
(2) Dept of Transport practical test following lessons.
(3) No night driving, no
Farooqi’s covering letter stated:
‘I have reviewed John
who underwent occupational therapy driving assessment. As per the
recommendations from this assessment,
the medical Fitness to Drive form was
completed with following conditions:
a) One to two lessons with driving instructor to work on slowing at
intersections to scan and to allow adequate reaction times.
b) Once the lessons completed, driving assessment to be conducted by transport
department.
c) On completing these assessment he can have license restricted to no driving
at night and no driving while towing.
I will appreciate your assistance in organizing temporary permit for this
gentleman to facilitate the driving lessons. Please do
not hesitate to contact
me if you have any
Farooqi was not called to give evidence in the inquest. The doctor did not
mention in the letter to the Registrar
that Ms Hayball noted, about
the results of the pre-drive screening, that Mr Robertson was fairly
dismissive of his vision loss and
the likely impact this could have on driving.
However, Ms Hayball’s report appears in the DIT file in the same
location as
Dr Farooqi’s letter and the Certificate of Fitness to Drive.
So, for present purposes it appears likely that Ms Hayball’s
which includes that reference, was forwarded to DIT with those documents and was
available to the Registrar for consideration.
Professor Dain expressed the view
that more attention should have been paid to the concerns of the on-road driving
have noted that in purported transcription from the Certificate of Fitness,
which referred to two driving lessons, the letter referred
’ lessons. Ms Hayball’s evidence was that she arranged
for Mr Robertson to have the two further recommended lessons with
driving instructor,
Mr Whiteside.
Ms Hayball elaborated in oral evidence that it was common for her to ask
these experienced driving instructors to undertake lessons
and give them
information about exactly what she was looking for. Although she did not have a
specific recollection, she was confident
Mr Whiteside gave her feedback
after those lessons. In the circumstances, I conclude it is likely that both of
the recommended lessons
was at pains to inform the Court that she, as an occupational therapist can only
make recommendations, not licensing
It is in that
context she wrote her report addressed to the medical referrer,
Dr Anastassiadis.
Mr Robertson is issued with a
temporary permit to allow a practical driving assessment for licensing
17 August 2015, in accordance with the advice given by Dr Farooqi,
Mr Robertson was issued with a section 80 permit (temporary
valid from 17 August
2015 until 17 October 2015 with conditions including to drive only while
accompanied by a motor driving instructor
and to drive only during daylight
permit was sent to Mr Robertson with a covering letter which unfortunately
referred to Dr Farooqi’s recommendation that
he undertake ‘
sessions with a Motor Driving Instructor prior to undertaking a practical
driving assessment
’. As I have noted, this was different from the
recommendation made by Ms Hayball, which I have observed was correctly
by Dr Farooqi in the Certificate of Fitness. However, for reasons I
have mentioned, I am not concerned that only one lesson may
have occurred as
opposed to the two lessons recommended by Ms Hayball. If I am wrong in
concluding that two lessons occurred, I
have no doubt that two lessons, as
opposed to one, would not have prevented Mr Hall’s death.
am, however, concerned that there had by this stage been no assessment by an
occupational therapist of Mr Robertson’s ability
to scan constantly
and consistently during long-distance country driving. Furthermore, neither the
report of Ms Hayball, nor the
Certificate of Fitness, or the covering
letter from Dr Farooqi drew specific attention to the fact that this had not
occurred. Neither
was there any specific suggestion that it ought to occur
before Mr Robertson should be issued a licence which would, by necessary
implication unless restricted by conditions, permit him to drive in all the
circumstances covered by that licence, including long-distance
country driving,
which was clearly something Mr Robertson intended to do. To be clear, I
include in my description for present purposes
long-distance
country driving
’ a drive such as that being undertaken by
Mr Robertson when he collided with Mr Hall, namely a half hour drive
of some 40 kilometres
on country roads. For practical purposes, and in the
circumstances under consideration, such a drive should be considered as a subset
of long-distance country driving.
the context of this observation, I mention the evidence of Professor Dain, with
which I agree, referring to the OT assessment and
what should be made of it by
the licensing authority:
‘In my opinion, the further
investigation and scope of and performance in the on-road assessment should
determine what is and
permitted.’
Practical driving assessment – Port
Augusta 10 September 2015
10 September 2015 Kathleen Roberts, a Licence Examiner and Accreditation Audit
Assessment Officer with DIT, conducted a PDA with
Mr Robertson in Port
Augusta. According to Google Maps, this is about half an hour’s drive
from Wilmington where Mr Robertson
was living. The test was mainly within
the city of Port Augusta but included a quite brief component of driving in
80 km/h and 100
km/h zones on the outskirts. This PDA was of the
standardised licensing variety, intended to assess a person’s ability to
safely operate in a motor vehicle and comply with the road rules. It is broadly
consistent with the test administered to a learner
driver seeking a probationary
licence, but without all of the elements, such as reverse parallel parking,
intended to test a new
Roberts was not called to give evidence during the inquest but provided an
in which she
stated that she undertook this PDA, and a subsequent one during which
Mr Robertson towed a caravan, without knowing
on either occasion that
Mr Robertson had an eye defect. Neither was she provided with a copy of
Ms Hayball’s report to Dr
Anastassiadis, or even a summary of
the report.
gave some pertinent evidence about the nature of the PDA, which was undertaken,
having regard to Ms Roberts’ PDA
which formed part of
the DIT licensing file. Mr Gilbert explained that Ms Roberts would not have had
the OT assessment or a summary
of information of that assessment, as the general
view at the time was that each PDA should be a standalone assessment of a
ability to drive safely and to meet all road rule requirements,
which should not be influenced by external information. This was
the standard
practice of the DIT at the time, and the assessor would be blind to
any specific issues
’ of the person being assessed.
practice has now changed following a previous coronial recommendation, in the
sense that the assessor, while not being informed
of any detail, would know
there was a visual field
assessor would not receive a copy of the occupational therapist’s
gave evidence that the DIT advised in 2023 that it was no longer necessary to
provide the DIT with the OT’s report,
so it only gets to DIT if the doctor
completing the Certificate of Fitness provides it together with that
certificate.
I express my
disapproval of this approach. In my opinion, in the case of a homonymous
hemianope seeking authority to drive, it
is essential that DIT receives and
takes into account the report of an occupational therapist to assist in, or at
least operate as,
a crosscheck in making a final determination whether a
conditional licence should be issued and, if so, upon what conditions. In
opinion, it is unwise, and potentially unsafe for the DIT driving assessor, not
to be clearly informed that the driver must constantly
scan to the left to see
the full field of view. Without doing so, the driver will fail to see the
left-hand side of the road.
PDA involved a 20-point demerit-based scoring system, accumulation of which
would lead to a fail. Some errors were prescribed
certain points, as set out on
the PDA form. Some, including breaches of road rules, anything that put the PDA
assessor in danger,
or any instances where the assessor had to intervene, for
example, making a turn onto the wrong side of the road, would lead to an
automatic fail.
Mr Robertson
passed the PDA with minor errors, only scoring four points. His errors
Fail to keep
safe distance from parked cars;
Fail to check
traffic behind (blind spot);
Lacked forward
judgement; and
Made incorrect
turn (cut right
to the rules of the test and having regard to Ms Roberts’ lack of
knowledge of Mr Robertson’s left absolute
homonymous hemianopia, she
was entirely unable to consider these errors in the context of his visual
disability. By reference to
design of the test and the scoring system,
Mr Robertson clearly passed without Ms Roberts being in any position to
consider whether
his visual field defect had a bearing on the way he drove.
Even if she had, Mr Robertson would have passed the test by reference
the criteria for doing so. In any event, in my opinion, it cannot be said that
the quite short period of driving in 80 km/h and
100 km/h speed limits could
specifically test a homonymous hemianope’s capacity to constantly and
consistently scan during
long-distance country driving, even if the assessor was
aware of the issue.
observe that if Mr Robertson had been tested on a specifically designed
extended route for the purpose of assessing his ability
to constantly and
consistently scan during long-distance country driving, there is no way of
knowing whether he would have passed.
If he had been so tested and had not
demonstrated an ability to maintain scanning for extended durations, a condition
been considered limiting his driving to lower speed limit roads
unless and until such time as he could demonstrate such ability.
If he had been
tested and did demonstrate that ability, then assuming the nature of the testing
was adequate and appropriate for
the purpose, the mere requirement of that
testing and its administration might have served to impress upon him the
necessity to maintain
constant and effective scanning even in conditions which
might suggest to him that there was minimal risk if he failed to do
Conditional licence
30 September 2015 Ms Phillips wrote to Mr Robertson informing him that he
may hold a car class driver’s licence with conditions
only during daylight hours
not valid for
conditions were as recommended by Ms Hayball and, in turn, Dr Farooqi who,
I assume, took into account Ms Hayball’s
recommendations.
Mr Gilbert explained that doctors’ recommendations are ‘
influential
’ in the decision-making of DIT, and that they would not
typically challenge those
recommendations.
However, Mr
Gilbert said that if the recommendations of one doctor appear inconsistent with
the recommendations of another doctor,
this may prompt follow-up questions as to
whether the doctor deliberately decided to recommend something
licence was also subject to annual review, which DIT asserted met the minimum
requirement for a conditional licence in Assessing
Fitness to Drive. During the
inquest there arose a question, which was the subject of contested submissions,
whether it was intended
in Part A section 10.3 of the Assessing Fitness to Drive
guidelines that ‘
annual review
’ could be the one and only
condition of a conditional licence. In my opinion this is, and remains,
unclear. It is an ambiguity
in the publication which, in my opinion, should be
corrected. It is my opinion that the nature of the condition of absolute
hemianopia, and the level of risk created by a driver with that
condition who does not at all times adequately scan to their blind
side, should
mean that a licence with no condition other than annual medical review should
never be considered as adequately addressing
Process which led to towing and
night time driving restrictions being lifted
Medical and visual assessments
4 November 2015 Mr Robertson was reviewed by Dr Anastassiadis, who
noted that Mr Robertson was disappointed by the driving restrictions
had asked him to review them. Dr Anastassiadis
to Dr Lian-Lloyd, with
copies to various practitioners including Professor Crompton and Dr Farooqi,
mentioning that Mr Robertson
was outside the normally permitted clearance
guidelines for recreational and commercial driving, but had demonstrated
scanning and passed OT and
PDAs. Also mentioned was
that Mr Robertson had sleep apnoea, which was not currently satisfactorily
controlled with BPAP, although
he was under medical management for this, and his
morphine intrathecal pump had been reduced by 20% to determine if this might
his sleep pattern. Dr Anastassiadis stated in conclusion that in
his opinion Mr Robertson had performed to a satisfactory and competent
level on the driving assessments. Nevertheless, he advised Dr Lian-Lloyd:
‘I have advised that the restrictions of no night time
driving and no towing of vehicles should remain in place. It is advisable
cautious and observe his progress over the next eight – nine months,
particularly while his OSA management and morphine
doses are optimized.
‘I will review John’s progress in mid-2016 and have reinforced
that he should be happy with his current driving clearance
and driving
permissions, given that he is strictly outside the return to driving visual
clearances/guidelines.’
9 November 2015 Dr Lian-Lloyd wrote to Professor Crompton. He
‘He has undergone driving assessment and review by
yourself in the past. I understand there is some attempt to change his licence
restrictions, which would be more restrictive for this gentleman. He is very
sensible and he has a number of other co-morbidities
and he does really need to
be able to drive. He is aware of his blind spot, he allows for this accordingly
and moves his head more
readily to check his visual field. I would appreciate
your assessment and recommendation with regard to the
12 April 2016 Dr Lian-Lloyd wrote to Dr Anastassiadis requesting he review
Mr Robertson, stating that he was due for review, and
requesting ongoing
care and management.
1 June 2016, presumably as a result of Dr Lian-Lloyd’s correspondence with
Dr Anastassiadis, Mr Robertson was reviewed by
Dr Mei-Fen Sung
(Rehabilitation Registrar) at the Whyalla Hospital and Health Service
Rehabilitation Clinic. Dr Sung spoke to Dr
Lydia Huang, the Rehabilitation
Medicine Consultant who was on call. Dr Huang advised that
Mr Robertson’s conditions could
not be removed given his persistent
left hemianopia. Dr Huang advised that if Mr Robertson wanted to pursue
the issue further, he
would require ophthalmologist review and either a driving
clinic review or a review with
Dr Anastassiadis.
3 June 2016 Dr Lian-Lloyd wrote to Professor Crompton advising that
Mr Robertson was due for his annual review and referring him
for Professor
Crompton’s assessment and recommendation.
14 June 2016 Professor Crompton reviewed Mr Robertson. He performed an
Esterman test, without fixation, which he
as showing further
great improvement over the test conducted on 31 March 2015. Professor Crompton
wrote to Dr Lian-Lloyd:
‘He has adapted very well and scans
perfectly well and never bumps into people. Even now in supermarkets he is very
not to collide with anyone. He has been driving happily by day and has
not had any [scares] at all. I see no reason why he cannot
upgrade his
driver’s licence and remove the restrictions about no night driving and
not towing a caravan. It is a waste of
time testing his fields on computerised
perimetry because he is scanning so well that he moves his midline well to his
unaided acuity is 6/6 in each eye and the rest of the
neuro-ophthalmic examination was unremarkable.
I will write to the rehabilitation doctors to help facilitate the upgrading
of his licence.’
next day, Professor Crompton wrote to
Dr Anastassiadis:
‘I have just reviewed John Robertson
who will always have the left absolute homonymous hemianopia. However, he has
very well and it is a waste of time doing computerized perimetry because
he scans so well that he shifts the midline well to his
left. Because of his
scanning ability he has not had any difficulties driving by day and I support
his application to have the restrictions,
i.e. allow him now to drive at night
and also to tow a caravan. He is very sensible and will not take risks, I am
His acuities are 6/6 unaided in each eye and the rest of the neuro-ophthalmic
examination is unremarkable.
I would be most grateful if you could help facilitate the relaxation of his
restrictions.’
17 July 2016 Professor Crompton completed section 4 (Eyesight Certificate) of a
Certificate of Fitness describing Mr Robertson’s
visual acuity as 6/6
in each eye and writing an additional note referring to his left absolute
homonymous hemianopia, stating:
‘He has adapted very well and
scans properly and has been driving his 4WD without problems (with a waiver to
I consider that he is now fit to drive his car at night and to be able to tow
his caravan as well.
I recommend that he have a driving test
caravan in tow every
three years.’
Professor Dain in relation to the June
assessment and July recommendation
Dain’s evidence in relation to the Esterman test administered by Professor
Crompton on that day was that the number
of points not seen does, indeed, reduce
(from the previous test administered on 31 March 2015) and is indicative of more
at least for the duration of the
Professor Dain
points out that the improvements in the tests (including in a subsequent test in
2017) could be due to improvements
in Mr Robertson’s condition,
improved insight into how to get the best result from the test, or greater
skills at scanning
the test area or a combination of
Professor Dain also
pointed out that the results of this test show Mr Robertson to be fixating
a little further to the left and,
consequently, a point to the far right then
fell outside his right temporal
Dain also gave evidence that he knows of no evidence that the binocular Esterman
tests undertaken without fixation, which
are stated by Professor Crompton to
demonstrate an ability to scan, translate into adequate scanning for the driving
task. Later
in this finding I shall refer to an academic article referred to by
Professor Dain which examines the relationship between Esterman
tests without
fixation and performance in an on-road driving test.
a statement taken to provide Professor Crompton with an opportunity to answer
observations by Professor Dain, Professor Crompton
agrees with Professor Dain
that there is no evidence that the Esterman tests translate into adequate
scanning for the driving task
and adds that he also relied upon history from
Mr Robertson and his wife. For these reasons, Professor Crompton stated he
on extra assessments by rehabilitation doctors (Dr Anastassiadis) and the
Guide Dog driving assessors,
by Dr Anastassiadis - 3 August 2016
Mr Robertson
then saw Dr Anastassiadis for review on 3 August 2016, following which
Dr Anastassiadis completed the remainder of the
Certificate of Fitness,
referring to Mr Robertson being cleared for driving after passing the OT
driving test and the PDA in in 2015,
and currently having restrictions on night
driving and towing. Dr Anastassiadis stated that Mr Robertson
required a practical assessment
for night driving and towing a caravan/trailer,
followed by medical clearance by his general practitioner every year. He
to Professor Crompton’s recommendation of a practical driving
test with caravan every three
He stated in a letter
to Dr Lian-Lloyd:
‘I have cleared John to undertake practical
driving assessments while towing (trailer/caravan) and night time
24 August 2016 a DIT client action sheet
‘Dr Anastassiadis confirms that if client passes
test towing a caravan we can remove both conditions. Not valid for towing
daylight hours.’
This note suggests that Dr Anastassiadis was contacted on or about that
day by the DIT employee who made the note. It does not record
any reason for
which Dr Anastassiadis said, if he did, that it was not necessary for the
test to occur at night. On the same day,
Ms Phillips wrote to Mr Robertson
saying that she had recently received information from Dr Anastassiadis who
recommended that he
undertake a PDA to remove the towing and daylight driving
conditions from his licence. Ms Phillips stated,
Dr Anastassiadis has advised that you must undertake this
assessment whilst towing a
was no specific evidence received at inquest to confirm, or otherwise, that
Dr Anastassiadis advised that the test need not
occur at night, so I can
only speculate why that requirement was not imposed. One possibility is that
Dr Anastassiadis was informed
by someone at DIT that they do not usually
undertake night time driving tests. I might guess that the DIT PDA staff are
expected to work during regular daylight hours.
Practical Driving Assessment – Port
Augusta 13 September 2016
Roberts conducted a PDA with Mr Robertson towing a caravan within and on
the fringe of the township of Port
It appears to have
followed a route quite similar to the previous test, including a limited time
driving on roads with 80 km/h and
100 km/h speed limits. The assessment was
undertaken during daylight
Mr Robertson
incurred no penalty points and drove according to road traffic and weather
conditions. It was raining during the assessment
and there was poor visibility
the evidence, I conclude that if Dr Anastassiadis had specifically advised
that the test should occur at night, DIT could have
arranged for that to occur,
unusual as it was.
observe that it would seem logical for a test to assess the suitability of
removing conditions of no towing and no night
time driving, to include driving
whilst towing and driving at night.
am not able to say whether Mr Robertson would have been likely to
demonstrate any difficulty in driving at night during a test conducted
Having regard to the previously discussed criteria for passing DIT PDAs for
licensing purposes, and what I regard as Mr
Robertson’s demonstrated
general competence for matters practical and his apparent adaptability, there is
no particular reason
to think that Mr Robertson would not have passed such
any event, there is no evidence to suggest that failing to conduct this test at
night was a factor which contributed to the death
of Mr Hall. Even if, by
the time of Mr Hall’s death, the original conditions were still in
place, Mr Robertson was driving
in daylight and would still have been
driving to Quorn on the morning of 14 May 2018 and, in all likelihood, still
would have collided
with Mr Hall. He would not have been driving in breach
of any condition.
what cannot be known is whether, if the conditions were still in place, they
might have operated upon Mr Robertson as a permanent
reminder of the
seriousness of his condition and in this sense operated as an effective reminder
to constantly scan to the left.
of ‘unrestricted’ driver’s licence
28 September 2016 Ms Jean Phillips wrote to Mr Robertson
‘As you are aware, the report recommended that the
current conditions endorsed on your driver’s licence is no longer required
it will be necessary [sic]. It will therefore be necessary to issue you with an
unrestricted driver’s license endorsed with
Phillips wrote to Dr Anastassiadis on the same day advising that
Mr Robertson had undertaken a PDA which he passed and that he,
may hold unrestricted car drivers licence
Condition of annual
medical review
the DIT Licensing File
produced to this Court for the purpose of the inquest, there is no other
document, including a copy of the driver’s licence
then issued, or a copy
of a covering letter sent with his licence, which specifically records that a
new licence then issued to Mr
Robertson was subject to annual review.
Accordingly, I do not know whether this was stated as a condition. I note that
sent by Ms Phillips refers to an ‘
unrestricted
driver’s licence. So, despite the submission on behalf of DIT that a
licence subject to annual review is a conditional
licence, I should think that
Mr Robertson’s impression would have been that the conditions
previously attaching to the licence
had been lifted and he would have seen it,
as Ms Phillips had described it, as an unrestricted licence.
is the case that the electronic database of DIT, TRUMPS, has an entry dated
24 September 2017 entitled ‘
Print Medical Reminder [transaction
name] – Overdue Licence Medical [description]
’. So, it is clear
that at least within the internal records of DIT, it was recorded that there was
a requirement for annual
There are also
references in screenshots from TRUMPS to ‘
Medical Certificate Due
10/8/2016, 3/8/2017 and
of whether annual review was imposed as a condition of issue of the licence, and
how or if this was conveyed to Mr Robertson,
it is nevertheless clear that
Mr Robertson’s doctors, at the very least, understood that an annual
review was required and
that this was a requirement of the issuing authority.
This is clear as on 10 July 2017 Dr Lian-Lloyd wrote to Professor Crompton
advising Mr Robertson was due for annual review and requesting his
assessment and
recommendation.
Lian-Lloyd also wrote to Dr Anastassiadis on 13 July 2017 advising
Mr Robertson was due for review and requesting ongoing care
management.
Lian-Lloyd’s medical notes relating to Mr Robertson also disclose
that in the same period Dr Lian-Lloyd was carefully managing
the prescription to
Mr Robertson of medications for ongoing pain
management.
Crompton’s review - 14 July 2017
Crompton reviewed Mr Robertson on 14 July 2017 and completed Section 4:
Eyesight Certificate of a Certificate of Fitness
to Drive, dated 14 July
as follows:
The question
Does your patient meet the eyesight standards in the Assessing Fitness
to Drive 2016
?’ was answered ‘
The question,
Should a condition be placed on the licence? (e.g. daylight hours
’ was answered ‘
Additional Notes
‘He passed his driving test and now drives
at night and tows a caravan with no problem. I recommend relicensing with a
with no need for van towing test and no need for three yearly driving
Crompton also completed Section 5: Medical Practitioners Declaration expressing
his opinions as follows:
As to whether
Mr Robertson ‘
meets the relevant medical standard
Professor Crompton ticked the box ‘
Asked to provide
details in relation to that answer, Professor Crompton wrote ‘
should be relicensed with a waiver as he has adapted so well from his left
homonymous hemianopia
Crompton stated Mr Robertson did not require a practical driving test as
he has already passed one see above and overleaf
In answer to the
Should a licence be issued subject to conditions?
Professor Crompton ticked the box ‘
’ and provided
‘Needs a waiver
Has been towing a caravan without problems
Should be retested (eye) annually.’
observe that during his evidence in Mr Robertson’s criminal trial,
Professor Crompton explained that by ‘
’ he meant the
conditions.
I infer that
Professor Crompton regarded a requirement for annual (eye) retesting to be the
waiver, or condition, which Mr Robertson
needed. Professor
Crompton’s assertion of the need for a waiver was presumably to propose a
conditional licence in light of
Mr Robertson’s unfitness, according
to Part A section 10.3 of the Assessing Fitness to Drive, for an unconditional
Crompton wrote to Dr Lian-Lloyd on 17 July 2017:
‘It was nice
to review this chap who tells me he is not having any troubles driving, towing
his van etc. I have recommended,
on renewing his licence, that he no longer
needs to have driving tests. Of course, he has adapted particularly well and
well to his blind left side.’
Crompton conducted an Esterman binocular test without fixation which, as pointed
out by Professor Dain, showed an improved
scanning ability over the previous
Professor Dain’s
previously highlighted comments apply, namely that the improvements in the tests
could be due to improvements
in Mr Robertson’s condition, improved
insight into how to get the best result from the test, or greater skills at
the test area or a combination of
and also that he knows
of no evidence that scanning demonstrated in an Esterman test translates into
adequate scanning for the driving
task, a proposition with which Professor
Crompton agrees.
also refer here to a recent article to which the Court was referred by Professor
Predictive Value of the Esterman Visual Field Test on the
Outcome of the On-Road Driving
in which the
authors, in conclusion, state:
‘The results of the study
confirm the relation between visual field damage and impaired driving
performance. When more points
are seen, the likelihood of passing the on-road
driving test increases. However, in our group, the Esterman visual field test
no discriminative ability to predict driving performance on an individual
authors also refer to an assumption made in the conduct of the
‘We assume the on-road driving test is the gold
standard for driving performance. Although this is generally accepted, it may
be debated. The expert on practical fitness to drive who administered the
on-road driving test was not blinded to the candidate’s
diagnoses and
visual field defects; otherwise, planning a suitable on-road driving test is not
possible. This could have biased
the outcome of the on-road driving
was the subject of questions in evidence to Professor Dain, who discussed and
noted the possibility for bias, but agreed with
the authors that without knowing
of the candidate’s diagnoses and visual field defects, planning of a
specific on-road driving
test would not be possible. The impact of planning
specific tests upon an otherwise desirable outcome of standardising tests
the various jurisdictions in Australia was then discussed. Pros and
cons of different approaches towards tailoring or standardising
In my opinion,
regardless of possibilities of bias which might arise from the planning of
specific tests and lack of standardisation,
the primary aim of individual
licensing authorities in Australia should be to ensure that, in assessing
fitness to drive of people
with conditions such as homonymous hemianopia which
lead to such an elevated risk, tests are fashioned which ensure that all
aspects of a person’s driving performance are appropriately
Dr Anastassiadis’
review - 16 August 2017
Dr Anastassiadis
saw Mr Robertson on 16 August
Mr Robertson
advised Dr Anastassiadis that Professor Crompton had cleared him to drive
without any ongoing restrictions (which I observe
is not strictly correct) and
Dr Anastassiadis understood that the restrictions of no night time driving
and no towing had been removed.
Mr Robertson
told Dr Anastassiadis of an incident two weeks prior to the appointment
when he had scraped the side of a parked car
with the left-hand side of his
vehicle whilst driving at night into a narrow space between two cars.
Dr Anastassiadis
wrote to Dr Lian-Lloyd about this and Professor Crompton received a copy.
Dr Anastassiadis referred to Mr Robertson
having been reviewed by
Professor Crompton and cleared for driving without ongoing restrictions, and
then advised:
‘2 weeks ago, however, John reported that he
entered a driveway to park his car in a space between 2 cars. He was driving at
night and the space was narrow. He reports that he collided with the right-hand
side of the vehicle to his left. The damage was
apparently small. He reported
no other vehicle accidents. He reports that he has had no seizures and no
transient ischaemic attacks.’
He continued:
‘Close monitoring of his vehicle driving and accident profile is
appropriate. I have not made any alteration to his driving
status, but I would
appreciate if Dr Lian-Lloyd could monitor any further driving incidents or
concerns. He may need to be restricted
to daytime driving or a company driving,
if there are further night time vehicle accidents.’
Mr Robertson’s criminal trial, Dr Anastassiadis explained that
he advised Mr Robertson that he would be making that recommendation
Lian-Lloyd.
It indicates a
degree of caution on the part of Dr Anastassiadis.
Lian-Lloyd gave evidence that Mr Robertson did not report to him any
further incidents or
fatal collision on Monday, 14 May 2018
14 May 2018 Mr Robertson got up at about 7:15am, after sleeping from about
8pm the previous evening, and left home at approximately
8am to travel the 40
kilometres from his home in Wilmington to an appointment with Dr Lian-Lloyd in
Quorn. He was familiar with
the road, having ‘
how many times he had travelled along that road in the many years he had lived
in the area. He travelled it on average
a description of what happened then I adopt a portion of the sentencing remarks
of his Honour Judge Stretton, delivered on 28
May 2021, after Mr Robertson
was found guilty in the District Court sitting at Port Augusta of the offence of
aggravated causing
death by dangerous driving:
8:20am on 14 May 2018 Robert Hall, a 66-year-old member of the local community,
was riding his bicycle along Horrocks
Highway. The weather was fine and clear
and the road was in perfect condition. Mr Hall was wearing a hi-vis vest
and riding to
the extreme left of the carriageway. In other words, he was doing
everything right. You were driving your Toyota Landcruiser in
direction along Horrocks Highway at about 108 km/h. The dash cam in your
vehicle captured the events that followed.
From over 200 m away, Mr Hall was plainly visible, cycling to the very
left of the road and, indeed, brightly illuminated by the morning
sun. The road
curved gently left and then straightened for a short period before beginning a
gentle right-hand turn. As you completed
the gentle left-hand curve,
Mr Hall was clearly visible about 50 or so meters ahead of you. Your
vehicle continued, however, to
veer to the left, took no evasive action and
struck Mr Hall. Mr Hall was mortally injured. You stopped your
vehicle, flagged down
a passerby, called 000 and rendered assistance including
performing CPR until medical assistance arrived. Unfortunately, Mr Hall
was pronounced dead.’
should comment upon and explain – so that it is understood that I agree
with it – Judge Stretton’s statement in
the sentencing remarks that
Mr Robertson’s vehicle ‘
continued... to veer to the
’. During the evidence at Mr Robertson’s criminal
trial, there were some seven images tendered which were captured from
cam footage covering the last 15 seconds or so of the passage of the vehicle
toward striking Mr Hall. The trial Judge identified
to Senior Sergeant
Kuchenmeister, an accredited forensic specialist in the field of motor vehicle
collision, investigation and reconstruction,
that in images six and seven of
exhibit P5 at the trial,
could be seen from the position of the vertical aerial relative to the left-hand
line on the road, that as Mr Robertson’s
vehicle got close to
Mr Hall the car seemed to be veering towards the left, towards
Mr Hall, because the aerial could be seen to
be closer to the left-hand
line. Senior Sergeant Kuchenmeister agreed, answering as
‘Yes, I agree. If we go to image 1 – 3,
because the road is bending, I’m not sure that that method or that vision
is, we can say how, if it’s going to the closer to the line or not. So I
discount images 1 – 3 when discussing what
your Honour has raised.
However, from image 4 through to image 7, when the road is straight and because
the camera is fixed, it
is apparent that the vehicle or that fixed aerial has
got closer to the left-hand side of the road. So if the aerial has moved
the left of the road and because it’s fixed to the front of the
vehicle, then the vehicle must have moved to the left side
of the road, over
those frames. So I agree with your
was discussion during the trial of possibilities that this slight veering may
have been because, either: Mr Robertson having
negotiated a left-hand bend,
after the road straightened up, just kept turning left; or at the moment of
impact the road had been
straight for not very long before being about to go
into an uphill right-hand bend and Mr Robertson was preparing to negotiate
right-hand bend, being aware of the possibility of any traffic, especially
trucks, which might have been coming towards him from
the opposite direction.
In other words, he was focussing on the centreline in order to give it a wide
berth to be well clear of
any oncoming traffic whilst negotiating the right-hand
regard each of these as a possible
explanation.
Conclusions to be drawn
from police interviews with Mr Robertson as to whether he saw
the collision, at about 9:50am on 14 May 2018 Mr Robertson was interviewed
at the Quorn Hospital by Probationary Constable
whose questions
‘Q. So what can you tell me about what happened
just saw the push biker up in the distance, and as I went past him the next
thing it was bang, then I just stopped and turned around.’
15 May 2018 Mr Robertson was interviewed by Brevet Sergeant Kylie
The transcript of
the record of interview relevantly provides:
‘I said: Ok, so
John I’m just gonna ask you, umm can you please tell me your version of
He said: There’s not a lot to tell, I saw the guy in the distance,
I’d driven through a lot of fog on the way and I was
having problem with
the sun shining, there wasn’t any fog on the scene, but the sun was
shining through fog on the right hand
side and I believe that may have
distracted me and then the next thing I know, I hit the gentleman.
And you said that you saw the cyclist?
Well I, I think I saw him in the distance
Yep umm so you do recall seeing the cyclist at a distance?
I said: But you don’t recall seeing the cyclist getting closer?
He said: No
He said: No and I’m sure there’s, I was having trouble with the
sun coming through, I had the sun visor on, over the driver’s
I said: Right
He said: Cos the sun was coming in from the east and it was in my eye and it
was actually coming around the end of the visor and I’m
move the visor and
I’m not sure if that’s exactly when it happened or.’
Mr Robertson
was then informed by Brevet Sergeant Peters that he would be arrested for
Causing Death by Dangerous Driving.
Was Mr Robertson distracted by
the sun shining through fog?
to Mr Robertson’s assertion about having been distracted by the sun
shining through the fog, it may be seen from the shadows
that having completed
the gentle left-hand bend, that the sun was quite low in the sky and shining
from behind, over Mr Robertson’s
right shoulder from the rear
right-hand quarter. I note also that during the U-turn undertaken by
Mr Robertson after striking Mr
Hall, the dashcam footage shows the sun
in the eastern sky, and I conclude any assertion that the sun was shining
through fog is
not supported. Further, I note Professor Dain’s opinion,
while acknowledging that photographic and video evidence does not
replicate the
view of the same subject from the human eye, that nevertheless having regard to
his expertise in human vision and experience
in giving expert evidence,
including having photographically documented accident scenes, he was not
concerned that this dashcam footage
demonstrated an issue suggesting the footage
was likely to mislead.
Did Mr Robertson see
Mr Hall at any time prior to colliding with him?
reviewed all of the evidence I have noted that the trial Judge sentenced
Mr Robertson – clearly on the basis he was satisfied
having regard to
the verdict of the jury – on the basis that he saw Mr Hall ahead
before, then failing to scan to his left
in order to continue to see him on his
blind side. It was also the prosecution case at trial, based on the police
interviews, that
Mr Robertson initially saw Mr Hall and then failed to
continue to see him before colliding with him. Interestingly however, at his
criminal trial, at which Mr Robertson did not give evidence,
Mr Robertson’s counsel suggested in submissions to the jury that
Mr Robertson might not in fact have seen Mr Hall at all. In all of
the circumstances, it is clear to me, that if the jury accepted
that suggestion
or regarded it as reasonably possible, this could not have saved
Mr Robertson from the finding of guilt upon the
most serious charge he
faced, that of aggravated causing death by dangerous driving.
myself, I regard with caution Mr Robertson’s assertion that he
initially saw Mr Hall, noting that the second time he was
asked about it by
Brevet Sergeant Peters, he said ‘
I saw him in the
apparent uncertainty was addressed by Brevet Sergeant Peters asking,
Yep, umm, so you do recall seeing the cyclist in the
’, and Mr Robertson replied ‘
This was apparently accepted at face value with a question which inherently
assumed that there was no uncertainty, ‘
OK so when you saw him in the
distance can you give me an approximate?
’, and was answered by
Mr Robertson, ‘
Well as I came around the left-hand bend
you’re talking about, he was up in the distance on the left, to my
’. Even then, the use of the words ‘
’ seem odd if he was certain that he did see him.
I mentioned, Mr Robertson did not give evidence at his criminal trial, and
he was not required to give evidence at this inquest.
On my own assessment of
all of the evidence, including that received at Mr Robertson’s
criminal trial, I do not regard it
as established, either beyond reasonable
doubt, or on the balance of probabilities, that Mr Robertson saw
Mr Hall before colliding
I should explain that in my judgment it was not necessary to call
Mr Robertson at this inquest in order to attempt to establish
the correct
position because it is in any event clear that at the time he struck
Mr Hall, Mr Robertson was not scanning to his left
and did not have
Mr Hall within his field of vision. In a man who is blind in his left
hemifield, and has no vision to the left
of the centreline of the direction in
which he is looking, and who knows that unless he scans constantly to the left
he cannot see
any hazard which may be present at the left-hand side of the road,
it was open for the jury to find that he was driving in a manner
whether or not it was proved beyond reasonable doubt that he saw Mr Hall
prior to the fatal collision. I note also in
this regard the opinion of
Professor Dain that there is no reasonable explanation for what occurred other
than that Mr Hall occupied
on his bicycle a portion of
Mr Robertson’s vision which was occluded by his left absolute
hemianopia and that Mr Robertson
did not sufficiently
Ms Hayball also
gave evidence, having observed the dashcam footage, that Mr Robertson
failed to adequately scan, to compensate for
his absolute homonymous hemianopia,
and at the time of the collision failed to see
for DIT and the Department for Health and Wellbeing
that the fact that
Mr Robertson saw Mr Hall in the distance demonstrates that his visual
field defect did not prevent him from seeing
Mr Hall in advance of the
crash. For the reasons I have just explained, I do not accept this submission.
Dain also addressed, by reference to the dashcam footage, whether
Mr Robertson might have been able to see Mr Hall prior
collision if, as he was driving, he was looking generally straight ahead, in the
direction of the front of his vehicle, rather
than scanning to his left. The
effect of the evidence was that as Mr Robertson came around the last
left-hand bend there was a moment
where Mr Hall might just have been in the
edge of Mr Robertson’s field of vision, allowing for macular sparing
and that thereafter,
Mr Hall would have been moving further into his blind
area as he approached.
Dain also took into account that as Mr Robertson rounded the left-hand
bend, logic would indicate that he would be using
the double white line in the
centre of the road as his
and probably paying
quite a bit of attention to that. In that context, Professor Dain also agreed
that a person with left homonymous
hemianopia could satisfactorily drive on a
road during a test by keeping a view of the middle of the road, or the white
line in the
middle of the road and whilst doing that, would tend to concentrate
on the right
and that, in
this way, a (left hemianopic) driver could be seen to demonstrate an ability to
drive on the correct part of the road
by actually hugging the white line in the
centre of the road.
find that at the time of the collision Mr Robertson could not see
Mr Hall because he was not within his field of vision, which was
because of his left absolute homonymous hemianopia and Mr Robertson was not
scanning sufficiently, if at all. I also find
that Mr Robertson’s
left absolute homonymous hemianopia and failing to adequately scan to his left
to compensate for it, was
the cause of the collision which killed
exact reason for which Mr Robertson was not adequately scanning to the left
at the time of the collision is not known. It might
be that he was momentarily
distracted by something. If so, as I have stated, I find there was no reason
for the sun to have distracted
him at that moment.
might be, as discussed above, that Mr Robertson was focussing on
negotiating the left-hand bend he had just passed and the right-hand
ahead of him by using the white line in the centre of the road as his guide in
order to keep his position in his lane.
might be that Mr Robertson had become complacent about scanning to the left
when on country roads, particularly ones he knew very
well, on the basis of his
experience that country roads are relatively featureless, compared to city and
suburban roads, and there
is no particular reason to expect to meet hazards on
possibilities take into account the clear evidence of Professor Dain and
Ms Hayball that scanning, involving as it does constant
eye, head and neck
movements, is fatiguing. It was also observed by Professor Dain that if driving
on country roads, the longer
the duration of the driving task, the more
fatiguing the scanning exercise
does not require an expert to understand that when driving on country roads a
(left) homonymous hemianope might be tempted to avoid
the fatigue of scanning or
might be lulled by complacency into not doing so adequately or often enough,
simply because he does not
expect hazards on the left and he can keep in his
lane perfectly well without constantly looking at the left-hand side of the
by using as a reference point the centre, or the centreline, of the road.
In the case of Mr Robertson, it could have been an added
comfort to him to
know that he was driving a large four-wheel-drive vehicle with a bull bar which
would deal with something unexpected
like a kangaroo.
is also reasonable to think that Mr Robertson may well not have been
expecting or adverting to the possibility of meeting a cyclist
on this open
speed limit country road, even relatively close to Quorn.
acknowledge that in the absence of the evidence of Mr Robertson, these
potential reasons for failing to scan amount to speculation,
but they are
logical and educated speculation as to a range of possibilities. It is simply
not necessary, for the purposes of this
inquest, to identify exactly which, or
which combination, was operating in this
Statutory provisions
governing medical assessment
South Australia fitness to hold a licence or a permit is governed by section 80
of the Motor Vehicles Act
1959 (the Act). Sub-section (2) requires that
medical tests must be conducted in accordance with guidelines published or
by the Minster by notice in the Gazette.
notice published in the Gazette dated 1 March 2012 adopted for the purpose of
section 80(2) of the Act
the guidelines and policies
contained within the publication entitled Assessing Fitness to Drive published
by Austroads Incorporated
notice published in the Gazette dated 22 September 2016, adopting for the
purpose of section 80(2) of the Act
the guidelines and policies
contained within the publication entitled Assessing Fitness to Drive published
by Austroads Incorporated
The notice further
advised that the guidelines and policies in Assessing Fitness to Drive
published by Austroads Incorporated in 2012 are adopted for use until the
31 December 2016.
notice published in the Gazette dated 30 June 2022, adopted for the purpose of
section 80(2) of the Act
the guidelines and policies
contained within the publication entitled Assessing Fitness to Drive published
by Austroads Incorporated
The notice further
advised that the guidelines and policies in Assessing Fitness to Drive published
by Austroads Incorporated in
2016 are adopted for use until 30 September
of the other Australian States’ and Territories’ licencing
authorities likewise refer to the medical standards in
the AFTD, in assessing
drivers with a medical
is a cooperative scheme, and it is noted that if one state imposes greater
restrictions in relation to particular conditions than
others, a driver might
seek a licence in a state with lesser restrictions. This is a matter which
counsel for DIT quite properly
asks me to bear in mind when considering
recommendations. I shall do so, but I must observe that even where there is a
cooperative
scheme, properly based reforms in one state need not be held up just
because an agreement for such a reform cannot be reached among
all the parties
to the cooperative scheme.
Fitness to Drive guidelines and their application to a person suffering (left or
right) homonymous hemianopia
AFTD guidelines, published by Austroads Incorporated (Austroads), contain the
medical standards for licensing and clinical management
guidelines. Austroads
is governed by a board consisting of senior executive representatives from each
of its member organisations,
including each State and Territory in Australia,
the Commonwealth and New Zealand. The AFTD is accepted and followed in all
states and territories. The National Transport Commission (NTC)
undertakes reviews of the AFTD
periodically.
AFTD in force at all relevant times, except at the time of his annual review in
2017, was the AFTD 2012 (V4, March 2012). In
relation to visual and eye
disorders the AFTD 2012 relevantly provides:
‘A person is
fit to hold an
unconditional licence
if the binocular
visual field does not have a horizontal extent of at least 110 degrees
within 10 degrees above and below the horizontal
if there is any
significant visual field loss (scotoma) within a central radius of 20 degrees of
the foveal fixation or other scotoma
likely to impede driving
performance.
conditional licence
may be considered by the driver licensing authority
annual review
, taking into account the nature of the driving
task and information provided by the
treating optometrist or
ophthalmologist
I have stated, in my opinion wording of this part of the provision suggests that
a requirement for annual review should be regarded
as mandatory and separate
from, and additional to, ‘
’ attaching to a
conditional licence
AFTD 2012 states, in relation to a ‘
conditional
‘A conditional licence provides a
mechanism for optimising driver and public safety while maintaining driver
independence when
a driver has a long-term or progressive health condition or
injury that may impact on their ability to drive safely. A conditional
identifies the need for medical treatments, vehicle modifications and/or driving
restrictions that would enable the person
to drive safely. It may also specify
a review period, after which the person is required to submit for medical review
to establish
the status of their condition and their continued fitness to drive.
A conditional licence therefore offers an alternative to withdrawal
of a licence
and enables individual case-based decision
definition refers, unsurprisingly, to identifying the ‘
need for medical
treatments, vehicle modifications and/or driving restrictions that would enable
the person to drive safely
’. These would clearly be
’ attaching to a ‘
conditional
definition also seems to include as a potential condition of a conditional
licence the ability to specify a review period after
which a person is required
to submit for medical review ‘
to establish the status of their
condition and their continued fitness to drive
’. In the provision
enabling a conditional licence to be considered by the licensing authority for a
person whose binocular
field of vision does not have a horizontal extent of at
least 110 degrees, (which includes each and every person with absolute
hemianopia), the frequency of ‘
specified as ‘
in my opinion, the combined effects of the provisions recited above are that the
AFTD are ambiguous as to whether a ‘
requirement for annual
’ was intended in those guidelines to be, if standing alone, a
sufficient restriction to render a licence to drive a ‘
conditional
any event, in my opinion the ambiguity should be addressed to make clear whether
a licence which is unrestricted, except for a
requirement for ‘
’, is a permissible ‘
conditional licence
a person who, because of a field of vision deficit, is stated to be ineligible
for an unconditional licence.
nature of the driving task required to be taken into account
nature of the driving task
’ appears as a matter to
which regard is to be had in relation to the issue of a conditional licence to a
person otherwise unfit
to hold an unconditional licence and appears many times
in each edition of the AFTD, but is not specifically defined. On a number
occasions where the term appears, there are examples given which make clear that
nature of the driving task
’ is not merely a reference to
the class of licence proposed to be issued, encompassing all the permissions
which a licence
of a particular class grants, but is a reference to all of the
circumstances in which the individual driver may be expected to drive.
Mr Robertson
did not and could not qualify for an unconditional licence. As I have already
observed, it was known to all concerned
in Mr Robertson’s medical and
OT assessments and treatments, and was either known or ought to have been known,
by all concerned
within DIT who were assessing or contributing to the assessment
of whether any conditional licence was to be granted, that he lived
in a remote
area and could be expected to be driving in all circumstances, including driving
in and between cities and towns and
driving long distances, regularly and often,
in the country. It must have been clear to all those individuals that
Mr Robertson
should have been treated as a man for whom the
nature of the driving task
’ included all those aspects of
driving. He could not reasonably have been regarded as a person likely to
restrict his driving
to short distances from his home, or within towns, or in
any way whatsoever. Accordingly, it was incumbent upon the licensing authority,
in considering whether to issue a
conditional
licence, to consider
whether any conditions were appropriate to impose in order to optimise
driver and public safety while maintaining driver independence when a
driver has a long-term or progressive health condition or injury
that may impact
on their ability to drive safely
is because it should at all times be understood by any person involved in
medical or licensing assessment of a left (or right)
homonymous hemianope that
if at any time, for any reason, such a person fails to scan, that person
immediately presents a danger
to other road users because he or she cannot see
the half of the road which is on their blind
The danger, or risk, presented
by a licensed left homonymous hemianope who at any time fails to scan
was specifically addressed in evidence by Professor Dain. The circumstances of
this case demonstrate that a left homonymous
hemianope, if licensed to drive,
presents a particular danger to cyclists. The reason is obvious: even if a
person is considered
to have shown an ability to scan and has passed a PDA for
licensing purposes, if for any reason at any time the driver fails to scan,
road user or hazard situated to the left of a centre line drawn straight ahead
of the subject driver will not be seen and is
at risk of being struck, without
any chance of being avoided.
must be presumed that any homonymous hemianope is at risk, at some undefined
time or other, of failing to adequately scan.
Dain summarised it thus in his expert report:
‘The primary
risk arises from the inability to see objects in the left hemifield. The
secondary risk is that, in adopting the
compensatory gaze scanning to observe
the objects to the left will result in less attention being paid to the other
driving tasks.
There are no reports of the factors in the accidents of drivers with left
absolute homonymous hemianopia but there are some published
observations from
on-road and simulator driving. The risks identified in these studies may be
summarised as;
Station keeping
Missing traffic
Negotiation of
Turns/intersections
Reaction time to
unexpected events or change
Pedestrian and
vehicle detection
It has also been reported that performance is
poorer in rural situations rather than city. The self-reported difficulties are
reliance on peripheral vision and driving in low
visibility.’
Dain agreed
proposition that a cyclist is in a unique position of danger from a left
homonymous hemianope. If the chances of there
being a cyclist on a particular
road might be expected by the driver to be relatively low, it is not something
you would routinely
look for. The cyclist is a road user who will tend to
assume that the driver behind has seen them, particularly if, as Mr Hall
they are wearing a hi-vis vest and displaying a flashing red light. In
this sense, the cyclist is in much greater danger from the
hemianope than is,
for example, a pedestrian, who can watch the approach of an oncoming driver and
make a decision to give way.
An animal of course, as I have observed, cannot be
expected to exercise any judgement, but in the case of Mr Robertson his
is equipped with a bull bar which reduces the risk to him and his
vehicle and might affect Mr Robertson’s perception of the
particular scenario was posed to Professor
namely driving up a
steep winding hills road with serial blind bends and, immediately after
negotiating a blind left-hand bend, coming
across a cyclist climbing slowly up
that road. Professor Dain agreed that unless a driver with a left homonymous
hemianopia was
scanning frequently and intensively as they were negotiating that
bend, there would be every chance that the cyclist just would not
be seen. He
said that this was the accident scenario which really stands out as the risk
associated with hemianopia and demonstrates
the most extreme danger that a
cyclist could find themselves in, from a left homonymous hemianope.
Dain agreed that unless there is a test that can adequately judge the likelihood
of such a driver dealing with that situation,
then the fate of the cyclist is
simply left to chance.
I have previously mentioned in the context of speculating about what
Mr Robertson might have been doing when he hit Mr Hall, Professor
agreed that there was logically a tendency on the part of a left homonymous
hemianope to focus on the centreline of the road
if assistance was required with
lane keeping. Going back to the example of a left homonymous hemianope coming
across a slow-moving
cyclist after rounding a steep blind left-hand uphill bend,
it stands to reason that the hemianope would be concerned when negotiating
bend to ensure that any oncoming downhill traffic is avoided, and so would be
looking out for oncoming traffic as they rounded
the bend and ensuring that they
did not cross to the wrong side of the road. This would, by the very nature of
the task, likely
lead the hemianope to focus on the centreline, at the expense
of scanning, involving a loss of focus on the left-hand side of the
will increase the chance of not seeing the cyclist.
find, as agreed with by Professor Dain, that a cyclist is a road user to whom a
left homonymous hemianope coming from behind potentially
presents an extreme
danger. In the absence of scrupulous compensation by scanning there is little
which can be done for any hapless
cyclist who happens to be present during this
moment of the progress of a left (in Australia) homonymous hemianope. Even if
just a momentary lapse in concentration, in this circumstance the
hemianope is to be starkly distinguished from a normally-sighted
person who is
not paying close attention, because the normally-sighted person, assuming they
are looking in the general direction
of the road ahead, will often or usually
nevertheless have the cyclist in their peripheral field of vision and has a
chance of being
thereby prompted to react appropriately to the cyclist, whereas
a left hemianope who is not scanning simply cannot see a cyclist
on the left at
my opinion, every person involved in assessing those who wish to drive with
homonymous hemianopia should at all times keep at the
forefront of their mind
the real and greatly heightened danger that a hemianope presents to other road
users in the event of any
failure to constantly and adequately
Absolute homonymous hemianopia
and driving – international context
in Australia, having regard to Assessing Fitness to Drive, the presence of a
homonymous hemianopia precludes the issuing of
an unrestricted licence to drive,
but does not preclude issuing a licence with conditions. Professor Dain gave
evidence that there
are quite a number of states in the USA which have a blanket
prohibition on issuing a licence to drive to a person with a homonymous
hemianopia. It also emerged that there are countries in Europe where there is a
blanket prohibition.
reference to several reported studies in the academic literature, Professor Dain
explained that there is evidence that those with
a homonymous hemianopia who are
permitted to drive tend to drive less and so, statistically, are involved in
accidents no more often
than somebody with full visual fields. However, given
that they are exposing themselves less to the risk by not driving as much,
adjustment is made by the distance driven, they are on average about two and a
half times more likely to be involved in an
accident and even more likely to be
involved in an accident which was their fault.
person diagnosed with a homonymous hemianopia is required to have that condition
reported by their medical practitioners to the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
resulting in a suspension of licence to drive. Professor Dain was asked what
percentage of those might
then be able to develop the compensatory mechanisms to
enable them to drive better, with a risk acceptable to the community. He
advised it would depend on other factors, particularly the person’s
comorbidities. Examples would be a condition which impairs
their ability to
make new compensatory body movements, their attitudes to driving, how much they
choose to drive and the time of
day. In addition, there are the major things
normally related to accidents, namely that they happen more at night and that
and speed are a major
statistics and studies
Dain presented in his report a
of some reported
studies bearing upon accident rates amongst those with visual field loss.
any recommendations in this finding may have Australia-wide implications, given
the cooperative regulatory scheme which operates,
I consider it more useful in
this instance to set out that summary from Professor Dain’s report rather
than attempt to further
summarise it:
‘Johnson and
studied 20,000
drivers to identify any relationship between visual field loss and accident
record for a three-year period from the
licensing authority. Hemianopias were
not specifically analysed but identified as being a severe binocular loss (0.3%
of the population).
Monocular field defects were not related to driving record.
The accident rate (per 160,000 km) was 2.25 higher and the conviction
160,000 km) 6.0 times higher in those with visual field losses in both eyes (p
<.005 and <.001 respectively). The
authors do point out that earlier
studies, mainly by Burg and his co- workers, failed to identify differences but
cast doubt on the
quality of those studies. The data presented are not in the
form of an Odds Ratio and confidence limits that could be used to calculate
proportion of drivers with homonymous hemianopia that perform with the range of
drivers with intact visual field, as I have done
in the next paragraph. From
their Figure 4, it may be calculated that for drivers with both eyes involved,
the Odds Ratio for accidents/person/160,000km
is 2.16 and for
convictions/person/160,000km is 3.86, which is of the same order as the findings
of the following, more specific,
Owsley et al
looked at the
relationship between a reduction in the Useful Field of View (UFoV) and a 3-year
incidence of crashes in subjects with
normal visual fields. When a subject is
given a loading task to do while having their visual field examined, compared
with simply
looking at the fixation point in the visual field, the measured
field of view reduces. The resulting visual field is known as the
phenomenon shows marked individual differences. The authors showed that drivers
whose UFoV reduced by 40% or more were
2.21 times more likely to have had a
crash in the following 3 years.
While this is not about hemianopsia, it does indicate the importance of
visual fields and it should be seen in the context of a loss
of more than 50% of
Mr Robertson’s field of view.
Huisingh et al
showed that
drivers with severe binocular visual field impairment, especially in the lower
or left region of the driving visual field
have a 40% increased rate of at-fault
collision involvement (RR, 1.4; 1.07-1.83). This was, however, carried out in
drivers 70 years
of age and above, which is an older age group than
Mr Robertson.
Rubin et al
also showed
that greater binocular visual field loss was a significant predictor of motor
vehicle collisions.
McGwin et al
motor vehicle collisions (MVCs) of 20 subjects with hemianopia and 7 with
quadrantanopia in a retrospective study. Co-morbidities
were excluded. The
accident records from the licensing authority for a 2-year nine-month period
were analysed. Expressed as MVCs
per person-year there was no statistically
significant difference between those with hemianopsia and drivers with normal
However, when analysed in terms of MVCs per person-mile, those with
hemianopsia were 2.45 times more likely to be involved in an
MVC and 2.64 times
more likely to be involved in an accident in which they were at fault. These
are statistically significant findings.
This odds ratio for accident
involvement of 2.64 (confidence limits 1.03-6.80):1 indicates that 15% of
drivers have reduced their
risk to less than 1 and could be considered safe to
Drivers with absolute homonymous hemianopia in
South Australia
Court has been advised by DIT in a letter dated 9 May
that, at that date,
84 drivers with homonymous hemianopia held a valid driver’s licence
in South Australia. DIT advised that
all held a conditional licence. I have no
information about what conditions were imposed and how many of those conditions
were limited
to a requirement for annual review. I have no information about
the processes to which those licensees were subjected. I was also
advised that
there are 1.3 million drivers in South Australia so it is clear that homonymous
hemianopes represent only a small proportion.
note in this context the evidence of Mr Gilbert on behalf of DIT who explained
his understanding that around one third of individuals
who undertake a PDA for
licensing purposes, after a certification of medical unfitness, fail that test.
I do not have the information
those cases which could enable any useful comparison with Professor Dain’s
suggested rate of suitability for driving by reduction of risk to that of the
normal population, of 15% of those suffering from homonymous
hemianopia.
Should those with
homonymous hemianopia be excluded from driving?
his oral evidence at inquest, Professor Dain
elaborated,
particularly on
his interpretation of the last-mentioned study by McGwin et al, which he
regarded as the most pertinent and best
available academic study on the
particular condition of absolute homonymous hemianopia, despite its relatively
small sample (of drivers
who had been through the ophthalmology clinic at the
University of Alabama in Birmingham, Alabama). Professor Dain noted that in
this study the estimated weekly mileage of a driver with hemianopia was 177
miles per week and for those with normal visual fields,
it was 296 miles per
week, so the hemianopes in the study were only driving about 60% of the distance
that the people with normal
visual fields were driving. Professor Dain
explained, by reference to the expressed confidence limits, that the 15% or
thereabouts
who have reduced their risk to less than one would have to be
accepted as performing better than the worst of the unaffected group,
they belong within driving ability distribution of the normal population. It is
for this reason that Professor Dain expressed
the opinion, with which I agree,
that this proportion of homonymous hemianopes should not be excluded from
Conversely, the
remainder of 85%, opined Professor Dain, should be considered not capable of
presenting only an ‘
acceptable risk
’, which he defines as the
risk of the normally-sighted
Nevertheless,
opined Professor Dain, the safe approach is to allow people identified as
presenting an acceptable risk to drive only
with conditions. He explained that
even if it is thought to be demonstrated that they are within the 15%, it will
always be somewhat
uncertain. He expressed the opinion, which I accept, that it
will be less uncertain if you also prudently place restrictions on
them, if only
to remind them that they are more at risk than everybody else. He explained
(with appropriate simplicity) when asked,
that they are more at risk because
hemianopia makes them more at risk, and what has happened with those who are
within the 15% is
they have coped with all the things that put them at risk and
minimised them, so it has brought them within the normal
distribution.
extreme nature of their risk is clear: even if they satisfy medical
practitioners, occupational therapists, licensing assessors
and the licensing
authority that they have demonstrated a capability of driving as safely as the
normal population, the risk is that
in any moment when they might fail, for
whatever reason, to continuously scan to their blind side, it is a fact that
they cannot
see one half of the road. What will then occur, if any cyclist or
other road user or hazard is unfortunately on the road at that
tragically demonstrated by the death of Mr Hall.
my opinion, it is fanciful to think that no hemianope with a driver’s
licence will ever fail to adequately scan whilst driving.
I observe that it
would be equally fanciful to think that no normally sighted driver will ever
fail to drive at all times with due
care and attention, and no collisions will
eventuate. However, it is the nature of the heightened risk, well above that of
population, which exists when a hemianope fails to adequately scan,
which in my view makes it appropriate to impose conditions, beyond
tests, upon all licensed drivers with this condition.
How may the increased risks be
ameliorated?
which, in my view,
should be read by regulators considering this finding for the purpose of the
next review of AFTD. Professor Dain
referred to the general argument that
compensatory behaviours will modify those risks and can, in some drivers, reduce
the risk to
be within the range of risks for drivers with full fields. He
observed, as I have stated, that some reduction can be achieved by
driving less.
As another strategy to reduce modifiable risks, both from the frequency and
severity of accidents, he referred to the
initial restriction against towing and
night driving serving that purpose in the case of Mr Robertson, as these
are more accident-prone
conditions. He also referred to the conditions such as
those imposed upon young, inexperienced drivers, such as zero blood alcohol
level, a speed limit and a passenger limit.
Dain expresses the view that the risks are able to be adequately ameliorated in
some drivers
and that the
elements in any amelioration include:
understands the consequence on driving of their visual field loss;
accepts that compensations need to be made;
the driver is
given help to understand the consequences and the necessary compensations;
the driver makes
the necessary compensations;
accepts that there will be conditions on the driving licence in areas where
their driving has not been evaluated as adequate
and/or cannot, in practice, be
appropriately evaluated.
have noted that Professor Crompton agrees with these propositions.
Dain stated,
and I agree,
that it follows that there needs to be appropriate, evidence-based education,
training and assessment and methods followed
by validated acceptance criteria.
As a guideline, having regard to the academic literature, he advocates that the
acceptance criteria
would pass less than 15% of people with absolute homonymous
hemianopias.
also note in this context the opinion, to which I shall return, of
Ms Hayball, expressed in her
that any person
with homonymous hemianopia who is granted a licence should have permanent
conditions on their licence similar to
the mandatory conditions for Provisional
not to drive or
attempt to put a motor vehicle in motion when there is any concentration of
alcohol in the blood or the presence of
THC, methylamphetamine or MDMA in the
blood or oral fluid;
not to exceed
the speed limit by 10 km/h or more;
not to drive
over 100 km/h even if the local speed limit exceeds 100 km/h;
not to use any
mobile phone function while driving, including hands-free mode, Bluetooth
technology and loudspeaker
appropriately assess drivers with absolute homonymous hemianopia
have mentioned Professor Dain’s opinion that reliance on clinical
observation and clinical tests is based upon methods which
and without evidence-based pass/fail criteria. He states that observation
in the consulting room and gaining a clinical impression
does not have an
evidence base. Professor Dain refers in his report to the Esterman test not
having been proposed as applicable
to driving but to personal mobility, and its
applicability to the driving task has been questioned, as have clinical tests in
clinical assessment is appropriate for identifying the condition of homonymous
hemianopia and the extent of the remaining
visual field. ‘
10.2.2 Visual
Section 10.2. General assessment and management
2022 version of AFTD states appropriate assessment methods for visual field
defects, which include defects of the horizontal
extent of the visual field,
which include homonymous hemianopias. Esterman tests without fixation are not
included in those methods.
Neither should it be thought that a binocular
Esterman test
fixation should be regarded as capable of
demonstrating to a licensing authority the extent of a person’s ability to
scan whilst
driving to adequately compensate for a loss of one side of a
person’s visual field. More on that shortly.
Dain stated in his expert report:
‘It is my opinion that, in a
general sense, it is appropriate to issue a conditional licence to a person
whose visual field
deficit is outside of the normally permitted clearance
guidelines for recreational and commercial driving provided that there is
evidence that:
driver is deemed to have demonstrated sufficient scanning ability
for all the driving conditions permitted in the
conditions of the licence;
driver has no significant co-morbidities, including cognitive impairment;
driver has demonstrated a thorough knowledge of the road rules;
driver has demonstrated an understanding of the consequences of their visual
field loss;
driver has successfully completed validated driving assessment(s) covering the
conditions in which they are permitted to drive;
driver accepts the limitations placed on their licence for driving situations in
which they have not been assessed or have not
successfully completed
assessment;
driver has the conditions to their licence that are imposed to mitigate the risk
in a more general way given that there is sufficient
evidence that they
contribute to risks of motor vehicle accidents (
permitted blood
alcohol levels, time or distance limits, night time driving limits, speed
the opinion of Professor Dain, an appropriate driving test is the appropriate
method of assessing the ability of an absolute homonymous
hemianope to
compensate for their field of vision defect. Upon the evidence I have heard in
this inquest, I agree. The question
then is what is an appropriate driving test
for that purpose. It is certainly Professor Dain’s opinion that the usual
authority driving test is not specifically directed to that purpose.
With this I also agree.
my opinion, the starting point in answering the question, what is an appropriate
driving test for that purpose, is a PDA conducted
by an occupational therapist,
as contemplated in ‘
Section 2.3.1. Practical driver
assessments
’ under the heading ‘
2.3. Assessing and supporting
functional driving capacity
’ in the 2022 version of AFTD. To meet the
requirements of Professor Dain’s list above, the driving in the test would
need not only to demonstrate sufficient scanning ability but do so for all the
driving conditions permitted in the conditions of
the licence. It follows
logically that an occupational therapist driving test, conducted to inform a
medical expert of matters which
that doctor cannot assess in a clinical setting,
must be conducted in all the conditions and circumstances in which the
hemianope is to be permitted to drive which, unless there are to be
limiting conditions placed upon the licence, are all the circumstances
that licence ordinarily permits any person to drive. Having regard to this, it
is my opinion that in South Australia, it
is appropriate that dual qualified
occupational therapist driver assessors may undertake PDAs for licensing
purposes in cases, such
as homonymous hemianopias, where a person’s
ability to compensate for the condition is regarded as the primary matter
assessment and this has led to the referral by a medical practitioner
for of an OT PDA as described in Section 2.3. of AFTD (2022).
asked what he meant by ‘appropriate driving test’ Professor Dain
‘Well, it means it’s got to be of sufficient
length to assess their compensatory behaviour over a period of time. I mean,
there’s no point in testing them for half an hour, and then letting them
go out onto the road and drive for four hours. So,
it’s got to be of a
realistic length, it’s got to be of a form that reflects the different
kinds of driving conditions,
and because – generally these tests,
it’s like a driving test it’s taken within a built up area, and
got clues, like other cars to follow, you’ve got a kind of a
heightened attention too, because things are happening –
whereas you go
out into, you know, the uninterrupted country road, it’s a different
problem. Keeping the car on the road in
the right place is a relatively
straightforward thing to do, but unexpected events become – responding to
unexpected events
and emergencies becomes more important. So, that driving test
has got to reflect the range of situations that people are going to
in, and also, I think to be linked with whatever restrictions you may place on
them. If you’ve only tested them
for half an hour, my logic says they
need to take a break every half hour.’
this answer, Professor Dain was talking about the test for licensing purposes
but was also assuming that that test would be capable
of assessing the capacity
to sufficiently scan so, clearly, the answer encompasses both types of
practical driving assessment
’ (that related to assessing and
supporting functional driver capacity and that related to licensing)
contemplated in AFTD.
It is fair to say that in referring to PDAs, the fact
that the term is used in AFTD to describe OT driver assessments and licensing
assessments can generate confusion. It did so during the evidence in this
inquest of Mr Gilbert from DIT.
potential for confusion is most evident, however, in ‘
Section 10.2.9.
Practical driver assessments
’ in AFTD (2022) which states:
‘A practical driver assessment is not considered to be a safe
or reliable method of assessing the effects of disorders of vision
on driving,
especially the visual fields, because the driver’s response to emergency
situations or various environmental conditions
cannot be determined.
Information about adaptation to visual field defects can be gained from visual
field tests such as the Esterman.
A practical driver assessment may be helpful in assessing the ability to
process visual information (refer to Part A section 2.3.1.
Practical driver
assessments).’
assertion in the first sentence of the passage above appears to be repeated as
an assumption
Department for Infrastructure and Transport - Submission to Review the
Australian Fitness to Drive - June 2021, which the
National Transport Commission
has advised DIT will be considered in the next AFTD review (early 2026), pending
the issue of the next
version of AFTD expected later in 2026.
relevant part, the submission states:
‘DIT would also welcome
some further clarification for visual fields on when a person would qualify for
a conditional licence,
where their visual fields are outside of the criteria for
the issue of an unconditional licence.
Presently the guidelines indicate a conditional licence may be considered
taking into account information provided by an optometrist
or ophthalmologist
but this could be very subjective with no definitive visual parameters or
criteria for how far out of the guidelines
a person can be before a conditional
licence should be refused.
DIT finds that a lot of optometrists or ophthalmologists will advise the
person doesn’t meet the visual field standards but
recommend the person
undertake a practical driving assessment to determine if they can qualify for a
conditional licence.
As practical assessments are not a good method of determining whether a
person with a visual field defect can safely
this will usually
be refused and the person will be refused an unconditional or conditional
Given the above, DIT would appreciate the standards addressing the
conditional licence aspect more definitively if possible and providing
guidance on what allowance there can be to consider a conditional licence where
the visual field readings are outside of the
allowable readings for an
unconditional licence.
For example, if a person has significant visual field loss with more than
four contiguous spots within a 20° radius from fixation,
would there be a
particular number of spots beyond four where a person would reasonably qualify
for a conditional licence?’
part of the submission was prepared by DIT having regard to DIT’s
knowledge of the tragic death of Mr Hall after Mr Robertson
was granted a
to the second paragraph of the submission reproduced above, I would agree,
except to say that apart from the test results which
establish the field of
vision with fixation, the ‘
information provided by an optometrist or
ophthalmologist
’ in support of proceeding to (OT) testing for a
conditional licence would almost inevitably be subjective, heavily reliant
self-reporting and, as Professor Dain stated and Professor Crompton agreed with,
without an evidence base. However, if OT testing
is the only or the only
appropriate way to assess a person’s ability to compensate for a medical
condition while driving, there
must be a means of assessing whether to proceed
to such testing. What is important is that subjective assessments heavily
upon self-reporting are not relied upon by a licensing authority as
final evidence of the sufficiency of a person’s compensation
medical condition.
information conveyed by DIT in the third paragraph does not surprise me.
Optometrists and ophthalmologists have been referred
to in identical terms, to
the exclusion of rehabilitation specialists and occupational therapists
conducting PDAs, in each of the
additions of AFTD since 2012, in the permissive
provision for consideration of conditional licences to those with defined visual
field defects:
conditional licence
may be considered
by the driver licensing authority subject to
annual review
, taking into
account the nature of the driving task and information provided by the
treating optometrist or ophthalmologist
plain that I have not heard evidence to this effect, I expect that DIT’s
experience is that such recommendations have
been made by optometrists and
ophthalmologists stating their views about a hemianope’s ability to scan,
commented with respect to the second paragraph above. On
this point, I should mention that in relation to Professor Dain’s
expressed in paragraph 79 of his expert report:
‘It follows
that there needs to be appropriate, evidence-based education, training and
assessment and methods followed by validated
acceptance criteria. As a
guideline, the acceptance criteria would pass less than 15% of people with
absolute homonymous hemianopias.’
Professor Crompton responded, not unreasonably:
‘With respect to paragraph 79 I can only act under present rules and
recommend available therapy/tests.’
last paragraph of the passage of the submission reproduced above refers to
conditions under the heading ‘
Central Field Loss
not the condition suffered by Mr Robertson and which has not been addressed
in this inquest. However, it was given
as the foundation for an example of the
sort of guidance DIT would seek – something that would relate to a test
conducted by
an ophthalmologist or optometrist.
the case of a person with good visual acuity but with a homonymous hemianopia
which is likely to be permanent, the guidelines might
be made more specific
cut-off is for consideration
of a conditional licence, but the real question
will remain whether a person can demonstrate an ability when driving to
and adequately scan to compensate for that defect, in order to bring
themselves within the driving ability distribution of the normal
population, and
what conditions should be imposed on the licence.
agree with Professor Dain’s opinion that the judgement of the adequacy of
the compensation really can only be in the driving
(2022) quite properly states in ‘
Section 10.2.2. Visual
’ (although whether it is intended to be under the heading
Central Field Loss
’ is not clear to
‘Methods of measuring visual fields are limited in their
ability to resemble the demands of the real-world driving environment
drivers are free to move their eyes as required and must sustain their visual
function in variable conditions.
Additional factors to be considered by the driver licensing authority in
assessing patients with defects in visual fields therefore
not limited
kinetic fields
conducted on a Goldman
Esterman visual fields conducted without fixation monitoring, often referred to
as a roving Esterman (two consecutive tests
must be performed with no more than
one false-positive allowed) – the test should be in the numeric field
format when it is
printed out or sent for an opinion
sensitivity and glare susceptibility
medical history;
duration and prognosis; if the condition is progressive; rate of
progression/deterioration; effectiveness of treatment/management
driving record
before and since the occurrence of the defect
the nature of
the driving task – for example, type of vehicle (truck, bus, etc.), roads
and distances to be travelled concomitant
medical conditions such as cognitive
impairment or impaired rotation of the neck.’
to the first dot point, I have heard no evidence and can make no comment.
to the second, the binocular Esterman test without fixation, it appears on the
basis of the evidence I have heard that these tests
may properly be regarded as
giving an indication of an ability to scan, but for reasons I have discussed
should not be regarded as
evidence that a person should be deemed able to
adequately scan whilst driving. Professor Dain also pointed out that as an
of scanning, this might be contaminated by the ability to fixate
somewhere else (into the blind
hemifield).
I accept that a
binocular Esterman test without fixation might, in an appropriate case, be one
factor favouring a decision to recommend
a PDA (undertaken by an occupational
therapist).
to the third dot point, I have heard no evidence and can make no comment,
although it stands to reason that a person assessed with
high sensitivity to
contrast and/or susceptibility to glare should be treated with even greater
to the other three dot points, they appear to be entirely appropriate
considerations.
Dain referred to ‘
the million-dollar question
question of how to determine which people with absolute homonymous hemianopia
should be granted a licence and with
what conditions. He referred to the
Esterman test, a clinical test carried out in the consulting room, which is
referred to in AFTD.
As to practical tests of driving which Professor Dain said
might be on-road tests and might be a simulated test, Professor Dain
is no consistency around the world and he understood there to be a different
appetite in different states of Australia
for the undertaking of practical
tests, as opposed to accepting the certification of an ophthalmologist or
optometrist. As I have
made plain, it is my view that, where homonymous
hemianopes are concerned, a medical certification by an ophthalmologist or
optometrist
should certainly not be accepted without a practical test, which
should include, as a minimum, an OT driving
assessment.
The potential value of
preparing his report and for giving evidence, Professor Dain was not
specifically asked about simulators and so had not tabulated
any academic
literature in relation to them, either generally or in relation to homonymous
hemianopia. However, he did inform the
Court when asked that a significant body
of research work has been done in relation to simulators and there are published
general terms though, he stated that people with homonymous hemianopia could
very easily be subject to assessment within a simulator
to determine what they
are actually doing and not doing, what they are seeing and not seeing. I
observe that simulator testing could
include extended duration driving on
country roads.
Dain was also asked about cars which have cameras to observe the driver and
their eyes, and what they are doing with their
eyes, being used to test people
with visual field defects. Professor Dain referred to research undertaken in
Queensland and, although
he had not personally worked with simulators set up
with cameras which monitor the eye and head movements of the driver, he said
would be very easy to do that.
observe from my own experience that some modern vehicles have a camera in the
dashboard which detects, either from the direction
of the eyes, or perhaps from
the position of the head, when a driver is not being attentive to the road
ahead, and delivers a warning.
the basis of what I have heard, I assume it would be technologically feasible to
set up extended duration country driving simulator
testing which would not only
present occasional random hazards to be appropriately negotiated by the subject
being tested, but could
separately monitor, with cameras, the extent and
consistency of scanning in a person with a
hemianopia.
Collision avoidance
I did not during the inquest hear evidence about these systems, and their
potential suitability for use in reducing the heightened
risk to road users such
as cyclists and pedestrians presented by some (or most) persons suffering from
homonymous hemianopia, it
occurs to me that a licensing authority could consider
imposing as a condition of a licence a requirement that such a driver only
in a vehicle equipped with such a system. This suggestion assumes that there is
some evidence that the incidence or severity
of injury to pedestrians or
cyclists is reduced in collisions involving vehicles deploying technology which
detects the presence
of cyclists or pedestrians vulnerable to an impending
collision and automatically applies the vehicle’s brakes. Whether
Hall might have survived the collision due to automatic braking applied
after the vehicle’s detection of him ahead, or whether
the collision might
have been avoided entirely, is a question I cannot answer. However, for present
purposes I can only speculate
that if Mr Robertson had been subject to such
a condition, rather than driving a Toyota Landcruiser with a bull bar,
chances of survival might have been
Some further observations
Mr Robertson
cannot be criticised for wanting to resume his life following his surgery and
subsequent stroke by obtaining his driver’s
licence, and therefore his
independence.
Mr Robertson
self-reported to Professor Crompton, Dr Anastassiadis and Ms Hayball,
Crompton appeared to
place some weight upon Mr Robertson’s
self-reporting.
In a general
sense, medical practitioners use self-reporting as a tool for history taking and
understanding the presenting complaint,
so there is a very real degree of
reliance put on self-reporting as a tool in everyday clinical use. However,
Ms Hayball did not
place any weight on self-reporting as to how well
Mr Robertson was compensating for the absolute homonymous hemianopia, a
with which Professor Dain
assisting submitted that Mr Robertson never appeared to fully grasp the
nature of the absolute
homonymous hemianopia and the
fact it did, and would continue to, impact on his ability to
It is difficult to
draw with certainty a conclusion about this but I agree with Professor Dain, who
expressed the view that Mr Robertson’s
reported lack of insight
should sound an alarm, and that more attention should have been paid to the
concerns of the on-road driving
Those concerns
were recorded in Ms Hayball’s report and represented reason for any
subsequently involved doctor or licensing
authority representative to question
whether Ms Hayball’s recommendations for driving lessons were
sufficient to deal with
those concerns, rather than requiring further OT
assessment.
my opinion, any indication during the whole assessment process that a person
with homonymous hemianopia does not fully grasp the
nature and impact upon them
of their condition, and their ability to drive, should lead the licensing
authority to carefully consider
referral for further OT assessment, in addition
to and after any further lessons which may be recommended.
the course of this finding I have made many comments and observations which fall
short of being specific findings as to fault or
failure to which
Mr Hall’s death might be attributable, directly or indirectly.
is undeniable in this tragic case that Mr Hall in no way contributed by his
conduct to the collision which caused his death. Mr
Hall was doing
everything right and he could not have anticipated that approaching him from
behind was a man who was blind on his
left-hand side and, if he was not scanning
to compensate for that, would not see him at all.
converse of that is that Mr Robertson was a driver on this road who knew
that he was blind on his left-hand side, that the only
way he could remedy that
condition and drive safely was to constantly and consistently scan to the
left-hand side, and failed to
do so. The fault was entirely
Mr Robertson’s and the fault amounted to criminal conduct of which he
was found guilty and for
which he was penalised. It is not for me in the
coronial process to review or comment upon the penalty.
is also true, as pointed out by Professor Dain as being obvious, that the death
of Mr Hall could have been prevented by Mr Robertson
being refused a
driving licence.
I cannot find that Mr Hall’s death was preventable.
evidence I have heard does not lead me to conclude that a homonymous hemianope
should in every case be refused a driving licence
or, specifically, that
Mr Robertson should have been refused a licence.
cannot conclude that Mr Robertson was issued an unconditional licence which
the licensing authority was not entitled to issue.
Whether it was a
conditional
’ licence for the purposes of AFTD is open to
debate and that debatability should be foreclosed by amendment of the relevant
provisions.
conclude that an ‘
unrestricted
’ C class license was issued to
Mr Robertson by the licensing authority without sufficient assessment of
his ability to demonstrate
adequate compensatory scanning on country roads, with
open speed limits, for extended periods of time.
occurred despite the fact that it was known to the licensing authority that the
nature of Mr Robertson’s driving task would
always involve driving on
country roads, with open speed limits, for extended periods of time.
lack of sufficient assessment of Mr Robertson’s ability to adequately scan
to compensate for his absolute homonymous hemianopia,
while driving on country
roads with open speed limits for extended periods of time, cannot be shown to
have led to the fatal collision
or contributed to its cause.
issuing of Mr Robertson’s licence also occurred despite the licensing
authority being aware of concerns expressed by an
occupational therapist which
should have led to doubts as to whether Mr Robertson had sufficient insight
into the impact of his condition
upon his ability to safely drive.
lack of sufficient insight into the impact Mr Robertson’s condition may
have had upon his ability to safely drive may have
been a contributing factor to
Mr Robertson’s failure to scan at the time he struck Mr Hall, in the sense
that sufficient insight
into that potential impact may have operated to avert
complacency, if that was a contributor to the cause.
conditions which could have been proposed or imposed upon Mr Robertson to
attempt to reduce the risk which would plainly arise
in the event that he should
fail to constantly and consistently scan were neither proposed nor imposed.
These included the conditions
mandatorily imposed upon provisional drivers and
limiting driving in conditions for which he had not been appropriately assessed,
including for extended durations on open speed limit country roads. A further
condition which could be considered, which was probably
not available at the
time Mr Robertson was issued with his licence but is now probably
available, is a condition requiring Mr Robertson
to drive a vehicle
equipped with an automatic emergency braking system of some commercially
available kind.
conclude that the AFTD guidelines require greater detail and clarity in order to
guide medical practitioners, occupational therapists
and licensing authorities
as to the minimum standards below which a person suffering a visual field defect
should never be granted
a conditional licence. However, in relation to most
cases of homonymous hemianopia, absent other comorbidities, in-principle
rather than a PDA are justified and lead me to doubt whether
such minimum
standards may properly be formulated. On the evidence I have heard, automatic
disqualification of Mr Robertson, for
example, would not be appropriate on
the basis of any minimum standard applied by clinical finding.
was no failure in or of the whole process of relicensing Mr Robertson which can
specifically be found to have led to the collision
which caused Mr Hall’s
death or have contributed to its cause.
condition of absolute homonymous hemianopia is the worst eyesight defect which
might present to the driver licensing authority.
a person who is appropriately assessed as having the ability to adequately scan
to compensate for his disability should be regarded
as presenting a high
potential for putting other road users in danger whenever they have moments of
inattention leading to a failure
to scan, as the result is that they cannot see
the side of the road in which they have lost their vision.
cyclist is the type of road user facing the greatest potential danger presented
by an absolute homonymous hemianope at any time
when they might fail to
adequately scan.
being able to identify this in any particular individual whether a doctor,
occupational therapist, driving instructor/assessor
or member of staff of the
licensing authority, in my opinion during the process which eventually led to Mr
Robertson being issued
an unrestricted driving licence after his stroke, there
was a general under-appreciation of the gravity of the risk potentially
to a road user, particularly a road user such as a cyclist, by an
absolute homonymous hemianope who should at any time fail to adequately
proper appreciation of that risk informed by greater awareness as a result of
the tragic fate of Mr Hall should lead those
involved, in the future in
such assessments and decisions, to have greater regard to the nature and extent
of the potential risk
which I have identified, when making recommendations and
decisions in relation to a conditional licence sought by a person suffering
absolute homonymous hemianopia.
Mr Hall’s death preventable?
stated by Professor Dain, it is obvious that Mr Hall’s death could
have been prevented if Mr Robertson was not granted a
if conditions had been imposed and even if they were more extensive than those
which were originally imposed, it is doubtful
that they would have had any
influence. The road was open, generally straight, with some curves but
undulating, and the road and
vehicle were familiar to Mr Robertson. It was
clear daylight and there was little other traffic. Mr Robertson had been
for a relatively short time and for a relatively short distance.
agree with Professor Dain that in those circumstances, the typical provisions on
a conditional licence e.g. daytime only, limited
distance from home, would have
had little influence.
probably, would conditions such as those imposed upon provisional drivers. In
the particular circumstances of this case,
a condition prohibiting
Mr Robertson from driving if THC was present in his blood or oral fluid
might have persuaded him not to drive
on this occasion, although this seems
unlikely, as driving in such circumstances is, and was, prohibited in any event.
Recommendations
I am empowered to make recommendations that in the opinion of
the Court might prevent, or reduce the likelihood of, a recurrence
similar to the events which were the subject of the inquest.
the Minister for Infrastructure and Transport I
the National Transport Commission and Austroads Incorporated (Austroads) be
requested to amend the next version of Assessing
Fitness to Drive:
a) to require that a person assessed pursuant to the Assessment Method stated in
‘Section 10.2.2. Visual fields’, who
demonstrates in accordance with
the Assessment Method a horizontal extension of the visual field of less than
110° but greater
or equal to 90° and is hemianopic, may only be
supported by an optometrist or ophthalmologist for the granting of a conditional
licence by the licensing authority when the person has undertaken a practical
driver assessment by an occupational therapist in accordance
with ‘Section
2.3. Assessing and supporting functional driver capacity’, and only if the
support and certification by
the optometrist or ophthalmologist considers the
occupational therapist’s conclusions and recommendations;
b) to require in ‘Section 2.3. Assessing and supporting functional driver
capacity’, or another suitable section, that
occupational therapy
practical driver assessments of absolute homonymous hemianopes are designed to
ensure that the driver pays sufficient
attention to scanning at all times. This
would mean assessing them on-road for longer periods and in a greater variety of
conditions, including rural roads and recommending any appropriate
conditions, including rest breaks, to ensure heightened vigilance;
c) to recognise and reflect in ‘Section 10.2.9. Practical driver
assessments’ that an occupational therapy practical
driver assessment is
the gold standard for assessing the ability of a person who has been clinically
assessed to be suffering an
absolute homonymous hemianopia to adequately and
appropriately compensate for that visual field defect during driving by scanning
to the blind side and should determine what is permitted pursuant to any
licence; and
d) as to‘10.3. Medical standards for licensing – vision and eye
disorders – Private standards’:
clarify whether there is a minimum horizontal extent of the visual field below
which an absolute homonymous hemianope is to be
considered unfit to hold any
licence, conditional or unconditional;
extend the range of providers of information to which the licensing authority is
to have regard when considering whether to issue
a conditional licence and, if
so, appropriate conditions to attach to a licence for an absolute homonymous
hemianope, extending that
range of providers to include rehabilitation
specialists and occupational therapists (where an occupational therapy practical
assessment has been undertaken);
require the licensing authority to consider imposing upon a conditional licence,
conditions which address the high potential for
risk to other road users
presented by an absolute homonymous hemianope at any time during which they may
fail to adequately scan
to compensate during driving for their visual field
require the licensing authority to impose conditions attaching to a licence
issued to an absolute homonymous hemianope, in addition
to the requirement for
annual review:
(1) similar to those imposed upon a driver with a Provisional licence, in
particular:
(a) not to drive a motor vehicle or attempt to put a motor vehicle in motion
whilst there is any concentration of alcohol in the
blood or the presence of
THC, methyl amphetamine, or MDMA in the blood or oral fluid;
(b) not to exceed the speed limit by 10 km/h or more;
(c) not to drive over 100 km/h even if the local speed limit exceeds 100
(d) not to use any mobile phone function while driving, including hands-free
mode, Bluetooth technology and loudspeaker operation;
(2) initially, no night driving or towing; and
(3) that the driver shall not drive except in a vehicle with an Automatic
Emergency Braking system or equivalent; and
(4) in the case of an absolute homonymous hemianope, to specify the nature
and extent of the requirement for annual review to include
medical, vision and
occupational therapy on-road reviews.
the National Transport Commission and Austroads Incorporated (Austroads) be
requested to investigate, or commission, initiate
or encourage research, into:
a) the assessment of persons with absolute homonymous hemianopia and their
ability to scan to adequately compensate for their visual
field loss, including
in extended duration, high-speed country driving; and
b) the potential for the use of driving simulators which include cameras
monitoring head and eye movements for the purpose of undertaking
assessments.
the National Transport Commission and Austroads Incorporated (Austroads) be
requested to consider making representations to the
Australian Government for
the inclusion of the cost of complex vision/medical driving assessment by
occupational therapists on the
Medicare rebate table.
in the event that any of the foregoing recommendations are not adopted into the
next edition of Assessing Fitness to Drive, DIT
internal policies and practices
be reconsidered with a view to incorporating and giving effect to these
recommendations within South
Australia in relation to conditional licences being
considered by the licensing authority for persons who do not qualify for the
issue of an unconditional licence as a result of absolute homonymous
hemianopia.
in South Australia, changes (if required) to legislation and DIT internal
procedures and policies be considered to enable occupational
therapy driver
assessors to formally make licence recommendations alongside medical
practitioners.
any report prepared by an occupational therapist following an occupational
therapy practical driving assessment be required to
be forwarded to DIT for
consideration by the licensing authority in determining the appropriateness of
issuing a conditional licence
to a person who does not qualify for the issue of
an unconditional licence due to absolute homonymous hemianopia and any
to be attached to the licence. The report should also assist the
licensing authority to understand and consider in the decision-making
whether the driver has demonstrated an understanding of the consequences of
their visual field loss and accepts limitations
placed on the licence for
driving situations in which they have not been assessed or have not successfully
completed assessment.
Keywords: Driving Licence, Fitness to Drive; Homonymous Hemianopia
Whether it is properly referred
to as a condition will be discussed
Exhibit 16a, Annexure JST1;
Exhibit C34, evidence at Mr Robertson's criminal
Exhibit C34, page
Exhibit C34, page
Exhibit C34, page
Exhibit C34, pages
Exhibit C34, pages
Exhibit C15,
Annexure KP1, record of interview, page
Exhibit C34, pages
Exhibit C34, page
Exhibit C34, page
Exhibit C34, pages
Exhibit C8 at
Exhibit C17, Expert
report of Emeritus Professor Dain, page
Exhibit C17, page
Exhibit C17, page
Exhibit C19, page
Exhibit C22, page
Exhibit C18, page
Exhibit C22, pages
97-100; Exhibit C8 at [17]
Exhibit C22, page 99
Transport Regulation User
Management Processing System – the IT system containing the register of
driver licenses and motor
vehicles as required to be maintained under the Motor
Vehicles Act
Exhibit C22,
Exhibit C22, page
Exhibit C22, page 96 -
This report was forwarded to
Exhibit C34, page
Exhibit C21, pages
Exhibit C19, pages
The reader is reminded that
this is where he was driving from when he struck
Exhibit C22,
pages 86-89
Exhibit C22,
The hemianopia was
By reference to Medmont
plots for each eye, with fixation. A roving binocular Esterman test taken on the
same day was not relevant
to determining the horizontal extent of the binocular
field of vision (see Exhibit C17 at
[80]-[81]).
Exhibit C22, page
Exhibit C22, page
Exhibit C22, page
The error in Professor
Crompton’s documentation provided to Dr Vuong is
Exhibit C22, page
Exhibit C33 at
Exhibit C25, page
Exhibit C25, page
Exhibit C33, page
Exhibit C33, page
T310.13-T310.17
Exhibit C33a, page 21
Exhibit C33a, page 6
practical component - the whole assessment was two
Exhibit C28, page
Exhibit C25, page
T329.11-T329.27
Exhibit C33
Exhibit C33 at
Exhibit C33 at
Exhibit C33 at [60];
Exhibit C33a, page 21
Exhibit C20a, pages 45-48
Exhibit C20a, page 45
Exhibit C20a, page
Exhibit C20a, page
Exhibit C20a, page
Exhibit C20a,
pages 47-48; T345.22
Exhibit C20a, page
Exhibit C20a,
Exhibit C20a, page
T340.30-T340.34;
T358.11-T358.31
C20a, page 25
T340.4-T341.9
Exhibit C20a,
T341.14-T341.24
C20a, page 31
Exhibit C20a, page
Exhibit C33 at
Exhibit C20a,
Exhibit C20a,
Exhibit C20a,
Exhibit C22, page
Exhibit C22, page
Exhibit C22, page
Exhibit C17 at
Exhibit C33 at
T371.38-T372.31
C22, page 52
Exhibit C17
Exhibit C22, page
T274.22-T275.12
T316.31-T317.16, ability of a homonymous hemianope
Exhibit C6 at [3];
Exhibit C22, pages 40-46
Exhibit C22, page 37
Exhibit C19, page
131; Exhibit C21, page 30
Plainly, Dr Anastassiadis is referring to DIT (previously
Exhibit C19, page
Exhibit C19, page
Exhibit C8 at
[66]-[70]; Exhibit C19, page
Exhibit C7, page
Exhibit C21, pages 8,
35; Exhibit C7, pages 2-3
Exhibit C21, page 36
Exhibit C17 at
Exhibit C17 at
Exhibit C7b at
Exhibit C22, page
Exhibit C19; Exhibit
C21, pages 37-38
C22, page 2
Exhibit C22,
pages 26-27
Exhibit C22,
pages 18-24
Exhibit C22,
Exhibit C22, pages
T281.10 and
Exhibit C22, page
Exhibit C32;
Exhibit C19, page
Exhibit C19, page
Exhibit C22
Exhibit C34, page
Exhibit C21, page
Exhibit C7, page 3;
Exhibit C21, page 7; Exhibit C22, pages
Exhibit C17 at
Exhibit C31; Faraji
and Others Transl Vis Sci Technol. 2022
Mar;11(3):20
Exhibit C31,
Exhibit C31, page
Exhibit C20a,
page 5; Exhibit C8 at [85]; Evidence at Mr Robertson's criminal trial,
Exhibit C34, pages
Exhibit C19, page
69; Exhibit C21, page 43
Exhibit C34, page 153
Exhibit C34, page 186
Record of interview with Brevet Sergeant Peters - Exhibit C15, Annexure
Annexed to Exhibit
Exhibit C34, evidence at
criminal trial, pages 117-118
In the Inquest brief, these images appear at
pages 13-19 of Exhibit C16, the affidavit of Brevet Sergeant
Exhibit C34, page
Exhibit C16b, Dashcam
submissions at [96]
Exhibit C26; An
addendum to the 2016 AFTD guidelines was issued in 2017, see Exhibit
Exhibit C28
fitness to drive (for medical professionals) | NSW Government
Information
for health professionals : VicRoads
State Growth Medical Letters updated June 2022.indd (transport.tas.gov.au)
Information
for health professionals | Transport and motoring | Queensland Government
(www.qld.gov.au)
drive (transport.wa.gov.au)
Licence Medical (act.gov.au)
medical assessment for fitness to drive |
C23, page 3
Mr Robertson's disqualifying
Not relevant to
Mr Robertson
C25, page 120
C25, page 13
Exhibit C17
Exhibit C17 at
Exhibit C17 at
Exhibit C17, pages
Johnson Exhibit CA,
Keltner JL. Incidence of Visual Field Loss in 20,000 Eyes and Its Relationship
to Driving Performance. Arch
Ophthalmol 1983;101:371-5
Owsley Exhibit C, Ball K,
McGwin G, et al. Visual Processing Impairment and Risk of Motor Vehicle Exhibit
Crash among Older Adults.
JAMA 1998;279:1083-8
Huisingh Exhibit C,
McGwin G, Wood J, Owsley Exhibit C. The Driving Visual Field and a History of
Motor Vehicle Exhibit Collision
Involvement in Older Drivers: A Population-Based
Examination. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2015;56:132-8
Rubin GS, Ng ESW,
Bandeen-Roche K, et al. A Prospective, Population- Based Study of the Role of
Visual Impairment in Motor Vehicle
Exhibit Crashes among Older Drivers: The See
Study. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2007;2004:1483-91
McGwin G, Wood J,
Huisingh Exhibit C, Owsley Exhibit C. Motor Vehicle Exhibit Collision
Involvement among Persons with Hemianopia
and Quadrantanopia. Geriatrics
T96.3-T97.26
Exhibit C17 at
Exhibit C17 at
Exhibit C33 at
Exhibit C17 at [76]
– references are cited in Professor Dain's
Exhibit C28, page
Exhibit C28, page
Exhibit C17 at
Exhibit C28, page
See the emphasised
passage referred to by the next
My emphasis
Exhibit C23, Annexure
Exhibit C7b at
Exhibit C28,
Exhibit C21, pages
20, 29 and 35
T160.37-T161.23; T374.15-T374.21; Exhibit C17 at
Exhibit C20a, page
Exhibit C17 at [110]
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (4.77 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (856 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter