URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SARTT/2014/310.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:04:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kamleh v Drummond & Knight [2014] SARTT 310 (22 January 2014)
REASONS FOR ORDER OF THE TRIBUNAL MADE ON 22 JANUARY
Hearing at Adelaide
KAMLEH v DRUMMOND & KNIGHT (RT14/0310)
Application by landlord to terminate tenancy under Section 90 of the RTA.
Tenant’s neighbour gives evidence of numerous threats
by the tenants;
being spat on by the tenants; having their electricity turned off on multiple
occasions by the tenants; having fish
emulsion poured over their car so that it
went through the air conditioning vents; the tenants strewing condoms across the
windshield; the tenants banging on the neighbour’s windows and door
and shouting abuse such as “
You’re a fucking wanker mate. Hope
you die in hell. Catch ya.”
RTT amends application to an application under Section 87(2) of the RTA and
makes an order for immediate eviction.
On 17 January 2014 an application was lodged with the Tribunal by the
landlord. It seeks an order for termination of the residential
tenancy agreement
over Unit 2 /384 Tapleys Hill Road, Seaton SA 5023 pursuant to
Residential Tenancies Act, 1995
RESIDENTIAL TENANCY AGREEMENT DETAILS
Rental premises: Unit 2 /384 Tapleys Hill Road, Seaton SA 5023
Remy Kamleh
Tenant: Kiraleigh Drummond & Michael Knight
commenced: 1 December 2013
Term of tenancy: Twelve months
Rent is payable under the agreement
Security Bond: $1680.00 was guaranteed on behalf of the tenants by the South
Australian Housing Trust and registered with the Commissioner
for Consumer and
Business Services (Bond No.3906424-5)
SWORN OR AFFIRMED EVIDENCE
was given by:
LANDLORD Remy Kamleh (in person)
WITNESS Tahir Muhammad (by phone)
There was no appearance by or on behalf of the respondent tenants. I am
satisfied due notice of this hearing has been given.
The application
of the Act states:
90—Tribunal may terminate tenancy where tenant's conduct
unacceptable
(1) The Tribunal may, on application by an interested person, terminate a
residential tenancy and make an order for possession of
the premises if it is
satisfied that the tenant has—
(a) used the premises, or caused or permitted the premises to be used,
for an illegal purpose; or
(b) caused or permitted a nuisance; or
(c) caused or permitted an interference with the reasonable peace,
comfort or privacy of another person who resides in the immediate
vicinity of
the premises.
(2) If the Tribunal terminates a tenancy and makes an order for
possession under this section—
(a) the Tribunal must specify the day as from which the order will
operate, being not more than 28 days after the day on which the
orders are made;
(b) the Tribunal may order the landlord—
(i) to take such action as is specified in the order for the purpose of
taking possession of the premises; and
(ii) not to permit the tenant to occupy the premises (whether as a tenant
or otherwise) for a specified period or until further order
(and any agreement
entered into in contravention of such an order is void).
(2a) However—
(a) the Tribunal must not make an order under this section unless the
landlord has been given a reasonable opportunity to be heard
in relation to the
matter; and
(b) if the landlord objects to the making of an order under this section,
the Tribunal must not make an order unless the Tribunal
is satisfied that
exceptional circumstances exist justifying the making of the order in any
(3) In this section—
interested person
(a) the landlord; or
(b) a person who has been adversely affected by the conduct of the tenant
on which the application is based.
This is a residential tenancy under the Residential Tenancies act, 1995
The applicant is the landlord and is therefore an interested
The evidence and submissions of the landlord and witness
Mr. Kamleh owns units at 384 Tapleys Hill Road, Seaton SA 5023. The landlord
stated that on 24 December 2013, he received a number
of distressed phone calls
from the tenants of Unit 3 that the power to the property was being deliberately
interfered with (repeated
blackouts). The police were called and they attended.
On the second occasion that power was interfered with, the landlord also
it was between 1.00 am and 2.00 am. The landlord said that he spent
the next several hours until approximately 5.00 am securing the
against interference.
Mr. Kamleh said that when he arrived at the property on 24 December 2013, the
car of the Unit 3 occupants had been vandalised. He
said that tyres were let
down at the rear, gaffer tape had been wound around the wheel and a stationery
object, and there was graffiti
across the rear window including the words:
Mr. Muhammad, the neighbour, in Unit 3, gave affirmed evidence by phone. He
said that on that night, he had walked past Unit 2 to
get to the power meter
box. He heard an occupant of Unit 2 say: “
I’ll smash your head
He said that when he first went to the box, the circuit breaker
had been tripped and he just reset it. On the second occasion, shortly
afterwards, he found all the power switches had been turned off which can only
be done manually. On the second occasion, he called
the police as it was clear
somebody was interfering with the power supply.
It appears that the Unit 2 neighbours may have been under the impression that
Mr. Muhammad had looked in their windows at night. Mr.
Muhammad said that he was
only outside on the night he was checking the meter box when the power went off
repeatedly. The landlord
said that you cannot see in the windows of the units
when walking past.
The landlord said that on 25 December 2013, he had repeated phone calls from
the Unit 3 occupants who were in great distress. He said
they reported the
occupants of Unit 2 had spat on them, attempted to assault them even in the
company of their five year old child
and had banged on the doors and window of
their car when they took shelter there. Again police reports were made.
Mr. Kamleh said that he had served the tenants of Unit 2 with a Form 2 Notice
of Termination in respect of rent arrears. On the morning
of 20 January 2014, he
was at Unit 1. He heard the occupants of Unit 2 banging on the window and door
of the Unit he was in and shouting
at him. He believed they were trying to get
him to come outside. He said that they were shouting verbal threats. He believed
may have been responding to receiving their hearing notice. The landlord
played one of the threats he had recorded on his phone at
12.21 pm on that day.
The speaker said “
You’re a fucking wanker mate. Hope you die in
hell. Catch ya”.
The landlord said that on that day he also noted more
property damage including window locks of Unit 2 that had been unscrewed and
removed; damage to the fence gate; a lot of rubbish around.
Mr. Kamleh said that on that day, his car was also damaged. He saw the
occupants of Unit 2 do this damage. In particular, they poured
some kind of fish
bait or fish emulsion over the car bonnet near the windshield and into the
air-conditioning vents. They also interfered
with the car of Unit 3 occupants by
strewing condoms across the front wind shield. He provided photographs of the
damage to the vehicles
and also a quote of $1005.00 to fix his car.
In his evidence, Mr. Muhammad confirming a written statement of events that
he had provided to the landlord in support of this application.
He said that
interaction with the neighbours in Unit 2 had been friendly at the outset. He
said that they regularly approached him
to borrow items including their washing
machine and later, to borrow money. He said that he had politely declined on
those occasions
because, as a new migrant to the country, he was not in a
position to be able to loan to others. He said that relations were still
at that time. He said that after the incidents with the power box interference
and he had called the police, the relationship
with the neighbours deteriorated
to a frightening degree. In particular, he described an incident when he was
going out with his
wife and child to the beach. A new occupant of Unit 2 who
appeared to be living there emerged from the Unit and started taking his
off and approached them in a menacing and aggressive manner. He understood that
the man was going to attack him. He rushed
his family into the car for shelter.
The man jumped on his car and started bashing on windows and doors and tried to
open the back
door where his terrified five year old child was sitting. Police
were again called. He said that police have attended on four occasions
Christmas eve. He said that when he was at work yesterday (21 January 2014), he
received a call from his wife who was alone
at home with their child, that the
neighbours were again banging on the windows and doors of their Unit. Police
were called to attend
to protect his family. Mr Muhammad said that his child is
extremely traumatised by these events and he is totally shocked by what
have encountered in their new home.
The landlord said that Mr. Mohammed has called him many times in the small
hours of the mornings about incidents including very loud
music that he could
hear over the phone. The landlord also printed text messages from the Unit 2
occupants to him. He said that he
has received dozens of abusive messages from
them. He showed me several in particular that were printed off and tendered in
We will pay u and trash hey watch ya house not the best thing to put ur
address on peoples things.”
Try it u try hard and u will get ur rent but not tommorrow and u turn up and my
boys and i will jump u.”
Conclusions and Findings
On the basis of the evidence and in the absence of any other evidence to the
contrary, I am satisfied that the landlord’s case
is made out. I am
satisfied that the occupants or guests of Unit 2/384 Tapleys Hill Road, Seaton
SA 5023 have interfered with the
reasonable peace, comfort and privacy of
immediate neighbours in Unit 3 of that address.
After examining all the evidence, I was also satisfied that
Section 87(2)
the Act is applicable.
Section 87(2)
of the Act states:
87—Termination
on application by
may, on application by a
terminate a residential tenancy and make an order for immediate possession of
or a person permitted on the
with the consent of the
has, intentionally or recklessly, caused or permitted, or is likely to cause or
serious damage to the
personal injury to—
a person in the vicinity of the
I am satisfied that the respondents have caused significant damage to
property and have threatened the landlord and the neighbours
with physical harm.
I am satisfied that the respondents are likely to cause damage to property and
harm to the landlord or the neighbours
if the tenancy continues. In these
circumstances, I will order immediate eviction of the tenants of Unit 2.
After eviction has been effected, the tenants can seek permission from the
landlord to access the property under supervision to remove
their goods at
designated times over the next two days. Police may be asked to attend while
this occurs. I remind the occupants of
Unit 2 that evidence has been given at
the Tribunal that they have already come to police attention for serious
allegations and it
is in their interests to cease and desist from all such
reported behaviour immediately.
ORDER (made under
Section 87(2)
of the Act):
The tenants must move out of the premises at Unit 2/384 Tapleys Hill
Seaton SA 5023 by 9.00am on Thursday 23 January 2014 but if the
tenant does not move out, this order may only be enforced by the Tribunal
H. Anderson
Tribunal Member
Residential Tenancies Act 1995
gives the right to apply
to the Residential Tenancies Tribunal to vary or set aside its decisions or
orders. The right to apply to
the Tribunal to vary or set aside a decision or
order is only available in certain circumstances. An application under
must be made within three months of the date the decision or order was made.
You can seek advice about the right to seek to vary
or set aside an order or
decision of the Tribunal from a Tenancy Officer at the Office of Consumer and
Business Services, Level 1,
91-97 Grenfell Street, Adelaide: Telephone number
8204 9544. (Country callers 131 882)
Residential Tenancies Act
gives the right to appeal to
the District Court from a decision or order of the Residential Tenancies
Tribunal. The right to appeal
to the District Court is available in most
circumstances. An appeal to the District Court must be lodged within one month
date the decision or order of the Tribunal was made. You can seek advice
Officer at the
office of Consumer and Business Services, Level 1, 91-97 Grenfell Street,
Adelaide: Telephone No. 8204 9544. (Country
callers 131 882)
The landlord, a
neighbour, a strata manager or the landlord of adjoining premises affected by
the behaviour may make the application.
An order cannot be made however, unless
the landlord has an opportunity to be heard.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (4.75 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter