URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASC/2025/180.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:05:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
AHMED v COMMISSIONER OF POLICE [2025] SASC 180 (4 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Magistrates Appeal: Criminal)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
AHMED v COMMISSIONER OF POLICE
[2025] SASC 180
Judgment of the Honourable
Auxiliary Justice Bochner
4 November 2025
MAGISTRATES - APPEAL AND REVIEW - SOUTH AUSTRALIA - APPEAL TO SUPREME
CRIMINAL LAW - PARTICULAR OFFENCES - OFFENCES AGAINST THE PERSON - SEXUAL
OFFENCES - SENTENCE - PARTICULAR CASES - INDECENT ASSAULT
AND RELATED
CRIMINAL LAW - APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - APPEAL AGAINST SENTENCE - GROUNDS
FOR INTERFERENCE - SENTENCE MANIFESTLY EXCESSIVE OR INADEQUATE
CRIMINAL LAW - SENTENCE - SENTENCING ORDERS - NON-CUSTODIAL ORDERS -
SUSPENDED SENTENCE OF IMPRISONMENT - PROCEDURE
This is an appeal against a sentence imposed in the Magistrates Court. The
appellant entered a plea of guilty to one count of aggravated
indecent assault
committed in February 2024. Following a discount for the plea, the appellant was
sentenced to six months imprisonment.
The sentence is appealed on the grounds
1. The sentence imposed by the Magistrate was manifestly excessive; and
2. In the alternative, the Magistrate erred in failing to impose a good
behaviour bond.
The appellant contends that the Magistrate failed to consider the totality of
his personal circumstances and the effect of imprisonment
on his rehabilitation.
The respondent contends that the Magistrate made no demonstrable error and that
the circumstances of the offending
warranted the sentence imposed.
Held: Application dismissed.
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Sentencing Act
s 71(2)(b)(ii)
s 96(3)(ba)
, referred to.
(1979) 23 SASR 98
R v Hibeljic
[2018] SASCFC 35
R v Butler (A Pseudonym)
[2022] SASCA 112
R v Lomas & Symmons
[2005] SASC 435
McManus v Police
[2019] SASC 206
House v The
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Hackett v The Queen
[2021] SASCA 32
Ndreka v The Queen
[2021] SASCA 11
[2005] SASC 203
considered.
AHMED v COMMISSIONER OF POLICE
[2025] SASC
Ahmed was sentenced in the Port Adelaide Magistrates Court on 2 May 2025,
having pleaded guilty to one count of aggravated
indecent assault contrary to
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA). He was
sentenced to a custodial sentence of ten months which was reduced to six months
after a reduction of 40% because of
his guilty plea. I note that the maximum
penalty is 10 years’ imprisonment.
Ahmed says that the sentence imposed by the Magistrate was manifestly excessive.
In the alternative, he says that the Magistrate
erred in failing to impose a
good behaviour bond pursuant to
Sentencing Act 2017
Sentencing Act
The circumstances of
the offending
early 2024, Mr Ahmed, who was 37 years old at the time, was working as an Uber
driver. On 18 February 2024, at around 2 am, he
picked up the 15-year-old
victim; the booking had been made by another person. The victim sat in the back
seat of the vehicle.
According to Mr Ahmed, she was having a panic attack.
way through the journey, Mr Ahmed stopped the car. He asked the victim to get
out while he smoked a cigarette. He then asked
her to sit in the front seat,
which she did. While he was driving, Mr Ahmed reached over and touched the
victim’s breast under
her top and asked her to have sex with him.
Ahmed then drove to a nearby McDonald’s and purchased food for the victim.
He then parked in a carpark and reached under
the victim’s bra and touched
her breast again. When she pushed his hand away and said, “no”, he
stopped. He then
drove her home.
Ahmed said, and the Magistrate accepted that he believed the victim to be in her
twenties, and he did not realise that the first
act of touching was without
The sentencing remarks
Magistrate said:
[The victim] cannot consent to sexual conduct
because of her age but I sentence you on the basis that you believed she was in
twenties. I also sentence you on the basis that you thought the first
prosecution.
describing Mr Ahmed’s personal circumstances, he said:
consider the offending to be opportunistic when your life was one of loneliness
and emotional distress. I accept that you had difficult
family circumstances at
the time of the offence. You suffered greatly by your divorce and being
isolated from your son. You turned
to excessive alcohol use as a maladaptive
coping mechanism with the stressors in your life. You have suffered from
loneliness and
struggled emotionally with your child access arrangements given
that your son lives some distance away from you. None of that excuses
behaviour and nor have you sought to do so, but they are your personal
circumstances at the time. Alcohol abuse was not a factor
in this offending but
was also a personal circumstance at the time.
You have apologised in writing to the victim via the court and I accept that
you are remorseful and contrite.
Of sentence
I make it patently clear that I am sentencing on the factual basis that you
did not realise the age of BT. I also make it patently
clear, that I sentence
you on the factual basis of the first act of touching, that you were not aware
that touching was non-consensual.
However, you were an Uber driver. You were in a position of trust with a
female passenger in the early hours of the morning and accepting
submissions, she was having a panic attack. Of the uncontested allegations of
the police, you were the one who asked her to
sit in the front seat of the
Not only did you touch here (sic) non-consensually on the second occasion,
but you propositioned her for sex and that should never
have happened as an Uber
driver, no matter what the circumstances.
If I find that a sentence of imprisonment is the only sentence that can be
justified given the seriousness of the offence, I cannot
suspend that term of
imprisonment, make a home detention order, nor impose an intensive corrections
order. That is what Parliament
has dictated in such matters.
So, of the sentencing armoury available to me, I am left with the
alternatives of community service, a fine or a good behaviour bond
individually or in any allowable combination. It is either that, or a term of
imprisonment to be served immediately.
I am cognisant of the provisions of the
Sentencing Act
, and I publicly
denounce your offending. The safety of the community is paramount and whilst
you may be no threat to others in the
future, general deterrence looms large for
people in a position of trust such as Uber drivers and others with passengers in
care. General deterrence carries quite some weight as a message to others
in the community in positions such as yours, that such
behaviour is entirely
unacceptable in the circumstances to which you have
Magistrate rejected the submission by Mr Ahmed’s counsel that a bond was
appropriate and said:
I say that a sentence of imprisonment is the
only sentence that can be justified given the seriousness of the offence upon
I have heard and in all the circumstances.
The seriousness of this offending and the punitive and protective purposes of
punishment in the circumstances of this matter are
reflected by ordering a good behaviour bond in my discretion and in all the
circumstances before me.
Submissions made on behalf of Mr Ahmed
for Mr Ahmed, Mr Mickan, submitted that Mr Ahmed had no prior convictions, and
that the offending occurred in the context
of situational stressors, including
loneliness, distress and alcoholism, following divorce from his wife and
separation from his
son. It was accepted by the Magistrate that he believed
that the victim consented to the first act of touching. It appears, however,
that the Magistrate found that, at the time of the second act, he was aware that
the victim did not consent. Mr Mickan submitted
that this finding was
inconsistent with the objective and subjective circumstances found by the
Magistrate. Mr Ahmed’s belief,
which was accepted by the Magistrate, that
the first act was consensual, informed his state of mind at the time of the
second act;
the victim only indicated her lack of consent after the second act
occurred and so this could not inform his state of mind at the
time it occurred.
There is no suggestion that Mr Ahmed continued to try to touch the victim after
she indicated her lack of consent.
On the basis of the facts accepted by the
Magistrate, he was in error to find that he knew that the victim did not consent
time of the second act. To sentence on this basis demonstrates
Mickan submitted that Mr Ahmed’s state of mind reduced his moral
culpability and reduced the need for community protection,
and personal and
general deterrence. This latter consideration is further mitigated by his
remorse and contrition, the support of
his family, friends and community and the
cognitive behavioural therapy with which he has engaged. Mr Mickan further
submitted that
Mr Ahmed’s psychologist expressed the view that
imprisonment would likely have an adverse effect on his rehabilitation.
Mickan relied on authorities such as
, where King CJ
To determine whether a sentence is excessive, it is necessary
to view it in the perspective of the maximum sentence prescribed by
law for the
crime, the standards of sentencing customarily observed with respect to the
crime, the place which the criminal conduct
occupies in the scale of seriousness
of crimes of that type, and the personal circumstances of the offender.
Of course, no two cases are alike and each sentence must be considered in
relation to the facts of the particular
also relied on
R v Hibeljic
where, more recently, the Full Court said:
In considering a
submission of manifest excess, it is appropriate to bear in mind the approach
mandated by the High Court in
Hili v The Queen
. This requires a
consideration of the range of matters relevant to the sentencing task, including
the maximum penalty for the relevant
offending, where the objective
circumstances of the offending sit in the scale of seriousness of crimes of that
circumstances of the offender. In the context of
sentencing for more than one offence, regard must also be had to the need to
proportionality in the overall sentence. But ultimately there is a limit
to the amount of analysis that may be brought to bear.
Often manifest excess
will be a conclusion that does not admit of lengthy
exposition.
relation to the imposition of a good behaviour bond, Mr Mickan referred to the
R v Butler (A
where the Court of
Appeal addressed the effect of
ss 71(2)(b)(ii)
(3)(ba) of the
Sentencing Act
and the circumstances in which it is appropriate to impose
a good behaviour bond. It said:
As a consequence of amendments made
Sentencing (Suspended and Community Based Custodial Sentences)
Amendment Act 2019
2019 Amendments
) which commenced on 23
May 2019, the sentencing judge was precluded by
ss 71(2)(b)(ii)
Sentencing Act
from imposing a suspended sentence or a home detention order.
This is because the respondent was being sentenced as an adult for
two counts of
a designated “serious sexual offence”, neither of which were
committed in the “prescribed circumstances”
(10) of the
Sentencing Act
Section 10(2)(a)
Sentencing Act
enshrines the principle, long
recognised in the criminal law, that imprisonment is the sentencing option of
last resort. That is,
no other penalty can be justified. A court cannot impose
a sentence of imprisonment unless positively satisfied that a sentencing
short of imprisonment is inappropriate.
As Kourakis CJ said in
, the sexual abuse of children calls for
a “strongly deterrent sentencing response”. Accordingly, matters
personal to
an offender, while not irrelevant, will be accorded relatively
limited weight.
In a similar vein, in
Evans v The Queen
, Kelly and Parker JJ
This Court has long recognised that it is necessary for courts to impose
penalties which protect young people from their own immaturity
and from older
people prepared to take advantage of their youth and naivety. In these
circumstances, the need for personal and general
deterrence has often been
emphasised.
A good behaviour bond under
Sentencing Act
may be imposed if
the court “thinks that good reason exists for doing so”. These
words are of wide import, but the discretion
to impose a good behaviour bond for
an offence of unlawful sexual intercourse cannot be exercised in a vacuum
without regard to the
principles we have just referred to and, in particular,
the need to impose strongly deterrent sentences. While good behaviour bonds
have been imposed in cases of sexual offending against children, generally
speaking, as a matter of fact, the usual sentencing outcome
for the offence of
unlawful sexual intercourse will be imprisonment. Prior to the 2019 Amendments,
leniency by way of a suspended
sentence or a home detention order may have been
extended, but Parliament has now foreclosed these options, other than in limited
circumstances which do not apply to the
respondent.
(Footnotes omitted)
Mickan referred to the case of
R v Lomas &
In this case, the
victim was 15 and the respondents were 19 and 18 respectively. The sentencing
judge did not record convictions
on the basis that they entered into good
behaviour bonds. The Full Court dismissed an appeal against sentence and in
upholding the
sentence imposed by the sentencing judge, relied on the facts that
the respondents stopped when the victim indicated her lack of
consent, they were
mistaken as to her age and they were young, of good character and had no
previous convictions.
also relied on
, where, in allowing
an appeal against a sentence of imprisonment, the Court took into account the
appellant’s lack of criminal
record, his acceptance of responsibility for
his conduct, his recognition of the harm he caused to his victim, the
unlikelihood of
his reoffending and his good prospects of rehabilitation. In
particular, Bampton J said:
The primary purpose for sentencing Mr
McManus, which must be the paramount consideration in determining and imposing
the sentence,
is to protect the safety of the community. The seriousness of the
offending and the punitive and protective purposes of punishment
circumstances of this matter are, in my view, adequately reflected by the making
of an order under
Sentencing Act
. Most importantly,
such an order will allow Mr McManus to immediately undertake the intervention
measures recommended by Mr Fugler,
giving him the best chance of
rehabilitation and thereby ensuring the protection of the safety of the
Mickan noted that the Magistrate rejected his submission that
good authority for the submission that a bond was appropriate, on the basis that
the circumstances of
were very different and did not involve a
breach of trust. Mr Mickan criticised the Magistrate’s approach in this
which he said failed to consider the totality of the circumstances. In
particular, he failed to take into consideration Mr Ahmed’s
circumstances and his rehabilitation which would be assisted by a bond.
Mickan submitted that in all of the circumstances, the appeal should be
The respondent’s submissions
Lakatos, on behalf of the respondent, emphasised the fact that an appeal of this
nature is governed by the principles in
House v The
In this regard, she
relied on the restatement of these principles in
Hackett v The
, where the Court of
Appeal said:
The administration of the criminal law involves
individualised justice. The imposition of a just sentence on an offender in a
case is an exercise of judicial discretion concerned with doing
justice in that case. The exercise of the discretion that the law
reposes in a
sentencing judge does not yield a single correct sentence. Absent a specific
error it is only if the sentence is found
to be “unreasonable or plainly
unjust” that a challenge of manifest excess will succeed. A sentence
which is unreasonable
or plainly unjust for no reason other than that it is
manifestly too long or too short is a sentence which has not been imposed
to rules of reason and justice. It is not sufficient for this court
to conclude that it would have come to a different decision
to the one reached
by the sentencing judge. The judgment is a discretionary one and what is
required is that the sentencing judge
must take into account all relevant (and
only relevant) considerations in forming the conclusions reached. Judges at
first instance
are to be allowed as much flexibility in sentencing as is
consonant with consistency of approach and as accords with the statutory
that applies. To observe that a sentence is “very heavy” when
compared with other sentences is not, without more,
to conclude that it exceeded
the bounds of the sentencing judge’s
discretion.
(Footnotes omitted)
Lakatos submitted that no outcome error can be demonstrated in the
Magistrate’s refusal to impose a good behaviour bond
rather than a period
of imprisonment. He clearly articulated the matters that he took into
consideration when determining that a
bond would not adequately reflect the
seriousness of Mr Ahmed’s conduct, including his position of trust as
an Uber driver,
the first act was compounded with a request to engage in sexual
intercourse, and the fact that he had asked the victim to sit in
the front seat,
which allowed him to commit the offence.
Lakatos submitted that an offence such as this is often committed by a person
with no previous convictions, and with personal
circumstances which might
suggest that personal deterrence would not be a significant factor in any
sentence imposed. General deterrence,
however, is an important factor to be
considered when determining the appropriate sentence. In this regard, she
relied on the case
, where Bleby J
Of course much can be and was said in favour of the appellant.
A regrettable feature of so many sexual abuse cases of this nature
before the courts is that defendants have impeccable records, are decent
hardworking upright members of society, undertake
substantial community service,
and on the surface have a good healthy family and marital relationship.
Furthermore, they almost
invariably show genuine and deep remorse.
It is because of all those common features that deterrence becomes such a
significant element, and why custodial sentences, distasteful
as they may be,
are more often than not imposed. The fact that the appellant has good support
systems, and still enjoys cordial
relationships with the victims, speaks volumes
for those who support him and stand by him, and says much for the Christian and
attitude of his victims. He and they are extremely fortunate people,
however that cannot detract from the seriousness of the offences,
and the need
to deter others of equal standing in the community who may be tempted to engage
in similar conduct.
her submissions, Ms Lakatos emphasised the fact that Mr Ahmed was to be
sentenced for an offence committed against a child aged
between 14 and 17 years.
Thus, the offence is aggravated by the fact that the victim was incapable of
consenting. Having pleaded
guilty to the offence of aggravated indecent
assault, he pleaded guilty to engaging intentionally in non-consensual touching
child. As a result, his submission that he believed that the victim was in
her twenties should be treated with caution. She submitted
that consent by a
child is irrelevant to the overall assessment of the criminality of the conduct
where there is a significant age
difference between the victim and the
perpetrator. This is demonstrated by the facts of
R v Lomas &
Lakatos submitted that it was a relevant consideration that Mr Ahmed was in a
position of trust and was only able to commit the
offence because of his
employment as an Uber driver. He took advantage of her vulnerability, including
her age, the time of the
offence (the early hours of the morning), and she was
having a panic attack. There was a significant age difference between the
parties, which led to a power imbalance between them. It was during the second
act that the victim pushed Mr Ahmed’s hand
away and said,
Lakatos distinguished this case from
. In that case, the
Magistrate sentenced on a more serious factual basis, misunderstood a relevant
part of the report of the appellant’s
psychologist and the appellant had
extenuating personal circumstances.
Lakatos submitted that Mr Ahmed’s personal circumstances were no different
to many other offenders: he was lonely, depressed
and abused alcohol. She
further noted that the psychologist found that there was no clear causal link
between Mr Ahmed’s psychological
state and his offending.
Lakatos submitted that the sentence of ten months was not so unjust as to
warrant intervention.
Consideration
, Bampton J described the purposes of sentencing in the following
Sentencing Act
prescribes that the primary purpose
for sentencing a defendant for an offence is to protect the safety of the
community. Protection
of vulnerable young persons is a paramount consideration.
The secondary purposes are to ensure Mr McManus is punished and held
accountable,
to publicly denounce his conduct, to publicly recognise the harm
done to the victim, to provide personal and general deterrence,
and to promote
his rehabilitation.
into account these purposes, and the principles set out in
House v The
, I am not satisfied that the sentence imposed by the Magistrate was
manifestly excessive, or that he erred in failing to impose a
good behaviour
Ndreka v The
, the Court of Appeal
The principles governing the Court’s consideration
of a submission of manifest excess are well-known. They were summarised
High Court in
Dinsdale v The Queen
Hili v The Queen
require satisfaction by the appellate court that the impugned sentence is
unreasonably high, or plainly unjust, in the sense
required by
House v The
. It is not enough that the sentence is higher than what the appellate
court, or some other sentencing judge, might have imposed.
The appellate court
will only interfere if the sentence is outside the range of sentences that might
reasonably have been imposed.
Whether this is so requires consideration of the
range of matters relevant to the sentencing task, including the maximum penalty
for the relevant offending, where the circumstances of the offending sit in the
scale of seriousness of crimes of that type, and
the personal circumstances of
the offender. But ultimately there is a limit to the amount of analysis that
may be brought to bear.
Often the existence or otherwise of manifest excess
will be a conclusion that does not admit of lengthy
exposition.
(Footnotes omitted)
is nothing in the sentence imposed by the Magistrate which is indicative of
manifest excess. The sentencing remarks of the
Magistrate are detailed and
clearly explain the basis for the sentence imposed. He appropriately took into
consideration the fact
that Mr Ahmed believed the victim was in her twenties and
that the first act was consensual; that he was in a position of trust as
driver, driving a young female passenger at 2 am; that the victim was having a
panic attack; that he asked her to sit in
the front seat of the vehicle;
Mr Ahmed’s personal circumstances; and the need for both personal and
general deterrence. He
also took into consideration the opinion of Mr
Ahmed’s psychologist. He made no error in distinguishing
from the case before him, where demonstrable errors had been made by the
sentencing magistrate. No error can be identified in any
of this reasoning. I
further consider that the case of
Lomas & Symonds
distinguishable, because of the relatively small age difference between the
offenders and the victim, and the fact that the
offenders were not in a position
of trust vis-à-vis the victim.
determining that no error has been demonstrated, I have taken into consideration
the words of the Court in
, in which a taxi
driver was sentenced for the offence of false imprisonment. The Court
In this case, the offence was deliberate. It continued over a
period of time. The respondent was in a position of power by reason
differential as well as the fact that his passenger was a woman. The experience
was a terrifying one.
There is also a significant public interest. Taxi drivers have a
responsibility to the public to safely convey passengers who engage
provide an essential service to many members of the public. Many members of the
public rely upon taxi drivers. In particular,
there are many vulnerable
individuals who are unable to travel on public transport, due to age or
infirmity, who require the assistance
of taxi drivers. Young women also rely on
taxis as a safe means of transport. The public is reliant upon the honesty and
of those who transport them. Often members of the public who engage
taxi drivers are not familiar with the areas into which they
travel. They are
entitled to expect to be conveyed to their destination by the most efficient and
most economical route.
words are apposite to the offending in question. The victim was a vulnerable
young person, as evidenced by the fact that she
was female, much younger than Mr
Ahmed, alone in an Uber at 2 am and having a panic attack. She was entitled to
trust him to convey
her to her destination without the risk of indecent assault.
This trust was breached.
into account all of the circumstances surrounding the offending, and the need
for personal and general deterrence in relation
to offences such as this against
children, no error on the part of the Magistrate has been demonstrated.
appeal will be
Sentencing remarks, 2.
Sentencing remarks, 4 –
Sentencing remarks, 5.
(1979) 23 SASR 98.
[2018] SASCFC 35
Ibid, [43].
[2022] SASCA 112.
Ibid, [56] – [70].
[2005] SASC 435.
[2019] SASC 206.
Ibid, [42].
(1936) 55 CLR 499.
[2021] SASCA 32.
Unreported, Bleby J, 11
December 1997.
[2019] SASC 206
[2021] SASCA 11.
[2005] SASC 203.
Ibid, [49] –
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (381 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter