URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SARTT/2013/7091.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:04:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
South Australian Housing Trust v Raco [2013] SARTT 7091 (15 January 2014)
REASONS FOR ORDER OF THE TRIBUNAL MADE ON 15 JANUARY
Hearing Order Date at ADELAIDE
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN HOUSING TRUST v RACO
(RT13/7091)
Application by the SAHT to terminate tenancy under Section 90. The tenant did
not attend by was represented by an officer from the
Public Advocate’s
office. An officer of Disability SA and Ms Raco’s community mental health
nurse were also in attendance
and gave evidence. The RTT takes evidence of Ms
Raco’s conduct - shouting and abusing neighbours and behaving in a
threatening
and aggressive manner towards SAHT officers.
The RTT considers that Ms Raco’s conduct has seriously interfered with
her neighbours’ enjoyment of their properties,
and although with the
assistance of the Public Advocate and other supports, her behaviour might
improve, there is no guarantee and
so terminates the tenancy.
On 9 December 2013 an application was lodged with the Tribunal by the
landlord. It seeks an order for termination of the residential
tenancy agreement
pursuant to
Residential Tenancies Act, 1995
RESIDENTIAL TENANCY AGREEMENT DETAILS
Rental premises: 13 Andrew Street Hendon SA 5014
Landlord: South
Australian Housing Trust
Tenant: Elisa Raco
Tenancy commenced: 5 June
2007 (in these premises)
Term of tenancy: Periodic
Rent: Rent is
payable under the agreement
SWORN or AFFIRMED EVIDENCE
was given in person by:
REPRESENTATIVES Todd Wierenga, Fred Taplin,
FOR LANDLORD
From South Australian Housing Trust
Peter Lawrence of the Western Community Health Services
Narelle Woodberry of Disability SA
Kaitlyn Ellis Witness for the landlord
Terry Clarke Witness for the landlord
Courtney Di Raimondo Witness for the landlord
The tenant Elisa Raco did not attend. I am satisfied that Ms Raco had notice
of this hearing. The Office of the Public Advocate full
guardians of Ms Raco
were represented by Julie-Anne Harris who appeared on Ms Raco’s behalf.
The evidence of the following witnesses for the landlord was not needed; Rob
Cavalera, Daniel Ellis, Corey Taylor and Neil Garvey.
The application
of the Act states:
90—Tribunal may terminate tenancy where tenant's conduct
unacceptable
(1) The Tribunal may, on application by an interested person, terminate a
residential tenancy and make an order for possession of
the premises if it is
satisfied that the tenant has—
(a) used the premises, or caused or permitted the premises to be used,
for an illegal purpose; or
(b) caused or permitted a nuisance; or
(c) caused or permitted an interference with the reasonable peace,
comfort or privacy of another person who resides in the immediate
vicinity of
the premises.
(2) If the Tribunal terminates a tenancy and makes an order for
possession under this section—
(a) the Tribunal must specify the day as from which the order will
operate, being not more than 28 days after the day on which the
orders are made;
(b) the Tribunal may order the landlord—
(i) to take such action as is specified in the order for the purpose of
taking possession of the premises; and
(ii) not to permit the tenant to occupy the premises (whether as a tenant
or otherwise) for a specified period or until further order
(and any agreement
entered into in contravention of such an order is void).
(2a) However—
(a) the Tribunal must not make an order under this section unless the
landlord has been given a reasonable opportunity to be heard
in relation to the
matter; and
(b) if the landlord objects to the making of an order under this section,
the Tribunal must not make an order unless the Tribunal
is satisfied that
exceptional circumstances exist justifying the making of the order in any
(3) In this section—
interested person
(a) the landlord; or
(b) a person who has been adversely affected by the conduct of the tenant
on which the application is based.
The applicant is the landlord and is therefore an interested person.
“The grounds on which the application is made are stated in the
application and they are as follows; Housing SA has been informed
disruption by the tenant Ms Raco, it is alleged Ms Raco yelling, screaming and
verbally abusing neighbours. Housing SA
has also been informed of incidents
where Ms Raco has behaved in an aggressive and threatening manner towards
Housing SA staff and
staff from other support agencies.
Housing SA is now seeking to have the tenancy terminated due to behaviour of
the tenant interfering with the reasonable peace, comfort
and privacy of
neighbours.”
The Tribunal heard the evidence of the
applicants and their witnesses. The Tribunal also heard the evidence of the
community mental health nurse and Disability SA social worker.
The Tribunal also heard submissions made by Ms Raco’s full adult
The Office of the Public Advocate.
Along with the above evidence and submissions the Tribunal also took into
account the following documentary evidence;
Guardianship Board order dated 8 January 2014 appointing the Office of the
Public Advocate full guardian for Ms Raco and the
Public Trustee to be her full
administrator.
statement of applicants along with copies of written warnings and behaviour
management agreement concerning the landlord and
photograph of Andrews Street and its surrounding neighbourhood.
memorandum of understanding between Housing SA and SAPOL concerning two
incidents on 14 September 2013, disturbances between
4 October 2013 and 8
November 2013, an incident on 8 November 2013 all leading to Ms Ellis, a witness
in this matter, obtaining an
Intervention Order on 3 December 2013 against Ms
memorandum of understanding also describes contraventions of the Intervention
Order as taking place on 21 December 2013
leading now to proceedings in the
Magistrate’s Court against Ms Raco.
Finally the
memorandum of understanding sets out details of events on 1 January 2014 and 8
January 2014 with the later incident culminating
in Ms Raco’s detention by
police under the Mental Health Act on that date.
The Tribunal on consideration of all the evidence finds that from
November 2011 to January 2014 Ms Raco has increasingly interfered
neighbour’s reasonable peace, comfort and privacy. The evidence of both Ms
Ellis and Ms Di Raimondo both close neighbours
of Ms Raco was credible and
showed that both neighbours and indeed Ms Di Raimondo’s young children now
live in fear of threats
and disturbed behaviour from Ms Raco. The evidence of Ms
Woodberry was also credible as to Ms Raco attempting to assault her on one
occasion, an incident witnessed by Mr Laurence and as to assaults by Ms Raco on
three Mind support workers engaged by Disability
SA to support Ms Raco in the
community. Such support was withdrawn by Mind over twelve months ago due to
concerns re: worker safety.
Ms Raco has continued her disturbed and threatening behaviour particularly
towards her female neighbours and support staff despite
two Intervention Orders
and despite two formal warnings from the landlord as to the threat to her
tenancy. The evidence shows that
Ms Raco has been either unable or unwilling to
control her behaviour even once she knew the landlord was proceeding with this
application
to terminate her tenancy.
The Tribunal is aware that Ms Raco has been found to be a person with mental
incapacity under the Guardianship and Administration
Act. In such circumstances
the Tribunal would only terminate a tenancy with great caution. Unfortunately I
feel I have no option
but to terminate this tenancy given Ms Raco’s
continued disruption and threats to neighbours and her escalating behaviour
them and those trying to support her over the last twelve months.
The Tribunal notes with some satisfaction the appointment of The Office of
the Public Advocate as guardian as it means this office
will now be able to
exert pressure to ensure Ms Raco’s mental and general health is
effectively assessed. It maybe with proper
assessment and treatment Ms Raco may
change her behaviour. However at present there is no guarantees of this. For
this reason and
in the interests of her neighbours and also indeed in the
interests of Ms Raco’s own safety I believe I should terminate this
tenancy. Vacant possession of the premises shall be given to the landlord on
11:00am on Wednesday 22 January 2014.
Pursuant to Section 90 of the Act this tenancy is terminated on Wednesday
22 January 2014. The tenant must move out of the premises
by 11.00am on
Wednesday 22 January 2014 but if the tenant does not move out this order may
only be enforced by the Tribunal bailiff.
Tribunal Member
Residential Tenancies Act 1995
gives the right to apply to the Residential Tenancies Tribunal to vary or set
aside its decisions or orders. The right to apply to
the Tribunal to vary or set
aside a decision or order is only available in certain circumstances. An
application under
must be made within three months of the date the
decision or order was made. You can seek advice about the right to seek to vary
or set aside an order or decision of the Tribunal from a Tenancy Officer at the
Office of Consumer and Business Services, Level 1,
91-97 Grenfell Street,
Adelaide: Telephone number 8204 9544. (Country callers 131 882)
Residential Tenancies Act
gives the right to appeal to
the District Court from a decision or order of the Residential Tenancies
Tribunal. The right to appeal
to the District Court is available in most
circumstances. An appeal to the District Court must be lodged within one month
date the decision or order of the Tribunal was made. You can seek advice
Officer at the
office of Consumer and Business Services, Level 1, 91-97 Grenfell Street,
Adelaide: Telephone No. 8204 9544. (Country
callers 131 882)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (4.79 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter