URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCAT/1998/33.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:08:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Karchinsky v Workcover v GIO Aust. (Olympic Aluminium Diecasting Pty. Ltd.) [1998] SAWCAT 33 (12 November 1998)
WORKERS COMPENSATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
In the matter of an appeal by
VICTOR JAN KARCHINSKY
the worker,
against a determination of a
REVIEW OFFICER
dated the 9th day of
September 1997, which also concerns
WORKCOVER/GIO AUSTRALIA (OLYMPIC
ALUMINIUM DIECASTING PTY. LTD.)
the employer.
(No. 140W of 1997)
Her Honour Deputy President Judge H.W. Parsons
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED THE 12TH
DAY OF NOVEMBER
Appeal - Discontinuance of weekly payments - Occupational stress - Whether
worker ceased to be incapacitated by the compensable disability
current symptoms attributable to the worker's compensable disability - Appeal
dismissed - Decision of Review Officer upheld
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
Cases cited:
Jones v. Hyde
[1989] HCA 20
(1988-1989) 85 A.L.R. 23
Kooragang Cement Pty. Ltd. v. Bates
(1994) 35 N.S.W.L.R. 452.
WorkCover Corporation v. Sherriff
, (unreported judgment Supreme Court
delivered 1 October 1996 S5831).
Appearances:
Ms. J. Milen (of counsel) for the Appellant.
Mr. G. Coppola (of counsel) for the Respondent.
The worker, Victor Karchinsky, has appealed the decision of the Review Officer
of 9 September 1997 whereby the determination of
the Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Corporation (`the Corporation') to discontinue his weekly payments
was confirmed.
The worker sustained a compensable disability in the nature of `occupational
stress' in his employment with Olympic Aluminium Diecasting
Pty. Ltd. on
12 September 1994 in respect of which he was in receipt of weekly payments
of income maintenance. By determination dated
2 February 1996 he was given
notice of intention to discontinue his weekly payments. The notice, pursuant to
Section 36(1)(b)
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Act'), asserted that he was no longer incapacitated by the compensable
disability and relied upon the medical certificate of
Dr. Cullum, the worker's
treating occupational physician, that he was fit to resume normal duties. The
certificate was dated 11 October
In summary, the Review Officer's determination was that the compensable
condition was an adjustment disorder with anxiety and that
this condition had
abated by the time of Dr. Cullum's certificate to the extent that, as at the
date of the notice, it was no longer
incapacitating the worker. She also found
that the worker continues to suffer a depression reactive to his inability to
but that this is not compensable, and an associated chronic anxiety
state, which does not incapacitate him for work.
At review the worker was required to establish on the balance of probabilities
that, as at the date when the notice was given,
he remained incapacitated for
work as a result of the compensable disability.
There is no dispute that the worker's compensable disability, for which he was
in receipt of weekly payments, arose out of a difficult
working relationship
with a supervisor which culminated in a confrontation on 12 September 1994 in
which the worker experienced an
anxiety response and physical symptoms
including ringing of the ears and tightness of the chest. He left work and went
he vomited. His leaving work was interpreted as a resignation which
led to further disputation with the employer, as a consequence
of which he
consulted his general practitioner Dr. Zoppa, and was referred to
Dr. Cullum on 3 November 1994 who diagnosed an adjustment
disorder with
anxiety. This condition was attributable to the interpersonal conflict at the
The purported discontinuance of weekly payments came about because in October
1995 Dr. Cullum formed the view that the worker was
fit for normal duties and
was no longer incapacitated as a result of the adjustment disorder with anxiety
and certified him fit for
The worker's evidence at review was that he remained incapacitated for work.
He said that he had been trying to find suitable work
for some considerable
time but that when he had to face a job interview he suffered dizziness,
palpitations and vomited or dry retched.
He said that although he looks for
work and is prepared to work, he does not feel sufficiently well enough to work
because he has
no confidence. He complained of symptoms which include disrupted
sleep pattern, vomiting, dizzy spells, itchiness and palpitations.
these symptoms have continued since the day of the confrontation at work.
The worker called three psychiatrists at review to establish his ongoing
incapacity for work. Dr. Couper-Smart, who examined him
once on 21 March 1995,
Dr. Burvill who examined him once on 21 June 1996, and Dr. Tingay who examined
him once on 22 May 1997.
The Corporation called Dr. Cullum, the treating occupational physician, who
examined him in November and December 1994, February,
June, August and October
1995, and Dr. Schembri, a psychiatrist to whom he was referred by Dr. Cullum,
who examined the worker on
19 January 1995 and 5 August 1996.
There were also a number of documents before the Review Officer including the
reports of these witnesses, the report of Mr. Mignone,
a psychologist, who
treated the worker on referral from Dr. Cullum during 1995 and 1996, and a
Functional Evaluation Report dated
13 March 1997.
On appeal Ms.
, counsel for the worker, submitted that the Review
Officer erred when she concluded that the worker has recovered from the
incapacitating
effects of the adjustment disorder and has been fit for some
time to find employment, that he now suffers a chronic anxiety disorder
fluctuates and which is not incapacitating, and a reactive depression resulting
from his inability to gain employment. Ms.
submitted that the
worker continues to suffer incapacitating symptoms and that these are either
part of the worker's ongoing compensable
disability or alternatively operate
upon that condition to perpetuate his incapacity for work.
, counsel for the Corporation, submitted that no error can
be found in the circumstances where the Review Officer, by preferring one
of medical evidence to another, reached a conclusion which was reasonably open
Essentially the nature of the claimed incapacity for work is the inability to
attend interviews necessary to obtain employment.
The worker may have put it
higher than that when he said he does not have the confidence to work, but all
of the medical witnesses
were of the view that his current condition, whatever
its genesis, does not incapacitate him from performing the duties of
employment.
Consistent with this evidence the Review Officer's finding was `the
worker is not incapacitated for work if he could only get a job'
Determination 97-198). In the context of an anxiety state, the inability to
attend interviews necessary to obtain suitable employment,
is capable of
constituting an incapacity for work, but in order to entitle the worker to
ongoing weekly payments of income maintenance
that incapacity must, on the
balance of probabilities, result from the compensable disability.
In expressing their respective opinions as to diagnosis, whether the worker's
current presentation is attributable to the compensable
disability of 1994, and
whether he is incapacitated for work, the medical witnesses have largely relied
on the worker's history including
the symptoms of which he complained.
As to those symptoms the Review Officer appears to have accepted the worker's
evidence that he now has a disrupted sleep pattern,
feels washed out, is
forgetful, feels angry and frustrated, feels violently ill, vomits, experiences
dizzy spells and headaches,
and suffers from itchiness (transcript p.60).
However, she has not accepted the worker's evidence that `It has not stopped
1 up until now' (transcript p. 60). This can be inferred from her
finding, `I find that the symptoms suffered by the worker in 1994/95
significantly from those described to Dr. Tingay in 1997' (Appeal Book Vol II).
It was these current symptoms which the
Review Officer found to be symptoms of
an adjustment disorder or reactive depression associated with searching for a
job, and not
related to the compensable disability. The Review Officer has been
influenced in this conclusion of a recovery from an anxiety response,
adjustment to his employment difficulties) and the commencement of a subsequent
anxiety disorder and depression, (as an adjustment
to the stress of trying to
find work), by the evidence of Dr. Couper-Smart that in 1995 the worker
was `vigorously applying for jobs';
the inference being that he had recovered
from the compensable disability sufficiently to do so and that any current
symptoms have
developed as a consequence of such attempts being stressful. She
was also influenced by the oral evidence of Drs. Cullum, Schembri
written report of Mr. Magliaro and particularly the histories which they took
from the worker, their findings on examination,
and their respective opinions
as to the cessation of a relationship between his symptoms and the compensable
disability.
Although the Review Officer's reasoning process may have been more clearly
expressed and she could perhaps have dealt explicitly
with the worker's
evidence and its relationship to the conflicting medical opinions, her
essential finding as to the nature of the
incapacity and that the symptoms
suffered by the worker in 1994 differed significantly from those described to
Dr. Tingay in 1997
are clear. As was said by McHugh J. in
Jones v. Hyde
[1989] HCA 20
(1988-89) 85 A.L.R. 23
`It is true that the learned judge did not expressly rely on the demeanour of
the plaintiff in making his findings of primary fact.
But this does not mean,
as Mr Ellicott submitted, that an appellate court is in as good a position as
the trial judge to determine
the primary facts of the case. When a trial judge
resolves a conflict of evidence between witnesses, the subtle influence of
on his determination cannot be overlooked. It does not follow that,
because the learned judge made no express reference to demeanour
credibility, they played no part in his conclusion: cf
Martin v Option
Investments (Aust) Pty Ltd (No 2)
[1982] VicRp 45
[1982] VR 464
This Tribunal should be cautious about the subtle influence of demeanour and
consider the Review Officer's decision in the light
of the advantage which she
had in seeing and hearing the witnesses.
The Review Officer's findings and conclusion are also supported by
medical evidence. Dr. Cullum said that by October 1995 the worker
had recovered
from the incapacitating effects of the disability. He had been treating the
worker since November 1994 and had noticed
a marked improvement in his symptoms
over that time. Initially he had noted depression, anger, frustration and
somatic symptoms such
as twitching eyes, dizziness and tightness in the chest
consistent with anxiety. By February 1995 he thought the worker was showing
signs of improvement but was not totally fit to go back to the workplace. This
was followed by further improvement in the worker's
condition when Dr. Cullum
noted that he demonstrated appropriate responses to issues associated with his
hoped-for return to work.
During this period Dr. Cullum noted `he wasn't
exposed to the constant stressors that had made him stress in the first place
he had improved and he wasn't a gibbering mess or full of emotional upset.'
(transcript p.178). After a further 6 months he thought
the worker was
presenting `without any real anxiety' (transcript p.180). He still had some
anger but that was `normal behaviour'.
The worker reported some insomnia and
lethargy, but a normal appetite, and did not report any distress such as
vomiting or hyperventilation
generally, or stress related to trying to find
employment. When he certified the worker fit for work in October 1995 and again
he examined him in December 1995, he thought the worker had recovered from
the effects of the adjustment disorder, which one would
normally expect to be
resolved within 6 months, and that his presentation at that time was more
consistent with `frustration at finding
alternative employment and having
difficulty of options of what he was going to do ...' (transcript p.370).
This was consistent with the opinion of Dr. Schembri who also said that the
ongoing symptoms of anxiety more recently were related
to looking for work. In
January 1995 he took a history of initial symptoms of agitation, nausea, and
dry retching in the mornings
following the work event. The worker had reported
that there had been some improvement in his condition by about January 1995 and
a settling of the anxiety. Dr. Schembri noted a mixture of anger, anxiety
and depression. By August 1996 the worker told him he felt
more settled and was
beginning to leave the past behind him. Dr. Schembri saw a noticeable
improvement in the worker's condition
and considered that the adjustment
disorder had resolved. At no time did he make any observation of crying, as had
Dr. Tingay. He
noted that the worker had been applying for jobs and was getting
frustrated at his lack of success, but he did not get a history
of vomiting and
extreme anxiety when he was applying for jobs as in the history obtained by Dr.
Tingay in 1997. Although there were
moments when he accepted that the worker
might experience anxiety he said that `... his ability to traffic life was not
being impaired
by the symptoms of anxiety' ( transcript p.265).
The report of Mr. Magliaro, the worker's treating psychologist, dated 24 April
1997, indicates that he saw the worker on 5 occasions
between 25 November 1995
and 2 February 1996, and then again on 20 July 1995 and 2 February 1996.
He noted that the worker's initial
presentation was characterised by
irritability and anger related to the interpersonal conflict at work, but his
opinion that, by
2 February 1996 the worker had recovered from that
situation and was only experiencing frustration at not being able to find a
was similar to that of Drs. Cullum and Schembri.
Dr. Couper-Smart saw the worker once in March 1995. At that stage his
assessment of the worker's condition was consistent with
that of his treating
doctors. Notably, he said that the worker was applying for work `vigorously' at
that stage. He took a history
from the worker that his emotional state had
improved since September 1994. He considered that the worker's state of anxiety
the physical effects of his mood state were continuing to affect him but
that he was fit for alternative full time duties. Dr. Couper-Smart's
at the review hearing that the worker has not yet recovered from the original
anxiety state was based on the history and
opinion contained in the 1997 report
of Dr. Tingay, and was expressed against the background that he had not
personally examined
the worker since very early in the piece. In expressing
this view, he acknowledged that more information may be needed. Then, in
cross-examination, he was less certain in his adoption of Dr. Tingay's opinion,
confirming that he had expected the condition to
resolve when he saw the worker
in March 1995, and agreeing that if there had been a resolution of the symptoms
so that the worker
was functioning well, then there had been a recovery of one
condition and the development of a new disorder. The Review Officer was
therefore entitled to view Dr. Couper-Smart's evidence as to the worker's
current situation with circumspection, but to accept that
his evidence as to
the worker's condition in March 1995 was consistent with that of Drs. Cullum
and Schembri.
In considering the medical evidence the Review Officer was entitled to take
into account that Dr. Burvill did not examine the worker
until 5 August 1996
and he has only seen him on one occasion. He took a history that the worker had
continued to have the same symptoms
ever since the work incident viz tightness
in the chest, wavering voice, and loss of ability to communicate. He certainly
get a history, as given to Dr. Couper-Smart, that the worker had been
vigorously applying for jobs (transcript p.429). His diagnosis
differed from
that of Dr. Tingay in that he did not consider that the worker was suffering
from depression. He took the view that
the worker may have started with an
adjustment disorder but that it had become an anxiety state.
Like Dr. Burvill, Dr. Tingay's opinion of an ongoing condition related to the
compensable disability was dependent on her assumption
that the symptom cluster
with which he presented to her was `virtually identical' to that identified by
Drs. Cullum and Schembri.
She noted in particular, panic attacks, tinnitus and
hyperventilation, vomiting, nausea and abdominal pain. He cried at the
examination
which was one of the reasons that Dr. Tingay diagnosed depression.
Having heard extensive evidence from a number of medical witnesses
importantly, the evidence of the worker, the Review Officer has not accepted
the continuity of symptoms essential to Dr.
Tingay's opinion of a link between
the compensable disability and the worker's current presentation. However, that
did not preclude
the Review Officer from accepting that part of Dr. Tingay's
evidence as to the worker's current diagnosis, namely that he `suffers
and depression' and that his anxiety will be evident from time to time. Dr.
Tingay's diagnosis as to the worker's current
condition is not inconsistent
with the opinions of Drs. Cullum and Schembri, both of whom recognised that the
worker will suffer
anxiety from time to time. The distinction is that the
latter doctors regard the current condition as unrelated to the compensable
disability and related to his attempts to find employment. Dr. Tingay and Dr.
Burvill held a different view.
The Review officer has regarded the chain of causation between the worker's
current inability to attend interviews and his employment
injury to have been
broken. She was required to make a commonsense evaluation of the causal chain.
As was said by Kirby P. in
Kooragang Cement Pty. Ltd. v. Bates
N.S.W.L.R. 452
, which was applied by Lander J. in
WorkCover Corporation v.
, (unreported judgment Supreme Court delivered 1 October 1996
`... a point will sometimes be reached where the link in the chain of causation
becomes so attenuated that, for legal purposes,
it will be held that the
causative connection has been snapped. This may be explained in terms of the
happening of a
novus actus
. Or it may be explained in terms of want of
sufficient connection.'
The Review Officer's acceptance of the treating doctors and rejection of Drs.
Burvill, Tingay and Couper-Smart on this issue of
a causal nexus was reasonably
open to her. It is understandable that she found the medical opinions, which
were formed on the basis
of the worker's history and presentation over a period
of time leading up to, or contemporaneous with, the purported discontinuance
weekly payments, more compelling on this essential issue of whether he
continued to be incapacitated by the compensable disability,
obtained after the discontinuance had taken effect. The evidence preferred by
the Review Officer supports a lack of sufficient
connection. The appeal is
dismissed and the decision of the Review Officer confirmed.
In accordance with the requirements of section 93 of the
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
the parties are notified that if a
party wishes to apply to the Full Supreme Court for leave to appeal against any
part of this decision
which raises a question of law, such appeal must be
instituted within one month after a party who is entitled to appeal receives
notice of this decision.
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are respectfully requested to note the provisions of the Supreme Court
Rules 96.04(a) and 97.05 which require that in the
event of an appeal a copy of
the Notice of Appeal filed in the Supreme Court is to be served upon `the
proper officer of the Court
or Tribunal below'.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (25.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter