URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCAT/2002/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:08:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Synnett v Workcover/Allianz Australia (SGIC Insurance - Monash Consulting) [2002] SAWCAT 4 (16 August 2002)
Synnett v WorkCover/Allianz Australia (SGIC Insurance - Monash
Consulting)
2002] SAWCAT 4
WORKERS COMPENSATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL (SA)
SYNNETT, Rodney Kenneth
WORKCOVER CORPORATION/ALLIANZ AUSTRALIA WORKERS COMPENSATION (SA) LTD (SGIC
Insurance - Monash Consulting)
Extension of Time Application
7537W of 2001
HEARING DATES:
6 June 2002
JUDGMENT OF:
His Honour Deputy President Judge BP Gilchrist
DELIVERED ON:
16 August 2002
CATCHWORDS:
Extension of time within which to appeal a determination by a Review Officer
- Principles guiding such applications discussed - Application
refused - S 43,
s 43(7a), s 95, s 96(2) and s 97(3)
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1986
WorkCover Corporation v Hann
[1994] SASC 4703
(1994) 62 SASR 271
Pond v WorkCover
[1999] SASC 362
Cedic v WorkCover/MMI (Modular Furniture Pty Ltd)
[2000] SAWCT 54
Synnett v WorkCover/Allianz Australia (SGIC)
[2002] SAWCAT 2
The Port of Melbourne Authority v Anshun
[1981] HCA 45
(1981) 147 CLR 589
Buckby v The Corporation (Lloyd Aviation Jet Charter Pty Ltd)
Della Flora v Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Corporation of SA
[1998] SASC 6691
(unreported delivered 28 May 1998)
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: In Person
Respondent: Mr M Crawley
Solicitors:
Appellant: N/A
Respondent: Piper Alderman
1 This is an application for an extension of time within which to appeal the
decision of a Review Officer.
2 The Review Officer's decision was made on 21 March 1994. Pursuant to s 97(3)
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation 1986
("the Act") as it
then was, an appeal should have been lodged within one month after the
appellant received notice of that decision.
That subsection, however, grants
the Tribunal the power to allow a longer time for the institution of the
3 Although the Act does not specify how that discretion is to be exercised it
is well settled that the extension of time will only
be granted if it is in the
interests of justice to do so. While each case must always be decided on its
own facts, various principles
have developed and these are collected and
discussed in the judgment of Lander J in
Pond v WorkCover
[1999] SASC 362.
After noting that the party seeking the extension is seeking an indulgence
which will only be granted if the relevant court or tribunal
is satisfied that
it is in the interests of justice to allow it, His Honour noted from par 54
onwards the following:-
"Usually, but not invariably, there will be, at least four factors that will
need to be addressed on an application for an extension
of time within which to
appeal; the length of the delay, the reason for the delay, whether there is an
arguable case on appeal and
the prejudice which the respondent might suffer;
Palata Investments Ltd v Burt & Sinfield
[1985] 2 All ER 517
The consequences to the applicant if the application was refused may also be
Gallo v Dawson
The length of the delay is obviously an important matter. The longer the delay
the better reason needed because the more likely
the prejudice to the
respondent to the application ...
In every case where an extension of time is sought the applicant must provide a
frank and candid explanation for the delay. ...
If the fault for the failure to comply with the time limit is that of the
applicant's legal adviser the court should be informed
of that. In the absence
of such information the court or tribunal would ordinarily infer that the delay
has been caused by the applicant.
In a consideration of an application to extend time for the institution of an
appeal the appellant's prospects on appeal will be
usually important. ...
The question of prejudice is at large and cannot be considered in the abstract.
In respect of this factor the respondent to the
application has, as I have
already said, an evidential onus to show actual or potential prejudice. True,
it is, some prejudice might
be able to be assumed by the court. In a
consideration of any prejudice which the respondent to the application might
have suffered
regard has to be had to the fact that the respondent to the
application has a `vested and right to retain the judgment':
(1962) 36 ALJR 200.
If the judgment has been in place for a long period of time and the respondent
to the application could reasonably have expected
that he or she would enjoy
the fruits of the judgment then that may mean it would not be in the interests
of justice to allow the
application.
The orders sought on the appeal might also be relevant in a consideration of
prejudice. The applicant seeks an order for a retrial
that then would be a
matter to which regard would be had for the purposes of determining whether a
retrial or re-hearing would mean
that the order should be refused in the
interests of justice. ...
The Court may have regard to the consequences to the applicant if the
application was refused. The consequences to the applicant
might be so serious
that notwithstanding the delay and the prejudice to the respondent to the
application it is in the interests
of justice that the application should be
allowed. Those consequences could only be serious, of course, if the applicant
prospects of success on appeal.
However, it will always depend on the facts and circumstances peculiar to the
particular application whether it is in the interests
of justice to allow the
application."
4 The factual circumstances underpinning this application are as follows.
5 The worker suffered compensable disabilities on 1 August 1990 and
24 September 1990. The worker asserted that as a result of these
sustained permanent disabilities that were compensable pursuant to s 43 of the
Act and he made various claims in relation thereto,
all of which were rejected
by the Corporation. Exercising the rights conferred by s 95 of the Act, as it
then was, the worker sought
a review of these rejections which culminated in a
hearing before a Review Officer. At this time the worker was legally
represented
and during the course of the hearing before the Review Officer his
legal representative and the legal representative of the Corporation
upon a series of discussions to resolve the matter. These discussions led to an
agreement that the worker would receive
a lump sum payment of $85000 pursuant
to s 43 on account of the various permanent disabilities that he allegedly
6 Thereafter the parties discussed the matter with the Review Officer.
7 Even though the position was presented to the Review Officer as a consent
position, pursuant to s 96(2) of the Act, as it then
was, it was for the Review
Officer to make a fresh determination of the matters that were subject to the
review and that is what
the Review Officer did. He proceeded to make various
assessments in respect of various losses including a 50 per cent impairment
the lower back and lumbar spine and a 50 per cent impairment of the whole body
on account of a mental injury or psychological
disability, which he described
as "anxiety and depression".
8 All of this was recorded on transcript. The transcript then noted a
discussion between the parties and the Review Officer and
concluded thus:-
"I will also note that no supplementary payment is payable and that is because
of the aggregate of compensation payable is a mixture
of two claims that arose
on different dates. They were not the same disabilities arising out of the same
situation - different circumstances
- the back happened in an incident, the
stress was obviously a protracted thing. On my understanding of section 43 that
it wouldn't
attract the 43(6) or (7) supplementary payment."
9 Although the Review Officer did not specifically mention s 43(7)(a), it is
plain enough that that is the provision to which he
was referring. That
provision provides:-
"(7a) If the amount of compensation to which a worker is entitled under
subsection (2) is greater than 55 per cent of the prescribed
sum, the worker is
entitled to a supplementary benefit equivalent to 1.5 times the amount by which
that amount exceeds 55 per cent
of the prescribed sum."
10 Sometime later the worker made further claims pursuant to s 43. These
further claims were rejected by the Corporation, amongst
other grounds, on the
basis that the Review Officer's decision had discharged its liability to pay
any further s 43 entitlements.
That issue came on for hearing before me sitting
as a Presidential Member of the Workers Compensation Tribunal. By decision
I concluded that the Corporation was right to have rejected the
worker's further claims for lump sum payments pursuant to s 43 in
all of the further claims that the worker was then making, except for one in
relation to bruxism, which I found had not
been dealt with by the Review
Officer's decision.
11 The worker appealed my decision. His appeal was dismissed by the Full Bench
of the Tribunal. Thereafter the matter was remitted
in relation to the outstanding bruxism claim. Prior to the hearing of that
matter the worker asserted
that there were other permanent disabilities that he
had sustained besides bruxism that had not been previously claimed or dealt
with by the Review Officer's decision. Accordingly, an order was made pursuant
to s 88DA of the Act to expand the issues in dispute
to include a determination
of all of these issues.
12 After a lengthy hearing over some nine days I concluded that the worker had
suffered some permanent disabilities as a result
of the compensable
disabilities that had not been included in the Review Officer's decision.
However I concluded that as a matter
of law the effect of the Review Officer's
decision was that the worker had no further entitlements to compensation
pursuant to s
43. I expressly excluded from that conclusion the possibility
that the worker might have a claim for a supplementary benefit pursuant
13 The worker appealed my decision. His appeal was dismissed by the Full Bench
of the Tribunal. Thereafter the worker asserted that
he was entitled to the
supplementary benefit described by s 43(7a).
14 Subsequent to the Review Officer's decision it was decided by the Full Bench
of the Workers Compensation Tribunal in
Cedic v WorkCover/MMI (Modular
Furniture Pty Ltd)
[2000] SAWCT 54
that the supplementary benefit
prescribed by s 43(7a) can apply to permanent disabilities even though they
might arise out of different
compensable disabilities. Hence, the worker
asserted, that because the aggregate of the permanent disabilities as found by
Officer exceeded 55 per cent of the prescribed sum, he was entitled
to the additional compensation that s 43(7a) provides.
15 The Corporation rejected this further claim. It maintained that this issue
had been dealt with by the Review Officer such that
his decision prevented the
worker from now pursuing this matter further.
16 The worker contended that the Review Officer's statement about his decision
not attracting the supplementary payment was gratuitous,
that it was not an
issue before him, and that it did not form part of his decision. In
v WorkCover/Allianz Australia (SGIC)
[2002] SAWCAT 2
, I dealt with this
issue as a preliminary point. I concluded that the issue in relation to the
worker's entitlement to a supplementary
benefit that was before the Review
Officer. In so doing, I relied upon a finding that I made at par 15 that:-
"...the irresistible inference is that that issue [ie whether or not the worker
was entitled to a supplementary benefit pursuant
to s 43(7a) of the Act] was
discussed and that the Review Officer was asked to deal with it."
17 The worker submitted that if in fact this issue had been dealt with by the
Review Officer in his decision, in light of later
authority his treatment of
this issue was plainly wrong and that it should therefore be set aside. Having
resolved the preliminary
point against the worker in order for him to pursue
this argument it was therefore necessary for him to proceed with his
application
for an extension of time within which to appeal that decision. This
is the matter that is now before me.
18 The worker contends that the reason why he did not lodge an appeal within
time is because he had no appreciation that the decision
of the Review Officer
foreclosed the possibility of him pursuing claims for compensation for other
permanent disabilities or that
it foreclosed the possibility of a claim for
supplementary benefits under s 43(7a). He says that it was not until after the
decisions in the Workers Compensation Tribunal and my decision on the
preliminary point in relation to the present appeal, that he
appreciation of the legal effect of the Review Officer's decision.
19 Next, he says that he will suffer a significant financial detriment if the
extension of time is not granted because the effect
of the decision of the Full
(supra) is such that if the extension is granted, it is
inevitable that the Review Officer's decision will be corrected.
20 He says that it is no answer for the Corporation to contend that in view of
the decision of the Full Supreme Court in
WorkCover Corporation v Hann
[1994] SASC 4703
(1994) 62 SASR 271
, that the assessment for compensation pursuant to s 43 on
account of his psychological disability should not have been made. He submits
was wrongly decided and should not be followed. Next, he says
that even if that is not right, if there was a rehearing of his s 43
entitlements arising out of the compensable disability, even without an
assessment on a claim of a psychiatric disability, his overall
entitlements
would well exceed the $85000 that he has been previously been paid.
21 The Corporation contends that the worker should have been aware of the
potential need for him to revisit the Review Officer's
decision as early as
1997, because it was discussed by me sitting in the Workers Compensation
Tribunal with his then counsel, Mr
Britton, and because I referred to it in my
decision JD59/1997.
22 As to the issue of prejudice, Mr Crawley, counsel for the Corporation,
submitted thus: (tr p97)
"Mr Synnett has had the use of $85,000 for eight years and yet now is seeking
to set aside the basis upon which that money was paid
to him. There has been,
since the time of that Review Officer's decision, two full trials before your
Honour, two full appeals from
the decisions of your Honour, all of which relied
upon that decision of the Review Officer, so that very substantial legal costs
have been incurred by the corporation and paid out to Mr Synnett's
representatives in relation to all of those hearings based upon
an acceptance
of the decision of the Review Officer, and if that decision is now revisited
then, of course, really all of those decisions,
all of those trial costs, have,
by and large, been wasted and we are really back to square one."
23 Mr Crawley then submitted, that based upon the authority of the High Court
The Port of Melbourne Authority v Anshun
[1981] HCA 45
(1981) 147 CLR 589
having attempted to get around the Review Officer's decision in the pursuit of
further claims for compensation pursuant to s
43 in one way, through the
hearings before me sitting in the Workers Compensation Tribunal and the appeals
thereafter, and having
failed, the worker should not now be permitted to embark
on a further round of litigation to attempt a different tack in respect
litigation concerning an issue that on its face had come to an end some seven
and a half years ago.
24 I now turn to consider the matters put to me.
25 I commence by noting that in the context of a limitation period of one
month, the delay in this case is extraordinarily long.
26 As for the explanation for that delay, given that the Corporation elected
not to cross-examine the worker I am prepared to accept
on face value that he
was not aware of the true implications of the decision of the Review Officer
namely that it foreclosed the
possibility of him pursuing supplementary benefit
in respect of the disabilities that were the subject of that decision until
27 The fact that the decision made by the Review Officer was made by the
request of and with the consent of the parties does not
make it immune from
Buckby v The Corporation (Lloyd Aviation Jet Charter Pty Ltd)
(1994) 6 WCATR 369
at 375. In light of the decision of the Full Bench of the
Workers Compensation Tribunal in
, if the extension were granted in
this case, it is likely that the appeal would succeed.
28 However, the fact that the Review Officer's decision was made at the request
of and with the consent of the parties cannot be
ignored. This is important,
because I do not think that the outcome of the appeal would simply be a setting
aside of that part of
the Review Officer's decision that determined that the
worker had no entitlement to the supplementary benefits prescribed to s 43(7a).
In view of the circumstances of the Review Officer's determination, in my
opinion, the only fair outcome of an appeal of this decision
would be for all
of it to set it aside. That in turn would require a hearing, with evidence
being led in respect of all of the alleged
permanent disabilities that the
worker now complains of.
29 In light of this I think that the prejudice that the Corporation complains
of has been made out. It has already incurred the
expenses associated with two
hearings and two appeals. To allow the worker's application would be to render
those hearings and the
results thereof otiose.
30 Moreover, it cannot be assumed that a full hearing and determination of the
worker's entitlements to compensation pursuant to
s 43 would necessarily result
in him receiving the $85000 that he has been previously been paid. That could
well be the outcome but
it may not be.
31 Whilst I am aware of evidence supporting the worker's contention that he has
suffered many severe disabilities as a result of
the compensable disabilities
and in other proceedings I have made findings in relation thereto, I also made
some adverse findings
as to the worker's credit and concluded that he was
obsessed by his disabilities and had a propensity to exaggerate his problems.
[2000] SAWCT 186
par 14 to 16. It is not inconceivable that a full hearing
would reveal that the worker is not as disabled as he contends. Although
worker might disagree with the decision of the Full Supreme Court in
(supra) it is an authority that is binding upon this Tribunal and
it would be followed. A substantial component of the compensation
paid to the worker was paid on account of his psychiatric disability.
32 Given that the ultimate outcome of the successful appeal could conceivably
result in a lower award of compensation than that
which was made by the Review
Officer and which was subsequently paid, the observations of Doyle CJ in
Della Flora v Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Corporation of SA
[1998] SASC 6691
(unreported delivered 28 May 1998) regarding the lack of a
mechanism provided for by the Act to permit the Corporation to recover
monies paid by it pursuant to a determination when it has been subsequently
determined that the amount paid was too high, have
to be considered.
33 In the end it comes to this. Over seven years ago a Review Officer made a
determination that in light of subsequent authorities
contained two errors. One
deprived the worker of a supplementary benefit. The other provided him with
compensation on account of
a psychiatric disability to which he was not
entitled. On the strength of the Review Officer's determination there have been
trials and two appeals in the Workers Compensation Tribunal. If an
extension is granted a fresh hearing dealing with all issues concerning
worker's s43 entitlements will have to be conducted. It is not inconceivable
that that hearing might result in a lower award
than that previously made and
paid and there is some doubt as to whether the Corporation could recover any
shortfall. Whilst I accept
that a refusal to grant this extension might well
result in the worker receiving less compensation pursuant to s 43 than that
he was entitled to receive and I accept that he has provided a reasonable
explanation for the delay, in all the circumstances I am
not satisfied that it
is in the interests of justice to grant the worker the extension of time that
he seeks. The application will
therefore be refused.
In accordance with the requirements of s 93 of the Workers Rehabilitation and
compensation Act, 1986 (as it was immediately prior
to 5 June 1996) the parties
are notified that if a party wishes to apply to the Full Supreme Court for
leave to appeal against any
part of this decision which raises a question of
law, such appeal must be instituted within one month after a party who is
to appeal received notice of this decision.
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are respectfully requested to note the provisions of the Supreme Court
Rules which require that in the event of an appeal
a copy of the Notice of
Appeal filed in the Supreme Court is to be served upon "the proper officer of
the Court or Tribunal below".
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter