URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCFC/2023/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
RYAN RAYGAN [2023] SASCFC 1 (3 August 2023)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Full Court)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
RYAN RAYGAN
[2023] SASCFC 1
Judgment of The Full Court
(The Honourable Acting Chief Justice Livesey, the Honourable
Justice Doyle and the Honourable Justice Bleby)
3 August 2023
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES - LAWYERS - QUALIFICATIONS AND ADMISSION - FIT AND
PROPER PERSONS
This is an application for admission as a barrister and solicitor of the
Supreme Court of South Australia.
The applicant was first registered as a migration agent on 20 July 2015. He
opened his own business in June 2015. Following a series
of complainants by
clients and from the Department of Home Affairs, on 11 May 2018, the Migration
Agents Registration Authority cancelled
the applicant’s registration as a
migration agent. The delegate concluded that the applicant was not a person of
or was otherwise not a fit and proper person to give immigration
assistance and had not complied with clauses of the Migration Agents
The applicant appealed to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. He gave
evidence and was cross examined. The Deputy President was not
impressed with the
applicant as a witness. He considered that the applicant failed to answer
questions directly and often provided
an explanation for his behaviour when not
asked. He found that the applicant often blamed his clients for changing their
failed to make appropriate concessions. He found the applicant gave
evidence that was clearly false.
The Deputy President found that the applicant had shown himself to be a
person lacking integrity and who was otherwise not a fit and
proper person to
give any immigration assistance. The Deputy President concluded that the
decision of MARA to cancel the applicant’s
registration was the correct
and preferable decision.
The applicant then completed a Bachelor of Laws in early 2022 and a Graduate
Diploma in Legal Practice in August 2022. By an
Originating
Application dated 11 August 2022, the applicant applied for admission as a legal
practitioner. The Board of Examiners
(‘the Board’) considered the
applicant’s application for admission at its meeting held on 30 August
2022. The Board
declined to issue the applicant a favourable report recommending
his admission as a practitioner of the Court, on the basis that
satisfied that the applicant was a fit and proper person to be admitted as a
practitioner. On 4 October 2022, the Board
produced written reasons for that
Held (by the Court), refusing the application:
applicant’s transgressions are too recent, and the assurances of his
understanding of his obligations too tenuous, especially
in light of his
continued lack of understanding of his disclosure obligations, for this Court to
be satisfied that he is presently
a fit and proper person for
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
(SA) rr 257.2, 257.8,
Rules of the Legal Practitioners Education and Admission Council
(SA) r 23(1);
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
Migration Act 1958
, referred to.
In Re Vadasz
(1988) 146 LSJS 455
In the matter of Claire Amy
[2015] SASCFC 20
Lincoln v New Zealand Law Society
[2019] NZCA
Law Society of NSW v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
Profession Conduct Commissioner v Cleland
[2021] SASCA 10
Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
(2001) 52 NSWLR 279
Raygan and Migration
Agents Registration Authority
[2020] AATA 1164
Re Application for
Admission as a Practitioner
[2004] SASC 426
(2004) 90 SASR 551
Re Harrison: Application
for Readmission
[2002] SASC 335
(2002) 84 SASR 120
[2007] SASC 263
Ziems v The Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South Wales
[1957] HCA 46
, considered.
RYAN RAYGAN
[2023] SASCFC 1
Full Court – Application for Admission: Livesey A/CJ, Doyle and
This is an application for admission as a barrister and solicitor
of the Supreme Court of South Australia.
Originating Application dated 11 August 2022, the applicant
applied for admission as a legal practitioner, pursuant to r 257.2 of
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
(SA). The applicant filed three affidavits in
support of his application, dated 9 August 2022, 15 August 2022, and 18 August
respectively.
Board of Examiners (‘the Board’) considered the applicant’s
application for admission at its meeting held on
30 August 2022. Rule 23(1) of
Rules of the Legal Practitioners Education and Admission Council 2018
(SA) (‘LPEAC Rules’)
required the Board to report to the
Court on the application for admission. The Board declined to issue the
applicant a favourable
report recommending his admission as a practitioner of
the Court, on the basis that it was not satisfied that the applicant was a
and proper person to be admitted as a practitioner. On 4 October 2022, the
Board produced written reasons for that decision.
Law Society of South Australia (‘the Law Society’), the interested
party in this matter, opposes the applicant’s
admission, on the ground
that the applicant is not a fit or proper person for the purpose of
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
(SA). It supports and adopts the reasons of
the Board dated 4 October 2022.
the hearing of the application before this Court, the applicant relied on three
further affidavits made by him dated 10 January
2023, 10 March 2023 and
4 May 2023. The Law Society cross-examined him briefly. The Law Society
relied on an affidavit of Rosalind
Burke made on 10 October 2022, which
exhibited the Reasons of the Board of Examiners dated 4 October 2022, and the
affidavits originally
made by the applicant in support of his
application.
The application for admission
early August 2022, the applicant applied to the Law Society for
pre‑admission assessment. In his accompanying affidavit
dated 9 August
2022, he set out the circumstances that might affect his good character as
In May 2018 the Migration Agents Registration Authority
(MARA) canceled [sic] my registration as a registered migration agent for
breaches of the code of conduct.
9 August 2022, the applicant received an email advising him of amendments that
needed to be made to his application. He made the
amendments as directed on that
11 August 2022, the applicant received an email notification that his
pre‑admission assessment was completed and that he
was required to file
the amended documents by no later than 19 August 2022. He filed the amended
documents on 16 August 2022.
17 August 2022, Ms Rosalind Burke, Director (Ethics and Practice) of the Law
Society, emailed the applicant advising of a number
of matters that needed to be
addressed. These included that the information the applicant had provided about
the termination of his
migration licence was inadequate. Ms Burke advised that
the applicant needed to provide complete details of all the circumstances
that matter and exhibit any relevant documentation, including a copy of the
decision by Migration Agents Registration Authority
(‘MARA’) and any
written submissions made by the applicant. She also directed him to read the Law
Admissions Consultative
Committee Disclosure Guidelines for Applicants for
Admission to the Legal Profession (‘Disclosure Guidelines’)
at Appendix D of the current LPEAC Rules.
18 August 2021, the applicant affirmed a fresh affidavit, which he filed
together with his application for admission. Paragraph
affidavit reads as follows:
I have not otherwise done or
suffered anything likely to affect adversely my good fame and character, nor am
I aware of any circumstances
that might affect my fitness to be admitted as a
practitioner [
except – set out any facts or circumstances that the
applicant is required to bring to the notice of the Board of Examiners
to in Exhibit “F”
Matters that must be disclosed include that the applicant is or has been
bankrupt and the circumstances of bankruptcy or has been
found to have engaged
in academic dishonesty such as plagiarism.
this paragraph, the applicant wrote:
Please see Exhibit
“F” and associated documents [F1, F2, F3, F4, F5, F6].
F comprised a cover page and six exhibited documents. The cover page contained
the following statement by the applicant about
the cancellation of his
registration and the steps he took subsequently:
On 6 May 2020, the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal confirmed MARA’s decision to cancel my
registration.
The AAT decided to cancel my registration for a period of five years.
I was very devastated. I had a family and young children. I had expected a
caution or a suspension but not a cancellation for the
maximum period of five
I went through a period of unemployment and depression but I thank God that I
had moral support from my wife and a few friends. I
had arrived in Australia
from Iran in 2007 and did not have many friends.
After the decision and with the moral support, I accepted my fate but decided
to improve myself.
I decided to study law to get a deep understanding of the Australian legal
system. I am glad that I did so because I now fully appreciate
the need for high
professional ethical standard required of me.
I regret my failure to adhere to those standards when I was a Migration
During the Graduate Diploma Legal Practice course, I took particular interest
in the Legal Practitioner’s Code of Conduct and
the Australian
Solicitors’ Conduct Rules.
I believe that the cancellation has been a blessing in disguise. I have
learnt a hard lesson from my mistakes while I was a Migration
(Footnotes omitted)
exhibited documents were:
decision dated 11 May 2018;
Administrative Appeals Tribunal (‘AAT’) decision and reasons dated 6
applicant’s supplementary submissions filed in the AAT proceedings dated 4
September 2019;
applicant’s written submissions in support of a stay application of the
AAT proceedings; and
respondent’s supplementary submissions filed in the AAT proceedings dated
18 September 2018.
applicant did not seek advice in preparing this affidavit.
19 August 2022, the applicant received an email confirming that his application
and affidavit had been filed with CourtSA.
1 September 2022, Ms Burke wrote to the applicant, enclosing a copy of a Report
of the Board of Examiners, dated 30 August 2022,
to be referred to the Full
Court. The Board concluded that it was not satisfied that the applicant was a
fit and proper person to
be admitted as a practitioner. Then on about 10 October
2022, the applicant received a copy of the Board’s reasons, dated 4
October 2022, for its decision of 30 August 2022.
cancellation of the applicant’s registration as a migration agent
applicant was born in Iran on 12 September 1975. He migrated to Australia in
2007. He worked in different jobs. In 2010, he completed
a diploma in financial
services through TAFE SA. In 2013 and 2014, he undertook and completed a
two-year Master’s degree in
professional accounting at the University of
South Australia. He became an associate member of Certified Public Accountants
Australia. In 2014, he enrolled in Victoria University, Australia to study
a Graduate Certificate in Australian Migration Law and
Practice. He graduated
from this course in April 2015. He applied for and was first registered as a
migration agent on 20 July 2015.
His registration was renewed annually, with the
most recent application for registration, before the revocation, having been
on 14 June 2017.
applicant had difficulty in finding employment at an established migration
agency, which led to him opening his own business.
On 16 June 2015, he
registered with ASIC a company, Immigration Services Pty Ltd (ACN: 606 451 567).
the first six months of opening, the applicant had accumulated a large client
base. His evidence was that he became overwhelmed
by the workload. He described
himself as being unprepared to act as a migration agent. He said he failed to
implement proper office
procedures, maintain clients’ files and record
instructions properly.
November 2016 and December 2017, MARA received six complaints from the
applicant’s clients and three from the Department
of Home Affairs
(‘the Department’) concerning the applicant’s conduct.
17 February 2017, MARA provided the applicant with a notice under
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) concerning three complaints received by MARA
between 5 November 2016 and 8 February 2017 and one complaint in February 2017.
On 10 April 2017, the applicant provided MARA with a response to the
3 May 2017, MARA provided the applicant with a second notice concerning a
complaint received by MARA on 1 March 2017. On 30 May
2017, the applicant
provided MARA with a response to this second notice.
25 July 2017, MARA made a further request for information, to which the
applicant responded on 11 August 2017.
On 13 December 2017, pursuant to
Migration Act
provided the applicant with a notice advising that it was considering
cautioning, suspending or cancelling the applicant’s
registration under
The applicant was invited to provide MARA with a written response to
this notice. He did so on 13 April 2018.
11 May 2018, MARA cancelled the applicant’s registration as a migration
agent, pursuant to
s 303(1)(a)
Migration Act
. Pursuant to
that Act, the applicant was prevented from applying for registration for five
years from that date.
Statement of Reasons of the delegate expressed the following conclusions as to
the applicant’s conduct:
230. Based on the evidence before
me, I am satisfied that the Agent:
failed to issue
any Statements of Service to clients, despite withdrawing client monies from his
clients account;
inaccurate and misleading information to the Department as part of
[...]’s, [...]’s. and [...]’s applications;
Failed to keep
adequate client file notes relating to drafting of client responses for their
protection applications and supporting
documentation;
provide frank and candid advice to clients when assisting them to apply for
protection, and failed to provide advice relating
to their prospects of success
in writing;
significant number of Protection visa applications and statements of claims that
shared duplicated or template claims for
protection, contrary to the integrity
of Australia’s visa program, and in doing so, undermined the program and
failed to act
in the best interests of his clients when articulating their
protection claims;
Prepared and
lodged a vexatious and/or grossly unfounded application for protection on behalf
of [...] using [...] and [...]’s
protection claims. This conduct,
considered to have occurred shortly after he responded to allegations of
fraudulent conduct in respect
of [...]’s application, as well as in the
section 308
notice, shows a propensity for deceitful conduct;
The Agent has
repeatedly attempted to mislead the Authority in his responses to the
complaints;
The Agent has
demonstrated a blatant disregard for the Authority and migration regulatory
scheme by failing to respond reasonably
to a request made by the Authority, and
engaging in subsequent fraudulent conduct after the Authority had already
brought conduct
concerns to his attention;
Agent’s conduct, as made out in this decision record, demonstrates a
blatant and ongoing disregard for the integrity of
the Department’s
Protection visa program; and
The Agent has
repeatedly demonstrated a lack of regard for section 11 of the Statutory
Declaration Act 1959 and his clients by drafting
and witnessing their statutory
declarations and Form 866C’s knowing that the responses contained large
amounts of duplicated,
misleading and inaccurate information.
delegate found that the applicant had not been forthcoming in acknowledging or
expressing remorse for the serious conduct identified.
She concluded that the
applicant was not a person of integrity or was otherwise not a fit and proper
person to give immigration assistance
and had not complied with clauses of the
Migration Agents Code of Conduct (‘the Migration Agents Code’).
The AAT appeal
applicant appealed to the AAT.
gave evidence and was cross‑examined. The Deputy President was not
impressed with the applicant as a witness. He considered
that the applicant
failed to answer questions directly and often provided an explanation for his
behaviour when not asked. He found
that the applicant often blamed his clients
for changing their story and failed to make appropriate concessions. There were
inconsistencies in the applicant’s
explanations.
Deputy President found that the applicant’s most significant failing as a
witness was when he was asked to explain why
passages of the written statements
of claim he prepared for different clients were often almost word for word the
same. It was evident
that the applicant had copied and pasted the same passages
for multiple clients. The Deputy President expressed his conclusions about
applicant’s evidence on this topic as
cross-examination the applicant denied fabricating any story of a client. He
said that he listened to the client’s story
and then wrote it down. He
denied copying any passages from a previous client’s statement of claim
and denied using those passages
in a new client’s statement of claim. This
evidence is clearly false. Counsel for the respondent put to the applicant
examples of replicated passages from the statements of claim of
different clients. The applicant maintained his denial. I raised
my concern that
it was apparent from the face of the documents that passages had been copied.
The applicant maintained his denial.
There was then a break for lunch after
which the applicant offered an explanation for his earlier evidence and said
that he was confused
when he had been asked whether he had copied and pasted
passages of statements of claim. He explained that he never fabricated a
client’s story but that he did copy and paste from previous clients’
statements of claim where their stories were the
same. He said that as a
migration agent he saw many clients whose stories had a common theme, for
example being persecuted as a Christian
in Iran and being arrested or shot at.
This was the reason for the similarity of the passages. The applicant maintained
that he accurately
recorded the instructions given to him by clients. This is
obviously false, and I reject this evidence from the applicant.
in his reasons, the Deputy President
There is no
acceptable explanation for the same passages of words appearing in different
statements of claims. Despite this, the applicant
maintained to the end that he
never fabricated a client’s story. I reject this contention and consider
that it indicates a
lack of integrity on the part of the applicant.
Deputy President found that the applicant had shown himself to be a person
lacking integrity and who was otherwise not a fit
and proper person to give any
immigration assistance. He found that the applicant had breached a wide variety
of clauses in the Migration
Agents Code relating to both professional conduct
and administrative requirements.
Further, the applicant’s conduct in response to the complaints and his
conduct in giving evidence before the Tribunal demonstrated
a lack of insight
into the contravening conduct.
Deputy President concluded that the decision of MARA to cancel the
applicant’s registration was the correct and preferable
The reasons of the Board
Board’s reasons, dated 4 October 2020, noted that the affidavit
accompanying the applicant’s application for admission
exhibited documents
addressing the cancellation of the applicant’s migration licence,
including the reasons of the AAT. The
Board referred to numerous remarks and
findings made by the Deputy President, namely of the applicant’s lack of
integrity and
conduct during cross-examination.
Board considered that the statement on the cover page of Exhibit F of his
affidavit of 18 August 2022 failed to deal with the
AAT’s finding that the
applicant gave false evidence before it. The Board expressed its deep concern
the applicant gave that evidence prior to
commencing his legal studies, the Board did not accept that a person who had not
law would not understand that evidence given to a Court or Tribunal must
be truthful and complete.
Board also considered that the statement failed to address the AAT’s
trenchant criticism of the applicant’s performance
as a migration agent.
The Board pointed to the findings of the Deputy President to the effect that the
applicant’s conduct
(a) not giving proper advice;
(b) failing to act in the best interests of the client;
(c) providing misleading and inaccurate information in the statement of
(d) misunderstanding the relevant legal principles;
(e) failing to keep records of instructions or dealings generally with
(f) being responsible for adverse credibility findings being made against the
client in their protection visa applications;
(g) maintaining a denial through despite incontrovertible evidence.
Board expressed the view that these matters were equally, if not more, crucial
in a legal practitioner’s practice as in
a migration agent’s
practice. It considered that the applicant did not deal with the AAT’s
criticisms beyond his words
‘I now fully appreciate the need for high
professional ethical standard required of me. I regret my failure to adhere to
standards when I was a Migration Agent’.
Board concluded that the applicant’s application was inadequate in dealing
finding that he gave false evidence;
criticisms of his integrity; and
detailed criticism of aspects of his practice as a migration agent, which in the
Board’s view were aspects equally,
if not more, applicable to legal
Board concluded that it was not satisfied that the applicant was a fit and
proper person to be admitted as a practitioner and
declined to issue a
favourable report.
The application for admission
7 of Chapter 20 of the
Uniform Civil Rules
governs the jurisdiction of
this Court to hear and determine applications for admission. Relevantly, r
257.8(2) provides:
(2) If an objection is filed or the Board
recommends that the applicant not be admitted,
the Registrar
will convene
directions hearing
before a Judge to give directions about the listing
and preparation of
the application for
hearing before 3 Judges of the
Court sitting in banco.
(Emphasis added)
257.9 provides:
257.9—Hearing
(1) At the hearing of the application, the Court may, if it thinks fit, act
upon a report of the Board of Examiners without further
(2) The applicant must attend the hearing, unless exempted by the Court on
application by the applicant made by filing a request
to the Registrar in
accordance with rule 13.2(5) at least 14 days before the hearing or on the
Court’s own initiative.
(3) If the Court orders that an applicant be admitted, the applicant must
take the oath or affirmation of admission in the following
(4) If the Court orders that an applicant be admitted, the applicant will be
enrolled as a solicitor and barrister of the Court upon
signing the Roll of
Practitioners.
Legal Practitioners Act
15—Entitlement to admission
(1) A person who satisfies the Supreme Court—
(a) that he or she is a fit and proper person to practise the profession of the
(i) he or she has complied with—
(A) the rules of the Supreme Court relating to the admission of barristers
and solicitors of the Supreme Court; and
(B) the rules made by LPEAC under this Act prescribing the qualifications
for admission as a barrister and solicitor of the Supreme
(ii) insofar as there has been non-compliance with those rules, he or she
should be exempted from such compliance,
is entitled to be admitted and enrolled as a barrister and solicitor of the
Supreme Court.
to s 15(1)(a), the onus is on the applicant to satisfy the Court of his fitness
to practise law. The time at which the applicant
must be ‘fit and
proper’ is the time of the determination of the
application.
Affidavit evidence
10 January 2023
his affidavit dated 10 January 2023, the applicant gave evidence about why he
had failed to address in his application the AAT’s
findings that he had
given false evidence and the AAT’s criticisms of his performance as a
migration agent. He said that if
he had known that the Board wanted more detail
regarding these two matters, he would have provided that detail. He said that he
not attempt to hide or cover the Deputy President’s findings. He
accepted that the evidence to which the Deputy President referred
which is why in his statement in Exhibit F, he said, ‘I regret my failure
to adhere to those standards when I was
a Migration Agent’.
applicant ‘endeavoured to emphasise [his] regret and contrition’ by
saying, ‘I believe that the cancellation
has been a blessing in disguise.
I have learnt a hard lesson from my mistakes while I was a migration
agent’. He said that
by this statement, he intended for the Board to take
it as recognition that he had accepted the findings of the Deputy President,
that his future conduct needed to change and that it had changed.
applicant accepted that his practices and behaviour during that time were wrong.
He said that he had since learnt from his conduct
and that the findings of the
AAT were at the forefront of his mind whilst undertaking his law degree and
Graduate Diploma in Legal
Practice. He said that he endeavours to ensure that he
is always up to date on all rules and regulations governing the ethical
of legal practitioners, so that if he is admitted, he will, at all
times, act both professionally and ethically. He concluded this
affidavit saying
that throughout his studies, he has continually reviewed the Australian
Solicitors’ Conduct Rules and Ethics
Policy to ensure that he is aware of
what is required ethically and professionally from a legal practitioner.
the cancellation of his migration licence, the applicant completed a Certificate
IV in Disability through TAFE. He has
since found work using his accounting and
financial services skills to gain employment as a casual subcontractor for NDIS
by undertaking bookkeeping and accounting work. He has worked for Care
Centre, Community Options and Anglicare on a casual basis.
applicant explained that he began attending the Lutheran Church at Pasadena in
recent years, as his religion assists him when
he is under pressure. He is a
member of various associations and volunteers regularly, such as at the
Salvation Army and St Vincent
de Paul Society.
applicant gave detailed evidence about the law degree he undertook. In deciding
to complete a law degree, he believed that he
had learnt from his previous
mistakes and resolved that nothing like that would happen again. He commenced a
Bachelor of Laws degree
through Victoria University in 2020 and completed it in
early 2022. He subsequently completed his Graduate Diploma in Legal Practice
(‘GDLP’) through the College of Law in August 2022. In 2021 and
2022, while completing his studies, he undertook work
placements at Morgan
Freeman Lawyers and Old Port Chambers.
applicant said that following the AAT proceedings, he determined that he would
not make the same mistakes again. This led to
him paying particular attention to
the ethics components of his degree and GDLP. He annexed exhibits to his
affidavit, which illustrated
his completion in various Continuing Professional
Development (‘CPD’) courses with a focus on ethics. These included
‘Mistaken Expectations: Managing and Owning Mistakes in the
Workplace’ and ‘Ethics – Professional and Practice
Risks’. He also said he read the Australian Solicitors Conduct Rules
(‘Conduct Rules’). He said that from studying
and completing
ethics-related courses, CPD courses and reading the Conduct Rules, he believed
that he has an awareness of the ethical
requirements of a legal practitioner. He
completed these additional ethics courses as he was determined that he would not
same mistakes again and that he would live up to the high standards
required of a legal practitioner.
9 March 2023
his affidavit dated 9 March 2023, the applicant acknowledged that by providing
false evidence in the AAT hearing, he had ‘effectively
lied’ to the
Tribunal. He said that at the time, he did not appreciate the seriousness of his
actions. He lied because he was
worried that he would not have his migration
agent’s registration reinstated or be able to continue working in
migration services.
He said that his actions were not premeditated and that he
did not want to admit what he had done, which led to him lying. Once he
one lie, he felt compelled to continue in order to cover up the initial lie.
applicant said that at the time of the AAT proceedings, he lacked insight into
his behaviour. He tried to protect himself and
his reputation and did not
realise the seriousness of his wrongdoing. His evidence was that having now
completed a law degree and
having an awareness of the ethical standards and
duties of a legal practitioner, he appreciates the seriousness of his actions.
reading the submissions of the Law Society, the applicant filed a further
affidavit, dated 4 May 2023. In this affidavit,
he sought to address the Law
Society’s submission that he had been ‘less than candid with the
Board in seeking admission
into legal practice’. In response to this
submission, he said he believed and proceeded on the basis that informing the
of the cancellation of his licence would result in the Court having access
to the MARA file, including the AAT decision. He said
that for that reason, he
had merely referred to his cancelled registration for breaches of the Migration
Agents Code. He likened
this process to that of a police check. He accepted
that he was wrong in that view.
applicant said that he believed that if the Law Society, the Board or the Court
needed further information on account of what
he had provided, they would ask.
He accepted that he was wrong in that view and that he had an obligation to
disclose the information
he had subsequently included in his affidavit of 18
August 2022. He said he did not know this at the time of filing the previous
affidavits. Once Ms Burke told him that this disclosure was inadequate, he filed
a fresh application with the materials exhibited
to his affidavit of 18 August
222, including the statement in Exhibit F.
applicant said that if he had known and appreciated his disclosure requirements
at the start, he would have annexed all the documents
he had in his affidavit
dated 18 August 2022 in earlier affidavits. He did not intend to be less than
candid with the Board and it
was never his intention to hide any aspect of his
migrant agent licence cancellation and the subsequent AAT proceedings from the
Board, the Law Society or the Court.
The applicant’s
oral evidence
applicant explained at the hearing that his first language is Farsi. When
speaking English, he thinks in Farsi and translates
his responses from Farsi
before answering in English.
asked in cross-examination about the errors he had to rectify in earlier
affidavits, prior to that which accompanied his final
application, he
There was lots of communication by phone and email with
Law Society... there wasn't any guideline for how to load application for
admission; and the website of Law Society also is very - is not user friendly,
is very confusing. And that's why I had lots of communication
by phone and
email with Law Society, to guide me how to load a perfect application. That's
why I lodged, I think, four application
was then asked about the Law Admissions Consultative Committee Disclosure
Guidelines, which he confirmed reading, in full, prior
to preparing his first
affidavit. He said he understood them. On that understanding, he disclosed that
his migration licence had
been cancelled, and expected that ‘they’
would access all the relevant documents or ask him to provide further documents.
He said there was no intention to hide anything. Senior Counsel for the Law
Society took the applicant to specific sections of the
Disclosure Guidelines
where applicants are instructed not to wait for the admitting authority to ask
for further information. The
applicant explained that he believed that his
failure to provide a full account at that stage was a misunderstanding and that
did not intend to hide anything.
applicant confirmed that he read the Disclosure Guidelines before he first sent
the materials to the Law Society but was unsure
of the documentation that would
be relevant, as there was a ‘huge amount of information and document
[sic]’. On his explanation,
this was why he was waiting for the Law
Society to ask for the information. Once they asked, he immediately provided it.
applicant maintained that he thought the Court would have access to the whole of
his migration agent file and the AAT decision,
similarly to undergoing a police
check. He made this assumption due to past experience with police checks. He
agreed that he now
understood that this was not the case and that the Board did
not have access to his migration agent file or the AAT material.
applicant said that he did not mention anything specifically about giving false
evidence in the AAT proceedings in his affidavit
of 18 August 2022 and the cover
page to Exhibit F because the AAT clearly discussed his lies in its Reasons for
Decision. He therefore
did not think it necessary to mention that he had lied.
He thought that if the Board was to read the decision, it would be aware
had lied. He did not provide any explanation why he lied or the circumstances
that brought him to that incident in the cover
page because there was
‘lots of information in [the] AAT decision’. He believed that they
would read the decision and
find out everything.
applicant confirmed that he now knew that an adverse credit finding that he had
lied was a very important matter when applying
for admission as a legal
practitioner. He disagreed that he did not appreciate its importance when
completing his affidavit dated
18 August 2022. He appreciated that it was
important, but he provided the AAT decision and thought that was enough for the
to find anything it needed to know.
cross-examination then focused on the lack of apology to the AAT in Exhibit F of
the affidavit and the subsequent apology in
his affidavit dated 10 January
staying with that single page, Exhibit F, do you agree with me that there is no
apology there to Deputy President Britten-Jones
A. I think you are right, I have ... to mention
specifically my apology.
you do do that in your January affidavit, I think it's para.46 of your January
affidavit you do specifically state you wished
to apologise to the
decision of the tribunal was much earlier, I think it's 2020 and your affidavit
is in January of this year, so there was quite
a period of time between when you
would've first read it and when you were making the apology. Is it a genuine
it is a genuine apology because during those few years I tried to improve my
knowledge in the area, now I understand the seriousness
of the matter I did in
I mean you had already completed your studies when you prepared Exhibit F, so
are you saying this is something that you have developed
more recently in terms
of your understanding.
all of us need to improve ourself daily basis, yeah, and no-one is perfect, you
have to ask is it the case that you are only apologising in January because it
is going to assist with your application for admission.
really understand what I did and what they tried to do, that's why I apology of
that and it is very embarrassing when I am talking
asked whether he knew that it was wrong to give false evidence to a tribunal
sitting in a witness box, like he was at the hearing
before this Court, he
accepted that he knew that it was wrong, but he did so in order to keep his
licence. He said he was really
under pressure at the time.
applicant accepted that when working as a migration agent, he cut and pasted
from one client’s statement of claim into
another client’s and that
he did so on multiple occasions. He accepted that it was dishonest and said he
was ‘so sorry
applicant was then asked about the CPD courses he had undertaken and noted in
his affidavit dated 10 January 2023. He explained
that he was not a solicitor at
the time and had no obligations to complete CPD courses but did so to improve
himself and his knowledge.
He noted that these courses were specifically in
ethics. When asked for an example of what he had learnt from these CPD courses,
the applicant said:
Yes, I learned briefly that lawyers have a duty
always to be honest about their - open and lawyer, about their client, about the
system because knowing law and the way of using law doesn't mean we can do
misdeals or to abuse or break the law. We have to act
ethically, always.
accepted that the things that he did and his practices as a migration agent
which resulted in complaints were unethical and that
he did not comply with the
Code of Conduct in many ways. If he was allowed to practice as a legal
practitioner, he was ‘pretty
sure’ that he would not make the same
mistakes again as he knew the seriousness of those actions and he had also
improved himself.
cross-examination concluded with counsel asking the applicant whether he
appreciated the need to ask for help and whether he
was willing to undergo
supervision for longer than the mandatory two-year period:
you appreciate that if you are allowed to practice as a legal practitioner that
it is very, very important that if you're unsure
you ask for help.
A. Definitely.
the court decides that you can be admitted as a legal practitioner would you be
willing to undergo supervision for a longer period
of time than the usual two
A. I will accept any decision from this honourable court.
Whether the applicant is a fit and proper person to practise the
profession of the law
legislation does not define the expression ‘fit and proper’.
Relevant considerations in cases where a doubt or concern
applicant’s fitness arises from previous conduct of the applicant
the protection
of the public;
the character of
the applicant;
applicant’s understanding of the standard of behaviour required of
solicitors;
the effect upon
relationships which must exist between solicitors; and
the nature and
circumstances of what was done.
Court should have regard to whether it is appropriate for the applicant to be
admitted when considering the role of practitioners
in the due administration of
justice, and whether courts and the profession will be able to have confidence
in the honesty and integrity
of the applicant as a practitioner.
is convenient to approach the question of whether the applicant is a fit and
proper person by reference to the three matters raised
by the Law Society, that
is, the applicant’s past practice as a migration agent, his giving false
evidence before the AAT and
the frankness of his disclosure to the Board in
making his application, particularly with reference to the findings of the
Disclosure to the Board
generally accept the applicant’s explanation that his failure to disclose
sufficient details about the cancellation of his
migration agent’s licence
and the findings of the AAT was not a deliberate attempt to mislead the Board.
When asked to provide
further materials, he did so without hesitation. We accept
that the ongoing lack of disclosure was based on a misunderstanding of
obligations and of the materials to which the Board would have access to in any
we accept, then, that these failures were not the product of dishonesty, they
cause us to doubt the applicant’s capacity
to have understood the
Disclosure Guidelines. The applicant confirmed in evidence that he had read
them. He has, with the benefit
of advice and representation, shown a better
understanding of his disclosure obligations before this Court. That he has done
at this late stage, on advice, when the question of disclosure was
explicitly in issue, gives some cause for concern about the depth
understanding of the obligation.
this lack of disclosure the only matter of concern, it would likely not warrant
a conclusion that the applicant is not a fit
and proper person. In
Application for Admission as a Legal
Practitioner
an applicant had
not given a full account of offending conduct he had committed some years
earlier. The offending conduct, which
consisted of larceny and receiving items
of clothing, and shoplifting, had occurred over five years earlier. The
applicant did not
have the Police Apprehension Report (‘PAR’) to
assist him.
CJ considered that the offending conduct was a product of immaturity and
difficulties the applicant was experiencing at the
time, and that in all the
circumstances it was not an obstacle to
applicant’s failure to make full disclosure of the circumstances of the
offending, rather than just the fact of the
convictions, Doyle CJ accepted that
the applicant did not have the PAR but that, nonetheless, it was troubling that
he did not disclose
details such as the imposition of a suspended sentence of
imprisonment. His Honour
I am troubled
not just by the failure to think more carefully about what should have been
disclosed. I am troubled by the fact that
this occurred in November 2002, at
which stage he had been working for some time, and should have had a better
understanding of what
would be required of an applicant for admission in these
circumstances.
However, in the end I am again prepared to conclude that this matter does not
prevent me finding that the applicant is a fit person
to be admitted. I do so
on the basis that the non-disclosure is attributable to an error of judgment,
and to some extent to immaturity,
and not to a deliberate attempt to mislead the
the present case, we are similarly prepared to accept that the applicant’s
non‑disclosure was not an attempt to mislead
the Board deliberately.
However, we are left with some concern about the applicant’s understanding
of obligations of disclosure.
That understanding is a critical capacity of a
legal practitioner.
are also concerned that the applicant’s failure to make sufficient
disclosure about the reasons for the cancellation of
his licence and the
findings of the AAT demonstrates a lack of insight into their gravity. He has,
with the benefit of advice and
representation, come to an understanding of their
seriousness. That he has done so only at this late stage and in the present
circumstances
gives reason to expect, at the very least, that his appointment
would undermine public confidence in the legal
profession.
applicant’s practice as a migration agent
various failures of the applicant to comply with the Migration Agents Code are
failures that speak directly to his character
and his ability to command public
confidence as a legal practitioner. Professional misconduct has a direct bearing
on the question
of fitness to practise. Personal misconduct may on occasion have
a less direct impact,
it will always depend on all the
circumstances.
applicant’s misconduct as a migration agent, being in a professional
capacity sharing some of the responsibilities
of a legal practitioner, is highly
relevant. In this regard, the applicant’s conduct was egregious. The AAT
Deputy President
The applicant
has failed to conduct himself in accordance with the proper standards of a
registered migration agent. I do not consider
that he possesses the minimum
attributes and abilities that a person must demonstrate to perform as a
registered migration agent.
The applicant has engaged in conduct that breaches
the Code in relation to almost all areas of practice – administrative
financial obligations; consumer protection obligations; dealings with
the authority; dealings with his clients; and the need to act
in the best
interest of the client. Breaches of the Code were often repeated, and the
applicant showed a lack of insight into his
conduct by not making appropriate
concessions and by maintaining a defence to his actions even where not plausibly
professional failings occurred in circumstances where the applicant held a
number of professional qualifications. They are
not explicable on the basis of
immaturity or lack of life experience. The applicant’s conduct, especially
that of copying and
pasting claims into different applications, had the capacity
to expose vulnerable clients to unwarranted adverse outcomes.
is relevant that MARA cancelled the applicant’s registration as a
migration agent on 11 May 2018. That is, five years have
passed. The capacity of
the applicant to have reformed thanks to his subsequent legal education and the
passage of time are the only
things capable of ameliorating the impact of this
conduct on the applicant’s fitness and propriety to be a legal
practitioner.
Those matters must be considered in the further context of the
applicant’s conduct before the AAT.
The findings of the
applicant’s lies before the AAT are of the greatest concern. These were
said and maintained on oath, in circumstances where
it was the applicant who had
brought the appeal in an effort to regain his registration as a migration agent.
Counsel for the applicant submitted that these lies were borne out of a
desperation on the part of the applicant to save his
livelihood. The maintenance
of the lies, in the face of incontrovertible evidence before the AAT that they
were lies, in his submission
constituted sheer stupidity. In this regard, these
lies should be contrasted with what might be described as calculated or devious
lies. Having been discovered in his lies, he told further lies to meet the
challenge. This was hardly a premeditated course of conduct.
readily accept that the applicant’s lies in the AAT were not at all
sophisticated. However, they formed the foundation of
his appeal. The applicant
persisted in these lies, in a futile attempt to recover the position. That the
applicant was prepared to
act in this way, with such dishonesty in circumstances
of desperation, still speaks heavily against his character.
senior counsel submitted, however, the ultimate question is whether this Court
is satisfied that the passage of time and efforts
of the applicant since the AAT
proceedings are such as to warrant the conclusion that the applicant is, now, a
fit and proper person
for admission as a practitioner.
applicant’s progress
AAT delivered its decision on 6 May 2020. The AAT hearing, during which the
applicant persisted in his lies, occurred on 10 and
11 September 2019. The
applicant commenced study for a Bachelor of Laws in 2020. It is since then that
he has engaged in the legal
studies described above and made a point on focusing
on the study of ethics. We are prepared to conclude that he has a greater
now into the nature of his behaviour and that he has worked to improve
his character. Having said that, we remain concerned that
his lack of
comprehension of his obligations of disclosure to the Board on this application
indicates that this understanding remains,
to some degree, superficial. His
assurances have come, finally, only with the benefit of legal advice and
representation.
historical fact of the applicant’s dishonesty and misconduct in a
professional capacity between 2016 and 2019 remains relevant
to the effect that
his admission would have on public confidence in the administration of justice.
Re Application for Admission as a Legal
Practitioner
where, it is to
be recalled, the applicant had engaged in dishonesty offences when young, Doyle
to the question of public confidence in the administration of justice and in the
legal profession. As I said earlier,
it is conceivable that the court might be
satisfied that an applicant for admission has changed his or her ways, but might
same time take the view that earlier misconduct was so serious that
public confidence in the administration of justice and in the
profession would
be shaken were the public to learn that a person with the applicant’s
record had been admitted as a practitioner.
the present case, we do not consider that an ordinary member of the public would
accept that the applicant’s conduct, which
occurred in a professional
context when he was aged in his 40s, can be put behind the applicant in only the
time that it has taken
him to obtain a law degree. It is one thing to have
undertaken the necessary studies and learned, explicitly, the obligations
to a legal practitioner. It is another for the public to have
confidence that the applicant not only understands these lessons as
intellectual exercise, but is also capable of putting them into practice, as
part of his ethical identity, in the pressured environment
does not mean that the applicant can never be regarded as a fit and proper
person to be admitted as a legal practitioner. As
already indicated, we are
satisfied that the applicant has embarked in good faith on reforming his
character. There is no reason
why the necessary public confidence cannot be
earned outside of legal practice. However, the applicant’s transgressions
too recent, and the assurances of his understanding of his obligations too
tenuous, especially in light of his continued lack of
understanding of his
disclosure obligations, for this Court to be satisfied that he is presently a
fit and proper person for admission.
conclusion does not prevent the applicant from applying for admission again,
when he has had the opportunity to consolidate
his understanding and put the
question of his fitness and propriety for admission on a firmer, more
demonstrable footing.
these reasons, we are not satisfied that the applicant is a fit and proper
person to be admitted as a practitioner of this Court
at this time. We refuse
application.
Raygan and Migration Agents
Registration Authority
[2020] AATA 1164.
Raygan and Migration Agents
Registration Authority
[2020] AATA 1164
Raygan and Migration Agents
Registration Authority
[2020] AATA 1164
Raygan and Migration Agents
Registration Authority
[2020] AATA 1164
Raygan and Migration Agents
Registration Authority
[2020] AATA 1164
Raygan and Migration Agents
Registration Authority
[2020] AATA 1164
See for example
Application for Admission as a Practitioner
[2004] SASC 426
(2004) 90 SASR 551
(Doyle CJ, White and Perry JJ agreeing) and [43] (Debelle J);
Lincoln v New
Zealand Law Society
[2019] NZCA 442
Law Society of NSW v
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408.
[2004] SASC 426
(2004) 90 SASR 551.
Re Application for
Admission as a Legal Practitioner
[2004] SASC 426
(2004) 90 SASR 551
Perry and White JJ agreeing).
Re Application for
as a Legal Practitioner
[2004] SASC 426
(2004) 90 SASR 551
(Doyle CJ, Perry and White JJ agreeing).
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Cleland
[2021] SASCA 10
[42]-[44], and see also the
applications to be readmitted, where the evaluation of the character
requirements for admission were
undertaken:
In Re Vadasz
[1988] SASC
(1988) 146 LSJS 455
Re Harrison: Application for Readmission
[2002] SASC 335
(2002) 84 SASR 120
In the matter of
Claire Amy Morel
Ziems v The Prothonotary
of the Supreme Court of New South Wales
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
(Fullagar J).
(Debelle J);
New South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
(2001) 52 NSWLR 279
(Spigelman CJ).
Raygan and Migration
Agents Registration Authority
[2020] AATA 1164
[2004] SASC 426
(2004) 90 SASR 551.
Re Application for
Admission as a Legal Practitioner
[2004] SASC 426
(2004) 90 SASR 551
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (470 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter