URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAOmbFOI/2021/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:01:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
University of Adelaide 2021/02707 [2021] SAOmbFOI 19 (24 November 2021)
Determination
External review - section 39
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Dr Mike Zyphur
University of Adelaide
Ombudsman reference:
Agency reference:
Determination:
The determination of the agency is reversed
Date of Deputy Ombudsman’s determination:
24 November 2021
Issues considered:
Definition of personal affairs
Unreasonableness (personal
Public interest
Diminished commercial value
Adverse effect on
business affairs
Exemption clauses relied upon:
Legislation considered:
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Terms of the original application:
The data provided to the ATO which facilitates the payment summaries for
those employees who have the top 50 payment summary values
– ie the top 50
payment summary values in terms of the total amount of compensation provided to
university employees annually,
across all work focus categories, roles and forms
of compensation (eg salary, loading, bonuses, and the like), for the two
years 2018-2019 and 2019-2020
Application for access
1. By application under the
Freedom of Information Act 1991
) the applicant requested access from the agency
The data provided to the ATO which facilitates the payment summaries for
those employees who have the top 50 payment summary values
– ie the top 50
payment summary values in terms of the total amount of compensation provided to
university employees annually,
across all work focus categories, roles and forms
of compensation (eg salary, loading, bonuses, and the like), for the two
years 2018-2019 and 2019-2020.
2. For ease of reference, procedural steps relating to the application and
the external review are set out in the
3. This external review is within the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman as a
relevant review authority under section 39 of the FOI Act.
Provisional
determination
4. I provided my tentative view about the agency’s determination to the
parties, by my provisional determination dated 10 September
2021, in my role as
the Acting Deputy Ombudsman.
5. I am issuing my determination in this matter in my role as the Deputy
6. I informed the parties that, subject to my receipt and consideration of
submissions from the parties, I proposed to reverse the
determination.
7. I have received further submissions from both parties, and I have
addressed them as necessary in the body of my determination.
8. A person has a legally enforceable right to be given access to an
agency’s documents in accordance with the FOI
9. The FOI Act provides that upon receipt of an access application, an agency
may make a determination to refuse access where the
documents are
‘exempt’. Schedule 1 lists various exemption clauses which may be
claimed by an agency as a basis for refusing
access. The following clauses are
relevant to this external review:
6—Documents affecting personal affairs
(1) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter the disclosure
of which would involve the unreasonable disclosure of
information concerning the
personal affairs of any person (living or dead).
(2) A document is an exempt document if it contains allegations or
suggestions of criminal or other improper conduct on the part
of a person
(living or dead) the truth of which has not been established by judicial process
and the disclosure of which would be
unreasonable.
(3) A document is not an exempt document by virtue of
subclause (1)
merely because it contains information concerning the person by or on whose
behalf an application for access to the document is made.
(3a) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter—
(a) consisting of information concerning a person who is presently under the
age of 18 years or suffering from mental illness, impairment
or infirmity or
concerning such a person's family or circumstances, or information of any kind
furnished by a person who was under
that age or suffering from mental illness,
impairment or infirmity when the information was furnished; and
(b) the disclosure of which would be unreasonable having regard to the need
to protect that person's welfare.
7—Documents
affecting business affairs
(1) A document is an exempt document—
(a) if it contains matter the disclosure of which would disclose trade
secrets of any agency or any other person; or
(b) if it contains
(i) consisting of information (other than trade secrets) that has a
commercial value to any agency or any other person; and
(ii) the disclosure of which—
(A) could reasonably be expected to destroy or diminish the commercial value
of the information; and
(B) would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest; or
(c) if it contains matter—
(i) consisting of information (other than trade secrets or information
referred to in
paragraph (b)
concerning the business, professional, commercial or financial affairs of any
agency or any other person; and
(ii) the disclosure of which—
(A) could reasonably be expected to have an adverse effect on those affairs
or to prejudice the future supply of such information
to the Government or to an
agency; and
(B) would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest.
13—Documents
containing confidential material
(1) A document is an
exempt document—
(a) if it contains matter the disclosure of which would found an action for
breach of confidence; or
(b) if it contains matter obtained in confidence the disclosure of
(i) might reasonably be expected to prejudice the future supply of such
information to the Government or to an agency; and
(ii) would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest.
10. Under section 48, the onus is on the agency to justify its determination
‘in any proceedings’. This includes the external
11. Section 39(11) provides that the Ombudsman may confirm, vary or reverse
the agency’s determination in an external review,
based on the
circumstances existing at the time of review.
Documents in
12. The agency identified one document (
the document
the scope of the application.
13. The agency determined that the document is exempt in full pursuant to
clauses 6(1), 7(1)(b) and 13(1)(a).
Issues in this review
14. Having regard to the agency’s submissions and the exemption clauses
provided in Schedule 1 of the FOI Act, it is for me
to determine whether to
confirm, vary or reverse the agency’s determination in regard to the
document in issue in this external
Consideration
15. While I will address specific submissions in respect to individual
clauses throughout my determination, there is a procedural
point that was raised
by the agency which I consider it appropriate to address first.
16. In my provisional determination, I made certain observations that the
information in issue presumably existed in contracts and
without evidence to the
contrary, I was not satisfied disclosure of the document would have an adverse
effect under clause 7.
17. Further, I also indicated that I would not be satisfied that the
information in issue was exempt by virtue of clause 13(1) unless
I was provided
with evidence that a contractual agreement existed between the agency and its
staff that met the confidentiality provisions
of clause 13(2).
18. In response to my provisional determination, the agency stated that it
considered it was not open for me to make determinations
based on assumptions
that gave regard to material that did not form part of the external review.
19. I informed the agency, by letter dated 29 September 2021, that I was
proceeding based on principles that were established in the
Department of the Premier & Cabinet v
on that basis
I may have regard to extrinsic material that is relevant to the review.
I requested that the agency provide:
confirmation
whether there are contractual agreements that include the information in issue
(also including any examples of any contractual
agreements you consider indicate
that the relevant information has the necessary quality of confidence for the
purpose of clause
supporting documents or submissions that would evince that employees of the
agency have a reasonable expectation of confidentiality
over their remuneration
(noting the agency’s status as a prescribed body within the meaning of the
20. I informed the agency that if it was not inclined to provide me with the
documents and information I considered relevant to this
review, I would proceed
to consider my determination based on the absence of all information necessary
to establish that the information
in issue is exempt.
21. It was open for the agency to provide me with evidence that would refute
my inference and also support a finding that the information
in issue attracted
an equitable obligation of confidence.
22. In support of this approach, I note that under section 48 of the FOI Act,
the agency bears the onus of justifying its determination,
proceedings.
23. The onus borne by the agency in justifying its determination under the
FOI Act was addressed by the Supreme Court in the matter
Anangu Pitjantjatjara Yankunytjatjara v Ombudsman
In that matter, Hinton J made the following observation:
Something more should be said about s 48 of the FOI Act. In my view, an
external review is a proceeding for the purposes of s 48.
Implicitly, the burden
in s 48 is not simply persuasive but evidential; accepting this, it is for the
agency to put all information
necessary to justifying a determination before the
Ombudsman. Failure to do so does not necessarily frustrate an external review
mean that the Ombudsman must resort to the powers contained in the
Commissions Act 1917
(SA). But it will impact upon the discharge of the
burden. That is to say, if an agency fails to put all information necessary to
justify a determination before the Ombudsman then it risks the review being
determined on the basis of what was before the Ombudsman.
If the determination
is adverse to the agency, it cannot
24. I consider the view put forward by Hinton J establishes a clear
expectation that in an external review, it is for the agency to
information before me, both evidential and persuasive, that would justify its
determination.
25. The agency declined to provide the evidence sought by my letter dated 29
September 2021, stating that it would not be practicable
nor reasonable to
provide 50 contracts with confidentiality provisions that satisfied clause
26. On 28 October 2021, the Ombudsman’s Manager of Information and
Audit sent an email to the agency clarifying my position,
and that I would be
satisfied by an example of one contract that had the relevant confidentiality
provisions.
27. On 3 November 2021 the agency again declined to provide any examples of a
completed contract with the relevant confidentiality
provisions. The agency did
however provide excerpts of an incomplete contract, and I have discussed those
excerpts at paragraphs
158 onwards.
28. I note that the purpose of my provisional determination was to inform the
agency of my preliminary views and that those views
would be subject to the
receipt and consideration of further submissions, which included supporting
evidence. My request to the agency
by letter and the request made by the Manager
of Information and Audit sought further evidence from the agency to assist me in
whether the determination of the agency was justified.
29. With the exception of sections 39(9) and 39(10) of the FOI Act, the
manner in which this Office chooses to conduct an external
review is a matter
for this Office’s
discretion.
30. Noting the onus under section 48 and with reference to
I consider it is reasonably open for me to draw the inferences that I have and
proceed in conducting this external review in the
manner that I have chosen, and
the agency has been provided with multiple opportunities to respond to my
inferences.
31. I also note that in the concluding paragraphs of the agency’s
submissions, it made the following statement:
Parliament has struck a balance between disclosure and restriction, reflected
in the terms of exemption. There is no presumption of
disclosure under the Act.
Exemptions are not to be restrictively construed to limit their potential
application or to ‘lean’
towards disclosure.
32. In making the above statement the agency
referred to the matter of
Attorney-General v Seven Network (Operations)
33. Having regard to the reasoning in
Attorney-General v Seven Network
(Operations Ltd),
I have not made reference to a presumption in favour of
disclosure in my determination, nor have I disregarded any authority on the
proper construction of the exemption clauses in this matter.
34. I will now turn to consider the application of the relevant exemption
Clause 6 – Documents affecting personal affairs
35. For a document to be exempt pursuant to clause
it must contain
information concerning the personal affairs of any person (not including the
applicant); and
the disclosure
of that information would be unreasonable.
36. The term ‘personal affairs’ is defined inclusively in section
4(1) of the FOI Act. Among other things, it provides
that ‘personal
qualities or attributes’ are a person’s personal affairs. The term
has also been held to involve
‘matters of private concern to an
individual’
‘composite collection of activities personal to the individual
concerned’.
37. The agency submits that the document contains salary information which
constitutes the personal affairs of individuals other than
the applicant.
38. Whilst the information is de-identified, I am nevertheless satisfied that
the information concerns the personal affairs of individuals
other than the
applicant and that the first element of clause 6(1) has been
established.
39. The second step in ascertaining whether clause 6(1) applies is whether
disclosure would be unreasonable.
40. In the matter of
the District
Court considered the following factors as relevant in determining whether
disclosure of information concerning the personal
affairs of any person would be
unreasonable:
the sensitivity
(past or present) of the personal information
any view about
the disclosure expressed by the person to whom the personal information
the relationship
between the personal information and any other information in the documents
how the personal
information was obtained by the agency (whether voluntarily or involuntarily and
whether or not in confidence)
whether and to
what extent the personal information was already known to the applicant
the nature of
any interest which the applicant can demonstrate in
information in the document other than the personal information; or
personal information.
41. The following dicta from
Page v Metropolitan Transit
referred to by the District Court in support of the above
... a balancing of interests: the right to personal privacy of an individual
whose personal affairs may be unreasonably disclosed
by granting access to the
information and the object of the Act to extend as far as possible the right of
the community to have access
to information in the possession of the Government
or Agencies. More particularly, this balancing exercise requires a consideration
of all the circumstances, including the interest that the applicant has in the
information in question, the nature of the information
that would be disclosed,
the circumstances in which the information was obtained, the likelihood of the
information being information
that the person concerned would not wish to have
disclosed without consent, and whether the information has any current
42. From the above factors it is clear that a number of considerations need
to be taken into account when determining whether disclosure
unreasonable.
43. In considering the information in issue, I do not consider disclosure of
the information would be unreasonable.
44. In response to my provisional determination, the agency made a number of
submissions disagreeing with my provisional view, with
particular reference to
some of the above factors.
45. The agency submits that the document consists solely of personal
information and that there is no other information in the document.
46. I do not agree with this position. Whilst noting that the information
relates to the personal affairs of individuals, the document
also reveals the
agency’s expenditure in paying the salaries of its highest-earning staff
members. The document, and information
in issue, has a value outside of what it
reveals about a person’s personal affairs.
47. The agency also submits that the applicant has no interest in the
information.
48. Whilst I do not consider the question of whether the applicant has a
special interest in the information is a substantial factor
in determining this
matter, I consider that the applicant has shown that he does have an interest in
the information.
49. This Office sought further information from the applicant to clarify his
interest in the information. The applicant made the following
As an Associate Professor of Human Resources Management and someone who
studies income inequality, I maintain an active interest in
top incomes
generally. Specific to the higher education sector, my request of Uni Adelaide
is part of a broader inquiry into university
top incomes, and for this
I’ve requested the top 50 incomes of all G8 universities. ... I am also a
local member and delegate
of the National Tertiary Education Union as well as
being on its National Council, and so my interest in top incomes is also
in nature, being a matter of what I consider to be ethics and equity.
Because Uni Adelaide – like other Australian universities
publicly funded, we must be able to assess the extent to which it is
distributing funds in ways that are consistent with
public values or
expectations.
... to be clear, I am not interested in the top 50 incomes at Uni Adelaide in
order to identify or in any way critique specific individuals.
... the public
debate [that information of this type] can and should generate, is in my view
precisely why we have FOI legislation.
The public has a right to know.
50. In the circumstance of this case, I consider that the applicant has a
legitimate interest in the information beyond what it reveals
affairs of individuals.
51. I note that whilst the stated purpose by an applicant is not binding in a
matter, it may be a relevant consideration of a review
52. Further, it may be the case that it is open for a review body to consider
the probability of certain events occurring following
disclosure of information
to an individual, as was found to be the case in relation to an
applicant’s assertion that they would
not disseminate information to the
world at large.
53. Whilst it may be open for the applicant to attempt to decipher the
identities of the individuals in the document, there is nothing
to suggest that
he intends to do so.
54. The agency has made a further assertion that there is no public interest
involved in assessing unreasonableness with respect to
clause 6(1). I note this
assertion is contrary to case law, which has established that considerations
respect to information concerning personal affairs
has ‘at its core, public interest
considerations’.
55. This is further supported by
where the District
Court stated that a balancing exercise is required, one which weighs a
person’s legal right to information
against a third party’s right to
protection of privacy,
in essence, a public interest balancing exercise.
56. With respect to the sensitivity of the information, the agency also made
the following submission:
... it is the nature rather than the volume of information which is to be
disclosed which is significant. There can be no serious
contention that the
disclosure of an individual’s employment remuneration is not disclosure of
one of the most sensitive pieces
of information regarding their personal affairs
and represents a substantial disclosure.
57. I do not find the agency’s position to be persuasive, noting that
the agency has not provided any further information in
support of its position.
58. Having regard to existing authority, I do not consider it clear that
information of such nature is generally regarded as highly
sensitive within the
meaning of clause 6(1).
59. Following on from this point, in my provisional determination I expressed
a view that as the information in question relates to
the remuneration of
individuals employed in the public sector, then the information is less
sensitive and it should be considered
to be liable for disclosure under the FOI
60. In response the agency made the following statement:
The Deputy Ombudsman also seems to take the position that the information is
less sensitive because it relates to salaries of persons
who are “employed
in the public sector”. Once again, there is no basis in the FOI Act for
applying such a test. Any determination
based on that position is misconceived
and cannot stand.
61. The agency did not elaborate any further upon this position. Having
carefully considered relevant case law, I do not accept the
62. The following observation from the matter of
Lower Burdekin Newspaper
Company Pty Ltd and Lower Burdekin Shire Council
referred to an equivalent provision of clause 6(1), is particularly relevant to
this discussion:
Information about the gross salary paid to an employee of a government agency
has a dual character. It is both information about the
income of an identifiable
individual (and hence information concerning that individual’s personal
affairs) and information
position performed for the benefit of the public. Governments fund their
by imposts on the public. ... The public has a strong, legitimate and
abiding interest in having access to sufficient information
to enable scrutiny
on whether funds raised by the government are expended efficiently and
effectively in furtherance of the wider
public interest. This extends to
scrutiny of whether the public is obtaining value for money from performance of
the duties of particular
positions for which a government has decided to
allocate funding. This public interest is even strong in the case of senior
who have responsibility for devising and/or implementing strategic and
operational plans, and delivering key performance outcomes.
I consider that there is a strong public interest consideration favouring
disclosure to any interested member of the public, of information
total cost in salary and related expenses of any job for which a government
decides to allocate funding, and that it is
even stronger in the case of senior
management positions of the kind under consideration in the present case. The
same public interest
considerations would apply in favour of informing the
public of the total costs of having services performed for the public by private
sector service-providers.
63. I find the above observations by the Queensland Information Commissioner
to be persuasive in this matter.
64. Whilst acknowledging that the information concerns the personal affairs
of individuals, the information also concerns the agency’s
expenditure of
public funding and it is a relevant factor to consider in favour of disclosure.
65. Further, noting that the information in issue relates to the
agency’s 50 highest paid staff, it would be reasonable to conclude
the information relates to senior management positions, in which case, having
regard to the above observations by the Queensland
Information Commissioner, it
becomes a more significant factor in determining whether disclosure is
reasonable.
66. The above observation from
is also relevant to another
assertion made by the agency, which was that its funding is more akin to a
private commercial enterprise
than a publicly funded body. The agency made the
following statement:
the University operates in a highly competitive market, which enables staff
and the University to privately negotiate salaries, with
the expectation that
this information is maintained as confidential. There can be no valid comparison
with public sector employees.
This raises an important issue in the assessment of FOI requests directed to
the commercial activities of universities. While the
University is an agency for
the purposes of the FOI Act, it cannot be treated in the same way as a
Government department. The University
is a significant commercial enterprise,
financed primarily through sources other than the public purse. The nature of
its operations
is far closer to those of a private corporation than a public
67. The agency did not provide a basis under the FOI Act or refer to any
supporting material that demonstrates why it should be treated
differently to
other agencies, noting that despite the agency’s view, it is an agency for
the purposes of the FOI Act.
68. Further, the agency has not raised any substantive arguments that would
lead me to accept that the remuneration of its senior
staff is related solely to
its private commercial activities and should not be subject to disclosure under
the FOI Act.
69. However, even if I were to accept that the senior management of the
agency are engaged for commercial purposes, the observation
also includes a finding that disclosure of the total costs of having services
performed for the public by private sector service
providers is also captured by
the same considerations.
70. Noting that the agency has suggested it should be treated in accordance
with its status as a university rather than a standard
agency, I have given
regard to a decision by the New South Wales Administrative Decisions Tribunal in
the matter of
McLennan v University of New England
referred to
with approval.
71. The matter of
bears particular relevance to the matter at
hand, as that matter considered an application for access to the
“salaries, KPIs
and bonuses of [the University of New England’s]
Senior Executive Staff, Directors and Heads of School”.
72. In the matter of
, the University of New England conceded
the disclosure of salaries, however an issue remained over whether it would be
unreasonable
to disclose information about the bonuses paid to executive staff
members. Relevantly, the Tribunal made the following observations:
I consider that the disclosure of the information could reasonably be
expected to ensure effective oversight of the expenditure of
public funds.
Knowledge of the actual bonuses paid to senior staff of the University would
enhance the accountability of the University
for the expenditure of public
funds, the transparency of its operations, and enable consideration of the value
obtained by the University
for the expenditure of public money.
... the public interest in renumeration paid to public officers (especially
those at a senior level) as a cost to government was recognised,
despite the
fact that the same information related to an individual’s personal
73. In the matter of
the Administrative Decisions Tribunal
concluded that the decision by the University of New England to refuse access to
the information
should be set
74. Whilst acknowledging that case law from other jurisdictions need to be
read with caution as provisions may not be identical, I
consider the above cases
to be of persuasive value. In particular, I consider the observations made in
in this matter.
75. I note that the agency has stated its view that whilst the information is
de-identified, it may be possible with reference to
extrinsic material for a
person to identify who the salaries belong to, and that those individuals would
not wish to have their salaries
76. I note that whether or not the person to whom the information relates can
be identified is not a determinative factor in assessing
unreasonableness,
referring to the above passage from
that concerns identifiable
information.
77. Whilst I acknowledge that some of the highest earning individuals listed
in the document could be identified with a degree of
certainty, I am not
convinced that all of the salaries contained in the document could be attributed
to specific individuals with
78. Where the information relates to the highest paid staff of the agency,
while noting that it may lead to a higher degree of probability
specific staff member could be identified, I consider that both the applicant,
and the public in general would have a genuine
interest in knowledge of the
highest paid salaries
79. Where the information relates to the lower paid individuals, while there
may be less interest in knowing those staff members’
salaries, this is
counterbalanced by the fact that divorced from any other identifying
information, there is a lower likelihood of
identifying the individuals
80. As a result I am not satisfied that all of the information could be
linked to specific individuals, but even if I were satisfied
that all the
information would be able to be linked to individuals, with reference to
I do not accept that disclosure of the remuneration of known
individuals would be unreasonable, noting that the remuneration relates
senior staff members employed in the public sector.
81. On a final point in response to the agency’s submissions, I refer
to the following statement:
The Deputy Ombudsman applies a standard which requires a “substantial
degree” of a person’s personal affairs to
be disclosed. The
University submits that there is no test under clause 6(1), or the FOI Act
generally, which establishes a threshold
of a “substantial degree”
of personal affairs. The test is whether there would be an unreasonable
disclosure of information
concerning the personal affairs.
82. I accept that the first element of clause 6(1), that the information
relates to a person’s personal affairs, requires no
finding of whether the
information is substantial, nor does it require a finding of whether the
information reveals something significant
whom the information relates.
83. However, I do consider that the substance of the information holds
relevance in ascertaining whether disclosure of the information
unreasonable.
84. I have given regard to the District Court’s reasoning in the matter
Bradshaw v SA Police
matter, the District Court stated that ‘in determining whether disclosure
would be unreasonable a decision-maker may
take into account
considered “relevant, logical and probative” to the
85. I consider that the substance of the information, and how much that
information may reveal about an individual, and the likelihood
information may or may not be identifiable, are all relevant and logical factors
to consider when taking into account unreasonableness.
86. In light of the above factors, I am not satisfied that disclosure of the
information would be unreasonable.
87. I note that under section 39(10) of the FOI Act, if I were to form the
view that information referred to in Division 2 of Part
3 is not exempt, I must
take steps as are reasonably practicable to obtain the views of interested
parties as to whether or not the
document is exempt.
88. Division 2 of Part 3 of the FOI Act includes documents relating to
personal affairs.
89. Given that the document relates to 50 individuals, and those individuals
are not identified in the document, I do not consider
that it is reasonably
practicable to obtain the views of all the parties, and I consider my onus under
section 39(10) has been discharged
in this matter.
90. Whilst not having the views of the individuals involved, I would
nonetheless be inclined to presume that the individuals would
not consent to the
information in the document being disclosed.
91. However, again I note that a party’s objection to information being
disclosed is not determinative of whether disclosure
of information would be
unreasonable.
92. In the circumstances of this matter, I do not consider that any
presumption that the individuals would not consent to the disclosure
salary information is in and of itself of sufficient weight to conclude
disclosure to be unreasonable.
93. While noting the agency’s view that the information could have a
detrimental impact on the agency’s ability to retain
staff or to negotiate
salaries in future, I am not of the view that this aspect of the agency’s
submissions is relevant to
a consideration of clause 6(1).
94. For the reasons stated above, I am not satisfied that disclosure of the
information would be unreasonable.
95. Accordingly I do not consider the information is exempt pursuant to
clause 6(1).
Clause 7 – Documents affecting business
96. The agency submits that the document is exempt
in full pursuant to clause 7(1)(b).
97. In order for a document to be exempt pursuant to clause 7(1)(b), each of
the following criteria must apply:
the document
contains matter consisting of information that has a commercial value to any
agency or any other person, and
disclosure of
the information could reasonably be expected to destroy or diminish the
commercial value of the information, and
disclosure of
the information would, on the balance, be contrary to the public interest.
98. The terms 'commercial' and 'value' are not defined in the FOI Act, and
should be afforded their ordinary meaning.
99. Whether or not the information has a commercial value is a question of
fact. The Queensland Information Commissioner has considered
the phrase and
noted that there are two possible interpretations of the phrase:
The first (and what I think is the meaning that was primarily intended) is
that information has commercial value to an agency or another
person if it is
valuable for the purposes of carrying on the commercial activity in which that
agency or other person is engaged.
The information may be valuable because it is
important or essential to the profitability or viability of a continuing
business operation,
or a pending, 'one-off’ commercial transaction ...
The second interpretation of 'commercial value' which is reasonably open is
that information has commercial value to an agency or
another person if a
genuine, arm’s length buyer is prepared to pay to obtain that information
from that agency or person. It
would follow that the market value of that
information would be destroyed or diminished if it could be obtained from a
agency that has come into possession of it, through disclosure under
the FOI Act, ...
100. I generally agree with this view and consider it applicable to clause
7(1)(b) of the FOI Act.
101. In viewing the information in the document, I am not satisfied that the
information has commercial value.
102. The agency is a publicly funded educational and research institution.
While acknowledging that the agency receives supplementary
funding from sources
that are commercial in nature, and that the agency may carry out research that
has commercial purposes, I would
hesitate to describe the agency overall as an
institution which engages in activities of a for-profit nature.
103. Similarly, the information relates to the remuneration of the highest
paid staff members of the agency, who would be in receipt
of public funding, and
receive such public funding for the purpose of the agency’s educational
and research functions. I do
not consider the information in issue is for-profit
104. Additionally, I note that some information related to the remuneration
of the agency’s senior management has been made
available publicly. This
information may be found on page 96 of the agency’s 2019 Annual Report,
which is available at the
following web address:
https://www.adelaide.edu.au/publications/ua/media/12/2019-annual-report.pdf
105. Given that some of the information is available, it is difficult to
conclude that a genuine, arm’s length buyer would be
prepared to pay to
obtain the further information contained in the document.
106. As a result, I am not satisfied that the document contains information
that has commercial value to the agency, or any other
107. In response to my provisional determination the agency made the
following statement:
The University submits that the Deputy Ombudsman erred in his finding ...
that the information cannot be of commercial value as the
University cannot be
classified as a “for-profit” institution. This is not the test in
determining whether the Document
is exempt for the purposes of clause 7(1)(b).
If it were the test, the exemption would largely be meaningless for agencies
the FOI Act as such agencies are generally not “for-profit”
institutions. That was plainly not the intention of legislature.
As outlined at paragraph 39 of the Provisional Determination, the test which
should be applied in determining whether the information
in question is valuable
for carrying on a commercial activity.
108. Whilst acknowledging the agency’s submissions, the agency has not
persuaded me to depart from the interpretation of commercial
value as set out by
the Queensland Information Commissioner.
109. I am not satisfied the agency’s further submissions that the
information in issue has commercial value.
110. Further, even if I were satisfied that the information possessed
commercial value, I am not satisfied that disclosure of the
information would
diminish or destroy the commercial value of the information itself.
111. However I acknowledge that the agency has raised, in the alternative to
clause 7(1)(b), that the document is exempt pursuant
to clause 7(1)(c).
112. For a document to be exempt pursuant to clause 7(1)(c) each of the
following criteria must apply:
the document
contains information concerning the business, professional, commercial or
financial affairs of any agency or any other
the disclosure
of that information could reasonably be expected to have an adverse effect on
those affairs, or to prejudice the future
supply of such information to the
Government or to an agency, and
the disclosure
of that information would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest.
113. The phrase ‘business, professional, commercial or financial
affairs’ is not defined in the FOI Act. Similar to commercial
‘business affairs’ has been held to mean activities carried out with
the view to make a profit, and not just affairs
derived from or to do with
business. The Queensland Information Commissioner has commented that:
For a matter to relate to ‘business affairs’ in the requisite
sense, it should ordinarily, in my opinion, relate to the
affairs of a business
undertaking which is carried in an organised way (whether full time of only
intermittent) with the purpose
of obtaining profits or gains (whether or not
they actually be obtained).
114. The courts in Victoria have also held that for the ‘business
affairs’ exemption to apply, the information at hand
must relate to
matters of business, commercial or financial nature and ‘not merely be
derived from a business or concerning
it or have some connection with
115. I agree with this view in considering the meaning of ‘business
affairs’ under clause 7(1)(c).
116. Whilst I do not consider the information to have commercial value, and
having regard to the above definition I would also hesitate
to conclude that the
information concerns the business affairs of the agency, I accept that the
information in issue concerns the
financial affairs of the agency.
117. The agency made numerous submissions as to why disclosure of the
information could reasonably be expected to have an adverse
effect on its
financial affairs, and I am willing to accept the agency’s position in
that regard.
118. The question of whether the information is exempt pursuant to clause
7(1)(c) then turns on whether disclosure of the information
would, on balance,
be contrary to the public interest.
119. In the agency’s initial determination, it identified the following
factors in favour of disclosure:
interest in fulfilling the objects of the FOI Act
interest in promoting openness and accountability.
120. The agency also identified the following factors as opposing
disclosure:
the nature of
the information in that it was never intended to be made publicly known
disclosure could
jeopardise the University’s future recruitment strategies
disclosure could
be detrimental to the University’s ability to retain its top paid
disclosure would
cause the University to be in breach of its own policy which would compromise
the University’s commitment institutionally
to compliance [sic] with laws
and policies and undermine the University’s relationship with its staff,
students and other parties
by divulging confidential information; and
disclosure may
negatively impact on current University staff and their relationship with the
University and potentially with their
colleagues.
121. In addition to the factors identified by the agency in favour of
disclosure, I consider the following to also be relevant:
transparency in how public funding is allocated, particularly with respect to
senior level staff
transparency over the agency’s senior operations
consideration of the value obtained by the agency for the expenditure of public
members of the public with access to information of special interest to
122. To avoid repetition, I consider the public interest as identified in the
suggests that disclosure of the
information in issue would not, on balance, be contrary to the public interest,
noting that the reasoning
also applied to a University.
123. I do not consider that the agency has persuaded me that the potential
adverse effect on its functions would be to such a degree
that it would outweigh
the benefits of disclosure.
124. In light of the above, I am not satisfied that disclosure would, on
balance, be contrary to the public interest.
125. In my provisional determination, I noted that I was mindful of the
operation of clause 7(3).
126. In response to my provisional determination, the agency submitted that
it was not reasonably open for me to speculate about whether
the information
existed in contracts.
127. I have reconsidered my position and no longer consider it a relevant
factor to this external review, noting that the agency has
indicated that not
all of the information can be found in individual contracts.
128. However, whilst I am no longer drawing any conclusions with respect to
clause 7(3), having regard to the other factors in favour
of disclosure, I am
still of the view that disclosure of the information would not, on balance, be
contrary to the public interest.
129. In light of all of the above, I am not satisfied that the document is
exempt pursuant to clauses 7(1)(b) or (c).
Clause 13 – Documents
containing confidential material
130. The agency determined that the document is exempt pursuant to clause
131. A document is exempt pursuant to clause 13(1)(a) if it contains matter
the disclosure of which would found an action for breach
of confidence.
132. The Administrative Appeals Tribunal (
) has had cause to
Freedom of Information Act 1982
which is in substantially
the same terms as clause 13(1)(a) of the FOI Act (SA). After consideration of
the authorities, Deputy President
Forgie of the AAT determined that an action
for breach of confidence can only mean an action for equitable breach of
confidence.
In my view, the AAT
decision has persuasive value.
133. An equitable obligation of confidence arises where the information was
given and received in circumstances that would make it
unconscionable for the
confidant to disclose the information in a way the confider has not authorised.
A number of criteria must
the information
must be capable of being identified with specificity
the information
must have the necessary quality of confidence
the information
must have been received in circumstances which import an obligation of
there must be
actual or threatened misuse of the information.
134. The agency has asserted that staff members have an expectation of
confidentiality with respect to salary information as a result
agency’s ‘Remuneration and Employment Benefits Policy’, which
is available at the follow web address:
https://www.adelaide.edu.au/policies/3543?dsn=policy.document;field=data;id=6142;m=view
135. Principle 5 of the policy provides:
Remuneration practices are transparent and remuneration information is
maintained confidentially and in accordance with privacy requirements.
136. The agency submits:
To disregard the preservation of confidential information in these
circumstances would cause the University to be in breach of its
own policy.
Breaching its own policy would not only compromise the University’s
commitment institutionally to compliance [sic]
with laws and policies but it
would further undermine the University’s relationship with its staff,
students and other parties
by divulging information which was agreed to be kept
confidential.
137. To my mind, the agency has not provided sufficient evidence to show that
the information has either the necessary quality of
confidence or that it was
received in circumstances which import an equitable obligation of
confidence.
138. While the agency has a policy stating that remuneration is maintained
confidentially, it does not on its own necessarily give
rise to the information
having the necessary quality of confidence to create an equitable obligation of
confidence, noting that the
mere fact that a document is marked as confidential
will not be definitive.
139. Whether or not disclosure of information would breach the agency’s
own policy is not determinative to a finding of whether
the information is
exempt pursuant to the FOI Act, or whether its disclosure would found an action
for breach of confidence.
140. In response to my provisional determination, and in response to two
subsequent requests for further information, the agency submitted
a significant
number of submissions in support of its views. In summarising its submissions on
the subject of clause 13(1)(a), the
agency made the following statement:
In all of the circumstances, there can be no serious suggestion that the
information regarding remuneration is not treated as confidential
parties. Every relevant factual matter supports the confidential nature of the
information. Further, all of the legal criteria
for the creation of an
obligation of confidentiality are manifestly present and satisfied. There is no
evidence of any kind to the
contrary. It is submitted that the only finding
reasonably open to the Deputy Ombudsman is that the remuneration information is
confidential.
141. In my view, there is a compelling argument to be made that the
information regarding the agency’s remuneration of its staff
does not have
the necessary quality of confidence that, if disclosed, would found an action
for breach of confidence.
142. I note that the agency has stated that all of the legal criteria for the
creation of an obligation of confidentiality are manifestly
present and
satisfied. The agency did not refer to any legal principles or case law in
making its submissions, rather, it referred
to my reference at paragraph 133
to accepted criteria in establishing an equitable obligation of confidence
and for the circumstances in which a breach would arise.
143. Further, the agency made the following statement:
It is apparent from the Provisional Determination that the absence of
confidentiality is being treated as the default position in
respect of the
person remuneration details. ... it is submitted that this is neither reasonable
nor appropriate.
144. I have not operated on the assumption that an absence of
confidentiality is the default position for person remuneration. Rather,
considered the relevant information in this case, I have formed the view that it
is not confidential, noting that confidential
in this context means that
disclosure would constitute an action for breach of confidence.
145. In my view, the agency has not provided sufficient evidence to establish
that two of the criteria at paragraph 133
are met. In reaching this view,
I consider it appropriate to further expand upon the proper construction of the
146. The finding required for exemption under clause 13(1)(a) is not merely
whether the information might be considered confidential
by the agency, but
whether it would
found an action for breach of confidence
147. The criteria set out at paragraph 133
were referred to by the
District Court in the matter of
Ekaton Corporation Pty Ltd v Chapman &
Department of Health
four criteria were accepted by the District Court with reference to the
following statement by Gummow J, as a member of the Federal
Pavey Whiting & Byrne v Collector of Customs
It is now well settled that in order to make out a case for protection in
equity of allegedly confidential information, a plaintiff
must satisfy certain
criteria. The plaintiff: (i) must be able to identify with specificity, and not
merely in global terms, that
which is said to be the information in question;
and must also be able to show that (ii) the information has the necessary
of confidence (and is not for example,
knowledge); (iii) the information was
received by the defendant in
such circumstances to import an obligation of confidence
; and (iv) there is
actual or threatened misuse of this
information...
[Emphasis mine]
148. I emphasise the point that the information must have the necessary
quality of confidence, and that it must have been received
by a potential
defendant, or in this case by the agency, in circumstances that imported an
obligation of confidence.
149. I am also mindful that as information in issue is de-identified, there
is a question as to whether the information has been identified
specificity, and not merely in global terms. However I consider it more apt to
turn my mind to the application of the second
and third criteria in the
circumstances of this matter.
150. To expand upon the requirement that the information has the necessary
quality of confidence, I refer to the following statement
by Debelle J in
Coulthard v South
The first question is whether the information conveyed
in the statements was confidential. There can be no breach of confidence in
revealing to others something which is already common knowledge:
Clark (Engineers) Ltd
(at 47). Confidential information is that which is
not public property or public knowledge or otherwise in the public domain:
Saltman Engineering Co v Campbell Engineering Co
[1971] 1 WLR 760
; [1977] 2All ER 751. It is a question of degree
whether information previously disclosed to a limited public has been made
Attorney-General v Guardian Newspapers Ltd
(at 177) per Simon John Donaldson MR. Equity will intervene only to protect a
confidence if the circumstances are of sufficient
gravity; it will not intervene
merely to protect trivial tittle-tattle, however confidential:
Clark (Engineers) Ltd
(at 48): nor “pernicious nonsense”:
Church of Scientology of California v Kaufman
[1973] RPC 635
other words, a duty of confidence will only be imposed where the information is
“a proper subject for protection”:
Hubbard v Vosper
151. I acknowledge that the agency has emphatically stated its view that the
information has the necessary quality of confidence.
However, in making its
arguments, the agency has not referred to any supporting case law; rather the
agency has made broad claims
that a person’s salary is ordinarily
considered to be sensitive and confidential and referred to its general
152. Given the emphasis, that in order for information to have the necessary
quality of confidence to found an action for a breach
of confidence, then that
the information must not be common and must be information that is “a
proper subject for protection”,
on the information before me I do not
accept that the information in issue attracts the necessary quality of
confidence to be protected
under equity.
153. Further, on the information before me, I do not consider that the
information in issue was
by the agency, nor would it have been
received in circumstances that imported an obligation of confidence upon the
154. Whilst having regard to the policies that the agency referred to, the
agency declined to provide me with any evidence that individuals
contractual agreements with the agency were given a legitimate expectation that
their salary information attracted the necessary
quality of confidence, and that
it would be a misuse by the agency for the agency to disclose it.
155. I asked the agency to provide me with examples of any contractual
agreements that contained sufficient confidentiality provisions.
declined to provide me with the contracts related to the information in issue,
stating that providing 50 contracts would
be an onerous undertaking.
156. The Ombudsman’s Manager of Information and Audit clarified my
request that I was not asking for evidence of all contractual
agreements, rather
that I would have been satisfied if the agency were able to provide me with one
example of a completed contract
that contained the necessary confidentiality
provisions.
157. Again, the agency declined the provide me with one contract, stating
that contracts varied between individuals and that one contract
necessarily reveal the confidentiality provisions of other contracts.
158. The agency did provide me with extracts of template contracts. Of
particular importance, I refer to the following extracts:
Confidentiality
(a) In this Employment Contract, ‘Confidential Information’ means
all information of a confidential nature (as determined
by the University)
whether in tangible or intangible form generated, accessed or obtained by or
made available to the Staff Member
in the course of or in connection with the
Staff Member’s employment with the University including but not limited
information relating to the business affairs of the University and
associated entities;
(ii) technical information, trade secrets, technical data, marketing
procedures and information, accounting programs and procedures,
information
, course structures, teaching and lecture notes and aids,
reference materials, student information, student lists, know how, technology
operation procedures, price lists, data bases, source codes, methodology
like information relating to the business of the University and associated
(b) Subject to this clause, the Staff Member agrees:
(i) not to copy, reproduce, divulge or use any Confidential Information other
than in the proper course of the Staff Member’s
duties as an employee of
the University;
(ii) not to use any Confidential Information in any matter which may cause
loss, embarrassment or be in any other way detrimental
to the University;
(iii) to immediately notify the University if the Staff Member becomes aware
of a breach of this clause.
(c) The Staff Member must not disclose any Confidential Information unless
one of the following circumstances applies:
(i) The University has consented in writing to the disclosure. The consent
may be subject to the condition that the person to whom
the disclosure is to be
made enter into a separate confidentiality agreement with the University.
(ii) The disclosure is specifically contemplated and permitted by this
Employment Contract.
(iii) The disclosure is to a professional adviser of the Staff Member in
order for it to provide advice in relation to matters arising
under or in
connection with this Employment Contract provided that the adviser is bound not
to disclose the Confidential Information
or to use it for any purpose other than
providing the relevant advise.
(iv) The disclosure is required by law.
(d) If the Staff member wishes to use any of the University’s
Confidential Information for a non-employment related purpose,
either during or
after employment with the University, they must seek the University’s
written approval and, if given, negotiate
and agree the terms and conditions
apply in the particular circumstances at that time.
[Emphasis by the agency]
159. Based on my reading of the above extracts, the confidentiality
provisions indicate that the agency owns its confidential information,
it is individual staff members that have an obligation not to disclose certain
kinds of confidential information, such as
the business affairs of the agency or
its intellectual property.
160. The above extract also specifies that the agency may designate
information confidential, and that it can include but is not limited
information relating to the business affairs of the agency. However the agency
did not provide any contracts that clearly indicate
that salaries were
confidential terms of the contracts.
161. I still remain of the view that the information in issue does not have
the necessary quality of confidence, nor that the information
was received by
the agency in circumstances that import an obligation of confidence.
162. If I were to accept that staff remuneration has the necessary quality of
confidence, and that its disclosure would found an action
for breach of
confidence, then based on the confidentiality provisions before me, that breach
would apply to staff members rather
than the agency itself, as the provisions
stipulate that staff members must not use the agency’s confidential
information outside
of the proper course of their duties and employees.
163. If I were to accept the agency’s position that staff remuneration
is confidential information, the corollary is that its
staff members would be
restrained from revealing their salaries outside of the identified exceptions.
This would include restraining
staff members from discussing their remuneration
to friends and relatives, or from disclosing this information to third parties
the financial benefit of the staff member, such as the staff member seeking
a loan from a bank.
164. The agency has not put forward any submissions that would support this
view and I would find it difficult to conclude that this
is the case.
165. In summary of the above points with regards to clause 13(1)(a), I make
the following observations:
the agency has
not relied upon any legal authority in making its submissions other than the
initial authority I cited in my provisional
determination
satisfied that the information in issue has the necessary quality of confidence,
as the agency has not provided me with any
evidence that salary information of
staff members is not ‘common’ or that it ought to be protected under
satisfied that the agency
the information in issue
satisfied that the information was provided to the agency in circumstances that
imported a duty of confidence
on the agency
, noting that the agency has
not provided me with a single completed contract indicating that staff members
have an expectation that
the agency will treat salary information as
confidential under equity
the evidence the
agency has provided me with indicates that it is its staff members who have an
obligation of confidence to the agency
with respect to confidential
information.
166. In light of the above, I am not satisfied that the criteria referred to
in paragraph 133
have been established and I do not consider that
disclosure of the information would found an action for breach of confidence.
167. Accordingly I am not satisfied that the document to be exempt pursuant
to clause 13(1)(a).
Determination
168. In light of my views above, I reverse the agency’s determination
to the effect that the document is disclosed in
Steven Strelan
DEPUTY OMBUDSMAN
November 2021
Procedural steps
27 April 2021
The agency received the FOI application dated 27 April 2021.
14 May 2021
The agency determined the application.
14 May 2021
The agency received the internal review application dated 14 May
28 May 2021
The agency failed to determine the application within the statutory time
frame, and is taken to have confirmed the original
determination.
5 June 2021
The Ombudsman received the applicant’s request for external review
dated 5 June 2021.
8 June 2021
The Ombudsman advised the agency of the external review and requested
submissions and documentation.
17 June 2021
The agency provided the Ombudsman with its submissions and
documentation.
10 September 2021
The Deputy Ombudsman issued his provisional determination and invited
submissions from the parties.
Freedom of Information Act
section 12.
Department of the Premier
& Cabinet v Redford
(2005) 240 LSJS 171.
Anangu Pitjantjatjara
Yankunytjatjara v Ombudsman & Anor
[2019] SASC 162.
Anangu Pitjantjatjara
Yankunytjatjara v Ombudsman & Anor
[2019] SASC 162
Anangu Pitjantjatjara
Yankunytjatjara v Ombudsman & Anor
[2019] SASC 162
Attorney-General v Seven
Network (Operations) Ltd
[2019] SASCFC 36.
Commissioner of Police v
District Court of New South Wales
(1993) 31 NSWLR 606, 625 citing
Williams and Registrar of Federal Court of Australia
[1985] AATA 226
(1985) 8 ALD 219
Young v Wicks
[1986] FCA 169
(1986) 13 FCR 85
Commissioner of Police v
District Court of New South Wales
(1993) 31 NSWLR 606, 625.
Hall v SA Police
Hall v SA Police
[2019] SADC 5
Page v Metropolitan
Transit Authority
(1988) 2 VAR 243.
Page v Metropolitan Transit Authority
[246] quoted in
Hall v SA Police
[2019] SADC 5
Treglown v SA Police
[2011] SADC 139
Colakovski v Australian
Telecommunications Corporation
[1991] FCA 152
(1991) 29 FCR 429
per Lockhard J at
Bradshaw v SA Police
[2012] SADC 184
, [53]-[55].
Lower Burdekin Newspaper
Company Pty Ltd and Lower Burdekin Shire Council
[2004] QICmr 2.
McLennan v University of
New England
[2013] NSWADT 113.
McLennan v University of
New England
[2013] NSWADT 113
McLennan v University of
New England
[2013] NSWADT 113
Bradshaw v SA Police
[2012] SADC 184.
Bradshaw v SA Police
[2012] SADC 184
Re Cannon and Australian
Quality Egg Farms Limited
[1994] QICmr 9
(1994) 1 QAR 491
, [54] - [55], Interpreting
section 45(1)(b)(i) of the
Freedom of Information Act 1992
which Is similar to
Stewart and Department
of Transport
[1993] QICmr 6
(1993) 1 QAR 227
Re Croom and Accident
Compensation Commission
(1989) 3 VAR 441
; The President's view regarding the
interpretation of
'business affairs' was upheld on appeal to the Full Court of the Supreme
Accident Compensation Commission v
[1991] VicRp 72
[1991] 2 VR 322).
Re Callejo v Department
of Immigration and Citizenship
[2010] AATA 244.
Re Callejo v Department
of Immigration and Citizenship
[2010] AATA 244
Ekaton Corporation Pty
Ltd v Chapman & Department of Health
[2010] SADC 150 (Unreported
Brebner, 9 December 2010), [38], affirming the test from
Corrs Pavey Whiting
& Byrne v Collector of Customs
[1987] FCA 266
(1987) 14 FCR 434
, 443. The test
was also endorsed in
Re Callejo v Department of Immigration and
Citizenship
[2010] AATA 244
Re B and Brisbane North
Regional Health Authority
[1994] 1 QAR 271
Ekaton Corporation Pty
Ltd v Chapman & Department of Health
[2010] SADC 150 (Unreported
Brebner, 9 December 2010), [38]
Coors Pavey Whiting
& Byrne v Collector of Customs (Vic)
[1987] FCA 266
(1987) 74 ALR 428
Coors Pavey Whiting
& Byrne v Collector of Customs (Vic)
[1987] FCA 266
(1987) 74 ALR 428
Courthard v South
[1995] SASC 4927
(1995) 63 SASR 531.
Courthard v South
[1995] SASC 4927
(1995) 63 SASR 531
Freedom of Information
section 29(5).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.25 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter