URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCAT/1999/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:09:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Thomas Frederick Peter Hanna v B.H.P. Integrated Steel Whyalla [1999] SAWCAT 1 (22 February 1999)
WORKERS COMPENSATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
JUDICIAL DETERMINATION
PRELIMINARY POINT
THOMAS FREDERICK PETER HANNA
(Appellant)
B.H.P. INTEGRATED STEEL WHYALLA
(Respondent)
(No. 27W of 1998)
His Honour Deputy President G.M. Thompson
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED THE 22ND
DAY OF FEBRUARY
Application for Deputy President to disqualify himself on grounds of
Cases Cited:
Caruso v. Pastro
J.2400 (F.C. 27/7/90).
Hutchins v. B.H.P.
Judgment No. A.85/1997.
Reg. v. Australian Stevedoring Industry Board: ex parte Melbourne
Stevedoring Co. Pty. Ltd.
[1953] HCA 22
(1953) 88 C.L.R. 100.
Reg. v. Watson ex parte Armstrong
[1976] HCA 39
(1976) 136 C.L.R. 248.
Ex parte Schofield: re Austin
(1953) 53 S.R. (N.S.W.) 163.
Livesey v. New South Wales Bar Association
[1983] HCA 17
(1983) 151 C.L.R. 288.
J.R.L.; Ex parte C.J.L.
[1986] HCA 39
(1986) 161 C.L.R. 342.
Polites and Another; Ex parte The Hoyts Corporation Pty. Limited and
[1991] HCA 25
(1991) 173 C.L.R. 78.
Webb and Hay v. The Queen
[1994] HCA 30
(1994) 181 C.L.R. 41.
Monroe Australia v. Burrian
S.6578 (F.C. 20/3/98).
Emanuel v. Emanuel Investments Pty. Ltd.
Appearances:
J.D. Lyons for the Applicant.
N.D. Wallwork for the Respondent.
The Appellant has applied for me to disqualify myself. This is the judgment on
that Preliminary Point.
The appeal against the decision of a Review Officer was lodged on 4 August
The Callover occurred on 25 August 1998. Mr. Symeonakis who attended the
Callover for the Appellant worker, had conducted the case
for the worker on
Review, appearing on some 20 odd occasions between 13 September 1995 and 1 July
A Directions Hearing on occurred 9 December 1998. Mr. Symeonakis then
intimated that there
a challenge to the matter being listed for
hearing before me. No grounds were specified. That was not intimated at the
The appeal was listed for hearing on 2 February 1999.
No Application for Directions supported by Affidavit was filed in support of
the challenge.
Counsel's Outline of Argument arrived (late) said:-
`Deputy President Thompson should disqualify himself from hearing the appeal
due to actual/and/or perceived bias.
2. It came to the attention of the appellant that Deputy President Thompson's
family company of which the Deputy President is a
Director had shareholdings in
the respondent company.
3. The appellant has read comments made by Deputy President Thompson in the
Hutchins v. B.H.P
. (heard on 22 October 1997 and judgment
delivered 14 November 1997 Judgment No.
where at p.87 of
the transcript the Deputy President said the following:-
"Well unless B.H.P. are extraordinarily generous and it may well be that
way because the share price has gone down to $15.00 odd
it may well be the
situation to the disgruntlement of their many shareholders amongst whom one is
my family and unless they are embarking
upon that - surely they are doing this
to comply with the Act and properly so to".
Consequently the appellant has instructed his legal representatives
to ask that the Deputy President disqualify himself from this
5. Its respectfully submitted that actual bias does not have to be shown for
the Tribunal to disqualify itself. The maxim "
nemo debet judex esse in causa
sua propria"
states that no-one should be a judge in his own cause and
therefore should apply those matters.
6. The test for a Tribunal to disqualify itself is stated in
R. v. Watson Ex
parte Armstrong
[1976] HCA 39
(1976) 136 C.L.R. 248
and 258-263. The principle is that a
Judge should not hear a case if in all the circumstances the parties or the
public might entertain
a reasonable apprehension that he might not bring an
impartial and unprejudiced mind to the resolution of the question involved in
it. The principle is a F
amily Livesey v. N.S.W. Bar Association
[1983] HCA 17
151 C.L.R. 288.
7. To state the principle more succinctly if a Judge as first instance
considers that there is any real possibility that his participation
might lead to a reasonable apprehension of pre-judgment or bias then a judge
should refrain from sitting.
8. Taking into account not only that Deputy President Thompson's family in
which he is a director has shareholdings in B.H.P. but
also the comments made
as transcribed on p.87 of
Hutchins v. B.H.P.
(supra) must lead any
litigant to a reasonable apprehension of bias and therefore even if the Deputy
President considers the Tribunal
has no bias it is still appropriate for this
qualification to take place.'
The application was made by Counsel orally on the day the matter was listed for
I dismissed the application and said I would give reasons at a later date.
These are the reasons.
Counsel's argument is twofold.
1. The litigant's own reasonable apprehension:
`If a Judge considers that his participation in the case might lead to a
reasonable apprehension of pre-judgment or bias a judge
should refrain from
To the extent that that proposition is advanced on the basis that the litigant
here asserts such apprehension or bias the matter
involves two propositions:
(a) that the litigant in fact has such an apprehension
(b) that the holding of thereof is reasonable.
As to (a) above there was no affidavit from the appellant. There is no way of
knowing what the appellant thinks. Even taking the
evidence (see
J.2400 (F.C. 27/7/90)) given from the Bar Table at face value,
Counsel for the Appellant did not suggest that the Appellant personally
apprehension of bias - let alone did Counsel suggest that the Appellant's view
was reasonable. Indeed the existence of such
apprehension in the Appellant
might be thought improbable, unless steel workers in general or this steel
worker in Whyalla in particular
read the transcript of
Hutchins v.
heard on 22 October 1997.
As to (b) the issue of the reasonableness of holding a view of apprehension of
bias - was not addressed - nor could it be.
There is no evidence at all that the Appellant had any view on the issue. The
application must fail on that ground.
2. The fair-minded and properly informed member of the public.
The second basis for the application is that if a member of the public might
entertain a reasonable apprehension that the judge
might not bring an impartial
and unprejudiced mind to the resolution of the question then the judge should
disqualify himself.
The evidentiary basis to support the application of the principle in this case
is that if a judge is a director of a company that
had B.H.P. shares in its
portfolio (B.H.P. not being the Respondent in this case but I presume the
Respondent is a subsidiary of
B.H.P.) that is sufficient to raise the ground of
ostensible bias.
conceded that if a judge was the director of a company
that held shares in companies such as Australian Foundation or Argo i.e. public
companies whose sole assets are shares in other publicly listed companies, that
in itself would be sufficient ground for disqualification.
If one of the 190
companies in which Argo held shares was a litigant - or one of the 120
companies in the Australian Foundation portfolio
was a litigant - a judge
should disqualify himself - because a fair-minded and properly informed member
of the public might entertain
a reasonable apprehension of bias.
The practical effect of Counsel's submission would have a novel and far
reaching effect upon the disposal of civil litigation in
this State.
The precise question of what has to be resolved in this Appeal, is formulated
by the Notice of Appeal found at p.576/7 of the Appeal
Book. The grounds of
appeal are:-
1. The Review Officer erred in law and in fact.
2. The Review Officer misunderstood the facts and in particular the medical
evidence and the worker's wife's evidence.
3. Having found that the expert medical opinion was that it is impossible to
say with any precision when the labral tear occurred,
the Review Officer erred
in finding it more likely that the hip disability occurred sometime late in
4. The Review Officer erred in her analysis of the worker's wife's evidence
which evidence corroborated the worker's evidence.
5. The Review Officer erred in failing to make a finding with respect to the
worker's credit and effectively deciding the causation
issue by reference to
the medical evidence only.
6. The Review Officer erred in law in her application of the appropriate burden
proof and/or in placing too high an onus on the
7. The Review Officer erred in law in failing to apply the appropriate
presumptive inferences.
8. Such further or other grounds of appeal as counsel may advise following
discovery and perusal of the transcript and evidence.
The issue for determination on this application is whether given the
transcript of the hearing at p. 87 of the Appeal Transcript
Hutchins v.
- would those remarks lead a fair-minded and properly informed a
member of the public to entertain a reasonable apprehension that
I might not
bring an impartial and unprejudiced mind to the resolution of the above
questions in issue on this appeal.
The modern law in this Country received attention in
Reg. v. Australian
Stevedoring Industry Board: ex parte Melbourne Stevedoring Co. Pty. Ltd.
[1953] HCA 22
(1953) 88 C.L.R. 100.
That was a case where an employer sought
prohibition against the Stevedoring Board. One of the grounds was that the
Board's delegate
who was to conduct an enquiry into the Applicant's fitness to
hold a license, had given a press interview and some remarks therein
construed as the delegate having prejudged the issue. The High Court said, p.
`... when bias of this kind (prejudgment) is in question, as distinguished from
a bias through interest, before it amounts to a
disqualification it is
necessary that there should be strong grounds for supposing that the judicial
or quasi-judicial officer has
so acted that he cannot be expected fairly to
discharge his duties. Bias must be "real". The officer must so have conducted
that a high probability arises of a bias inconsistent with the fair
performance of his duties, with the result that a substantial
distrust of the
result must exist in the minds of reasonable persons.'
Melbourne Stevedoring was applied in
Reg. v. Watson ex parte Armstrong
[1976] HCA 39
(1976) 136 C.L.R. 248.
In that case prohibition was sought against a Judge of the Family Court to
prevent him from continuing the hearing for ancillary
relief (property
settlement and maintenance) - on the ground that remarks made by the Judge at
interlocutory stages of the matter
demonstrated prejudgment.
`If fair-minded people reasonably apprehend or suspect that the tribunal has
the case, they cannot have confidence in the decision.' (my
The High Court quoted with approval (
inter alia)
Ex parte Schofield:
(1953) 53 S.R. (N.S.W.) 163
where prohibition went against a
Magistrate from hearing a case, where he had in an
expressed strong views as to the credibility of two persons who had been the
defendants in that case, and were the complainants
in the latter proceedings in
which prohibition was sought.
Livesey v. New South Wales Bar Association
[1983] HCA 17
(1983) 151 C.L.R. 288
High Court dealt with an appeal by P.M. Livesey and Wendy Bacon against orders
of the N.S.W. Court of Appeal striking the Appellants
off the Roll. The Court
of Appeal was then sitting at first instance - the motion to strike off being
brought on before it by the
N.S.W. Bar Association. The grounds of appeal were
that two of the Justices of Appeal had in previous proceedings expressed a view
of the facts and of the credibility of the parties in the case. A judgment on
the same sort of incidents was required in the instant
case, ie. the instant
matter had been prejudged, in a previous case.
At p. 299 the High Court said:
`What is in issue in the present case is the appearance and not the actuality
of bias by reason of prejudgment. The reasonable observer
is to be presumed to
approach the matter on the basis that ordinarily a judge will so act as to
ensure both the appearance and the
substance of fairness and impartiality.'
`... in a case such as the present where ... a fair-minded observer might
entertain a reasonable apprehension of bias by reason
of prejudgment if a judge
sits to hear a case at first instance after he has, in a previous case,
expressed clear views either about
a question of fact which constitutes a live
and significant issue in the subsequent case or about the credit of a witness
whose evidence
is of significance on such a question of fact. The consideration
that the relevant question of fact may be conceded or that the relevant
may not be called as a witness if the particular judge sits would not, of
course, avoid the appearance of bias. To the contrary,
it would underline the
need for the judge to refrain from sitting.'
J.R.L.; Ex parte C.J.L.
[1986] HCA 39
(1986) 161 C.L.R. 342
the factual situation
was that prohibition was sought against a Judge of the Family Court dealing
with a custody dispute. The judge's
private chambers were attended upon by a
Court Counsellor in the absence of the parties or Counsel. This person
complained of the
intended adjournment of the custody proceedings and
volunteered information about her qualifications as an expert witness and
aspects of the proceedings before the Judge requested Counsel for the
parties so to do. The order nisi was made absolute.
In his judgment, Mason, J. p. 352 said:
`It seems that the acceptance by this Court of the test of reasonable
apprehension of bias in such cases as
to an increase in the frequency of applications by litigants that judicial
officers should disqualify themselves from sitting
in particular cases on
account of their participation in other proceedings involving one of the
litigants or on account of conduct
during the litigation. It needs to be said
loudly and clearly that the ground of disqualification is a reasonable
apprehension that
the judicial officer will not decide the case impartially or
without prejudice, rather than that he will decide the case adversely
party. There may be many situations in which previous decisions of a judicial
officer on issues of fact and law may generate
an expectation that he is likely
to decide issues in a particular case adversely to one of the parties. But this
does not mean either
that he will approach the issues in that case otherwise
than with an impartial and unprejudiced mind in the sense in which that
is used in the authorities or that his previous decisions provide an
acceptable basis for inferring that there is a reasonable apprehension
will approach the issues in this way. In cases of this kind, disqualification
is only made out by showing that there is a
reasonable apprehension of bias by
reason of prejudgment and this must be "firmly established.'
... Although it is important that justice must be seen to be done, it is
equally important that judicial officers discharge their
duty to sit and do
not, by acceding too readily to suggestions of appearance of bias, encourage
parties to believe that by seeking
the disqualification of a judge, they will
have their case tried by someone thought to be more likely to decide the case
Polites and Another; Ex parte The Hoyts Corporation Pty. Limited and
[1991] HCA 25
(1991) 173 C.L.R. 78
the factual situation was that a writ of
mandamus was sought to compel a Deputy President of the Industrial Relations
to continue to hear a matter involving the Applicant - even though
prior to appointment the Deputy President had advised the Applicant
was in private practice.
At p. 66 the Full Court quoted with approval, the above passages from
Melbourne Stevedoring
. The Full Bench of the Australian
Industrial Relations Commission was hearing the matter at first instance.
Webb v. The Queen
[1994] HCA 30
(1994) 181 C.L.R. 41
at p.47 Mason, C.J. and
McHugh, J. restated the principle at p. 47:
`When it is alleged that a judge has been or might be actuated by bias, the
Court has held that the proper test is whether fair-minded
people might
reasonably apprehend or suspect that the judge has prejudged or might prejudge
The facts of
concerned the conduct of a juror in a
criminal trial.
The Full Court of South Australia in
Monroe Australia v. Burrian
(F.C. 20/3/98) dealt with a situation that arose before a Review Officer at
first instance. The facts were analogous to
Emanuel v. Emanuel Investments Pty. Ltd.
(S6177 Full Court Supreme
Court 30 May 1997) at p.11 and 11 these remarks fell from Olsson J.:-
`It cannot be stressed too strongly that the test of reasonable apprehension of
bias involves a consideration of the likely mental
state of a fair minded and
properly informed member of the public (
Webb and Hay v. The Queen
[1994] HCA 30
68 A.L.J.R. 582.'
His Honour then went on to enumerate the material that a properly informed
member of the public would in that case have.
In the instant case such a member of the public would be aware:-
1. The remarks in
Hutchins' Case
were part of some judicial badinage
between the Bench and Counsel for B.H.P. in final address.
2. In the judgment in
at p. 23 I said:-
`I don't personally hold shares in B.H.P.. A company which my family is
interested in has a holding in B.H.P. shares and it has
had for many years and
I wouldn't have thought in this day and age that the holding of shares in
Australia's leading company could
in any way be approached on the basis of
At p. 24.. I would hardly think that shareholdings per se could give rise to
an application to disqualify oneself. I assume that
there is meant to be a
suggestion of ostensible bias.'
3. The real point in
Hutchins' Case
which was a Workers Compensation
Tribunal appeal, was whether the worker had restored mutuality such as would
entitle him to ongoing
weekly payments of compensation. The Review Officer
found in favour of Mr. Hutchins. I dismissed B.H.P.'s appeal against the Review
Officer. Mr. Hutchins therefore retained his right to weekly compensation.
4. Although there were other aspects of the matter which were the subject of a
number of unsuccessful appeals to the Full Court,
Mr. Hutchins did not appeal
against my decision not to disqualify myself. He was seemingly advised against
the necessity or desirability
of appealing against my having heard his case.
5. B.H.P. appealed against my decision on mutuality in favour of the worker.
B.H.P.'s appeal was dismissed by the Full Court.
6. The instructing solicitor in
Hutchins' Case
is the instructing
solicitor in this case.
7. At a Directions Hearing on 9 December 1998 Mr. Symeonakis for the
worker having first unsuccessfully sought an adjournment of
the hearing date of
2 February to suit Counsel's convenience said
`The main point Sir is whether you'll be hearing the matter or not. That's
the main point because if you are then we go to the
next step. If you're not
then it will be a different ball game so to speak. We just don't know. Your
views upon the admissibility
of evidence may not be the same as what another
colleague of yours might be. I would have thought that's fairly straight
and that's what has to be argued.'
8. On the day the application was made the Financial Review - The Australian
and The Advertiser published the results of a survey
showing that 40.3% of the
adult population of Australia held shares in publicly listed companies.
Applying the authorities to the facts relied upon:
Those facts fall far short of making out a case of ostensible bias. Putting
aside the question of whether the authorities apply
in their terms other than
to judicial officers at
first instance
(and all of the authorities deal
with cases at first instance, not on appeal) the principles have evolved in the
context of pre-judgment
- ie. some tangible or identifiable remarks either in a
previous case or extra curially that disclose prejudgment. That is true of
Melbourne Stevedoring - Watson - Livesey - Schofield
. The second group -
RJL - Polites and Burrian
deal with the propriety of extra curial
To assert that being the director of a private company among whose assets are
shares in the parent company of the Respondent - which
parent company happens
to be one of the largest public companies in Australia as evidence of
ostensible bias - is without merit.
The link necessary to raise the spectre of
bias so as to apprehend that the issues in the Notice of Appeal would not be
impartially is distinguished only by its absence.
To hold otherwise would be to ignore both the facts and the actual result of
- as well as the conduct of the Appellant's
solicitors on appeal in
Hutchins' Case
. On the basis solely of
the Respondent to this appeal has more grounds for
apprehension than the Appellant.
The Appellant's solicitors have embarked upon a strategy of judge shopping -
within the dicta quoted from Mason J in
The almost concluding remarks of Olsson J. in
`Moreover it is timely to draw attention to what fell from the High Court in
. It is not in the interests of the due
administration of justice that judicial officers should too readily disqualify
from continuing to preside simply because a party seeks to ventilate
the issue of possible bias. There must be a real and substantial
withdrawal.'
In my view the application is quite devoid of any rational and intelligible
ground. It falls within the category of the strictures
of a recent commentator
to the effect that the perseverance in applications to disqualify a judge
because of presumed bias, where
there is no real ground for complaint does
nothing but bring the administration of justice into disrepute.
I dismiss the application.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (33.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter