URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASC/2025/166.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:05:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ABDULLA v POLICE [2025] SASC 166 (2 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Magistrates Appeal)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
ABDULLA v POLICE
[2025] SASC 166
Judgment of the Honourable
Justice Gray
2 October 2025
MAGISTRATES - APPEAL AND REVIEW - SOUTH AUSTRALIA - APPEAL TO SUPREME
CRIMINAL LAW - APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - APPEAL AGAINST SENTENCE - GROUNDS
FOR INTERFERENCE - SENTENCE MANIFESTLY EXCESSIVE OR INADEQUATE
CRIMINAL LAW - SENTENCE - SENTENCING PROCEDURE
CRIMINAL LAW - SENTENCE - SENTENCING ORDERS - NON-PAROLE PERIOD OR MINIMUM
This is an appeal against a sentence imposed by a magistrate on 26 February
2025 for an offence of aggravated assault.
The appellant complains that the learned sentencing Magistrate failed to
apply the correct sentencing discount pursuant to
s 39(2)(b)(ii)
Sentencing Act 2017
Two further complaints are advanced in relation to manifest excess concerning
the head sentence of 7 months imprisonment, and the
extension of an existing
non-parole period from 11 months to 18 months. A complaint is also made that the
reasons for extending the
non-parole period are inadequate.
The respondent submits that the appropriate sentencing discount was applied,
that neither the head sentence nor the extended non-parole
period are manifestly
excessive, and that sufficient reasons for extending the non-parole period were
Held, dismissing the appeal:
amended information, having been filed in accordance with the relevant statutory
provisions and rules, was before the Court on
15 November 2024. The appellant
appeared on 21 November 2024 in respect of that information and pleaded guilty
in February 2025.
While a complaint was made by defence counsel as to the late
filing of the amended information, no application for its disallowance
pursuant to r 63.1(4) of the
Joint Criminal Rules 2022
(SA). The discount
applied by the learned sentencing Magistrate of 30 per cent, pursuant to
39(2)(b)(ii)
Sentencing Act 2017
(SA), does not reveal error: at
sentence of 7 months imprisonment, having regard to the maximum penalty, the
seriousness of the offence, and the circumstances
of the appellant, was not
manifestly excessive: at [38];
review and extension of the non-parole period did not result in a manifestly
excessive sentence and the learned sentencing Magistrate
had regard to relevant
matters. The learned sentencing Magistrate’s reasons for review and
extension, whilst brief, were not
insufficient: at [45]-[46],
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Sentencing Act 2017
Joint Criminal Rules 2022
(SA) r 63.1;
Magistrates Court Act 1991
, referred to.
Bugmy v The Queen
[2013] HCA 37; (2013) 249 CLR 571;
Buzzacott v
[2017] SASC 64
Edwards v Police; Weber v Police; Homewood v
[2023] SASC 170
Hili v The Queen
[2010] HCA 45
R v Horstmann
[2010] SASC 103
(2010) 269 LSJS 42
[1936] HCA 40
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Kentwell v The Queen
[2014] HCA 37
; (2014) 252 CLR 601;
[2019] SASCFC 48
[1999] SASC 129
; (1999) 105 A Crim R 12;
Munda v Western Australia
[2013] HCA 38
(2013) 249 CLR 600
Police (SA) v Chilton
[2014] SASCFC 76
(2014) 120 SASR 32
[2023] SASCA 2
Warren v Police (SA)
[2020] SASC 145
[2013] SASCFC 26
Wittwer v Police
[2004] SASC 226
Yardley v Betts
(1979) 22 SASR 108
, considered.
ABDULLA v POLICE
[2025] SASC 166
Criminal: Magistrates Appeal
matter concerns an appeal against sentence imposed in the Magistrates Court on
26 February 2025, in relation to a single count
of aggravated assault contrary
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
circumstance of aggravation was that the appellant was the brother of the
The maximum penalty for
the offence is imprisonment for 3
The learned sentencing
Magistrate imposed a sentence of 7 months imprisonment, taking into
consideration the reduction on account
of the guilty plea. The learned
sentencing Magistrate imposed the sentence to be cumulative on the current
sentence that the appellant
was serving, increasing the head sentence to 20
months and 5 days commencing from 18 April 2024. The non-parole period was
by the learned sentencing Magistrate and also increased by 7 months to
commence from 18 April 2024.
are four grounds of appeal:
Magistrate failed to nominate that the maximum reduction on sentence to which
the Appellant was entitled for the guilty plea for
the offence of aggravated
assault was up to 40%.
sentence imposed in relation to the offence of aggravated assault was manifestly
decision to extend the existing non-parole period to imprisonment for 18 months
resulted in a sentence which was manifestly excessive.
reasons for sentence provided by the Magistrate were inadequate in relation to
[the] decision to extend the existing non-parole
respondent submits that the learned sentencing Magistrate did not err in the
imposition of the sentence imposed, the resultant
non-parole period after
accumulation was not manifestly excessive, and sufficient reasons for extending
the non-parole period were
remarks on penalty record that, on 29 April 2023 at Renmark, the appellant went
to his sister’s house whilst he was heavily
intoxicated.
She was home with
some friends. The appellant, by his plea, admitted he grabbed his sister from
behind and touched her breast over
the top of her clothing. The
appellant’s sister had indicated to him not to do that. Following this
assault the appellant
followed his sister outside and said, “if you
weren’t my sister, I’d have you”.
learned sentencing Magistrate noted that the appellant was on a suspended
sentence bond at the time of the offending and that
the bond was entered into in
November 2022 for a period of 2 years. The appellant had breached that bond by
unrelated offending
and was serving a sentence which included the revoked
suspended sentence such that the learned sentencing Magistrate did not need
take any further action in relation to the breach of bond.
sentence the appellant was serving at the time of the imposition of sentence was
a period of 13 months and 5 days which commenced
on 18 April 2024,
with a non-parole period of 11 months starting on that date.
appellant was initially charged by information dated 5 June 2023, with a single
count of aggravated indecent
On 11 July 2024, the
learned sentencing Magistrate made orders for the prosecution to file and serve
any application to amend the
information “to add count 2” within 7
The matter was then remanded
for trial on 21 November 2024.
15 November 2024, a revised information was filed alleging two further counts of
aggravated indecent assault and two counts of
aggravated assault. An application
to vacate the trial due to counsel unavailability was heard on 21 November
2024. That application
was not opposed, and the trial did not proceed. On 21
November 2024, defence objected to the revised information being filed. The
parties were advised to confer and discuss the scope of the issues at trial,
agree matters capable of agreement, to continue negotiations
and to bring any
pre-trial applications.
was remanded to 24 February 2025 for pre‑trial conference. No application
objecting to the amended information
was brought.
24 February 2025, at the pre-trial conference, the appellant entered a guilty
plea to count 5 on the revised information with
the remaining charges being
factual and procedural background of the matter in the Magistrates Court is
relevant to the issue joined between the parties
in respect of ground 1. Ground
1 concerns whether, in circumstances where the guilty plea was entered more than
3 months after the
revised information was filed, the appellant was entitled to
be afforded a reduction in his sentence by up to 30 per cent pursuant
s 39(2)(b)(ii)
Sentencing Act 2017
Act’), or whether, as the appellant contends, a greater discount should
have been applied.
remaining issues in dispute between the parties concern the question of whether
the sentence and the decision extending the non-parole
period were manifestly
excessive and whether or not adequate reasons were provided for extending the
non-parole period.
Statutory basis of the appeal and relevant
Principles on appeal
appeal is governed by
Magistrates Court Act 1991
(SA) and is
by way of rehearing.
To interfere
with the exercise of a sentencing discretion, there must be demonstrated error
of the kind described in
House v The
The approach to
be adopted was explained in
case, White J
The imposition
of a sentence involves an exercise of judicial discretion. This Court
interferes with the exercise of that discretion
only when it is satisfied that
the sentencing Magistrate has acted upon some wrong principle, or [if it] has
allowed irrelevant considerations
to influence it, or it has failed to have
regard to a relevant consideration or alternatively, even though no precise
error can be
identified, the sentence is so obviously unreasonable or unjust
that it can be said that there must have been a failure to exercise
discretion properly.
Police (SA) v Chilton
Kourakis CJ observed that the sentence imposed by a magistrate can only be set
aside for error in accordance with
House v The King
. Kourakis CJ
mischiefs which this Court must avoid in sentencing appeals are, on the one
hand, too readily imagining error in the interstices
of the necessarily economic
sentencing remarks of busy Magistrates and, on the other, too readily excusing
error as a merely infelicitous
expression of no consequence. The mischiefs can
be avoided by fidelity to, and a rigorous application of, the prescript in
House v The King
House v The King
It must appear
that some error has been made in exercising the discretion. If the judge acts
upon a wrong principle, if he allows
extraneous or irrelevant matters to guide
or affect him, if he mistakes the facts, if he does not take into account some
consideration, then his determination should be reviewed and the
appellate court may exercise its own discretion in substitution
for his if it
has the materials for doing so. It may not appear how the primary judge has
reached the result embodied in his order,
but, if upon the facts it is
unreasonable or plainly unjust, the appellate court may infer that in some way
there has been a failure
properly to exercise the discretion which the law
reposes in the court of first instance. In such a case, although the nature of
the error may not be discoverable, the exercise of the discretion is reviewed on
the ground that a substantial wrong has in fact
establish that a sentence imposed was manifestly excessive, the appellant may
establish that the sentence was unreasonable or
plainly unjust such that it can
be inferred that the outcome has been attended by
It is insufficient to
find on appeal that the appellate court would have imposed a different sentence.
Rather, the sentence must
be outside the permissible range of sentences for the
offender and the offence.
considering whether the sentence was manifestly excessive, regard will be had to
the following:
maximum sentence prescribed by law for the offence.
standards of sentence customarily observed for offences of the kind in
place which the criminal conduct occupies in the scale of seriousness of crimes
of that type.
personal circumstances of the offender.
an outcome error is established, the appellate court will resentence, or remit
the matter for resentence, having formed the view
that the sentence imposed at
first instance was either manifestly excessive or inadequate. Where a process
error is established,
the appellate court ought to resentence unless it is
considered the sentence imposed in the court below was appropriate,
notwithstanding
appellant complains, as to grounds 1 and 4, that the learned sentencing
Magistrate’s decision was attended by a process
error, whereas grounds 2
and 3 complain of outcome errors of manifest excess. The respondent’s
position is that there are neither
process errors nor outcome errors in this
matter. Alternatively, the respondent submits, if this Court was to find a
process error,
then the sentence imposed was appropriate in all the
circumstances and this Court ought not interfere.
Consideration
of grounds of appeal
Ground 1 – sentencing discount
appellant contends that the learned sentencing Magistrate incorrectly nominated
a maximum sentencing discount of 30 per cent
when the appellant was entitled to
a maximum reduction of up to 40 per cent. The relevant legislative provision
concerning this
ground of appeal is
of the Act.
provides as follows:
39—Reduction of sentences for guilty
plea in Magistrates Court etc
(2) Subject to this section, if a defendant has pleaded guilty to an offence
or offences—
(a) not more than 4 weeks after the defendant's first court appearance in
relation to the relevant offence or offences—the
sentencing court may
reduce the sentence that it would otherwise have imposed by up to 40%;
(b) more than 4 weeks after the defendant's first court appearance in relation
to the relevant offence or offences but—
(i) if a date has been set for a trial for the offence or offences—not
less than 4 weeks before that day; or
(ii) in any other case—before the commencement of the trial for the
offence or offences, the sentencing court may reduce the
sentence that it would
otherwise have imposed by up to 30%;
appellant contends that the maximum discount of 40 per cent should have been
applied by application of
of the Act, whereas the respondent contends
that the learned sentencing Magistrate correctly applied the discount of 30 per
pursuant to
s 39(2)(b).
appellant contends,
, that, in circumstances where the
prosecution, being the respondent on this appeal, was initially given leave to
file an amended
information by 18 July 2024, but did not do so within that
timeframe, then the subsequent lodgement on 15 November 2024 did not have
effect of amending the original information. This contention is advanced on the
basis that objection had been taken to that
information being lodged at the
hearing on 21 November 2024. Further, the appellant contends that the
prosecution had not obtained
leave of the Court to amend the information as
provided for in r 63.1(6) of the
Joint Criminal Rules 2022
(‘the Rules’). As such, the appellant contends that, prior to the
hearing on 24 February 2025, the appellant was
never before the Court for the
charge of the offence of aggravated assault to which the appellant ultimately
pleaded guilty. The
appellant contends that the appellant’s first court
appearance in relation to the charge for the offence only arose during
course of the hearing on 24 February 2025, when the appellant indicated to the
Court that he intended to plead guilty to that
respondent contends that on 21 November 2024, when the matter was before the
learned sentencing Magistrate, the record of outcome
shows that the revised
information was before her Honour. The respondent submits that defence counsel
applied to vacate the trial
date, which was not opposed, and that
notwithstanding that defence counsel objected to the late filing of the revised
information,
no application for an order disallowing the revised information was
advanced by defence counsel. The learned sentencing Magistrate
in remanding the
matter for a pre-trial conference on 24 February 2025 made the following orders:
“any pre-trial applications
requiring argument and determination to be
filed and served no later than 21 days prior to next status
The respondent
further contends that the revised information complied with r 63.1(2)(a) of the
Rules and, as a consequence, leave
was not required for the filing of the
revised information.
am unable to accept the contention put forward by the appellant that the revised
information was not before the Court on 21 November
2024. The information dated
15 November 2024 was before the Magistrates Court on the date that it was
validly presented and filed
in that Court by the
The Commissioner of
Police was the informant in this matter and had filed the information in
accordance with the Rules and relevant
provisions.
I have considered
the record of outcome and listened to the audio recordings of the hearings
before the learned sentencing Magistrate
on 21 November 2024,
24 February 2025 and 26 February 2025. I find that the appellant did not
apply for an order disallowing the
amendment in whole or in part, or in any way
after 21 November 2024 advance that complaint before the Court.
audio recording of the hearing on 21 November 2024 indicates that the
prosecution raised before the Court that the defence had
made a complaint
concerning the amended information. The prosecution acknowledged that the
amended complaint was filed after the
time provided for in a previous order.
The learned sentencing Magistrate clearly indicated that any complaint about the
information needed to be made in writing by application, filed and
served 21 days prior to the next status hearing. Whilst the appellant
complaint as to the late filing of the amended information, on 21 November 2024,
that complaint was not formalised in an application
that the amendment be
disallowed, nor did the appellant take any step to seek such an order at any
time prior to sentence. In addition
to not applying for an order disallowing
the amendment in whole or in part, defence counsel appearing on 26 February 2025
that the discount to be applied was 30 per cent.
find that the appellant has not made out the factual basis to substantiate the
claim made in this ground of appeal that the amended
information was not before
the learned sentencing Magistrate on 21 November 2024.
find that there was no error in the learned sentencing Magistrate applying a
maximum reduction on account of the guilty plea of
30 per cent pursuant to
s 39(2)(b)(ii) of the Act.
dismiss ground 1 of the appeal.
Ground 2 – whether the
sentence imposed in relation to the offence of aggravated assault was manifestly
appellant submits that the sentence of imprisonment of 7 months imposed in
relation to the offence of aggravated assault was
manifestly excessive. The
appellant contends that the sentence resulted in an outcome which was unjust or
unreasonable.
appellant noted that the maximum penalty for the offence of aggravated assault
is imprisonment for 3 years.
The appellant also referred to the decision of
in which the Court
declined to set any standard regarding the offence of assault in relation to a
previous legislative scheme and
observed that “[an assault varies] very
greatly in seriousness. Some result in injury to the victim and some do
The Court held
consideration of these factors leads to the conclusion that cases of assault
require individual assessment and treatment. In my
opinion there can be no
presumption one way or the other as to whether imprisonment is the appropriate
way of dealing with any particular
case. A judicial policy which were to embody
such a presumption in respect of assaults generally, or assaults which could be
characterized
as "serious", or assaults where "some injury is caused to the
victim", would not, in my view, be justified. It is worth pointing
out that the
degree of injury suffered by the victim is not in every case a satisfactory
measure of the gravity of the offence or
the culpability of the offender.
appellant submitted that the offence was at the lower end of the scale of
objective seriousness for offences of this kind for
the following reasons:
the offence was “aggravated”, the aggravating feature was that the
victim was the adult sister of the appellant.
Despite that aggravating feature,
there was no suggestion that the appellant somehow sought to use, rely upon, or
take advantage
of, that relationship, to commit the offence. The aggravating
feature reflects nothing more than the status of the relationship between
victim and the appellant;
was not any suggestion that the offending conduct was premeditated or planned.
Rather, the offending appeared to be spontaneous
and opportunistic;
appellant was highly intoxicated. Whilst not an excuse, his intoxication would
have obviously lowered his inhibitions;
offending involved the appellant touching the breast of the victim over the top
of the victim’s clothing. The offending
did not involve the appellant
attempting in any way to place his hand under the victim’s clothing so as
to touch her breast;
appellant immediately removed his hand from the victim’s breast upon the
victim protesting against the appellant’s
conduct; and,
offending conduct only lasted a short moment.
appellant also made extensive and detailed submissions as to the personal
circumstances of the appellant.
appellant in submissions refers to the personal circumstances of the appellant,
especially as a child, and to their relevance
in the exercise of the sentencing
discretion.
The appellant
referred to the principles in
Bugmy v The Queen
in which it was
experience of growing up in an environment surrounded by alcohol abuse and
violence may leave its mark on a person throughout
life. Among other things, a
background of that kind may compromise the person's capacity to mature and to
learn from experience.
It is a feature of the person's make-up and remains
relevant to the determination of the appropriate sentence, notwithstanding that
the person has a long history of offending.
Because the effects of profound childhood deprivation do not diminish with
the passage of time and repeated offending, it is right
to speak of giving
“full weight” to an offender's deprived background in every
sentencing decision. However, this is
not to suggest, as the appellant's
submissions were apt to do, that an offender's deprived background has the same
(mitigatory) relevance
for all of the purposes of punishment. Giving weight to
the conflicting purposes of punishment is what makes the exercise of the
discretion so difficult. An offender's childhood exposure to extreme violence
and alcohol abuse may explain the offender's recourse
to violence when
frustrated such that the offender's moral culpability for the inability to
control that impulse may be substantially
reduced. However, the inability to
control the violent response to frustration may increase the importance of
protecting the community
from the offender.
(citations omitted)
appellant also submits that the starting point of imprisonment for
10 months nominated by the learned sentencing Magistrate for
the offence of
aggravated assault, being almost one-third of the maximum penalty of
imprisonment for 3 years, provides insight into
the risk of
The appellant submitted
that the offending in this matter did not involve the level of violence
committed in, for example,
Trott-Dan v The King
Buzzacott v Police
respondent contends that it is not sufficient for an appellate court to merely
conclude that it would have come to a different
decision to that ultimately
reached by a sentencing court, or that the sentence imposed is markedly
different from that imposed in
The respondent submits
that the offending is plainly serious for a number of reasons, including,
, the relationship between the appellant and the victim and
that the offence occurred in the victim’s own home, a place where
should have been entitled to feel safe. The respondent also refers to the
unprovoked nature of the assault.
respondent also referred to the regard that the learned sentencing Magistrate
had for the appellant’s relevant criminal
history which was recorded in
her Honour’s
November 2022, you were convicted of breaching an intervention order, two counts
of aggravated assault and you were given a
term of imprisonment of nine months
which was suspended on that bond I just referred to for a period of two years.
You received
a further sentence, which is not a prior offence, the reason you
are now in custody, of four months and five days so the total sentence
months and five days with a non-parole period of 11 months.
You do have a long history of prior offending. In May 2020, you were
convicted for breaching an intervention order on a second or
subsequent time and
no penalty was imposed.
On 31 December 2019, it was the same offence for a first time and no penalty
was imposed.
On October 2016, you were convicted while driving disqualified, aggravated
assault against a child or spouse, fighting and breach
of intervention order.
At that time, you were sentenced to a period of imprisonment of six months which
was suspended on a 12-month
good behaviour bond with supervision.
In 2012, you pleaded guilty to a charge of basic assault and no conviction
was recorded. I need not go back any further.
respondent also notes that the learned sentencing Magistrate in the course of
her Honour’s sentencing remarks stated as
I take into
account your history of criminal offending. You are not punished again for
that, but it is relevant to your risk of reoffending
and speaks against any
leniency that I might otherwise have been able to apply.
consideration of other sentences imposed in other cases is relevant, the primary
question is whether this particular sentence
imposed was within the permissible
discretion of the learned sentencing Magistrate. The question in this matter is
whether or not
there is an outcome error, that is, the result embodied an order
that was unreasonable or plainly unjust.
am unable to conclude that the sentence imposed was manifestly excessive.
Having regard to the maximum penalty for the offence
and considering both the
worst possible case and the case before the Court, balancing these matters with
other relevant factors including
the range of sentences customarily observed for
the type of offending,
seriousness of the offending, and the personal circumstances of the appellant,
there is no error in the sentence, either express
or implied, that can be
demonstrated. The imposition of sentence involves an individualised form of
justice, and the learned sentencing
Magistrate was faced with an offender who
could be afforded little leniency. It is not enough that this Court may be of
that it would exercise the sentencing discretion differently.
Therefore, in my view, having regard to all these matters, it is not
appropriate
to intervene.
dismiss ground 2 of the appeal.
Ground 3 – whether the
decision to extend the existing non-parole period resulted in a sentence which
was manifestly excessive
appellant submits that, having determined the sentence to impose in relation to
the offence of aggravated assault, the learned
sentencing Magistrate then had to
review the existing non-parole period to which the appellant was subject. The
learned sentencing
Magistrate determined to extend the existing non‑parole
period by 7 months – an amount equal to the sentence imposed
offence of aggravated assault – resulting in a non-parole period of 18
months. The appellant submits that the non-parole
period imposed was manifestly
excessive or otherwise resulted in an unjust or unreasonable outcome.
appellant also submits that the learned sentencing Magistrate was, whilst still
bearing in mind all the factors relevant to the
determination of the head
sentence, required to afford greater weight to the sentencing objective of
rehabilitation in fixing the
non-parole period. Her Honour was also required to
conduct a “final check” to ensure that the non-parole period was
crushing and would not leave the appellant with “little cause for
The appellant also
complains, both in relation to this ground and ground 4, that the remarks on
penalty as they related to the decision
to extend the existing non-parole period
were inadequate. These remarks provide as
be a conviction, and I would have imposed a sentence of 10 months imprisonment
but will reduce this on account of your
plea to seven months. That sentence
will be cumulative on the current sentence you are serving so the head sentence
is therefore
increased to 20 months and five days commencing from 18 April 2024.
I am required to review the non-parole period for the same reasons
that I have
set out in relation to the sentencing [principles] and their application, I will
increase the non-parole period from
11 months to 18 months again to commence
from 18 April 2024. It is entirely a matter for you as to whether you apply to
be released
on parole in due course or not.
appellant complains that, bearing in mind the need for punishment and
deterrence, the personal circumstances of the appellant
and the need for greater
weight to be afforded to promoting rehabilitation, the learned sentencing
Magistrate should have fixed a
non-parole period which afforded the appellant
greater “scope for a better chance to prove
respondent submits that as the sentence imposed was less than 12 months,
there was no error in the learned sentencing Magistrate
not fixing an initial
non-parole period for the charged offence. However, as the appellant was
already serving a sentence of imprisonment
and was subject to an existing
non‑parole period, the learned sentencing Magistrate was required to
review and extend the existing
As the respondent
In determining whether a non-parole period is manifestly
excessive, it is necessary to recognise that the function of a non-parole
is different to that of a head-sentence; a defendant’s rehabilitative
prospects should be given greater emphasis when
fixing a non-parole period than
when imposing a head sentence. While a non-parole period should operate as a
personal deterrent and
be properly proportionate to the gravity of the
offending, it is appropriate to give greater weight to a defendant’s
rehabilitative
prospects at that point of the sentence.
the respondent submits on this appeal, there are difficulties with the
suggestion that the learned sentencing Magistrate erred,
by having inadequate
regard to the appellant’s prospects of rehabilitation and failing to
consider the principles of totality.
The difficulties are twofold. Firstly, no
process error is alleged, rather the allegation of manifest excess concerns an
error. Secondly, and in any event, it is difficult to see how the
complaint of insufficient regard to rehabilitation can be made
out where, on the
material before the learned sentencing Magistrate, the appellant’s
prospects of rehabilitation were regrettably
find that the offending was committed against a background of convictions and
terms of imprisonment, albeit suspended, for offences
of the same type, with
previous offending being committed against other members of the community, as
well as against persons with
whom the appellant was in a relationship. The
sentencing remarks of the learned sentencing Magistrate make plain that the
and extension of the non-parole period was a separate and considered
assessment having regard to all of the matters before the Court,
which the Court
considered when arriving at an appropriate sentence for the aggravated assault
charge. I reject the suggestion of
manifest excess advanced in oral submissions
based upon the suggestion that the learned sentencing Magistrate engaged in a
mechanical’
my view, neither regard to the prospects of rehabilitation or the principle of
totality indicate that there was manifest excess
in the outcome of the
sentencing process, and the extension of the non-parole period was neither
unreasonable or unjust.
dismiss ground 3 of the appeal.
Ground 4 – inadequate
appellant submits that the learned sentencing Magistrate did not give adequate
reasons in relation to the decision to extend
the existing non-parole period to
imprisonment for 18 months, and that, in doing so, committed a process
The appellant submits
that a failure to provide adequate reasons for imposing sentence is an error of
law. The appellant refers
Edwards v Police
Weber v Police
in which McIntyre J
remarks must contain sufficient detail to allow an appellate court to adequately
discharge its function. A failure to give
adequate reasons for imposing a
sentence can amount to an error justifying the sentence being set aside.
However, sentencing remarks
are not to be read and deconstructed with the same
scrutiny as might apply to written reasons for judgment. Sentencing remarks are
not required to deal with every matter that may be relevant to the sentence
ultimately imposed. This is particularly the case when
considering the remarks
of a Magistrate conducting a busy list. It is not necessary for any more than
brief reasons, identifying
for the benefit of the appellants, what are the
critical factors that weighed in reaching the decision on penalty. It is not a
(citations omitted)
appellant submits that the review of the non-parole period required the learned
sentencing Magistrate to consider and determine
the minimum period necessary to
meet the punitive and protective purposes of the sentence, whilst, at the same
time, in exercising
that discretion, to give relatively more weight to the
sentencing objective of rehabilitation. Further, the appellant submits that,
whilst there was not a mandated or standard non‑parole period, a
non-parole period of between 50 and 75 per cent of the head
sentence might have
been expected, and the learned sentencing Magistrate is said to have been
required to provide some explanation
for fixing a non-parole period beyond that
general range.
respondent submits that the learned sentencing Magistrate, throughout the course
of the sentencing remarks, highlighted the relevant
critical factors and
sentencing principles. The respondent submits that it is plain from the
sentencing remarks that the learned
sentencing Magistrate separately considered
and approached the review and extension of the non-parole period. The learned
Magistrate referred to, in a shorthand way, the relevant principles
governing sentence and the respondent submits that the reasons
extension, whilst brief, were sufficiently exposed.
my view, reading the sentencing remarks as a whole, it is clear that the learned
sentencing Magistrate recognised that there was
separate discretion to be
exercised in considering the extension of the non-parole period. Whilst the
remarks in respect of the
decision to extend the non-parole period by 7 months
are brief, the learned sentencing Magistrate specifically makes reference to
previous consideration that had been made during the course of her
Honour’s sentencing remarks to relevant critical factors
and sentencing
principles. In my view, it would be reading error into the learned sentencing
Magistrate’s reasons to find
that her Honour gave inadequate weight to the
questions of rehabilitation and totality. I find that the sentencing remarks
adequate. I find that a separate explanation was not required because the
non-parole period fell outside of the range of 50 to 75
my view, it was sufficient that the learned sentencing Magistrate recognised
that there was a separate discretion to be exercised
and it was sufficient for
the learned sentencing Magistrate to refer to the factors her Honour had
previously considered. It cannot
be said on a fair reading of the learned
sentencing Magistrate’s reasons as a whole that her Honour did not provide
an explanation
for the extension of the non-parole
dismiss ground 4 of the appeal.
Conclusion and orders
dismiss the appeal.
will hear from the parties as to any other orders.
Criminal Law Consolidation
s 5AA(1)(g).
Criminal Law Consolidation
s 20(3)(b).
Notice of Appeal (FDN 1).
Appeal Book (FDN 11)
(‘AB’) at 18-21 (Ex tempore Remarks on Penalty of Magistrate Burton
dated 26 February 2025 (‘Remarks
on Penalty’)).
Contrary to
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
AB at 56-8 (Affidavit of
Ryszard Michal Duluk sworn 2 April 2025, Annexure RMD-2 (Record of Outcome dated
11 July 2024 (FDN 3))).
AB at 39-40 (Record of Outcome
dated 21 November 2024 (FDN 42)).
Joint Criminal Rules 2022
(SA) r 191.1.
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
at 504-5 (Dixon, Evatt and McTiernan JJ).
Wittwer v Police
[2004] SASC 226 (White
Wittwer v Police
[2004] SASC 226
Police (SA) v Chilton
[2014] SASCFC 76
(2014) 120 SASR 32 (Kourakis
CJ, David J agreeing).
Police (SA) v Chilton
[2014] SASCFC 76
(2014) 120 SASR 32
(Kourakis CJ, David J
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
(1936) 55 CLR 499
at 505 (Dixon, Evatt and McTiernan JJ).
Kentwell v The Queen
[2014] HCA 37
; (2014) 252 CLR 601 at 615,
(French CJ, Hayne, Bell and Keane
Kentwell v The Queen
[2014] HCA 37
; (2014) 252 CLR 601 at 615,
(French CJ, Hayne, Bell and Keane
at 99 (King CJ, White and Mohr JJ agreeing); see further
Commissioner of Police (SA)
[2024] SASC 147
(Stanley J).
R v Horstmann
(2010) 269 LSJS 42
(Kourakis J).
AB at 39-40 (Record of
Outcome dated 21 November 2024 (FDN 42)).
Jago v District Court
[1989] HCA 46
(1989) 168 CLR 23
at 36 (Brennan J).
Criminal Procedure
Joint Criminal Rules 2022
(SA) rr 23.2(5)
at 99 (King CJ, White and Mohr JJ agreeing).
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
s 20(3)(b).
Yardley v Betts
(1979) 22 SASR 108.
Yardley v Betts
(1979) 22 SASR 108
at 113 (King CJ, Mitchell and Legoe JJ agreeing).
Yardley v Betts
(1979) 22 SASR 108
at 113 (King CJ, Mitchell and Legoe JJ agreeing).
Warren v Police (SA)
[2020] SASC 145
Munda v Western Australia
(2013) 249 CLR 600
(French CJ, Hayne, Crennan,
Kiefel, Gageler and Keane JJ);
Bugmy v The Queen
[2013] HCA 37; (2013)
249 CLR 571 at 594-5, [43]-[44] (French CJ, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel, Bell and
Bugmy v The Queen
[2013] HCA 37; (2013) 249 CLR 571 at 594-5, [43]-[44] (French CJ, Hayne,
Crennan, Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ).
Appellant’s Written
Submissions (FDN 6) (‘AWS’) at [42].
Trott-Dan v The King
[2023] SASCA 2
(Lovell, Doyle and David JJA).
Buzzacott v Police (SA)
[2017] SASC 64
(Kourakis CJ).
Hili v The Queen
[2010] HCA 45
(2010) 242 CLR 520
(French CJ, Gummow, Hayne,
Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ);
[2019] SASCFC 48
J, Peek and S Doyle JJ agreeing). See also,
Kentwell v The Queen
; (2014) 252 CLR 601 at 615,
(French CJ, Hayne, Bell and Keane
AB at 18-21 (Remarks on
Hird v The King
[2025] SASCA 104 (Livesey
P, David J and Mullins AJA).
R v McFarlane
(1999) 105 A Crim R 121
(Doyle CJ, Martin J
R v Williams
[2013] SASCFC 26
AB at 21 (Remarks on
R v McFarlane
(1999) 105 A Crim R 121
(Doyle CJ, Martin J
R v Williams
[2013] SASCFC 26
Sentencing Act 2017
ss 47(1)(b)
and (5)(a)(i).
Trott-Dan v The King
[2023] SASCA 2
(Lovell, Doyle and David JJA).
Appeal Transcript at
T19.15-20 and T20.9-11.
AWS at [54].
Edwards v Police; Weber
v Police; Homewood v Police
[2023] SASC 170
(McIntyre J).
Trott-Dan v The King
[2023] SASCA 2
(Lovell, Doyle and David JJA).
Trott-Dan v The King
[2023] SASCA 2
(Lovell, Doyle and David JJA).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (422 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter