URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAHPT/2019/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Richards [2019] SAHPT 10 (10 May 2019)
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Anthony Glenn Richards
[2019] SAHPT 10
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL OF SOUTH
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY BOARD OF
RICHARDS, Anthony Glenn
Health Practitioners
380 of 2018
HEARING DATE:
6 June 2018
and 10 October 2018
DECISION OF SA HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL:
constituted by: Deputy President G R A Clark
Dr P Glover
Ms B Simondson
DELIVERED ON:
REASONS FOR DECISION PUBLISHED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Registered nurse – Addiction to
opioids - Professional misconduct - Code of Professional Conduct for Nurses in
Respondent’s conduct found to be misconduct –
Respondent’s registration as a Registered Nurse (Division 1) is suspended
for a period of 12 months – Respondent is to undertake education–
Respondent to pay complainant’s costs.
Section 552
Practitioners Regulation National Law (South Australia) Act
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant: Mr A
Respondent: Mr J Robinson
Solicitors:
Complainant: Lander
& Roberts Lawyers, AHPRA
Respondent: Rudall & Rudall Lawyers
Introduction
proceedings commenced on 6 June 2018 and Mr Richards requested an adjournment to
get legal advice and representation.
the Tribunal also expressed concern about the absence of recent psychological
and other reports, the application was adjourned
to Wednesday 10 October
the resumed hearing the complainant was represented by Mr Forbes and
Mr Robinson appeared for the respondent.
hearing from the parties and receiving the material provided in the Book of
the Tribunal made orders
as set out in transcript.
Tribunal now publishes its reasons.
Allegations
Complainant alleges that Anthony Glenn Richards:
a registered nurse obtaining general registration on 18 December 2012;
employed at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital as a registered nurse in the emergency
Department;
he was a domestic partner and spouse of Angela Argel Adelle Zilm a registered
medical practitioner who also was employed at the
Queen Elizabeth Hospital;
they were living together.
complainant and the respondent tendered a detailed Statement of Agreed
conceding the allegation set
out in the Complaint.
the Agreed Statement of Facts
Respondent admitted that:
Zilm had prescribed for the respondent oxycodone as detailed in Annexure A of
Statement of Agreed Facts;
4 January and 7 March 2016, Jack Christian was prescribed oxycodone as detailed
in Annexure B;
received the benefits of all such prescriptions;
misappropriated script pads, syringes and needles;
was dependent on opioid medication and was diagnosed as suffering ‘very
severe opioid use disorder’;
had consulted Dr Luu to come off opioids and commence a withdrawal treatment
participated in an interview dated 20 October 2016 with AHPRA investigators and
made admissions;
lack of candour to AHPRA investigators in an earlier interview dated 5 April
made further admissions.
The Hearing
Tribunal was told that Mr Forbes and Mr Robinson had an agreed position on
outcome but accepted that the tribunal discretion is
not fettered by the
agreement between the parties. In addition the Tribunal has written submissions
from Mr Forbes.
Mr Robinson submitted at p 23 of
transcript:
....the respondent, through me, again apologises for his
actions and he acknowledges that those actions do constitute professional
misconduct and also, this was something I think that my friend didn’t
mention that it’s really conceded, it is also acknowledged,
respondent, that this misconduct was related to the practice of nursing even
though, of course, it was not involved in the
delivery of nursing activities per
se. Nonetheless it is accepted that this constitutes not only misconduct but
professional misconduct.
And all of this, I have previously explained to him. As
I foreshadowed, I do wish to be heard in relation to the proposed orders
sorry, two and four. Always acknowledging, of course as we do, the question of
penalties is a matter for the tribunal.
Robinson reported that he conceded paragraphs 1 and 2 of the joint submission on
was further conceded that Mr Richards’ registration was suspended on 6
April 2016 and since that date he has not returned
to work as a nurse. On
18 August 2017 the Board revoked his suspension.
Robinson submitted that Mr Richards has undergone all necessary medical
treatment for his recovery of his addiction to opioids.
The Tribunal was
referred to the written report of Dr Luu and Dr Julian Begg. There is no dispute
that Mr Richards has got all appropriate
Nor is there any dispute that Mr Richards is contrite about his wrongdoing and
remorseful for his
past behaviour. There are no legal proceedings in other
Tribunal accepts that Mr Richards is contrite for his wrongdoing and
misinformation to the AHPRA investigators. Mr Richards made
detailed admissions
to the investigators concerning his misleading information about the
prescriptions but not before a forensic
handwriting expert was engaged by AHPRA
to examine the handwriting on the prescriptions in question. Mr Richards
reported that he
had forged Dr Zilm’s signature on the prescriptions.
Tribunal was told that Mr Richards:
32 years of age;
living with university friends;
studying engineering at University of South Australia;
course commenced in March 2017 and finishes in 2020;
5 – 10 hours each week for Auscold, Pooraka earning $19.50 an hour. In
addition, he has another job undertaking electrical
design work at home for
Solid State. This work is for 8 – 10 hours each week is $18 an hour;
take-home pay each week is about $315;
pays rent of $150 each week and has disposable income of $165 each week;
Richards would like to return to nursing: to shifts 16 hours each
Tribunal was also mindful of the report of Dr Julian Begg dated 9 May 2018 and
He attends university and is reliable with his studies
and assignments. He has two part-time jobs.
He has started a new relationship, but continues to maintain other friendships
i.e. it (sic) doesn’t appear to have become
dependent within the
relationship.
He reports compliance with the drug testing regime and attendance upon his
general practitioner.
he does not report symptoms of mental disorder such as depression or
His mental state has been normal throughout our consultations. It appears to me
that he was in dependent relationship and that was
a significant factor in his
drug use. I note that at no time in our consultations has he blamed his then
partner, he has always acknowledged
his responsibility for his decisions.
As his substance use disorder is now in sustained remission, and he has
traversed a number of minor social stresses without resorting
to any drugs or
abnormal coping strategies I consider that he has fully recovered from the
substance use disorder for which he is
under supervision by AHPRA.
My clinical practice would be to discharge him from my care. I believe the
general practitioner can provide appropriate supervision.
I don’t see the
need to see him again but am prepared to do so that will assist
Purpose of Disciplinary Proceedings
Nursing Board of Australia v
at paragraph
A sanction imposed by this Tribunal may have the purpose of
preventing persons who are unfit to practice from doing so, of securing
maintenance of proper professional standards in the profession and of assuring
members of the public and the profession that
appropriate standards are being
maintained and that unprofessional conduct will not be tolerated as well as
bringing home to a practitioner
the seriousness of his or her unprofessional
conduct. A disciplinary sanction might also have the purpose of deterring other
of the profession who might be minded to act in a similar way. It was
submitted, and we accept, that the focus in these proceedings
is quite different
from that seen in the criminal courts and in particular, that some mitigatory
circumstances relevant to matters
in criminal courts, and related to a
practitioner’s personal circumstances and personal life, are not as
significant in these
proceedings, whereas a sentencing court must have regard to
such issues.
is helpful to also refer to
Craig v Medical Board of South
paragraph 47:
In other cases the protection of the public or the
public interest may justify an order intended to bring home to the practitioner
the seriousness of the practitioner's departure from professional standards, and
intended to deter the practitioner from any further
departure. A fine might well
be imposed with this object. An order imposing a fine might look like a
punishment imposed by a court
exercising criminal jurisdiction, but in
professional disciplinary proceedings it is imposed on a different basis. An
order might
also be made in professional disciplinary proceedings to emphasise
to other members of the profession, or to reassure the public,
that a certain
order is made in part to protect the
profession, by demonstrating that the
profession does not allow certain conduct. This, in the end, is also in the
public interest.
... I make these points merely to emphasise that the protection of the public
has various aspects. The public may be protected by
preventing a person from
practising a profession, by limiting the right of practise, or by making it
clear that certain conduct is
not acceptable. These are merely illustrations of
the sort of order that may be called
further at paragraph 57:
If the order is to be supported in point of principle,
it seems to me that it must be supported on the basis of protecting the
and maintaining public confidence by emphasising to the profession
and to the public that Dr Craig's conduct was not acceptable and
Tribunal has also had regard to the Code of Professional Conduct for Nurses in
in particular and
quote page 283:
The nursing profession expects nurses will conduct
themselves personally and professionally in a way that maintains public trust
confidence in the profession.
also have regard to Conduct Statement
entitled ‘Nurses
practice and conduct themselves in accordance with the laws relevant to the
profession and practice of nursing’
in the Code of Professional Conduct
for Nurses in Australia.
acknowledging the contrition of the respondent and rehabilitation there is a
need to bring home to him and others, that the
public confidence in the nursing
profession is of paramount concern, and that Mr Richards has put his selfish
interests ahead of
his profession and the community
We order that:
AND UPON finding this day that the respondent’s conduct submitted in
the statement of agreed fact is professional misconduct
within the meaning of
section 552 the Health Practitioners Regulations National Law
(South Australia) Act 2010 (“National Law”)
in accordance with
section 196 in schedule 2 the National Law the South Australian Health
Practitioner Tribunal ORDERS THAT:
Respondent is reprimanded;
Respondent’s registration as a Registered Nurse (Division 1) is suspended
for a period of 12 months from the date of this
following Conditions be imposed on the Respondent’s registration (in these
conditions the Respondent is called “the
Practitioner” and the
Complainant is called “the Board” within one month of the
Respondent’s return to practice
after the period of suspension
(“Commencement of Conditions”):
Practitioner must undertake and successfully complete a program of education,
approved by the Board and including a reflective
practice report, in relation to
legal and ethical considerations for nursing practice.
28 days of the notice of the Commencement of Conditions, the Practitioner must,
on the approved form (HPN24), nominate for
approval by the Board an education
course, assessment or program (the education) addressing the topic required.
The Practitioner
must ensure:
nomination includes a copy of the curriculum of the education.
education consists of a minimum of 5 hours.
Practitioner must complete the education within 6 months of the notice of the
Board approval of the education.
28 days of the completion of the education, the Practitioner must to provide to
of successful completion of the education.
reflective practice report demonstrating, to the satisfaction of the Board, that
the Practitioner has reflected on the issues that
gave rise to this condition
and how the Practitioner has incorporated the lessons learnt in the education
into the Practitioner’s
costs associated with compliance with these conditions are at the
Practitioner’s own expense.
review period for these conditions is 9 months from the commencement of
conditions.
Respondent is to pay the Complainant’s costs of and incidental to these
proceedings in the sum of $2,000 to be paid within
12 months of the date of this
suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person using material in the
judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any
such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed to the Registrar of
the Health Practitioners Tribunal.
Exhibit C1.
Tr p 44 - 45.
Filed as part of Ex C1.
Agreed Statement of Facts [14]
Ex C1 p 350.
Tr 23 [36].
Ex C1 Court Book p 384.
(2012) SAHPT 5.
(2012) SAHPT 5
[2001] SASC 169.
Craig v Medical Board of
South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
Craig v Medical Board of
South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
Craig v Medical Board of
South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
Ex C1- Court Book p 330.
Ex C1 – Court Book -
column 2 on page 331.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (166 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter