URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWC/2013/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:08:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
RUSSELL-TAYLOR v GOLDSTEIN & MARTIN [2013] SAWC 1 (29 April 2013)
WARDENS COURT OF SOUTH
(District Court Administrative and
Disciplinary Division)
comply with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting publication
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person using material
in the judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach
any such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry
of the Court in which it was generated.
RUSSELL-TAYLOR
v GOLDSTEIN & MARTIN
[2013] SAWC 1
Judgment of Senior Warden Dr
29 April 2013
RUSSELL-TAYLOR v
GOLDSTEIN & MARTIN
is an application to strike out this plaint on the grounds that this court has
no jurisdiction to deal with it and that the relief
sought is an abuse of the
process of the court.
plaint itself is an application that:
“objects to the manner in which persons listed above (the respondents)
have failed to act within the intent of relevant acts
and regulations in
relation to exploration lease applications: ELA924/04 and ELA925/04. Mr
Russell-Taylor makes application for this
matter to be examined and
matters arise from circumstances that have been already considered in
administrative review proceedings in the case
Russell-Taylor v State of South
[2011] SASC 238
in the judgment by His Honour Justice Blue
delivered on 21 December 2011 and by the Full Court in
Mintech Resources Pty
Ltd and another v Russell-Taylor and another
[2012] SASCFC 67
delivered on 8
June 2012. There is a complaint that DMITRE “have worked in unison with
the Crown Solicitor to act in contempt
of the Supreme Court judgment of 22
December 2012.” He complains of conduct of the respondents subsequent to
the Full Court
judgment. The prayer for relief is that they withdraw the
cancellation of exploration of lease applications ELA924/04 and ELA925/04
respond to correspondence by the plaintor of 13 June and 31 July.
hearing the application to strike out his plaint I offered to disqualify myself
but both plaintor and respondents agreed that
I should continue to hear the
matter and I did so on the understanding that I would not canvas any allegations
of factual inaccuracy
by officers of DMITRE who commonly appear before the court
and in particular I had in mind Ms Martin, Ms Tyrteous and Ms Watson.
reasons at the time in relation to that issue and do not repeat them here. I
also apologise for my delay in publishing these
reasons. The reason, but not
excuse, is that in addition to my normal duties I have devoted a great deal of
time to reviewing the
Magistrates Court (Civil) Rules 1992 in anticipation of
the commencement of a substantial increase in the jurisdiction of that court
this has made it hard to devote the time to this matter that it deserves.
plaintor at one stage worked with Mr Ivan Peter Lewis. Mr Lewis has an
interest in what Justice Blue described as the Goldus
Group, namely Mintech
Resources Pty Ltd, Goldus Pty Ltd, and Mawson Gold NL. In the proceedings before
me there is an inference that
Mr Lewis was also associated with Gladstone
Resources Ltd.
Russell-Taylor points to these matters:
On 19 February
2001 the Minister granted EL 2799 to Mintech Resources Pty Ltd for six months
and this was renewed until 19 February
2004 (Blue J para.51).
On 17 July 2001
the Minister granted ELs 2822, 2823 and 2824 to Goldus Pty Ltd for one year
which were renewed to expire on 17 July
2003 (Blue J para.60).
Mr Ivan Peter
Lewis became speaker of the House of Assembly after the formation of the Rann
Labor Government in March 2002.
On 12 February
2003 the Minister granted EL 3060 to Mawson Gold NL for one year.
On 8 February
2004 Mintech Resources Pty Ltd asked for a renewal, but it did not pay the
application fee of $69, it did not pay the
annual fee or $1,298.95 for 2004/2005
and did not later that year submit the technical report and semi annual reports
that were due
under the terms of the licence (Blue J para.54). This licence was
not renewed (Blue J para.53).
On 16 June 2003
Goldus Pty Ltd requested renewal of its three licences. It did not pay the
prescribed renewal fees. The renewals
were not processed by the Department nor
granted by the Minister (Blue J para.61).
On 17July 2003
annual fees for 2003/2004 totalling $11,707.15 became payable for the three
licences but were not paid. The Department
wrote requesting payment of these
fees on 20 April 2004, 21 June 2004, 30 July 2004 and 15 September 2004 and in
the last two letters
warned that if payment was not made within seven days the
licences may be cancelled (Blue J para.62).
Goldus Pty Ltd
did not submit the semi annual reports for the licences due on 17 February and
17 August 2004 nor the technical reports
due by 17 September 2004 (Blue J
On 9 December
2004 Mr Russell-Taylor by letter drew these defaults to the attention of the
Minister and applied for two Exploration
Licences over the area in the ELs 2799
(Mintech Resources Pty Ltd), 2822 (Goldus Pty Ltd) and 3060 (Mawson Gold NL) and
(Blue J para.65).
On 21 December
2004 the Mining Registrar, Ms Thomas, sent a minute to the Acting Executive
Director recommending that the licences
be cancelled and letters dated 21 and 22
December 2004, signed on 23 December 2004 were sent by registered mail
cancelling licences
2799 (Mintech Resources Pty Ltd), 2822-2824 (Goldus Pty Ltd)
and 3060 (Mawson Gold NL). These were received on 29 December 2004
paras.66-70).
Russell-Taylor who had expressed an interest in the area was also notified of
the cancellation (and found out by his own enquiries)
and on 29 December
personally lodged two new applications for ELs in identical terms of his
applications of 9 December 2004 and paid
the application fees of $442 and they
were accepted by the Mining Registrar and designated ELAs 924 and 925 of 2004
(Blue J paras.72-3).
On 31 December
2004 PepinNini Minerals Pty Ltd lodged an application for an Exploration Licence
which partially overlapped ELA 924
and areas within the former Mintech and
Goldus licences. On 4 January 2005 Gladstone Resources Limited, lodged an
application for
an Exploration Licence which partially overlapped ELA 925 and
part of the former Mawson licence (Blue J paras.75-6). It is alleged
Russell-Taylor that Mr Lewis was associated with Gladstone Resources Limited
which he says was incorporated only two days before
the Goldus licences were
5 January 2005 Mr Russell-Taylor issued a plaint in this court complaining about
the lenient treatment extended to the Goldus Group
and seeking orders against
officers of DMITRE. It was contended by both parties to that plaint that this
court had no jurisdiction
(for different reasons) and the matter was adjourned
sine die. Those proceedings were called back on in June 2006 and listed for
trial in December 2006. That trial date was vacated. A further plaint was filed
on 13 February 2007 seeking orders that the court
require relevant departmental
officers to approve Mr Russell-Taylor’s Exploration Licence applications.
His applications in
the Warden’s Court were dismissed by consent on 19
April 2007 in anticipation of his judicial review proceedings which he commenced
in the Supreme Court on 28 June 2007. Those proceedings sought an order that the
Exploration Licences be granted to him (Blue J para.83).
18 January 2005 the Goldus Group filed notices of appeal against cancellations
in the ERD Court and the Acting Mining Registrar
wrote to the competing
applicants, Mr Russell-Taylor, PepinNini and Gladstone advising them that their
applications were on hold
pending the outcome of the appeal. It also went on to
state that any competing applications would be determined by a ballot (Blue
20 October 2005 the Crown Solicitor’s Office advised DMITRE that,
notwithstanding the companies in the Goldus Group were
in breach of their
respective licence conditions by failing to pay annual fees and by failing to
lodge summary and technical reports,
that there may not have been proper grounds
to cancel the licences. By the time this ERD Court application was filed the
only current
licences were those of Mawson and Mintech and it was recommended
that the appeals by them be settled on the basis that the cancellation
two licences be declared void and each party bear its own costs. It was noted
that the three Goldus licences had expired
due to the passage of time (Blue J
para.81-2).
18 November 2005 the ERD Court made a consent order that the cancellation of
each of the five Goldus Group of licences was void.
The Mintech and Mawson
licences also had expired in February 2005 and so there were no current licences
reinstated as a result of
that decision. However, Goldus had applied for renewal
of its licences (but without paying the required fee for renewal – Blue
para.61) and on 13 December 2005 the Mining Registrar wrote to Mr Lewis advising
him that the Department would now proceed to make
a decision as to the renewal.
Where applications involve the same piece of land an assessment of the relevant
merits of the application will be undertaken. (Blue
January 2006 Mr Lewis wrote to the Mining Registrar contesting this approach and
claiming that the Goldus Group was entitled to
reinstatement of all its licences
without competition. In February 2006 Dr Paul Heithersay, the Executive
Director, sent a minute
to the Minister recommending that Mawson and Mintech be
permitted to lodge applications over the areas within their expired Exploration
Licences and that those applications be given priority over competing applicants
due to the cancellations having been deemed to be
void. He further recommended
that the Minister grant renewals of the three Goldus
If Goldus provided the requisite information and if it were found that Goldus
had complied with the conditions, Act and Regulations
during the term for which
the licences were last renewed’. (Blue J
16 February 2006 the Minister wrote to Mr Lewis and invited him to meet with
departmental officers to discuss the lodging of new
Exploration Licence
applications. A meeting occurred on 18 July between Mr Lewis and Dr Heithersay
and Dr Heithersay wrote on 17
August 2006 and recommended the Goldus Group apply
for new Exploration Licences over the area of the expired licences. Mr
pursuit of the Goldus renewals had been abandoned (Blue J
22 December 2006 Dr Heithersay wrote to Mr Lewis and ‘noted that no
applications had been lodged and stated that he required
that all necessary
applications and documentation be lodged on or before 28 February 2007 after
which the Department would proceed
to determine all undecided
applications’. (Blue J para.90) It was not until 27 February 2007, the day
before the final date
given, that Mawson lodged an Exploration Licence
application (ELA99) in respect of part of the area previously held by it and
lodged an Exploration Licence application (ELA101) in respect of part of
the area formerly held by Mintech (and the name of the applicant
changed from Goldus to Mintech). Goldus lodged an Exploration Licence
application (ELA116) in respect of portion of an
area previously held by it on 2
March 2007, after the expiry date that had been given but it was accepted (Blue
J paras.90-93).
20 July 2007 the Acting Mining Registrar wrote identical letters to all current
applicants making it clear that the success of
the applications would be
determined by a technical panel of departmental officers, not by order of
lodging nor by a ballot (Blue
J para.90). On 9 August 2007 Gladstone withdrew
its application (Blue J para.102).
panel met, assessed the applications and ranked Mawson as the preferred
applicant in relation to area one, PepinNini in relation
to areas two and three
and Mintech in relation to areas four and five and Exploration Licences were
offered to those companies in
respect of those areas. Mr Russell-Taylor and
Goldus were only offered Exploration Licences to the extent that their
applications
covered uncontested areas. Mr Russell-Taylor was allowed to make
further submissions but they were to no avail (Blue J para.108-121).
decisions were put on hold as a result of an injunction in the Supreme Court
judicial review proceedings but ultimately once
those proceedings were resolved
that was the outcome.
departmental information sheet at that time contained the following
Applications are treated on a first come, first served basis. If two or more
applications arrive for the same area on the same day,
priority will be based on
the relative merits of the applications. (Blue J
Warden’s Court jurisdiction concerns mainly Claims of various types and
Leases of various types and disputes between landowners
and miners. Claims and
Leases are historic mining titles and priority between them is almost invariably
dealt with on a first come,
first served basis. The exception of which this
court is aware, is the circumstance where a particular block of land is released
on a date that is anticipated by miners and so that competing applicants are all
ready to peg at the one time. To avoid the obvious
conflict that a first come,
first served basis would lead to in that circumstance, the Department on such
occasions has used a ballot
system. For example, this occurred when land in the
old Mintabie airstrip was released for opal mining.
is to be expected that these well established principles that have been the
method of resolving competing interests in the industry
for well over a hundred
years should find their way into the basis of allocating Exploration Licences.
Exploration Licences are a
departure from the traditional mining titles and
rather than being managed by pegging on the ground, which would be impractical
they are granted over such large areas, they are managed
administratively within the Department. In my term as Senior Mining Warden
25 years I am not aware of this Court ever having to rule upon the priority
between competing Exploration Licence applications
or on the consequences of a
failure to observe the terms of a licence. The jurisdiction of this Court, for
the purpose of this application,
Section 67(1)
Mining Act 1978
which provides:
Warden’s Court shall have jurisdiction to determine, in such manner as may
be just, all actions concerning any right
claimed in, under, or in relation to,
any mining tenement or purported mining
directs the work of the court to matters that arise from a tenement or purported
tenement rather than giving the court any jurisdiction
over the process whereby
the tenement is granted. For that reason it seems clear that this Court does not
have jurisdiction to permit
an investigation of, nor interfere with, the process
of granting of Exploration Licences.
Court has a substantial jurisdiction in relation to breaches of the terms and
conditions of Claims and Leases. This Court has
always taken the view in
relation to Claims and Leases that the conditions must be strictly complied
with, otherwise miners may feel
free to ignore their obligations. However, the
process for enforcing the obligations under Exploration Licences is
administrative
and under the direction of the Minister.
(1) Where the
holder of an Exploration Licence has contravened, or failed to comply with, any
provision of this Act or any condition
of the licence, the Minister may suspend
the licence (in which case the licence shall, during the period of suspension,
force or effect) or cancel a
grants an appeal against that cancellation to the ERD Court, as was exercised
by Goldus in the circumstances here. The grant of
over such appeals makes it clear that the Warden’s Court has no
supervisory jurisdiction over
the non-compliance with conditions in Exploration
will be noted that I have drawn my summary of facts from the judgment of his
Honour Justice Blue in
Russell-Taylor v State of South Australia & Ors
[2011] SASC 238
delivered on 21 December 2011. His Honour dealt
comprehensively with most of the issues raised in this Plaint and to the extent
his Honour has traversed those issues, that is a matter of
res judicata,
or simply put, once a court has given a final decision on an issue the only
remedy lies in an appeal from that court. The same case
cannot be litigated
again in any court and certainly not in one lower in the hierarchy of
7 to 12 of Mr Russell-Taylor’s plaint traverses issues subsequent to the
Supreme Court judgment. To that extent they
may not be covered by the principle
res judicata
. Those paragraphs make complaints about the subsequent
conduct of DMITRE and that it has ‘worked in unison with the Crown
to act in contempt of the Supreme Court judgment of 22 December
2012.’ The jurisdiction over contempt lies within the court
against which
the contempt may be shown, in this instance the Supreme Court. To the extent
that paragraphs 7 to 12 complain of the
process of offering and granting of new
Exploration Licences, for the reasons given above, this Court has no
an application in relation to those processes.
court has no jurisdiction to consider any issues of which these facts may speak.
The plaint is dismissed.
Crown has made it clear that it limits its application for costs to a quite
modest amount. In all the circumstances, I am not
convinced that the Crown is
entitled to any costs in relation to this matter and I decline to make an order
for costs. Having given
that determination, I make it clear to Mr Russell-Taylor
that should he take a further application in this Court in relation to these
matters, he can expect, if he is unsuccessful, to have costs awarded against him
on the usual basis.
shall have my staff send this judgment to the parties by post. The deemed date
of delivery will be 29 April 2013 by which date
they should have received it. I
give liberty to apply.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (164 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter