URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCRP/1996/142.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:09:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ettridge v TransAdelaide (No.7) [1996] SAWCRP 142 (18 March 1996)
[1996] SAWCRP 142
Review Officer
Catchwords:
Discontinuance — whether worker
returned to work within meaning of section 36 — stress claim following
election as shop
steward on construction site and legal notice served
threatening worker’s personal assets — credibility of worker —
medical evidence — observations as to management of claim by WorkCover
— incapacity appearing to be ongoing — decision
to accept claim for
closed period varied to ongoing.
RE: ETTRIDGE AND TRANSADELAIDE
(1996) 9 WRO Determination 142/96
See further,
Ettridge and State Transport Authority
[1990] SAWCRP
157 (Review
Officer Mostowyj);
State Transport Authority v. Ettridge
(1990) 2 WCATR 264
; Print A.62/1990 (Stanley P);
Ettridge and State Transport
Authority (No.1)
[1991] SAWCRP 563 (Review
Officer Player-Brown);
Ettridge and STA (No.2)
[1992] SAWCRP 47 (Review Officer Player-Brown);
Ettridge v. STA and WorkCover (intervener)
(1992) 163 LSJS 153 (Legoe
Millhouse JJ, Zelling AJ);
Ettridge and STA
[1993] SAWCRP 563 (Review
Officer Russell);
Ettridge and STA
[1994] SAWCRP 230 (Review Officer
Ettridge v. STA
[1995] SAWCAT 84 (Cawthorne
[1995] SAWCAT 127
; (1995) 7 WCATR 624 (Cawthorne DP);
Ettridge v.
TransAdelaide
[1996] SAWCAT 10 (Thompson
TransAadelaide v. Ettridge
(WorkCover intervener)
[1996] SAWCAT 42
; (1996) 8 WCATR 102 (Hardy DP);
Ettridge v. TransAdelaide
[1996] SAWCAT 135 (Thompson
and TransAdelaide
[1995] SAWCRP 518 (Review Officer Sargent);
Ettridge v.
TransAdelaide
[1996] SAWCAT 154 (Thompson
Ettridge v.
TransAdelaide
[1996] SAWCAT 155
; (1996) 8 WCATR 307 (Gilchrist DP);
Ettridge v. TransAdelaide
[1997] SAWCAT 8 (Thompson
Ettridge v.
TransAdelaide
[1997] SASC 6422 (Matheson
, Duggan and Nyland JJ);
v. TransAdelaide
[1997] SAWCAT 93 (Thompson
Ettridge v.
TransAdelaide
[1997] SAWCT 16
; (1997) 1 WCTR 83 (McCusker DP);
v. TransAdelaide
[1998] SAWCAT 18 (Cawthorne
Ettridge v.
TransAdelaide
[1998] SAWCT 22 (Gilchrist
Determination No. 96-0142
Compensation
Review Panel
ETTRIDGE AND
TRANSADELAIDE
(00247717/01/16)
Determination of Review Officer made
on 18th March, 1996
Review Officer Duigan
This application for review by Mr John Patrick Ettridge
arises from a Notice of Disability and Claim for Compensation that he lodged
30th July, 1995. That Claim Form alleged that he was suffering anxiety and
depression as a result of working in the Claims Office
at S.T.A. and was the
consequence of “constant litigation by S.T.A./TransAdelaide”. The
claim was accompanied by a prescribed
medical certificate issued by the
worker’s general practitioner, Dr P T Carey on 28th July, 1995 which
certified that in his
opinion, the worker was suffering from anxiety/depression
caused by unnecessary and stressful litigation in pursuit of entitlements.
Carey certified that Mr Ettridge was unfit for work for one week, was not to
attend the workplace, not to drive, should have
rest at home and begin a process
of relaxation counselling and would review him in a week. Certificates of this
nature continued
to be provided for the rest of 1995 and just prior to the full
hearing of this matter, a certificate from Dr Carey was handed up
which, like
the first one of 28th July, 1995, certified that the worker was suffering from
anxiety/depression/hostility as a result
of unnecessary and stressful litigation
in pursuit of entitlements. It certified that Mr Ettridge was still unfit for
until at least the 28th February, 1996 and that a review would be
necessary on about the 24th February. The worker was advised not
to attend the
workplace, not to drive, to rest at home and to continue relaxation counselling.
Both the certificate of 24th January,
1996 and the one which accompanied the
Compensation Claim Form in July, 1995 identified in Dr Carey’s handwriting
approximate date of injury was “since
On 15th August, 1995, TransAdelaide
responded to the Compensation Claim and asked Mr Ettridge if he could provide a
medical report
from his treating general practitioner, Dr Carey and to make
himself available for an independent medical assessment by a psychiatrist,
Couper-Smartt. Mr Ettridge met with Dr Couper-Smartt on 22nd August who
prepared a report on the same day. The report was
sent to Mr Ettridge on 7th
September together with a determination made by TransAdelaide on the basis of
the information and report
provided by Dr Couper-Smartt. The determination
rejected Mr Ettridge’s application which in turn led to him lodging an
application
for Review on 11th September, 1995 in which he re-asserted that it
was the constant litigation required of him because of continuing
misinterpretation of the Act by his employer that gave rise to his stress. He
also identified in the application for Review, as
he did in the Compensation
Claim Form, that in his view, the claim for compensation was for a secondary
disability following an acceptance
of an earlier claim for stress which led to
him being provided with two days compensation by way of income maintenance on
and 19th March, 1993 as a result of a determination by Review Officer
Russell issued on 24th August, 1993.
This matter first came to the
Panel on the 10th November, 1994 when Mr Ettridge was again representing himself
and the exempt employer,
namely TransAdelaide was represented by Ms Hughes of
the Crown Solicitor’s Office and Mr Wingrave, the Manager of the Risk
Injury Department of TransAdelaide. At subsequent hearings, Ms Hughes’
position as principal advocate was taken by Mr
J A Telfer also of the Crown
Solicitor’s Office. On that first hearing, Mr Ettridge provided a one and
a half page statement
of claim to Ms Hughes identifying eleven items which Mr
Ettridge identified as being the events or circumstances which gave rise
alleged condition.
On 2nd February, 1996, I wrote to the parties
instructing them to attend a directions hearing on 9th February, 1996. I had
the parties to turn their mind to the issue of whether the claim being
prosecuted was for a new disability or a secondary disability;
whether both
administrative and medical evidence would be led and the extent of it; what
witnesses were being called in respect
of both criteria for acceptance; whether
the parties had prepared summaries of argument and whether they were in
possession of relevant
lists of authorities. There was little common ground. I
asked Mr Ettridge for the first of many occasions whether he intended to
a report from Dr Carey and whether he was going to call him in evidence. He
said he would probably get a report but that
he would not be seeking to call him
as he did not require him and he thought it was an unnecessary waste of his
At the beginning of the hearing and in addition to documents that
Mr Ettridge had already provided to the Panel, he handed up a number
additional documents. One of them which was numbered “B3” was a
handwritten letter from Dr Carey and was addressed
“To the Officer
concerned” dated 10th February, 1996. The text of that letter was as
“This man has been pursuing his entitlements through various forms of
litigation since early 1989.
I have observed over this time increasing distress in Mr Ettridge over the
seemingly endless amount of claims and the necessary work
they entail.
As early as 1992, I have been advising him of the stressful effects of
pursuing this litigation and the deleterious effect on his
On the 2nd of the 3rd, 1993, I have recorded in my notes regarding Mr
Ettridge ‘I feel he is suffering stress now as a result
of the legal
battles with the STA lawyer.’ The current stress claim is therefore a
culmination, I believe, of the ongoing
litigation.
Yours sincerely
P T Carey, MBBS”
After being sworn in, Mr Ettridge made a
statement which covered the ground of the claim and the application for review.
his health was still suffering and in addition to the stress, he was
still experiencing the symptoms of the original shoulder injury
of 1988 and
should not be driving buses. He referred to both Drs Carey and
Couper-Smartt’s reports which certified that he
needed time off work and
could not drive. It was at this point that Mr Ettridge indicated that he had
finished and concluded his
statement and relied thereafter on the various
written materials including judgements that he had already tendered. I
him to perhaps identify while he was under oath, what he believed
were some of the events which gave rise to his stress. He identified
concern about the safety issues involved with the refilling of gas driven buses
occasioned by other personnel smoking in the vicinity
and what, in his view
appeared to be the lack of action taken by TA in response to his expressions of
that he believed that he had as a result of what he saw as the non-co-operation
or the non-compliance by officers of the
Crown Solicitors Office to orders made
by Deputy Presidents of the Tribunal.
litigation and appearances before Review Officers as evidenced in particular by
the matters that were before Review Sargent
and about which Review Officer
Sargent had issued a determination on the 26th September, 1995.
actions taken by the TA which resulted in him having to forfeit income and time
from his annual leave as a result of having to
be involved in litigation.
continual build-up of stress and anxiety which had occurred as a result of
having to take matters to the Tribunal and to the Supreme
Court. Compensation
by way of this followed a period of income maintenance and that stress for two
days on the 18th and 19th March,
1993 which were occasioned by the bankruptcy
proceedings taken out by the TA and granted by Review Officer
not taking into account the commendations that he had received from members of
the travelling public when he was driving buses.
cross-examination, Mr Ettridge agreed that from February 1992 until July 1995,
namely the date of the application which is the
subject of the dispute, he
continued to work although not always as a driver on a full-time basis. Mr
Ettridge confirmed that since
28th July, 1995, he had been off from work. Mr
Ettridge confirmed his authorship of the one and a half page document which
the eleven matters that gave rise to his claim for compensation. Mr
Ettridge seemed to be taken somewhat by surprise and indicated
that he had
forgotten he had handed up that document, but he acknowledged it was before the
Panel document A13 entitled “Stress
caused by”.
The following
is a summary of Mr Ettridge’s response to questions from Mr Telfer in
respect of each of these items/stressors:
Cancelled days off/Supreme Court ruling:
Mr Ettridge said that he was dissatisfied with the decision of the Supreme
Court but accepted their decision. He said that it had
little impact on his
ability to work but that the time and circumstances involved in taking the
matter to the Supreme Court were
always in the background.
Continued litigation:
Mr Ettridge agreed with the list and sequence of litigation that he and
TransAdelaide had been involved in but pointed out that it
excluded the
bankruptcy issue. He objected to the list prepared by Mr Telfer not being
provided to him prior to the hearing. An
adjournment of 15 minutes was taken
while Mr Ettridge read the list. He said that where the document (which is
attached to this
determination) indicated that he had “initiated”
action, it was misleading in the sense that he only had to initiate
because TransAdelaide had got it wrong. He said he had no objections to the
process followed by any of the Deputy Presidents,
nor any of the Review Officers
in the way that they handled themselves, even if in his opinion they got their
determinations wrong
Bankruptcy/Stress:
Mr Ettridge acknowledged that this issue had been heard and determined and
that he had been awarded two days’ stress leave as
a consequence of the
hearing before Review Officer Russell. He did not claim that the bankruptcy
action taken in 1993 was directly
causing his stress now, but rather, that it
had a general impact as it was an indication of TransAdelaide being out to
harass him.
He agreed that the Review Officer’s determination was correct
in that he had only asked for two days and that was all he got.
R.O. Bowering - Production of documents
Mr Ettridge says that his main complaint about the hearings before Review
Officer Bowering was what he believed was the contempt that
Ms Hughes from the
Crown Solicitor’s Office and Mr Wingrave from TransAdelaide showed towards
the review process and the provision
of documents. He agreed that there was
nothing in what Mr Bowering did that caused stress, it was simply another link
in the chain
of events leading up to his current claim.
Agreement between P.T.U. and T.A.:
Mr Ettridge agreed that he had eventually been provided with the agreement
although he said that he should not have been put to the
effort of seeking
constant orders to have it produced.
Orders for Depot shift roster and other documents:
Mr Ettridge agreed that discovery could only be effected of documents that
actually existed, not of documents that hadn’t been
compiled. He
acknowledged that he eventually received documents from TransAdelaide but that
they were in his opinion inadequate
and incomplete and that in order to get
them, he had to seek orders from the Tribunal which should not have been
Top earners list :
Mr Ettridge did not accept that there was no such list or that it was
difficult to provide and expressed surprise that the records
were archived so
quickly. Mr Ettridge indicated that at one stage he had decided to seek a
direction from the Supreme Court in order
to ensure that Judge Cawthorne allowed
him to proceed in the way that he wished but decided against it.
Mr Ettridge said his concern was his inability to get adequate recompense for
the time that he was spending on legal procedures and
in typing, photocopying,
attending hearings and other matters associated with the pursuit of his claims.
He said that TA was victimising
and harassing him, running him around in circles
and were using the legal system as a barrier to hide behind. He said that it
very unfair that the law could prevent a lay litigant from successfully
pursuing his rights in a way that wouldn’t be presented
TransAdelaide employee relations:
Mr Ettridge said that this related to his concern with the way that he
believed TA treated other workers and employees, particularly
those at the depot
on weekly payments; he said TA denied them their proper entitlements for
overtime, for annual leave and that
its management style created a climate of
distrust which led to stress.
Incorrect TransAdelaide decisions re Workers
Compensation:
Mr Ettridge said that his stress was exacerbated by the continuing
misinterpretation of the provisions of the Act resulting in other
workers being
seriously disadvantaged. He referred in particular to what he believed were
mistakes by TransAdelaide in interpreting
Section 40. He said it was stressful
working for an organisation you couldn’t trust.
Refuelling Depot:
While canvassed at length, Mr Ettridge’s main concern was that
management’s responsibility to safety viz to erect suitable
appropriate signage and employees’ responsibility to comply with them,
were being ignored. He agreed that he hadn’t
been at work since July 1995
when the current claim was lodged and indicated that the various managers that
are involved in the depot
had said they did not want him there at all.
accepted that the canvassing of these eleven issues also dealt with five of the
six examples that were raised by Mr Ettridge in
his statement. The other, his
commendations for being a good driver, is dealt with later. Cross-examination
continued with Mr Ettridge
agreeing that his elderly mother had become quite ill
in August 1995 and had died in October of 1995. He said the reason that he
not mention this to the psychiatrist, was that he accepted her illness and death
as inevitable.
He said that he didn’t mention his concerns about
the gas filling station with the psychiatrist because the interview was very
much controlled by the doctor. He did say, however, that he continues to be
very concerned about the safety practices at the refuelling
depot and is
frightened by the prospect of an explosion in an area adjacent to blocks of
flats and a busy road. Mr Telfer went on
to ask Mr Ettridge about Dr Carey and
his report and Mr Ettridge confirmed that he wouldn’t be calling him as he
think that it was necessary. He told Mr Telfer that he was not on
any medication for anxiety or depression because he didn’t
believe in it.
He said he might do some deep breathing exercises or some relaxation exercises
or if he was very fatigued, sleep.
However, he said he doesn’t sleep very
well, he has headaches and that some of those aches come from his neck and his
He said that he saw Dr Carey on a regular basis, about every month
for the purpose of obtaining a further prescribed medical certificate,
anything else that was needed and for some stress counselling. Mr Ettridge then
described a fairly typical day of rising
somewhere between 5.00 and 6.00,
walking the dog, undertaking a variety of domestic tasks and some minor
maintenance, taking a cat
nap if it was necessary. He said that he had a hobby
lathe and a shed which was in effect a workshop where he liked to spend some
time. He worked on and did his own car repairs and sometimes did his
son’s. He said he had bought a photo enlarger, a fax
machine and a
photocopier from proceeds of his mother’s estate and agreed that
litigation and preparing for it was the most
important part of his day. He said
his most important priority in life at the moment was to sort out his litigation
issues with
TA but agreed that if he was going to do that, he wouldn’t be
able to go back driving immediately. He acknowledged that he
was currently
receiving income maintenance through the sick pool fund which he agreed amounted
to about 800 hours or 100 days in
the period from July, 1995 until now.
Mr Telfer then asked Mr Ettridge about Dr Carey’s certificate and
its exhortation to Mr Ettridge not to drive. He said that
he understood this to
mean that he shouldn’t be driving buses as when he was doing so, he was
thinking about litigation all
the time, and was a danger to himself and others.
He said that he had driven to the hearing and, when asked, replied that he never
understood the doctor’s prohibition applied to him driving himself. He
agreed that he had memory lapses of the same sort when
he was driving his own
car as when he was driving buses but that he had never had an accident or failed
to stop when required.
Mr Telfer also asked about Mr Ettridge’s
sporting and recreational activities and he agreed that he was involved in pedal
racing and had recently been involved at a 24 hour marathon at the Bolivar
Mr Telfer then canvassed the appearances before Deputy President
Parsons in an attempt to identify whether these may have contributed
stress claim being pursued. Although unclear about all the details, Mr Ettridge
was quite convinced that there had been a
withholding of information by
TransAdelaide and that the actions of other Deputy Presidents and other Review
Officers and officers
of the Crown Solicitor’s Office were actions in
contempt of the order for discovery issued by Judge Parsons.
Mr Ettridge
said he had written to the Equal Opportunity Commission in June of 1994 alleging
continuous and ceaseless harassment
and victimisation by the TransAdelaide Risk
and Injury Department and lodged a formal complaint that he was being
discriminated against
and asked the Commission to act on his behalf. He also
indicated he had made complaints about Ms Hughes to the Legal
Practitioner’s
Complaints Committee as he had about the solicitors that
had represented him at the beginning of his process of litigation. He said
he had made written complaints to the Attorney General, to the Chief Justice of
South Australia, Chief Justice King, to the
Chief Justice of the High Court of
Australia, Sir Anthony Mason, to the Minister of Transport, The Honourable Diana
Laidlaw MLC,
to the Senior Judge of the Workers Compensation Appeal Tribunal,
His Honour Judge Jennings, to His Honour, Deputy President Judge
Cawthorne and
to Chief Review Officer Saunders. While he had got some replies, they were not
satisfactory for the purpose of dealing
with his complaints, viz his ceaseless
harassment and victimisation by TransAdelaide and the constant litigation that
was being forced
on him by TransAdelaide.
Mr Ettridge’s response by
way of re-examination was in effect, a number of assertions. He said he had a
disability, that it
complied with the definitions provided for in Section 3 of
the Act; that it was a secondary disability because it was a re-aggravation
an earlier injury and that it had been caused by his employer and the fact that
it was a illness or disorder of the mind was demonstrated
in the letter from Dr
Carey. He claimed his cross-examination by Mr Telfer provided no evidence that
his stress was not a continuation
of his 1993 condition. He told me that my
requirement for him to confine himself to the facts arising from evidence in
unfair. He said the letter from Dr Carey ought to be relied upon to a
much greater extent than that of Couper-Smartt as he saw the
latter doctor on
only one occasion. He also made a number of submissions in relation to the
determination being invalid and of TransAdelaide
being estopped from opposing
I had considerable difficulty identifying the essence of Mr
Ettridge’s argument. I found him indirect, verbose, even evasive.
rarely gave a direct answer even to a simple question and became very defensive
and suspicious on a number of occasions when
under cross-examination. He
appeared convinced of his entitlement and the strength of his argument in
support of it. He believed
that TransAdelaide had the onus to prove that he
wasn’t stressed. His earnestness and persistent conviction of the
correctness
of his argument and of his circumstances clouded his judgment and
revealed his obsession.
On the second day of the hearing, Mr Telfer
called Mr Wingrave, the Risk and Injury Manager for TransAdelaide, Mr Wall, the
Manager at the Morphettville Depot of TransAdelaide and Mr Bruce
Mitchell, the investigations officer for TransAdelaide.
Mr Wingrave
advised the Panel that he had been involved in nearly all the Panel hearings and
the Tribunal and the Supreme Court in
hearings involving Mr Ettridge and that it
was he who provided the instructions to Crown Law and that those instructions
carried out. Mr Wingrave confirmed that to the best of his knowledge
the summary of the matters involving Mr Ettridge prepared by
Solicitor’s Office was correct as to the issue, the Review Number, the
Review Officer and the date and were also
correct when it came to Tribunal and
Supreme Court matters. He said he did not believe that he had harassed Mr
Ettridge in any way
and vigorously denied any victimisation. He said that he
only spoke with Mr Ettridge when Mr Ettridge rang him. Mr Wingrave agreed
he attended the hearings before Deputy President Parsons when orders were made
for discovery and that he attempted to make discovery
in accordance with those
orders even when they involved a lot of extra research and work. He said this
was particularly so when
new lists and new documents had to be drawn up and he
acknowledged that on some occasions, some of the documents were late in being
Mr Telfer also asked him whether there was any reason why the
medical accounts of Dr Carey who was treating Mr Ettridge were not being
He said that as a matter of course, Dr Carey had been putting the fee on the
bottom of his Prescribed Medical Certificate
which then had to be dealt with by
two separate Sections of TransAdelaide. He said that it was TransAdelaide
policy to keep accounts
for workers compensation matters separate from the
personnel and accounting information it was necessary to keep. He said
TransAdelaide
had advised Dr Carey of this and, that the actions of
TransAdelaide were designed to protect the privacy of individuals and the
of the information rather than any attempt to present obstacles to Dr
Carey or Mr Ettridge’s and that this issue had been fully
canvassed in the
determination of Review Officer Russell. Mr Wingrave said he deals with about
1300 WorkCover files a year and at
any one time, there are about 500 of them
open. He is in charge of a staff of 10 and requests for separate medical
accounts are
made of all applicants.
On cross-examination by Mr
Ettridge, Mr Wingrave said that he was accountable for his performance and the
performance of his staff
and the management of the Workers Compensation files
that came before them and that this accountability was an accountability for
policy objectives of TransAdelaide, for staff performance and for meeting the
objectives within the budget allocated to him.
He told Mr Ettridge that to the
best of his knowledge the duty rosters and other information that was sought by
him and ordered
by Judge Parsons had been provided and was complete to the best
extent possible.
Mr Bruce Mitchell was the investigation officer for
TransAdelaide and also the person who set up the whistle-blower’s mail box
for employees of TransAdelaide to identify matters that were of concern to them.
In giving his evidence, he said that he received
a letter from Mr Ettridge in
the mail box about the procedures at the fuelling bay at the Morphettville
Depot. As a consequence,
he inspected the depot with the Operations Manager and
replied to Mr Ettridge that he had spoken with Mr Williams who was in charge
the Natural Gas Vehicle Division of the Gas Company as well as the foreman in
charge of the refuellers. It appears that the matter
was also coincidentally
being discussed by members of the Occupational Health and Safety Committee. An
administrative order was
also issued that buses should be turned off when
refuelling. Mr Ettridge, in cross-examination, asked Mr Mitchell if he was
of the gas code of conduct. He said that he wasn’t because he was
relying on the appropriate safety measures to be put in
place by the Gas Company
who after all were licensed to provide both the gas and its facilities to
TransAdelaide. Mr Mitchell also
told Mr Ettridge that he didn’t check
that the signs were being prepared and erected as he accepted the commitment
been given that they would be.
Mr Richard Wald is the Operations
Manager for TransAdelaide at the Morphettville Depot and while only having that
job since 1995 had
previously been the Administration Officer for two years
prior to that. He was involved in supervising and despatching vehicles,
supervising employees and in control of the accounts. He acknowledged the set
up of the fuelling depot in that the Gas Company provided
three compressors and
the gas was fed in off the mains lines for the purpose of gas filled buses and
this was provided by the Gas
Company and that for those buses running on diesel,
facilities were installed and maintained by the Department of Construction.
said that the officers involved in refuelling were given training prior to
taking on that job including any person who would act
as a stand-by and they
were all designated as refuellers. In the process of this training, they were
also advised of the issues
of safety relating to the area in general. He said
that the signs at the southern and northern entrance indicated that naked
smoking and fire were prohibited in that area and that those signs had
been installed in February, 1995 as a result of an audit that
had been initiated
by the Occupational Health and Safety Committee on the 19th December, 1994. He
agreed that there were no signs
of the sort tabled by Mr Ettridge. In
cross-examination by Mr Ettridge, Mr Wald agreed that it was somewhere between
late 1992 and
early 1993 when gas buses started being operated from
Morphettville and that in all likelihood, not all of the required signs had
installed at that time. He also acknowledged that there were some gas vehicles
which could be fuelled without being turned
off and it was for that purpose,
that an administrative order had been issued requiring all buses to be turned
off when refuelling.
Dr Couper-Smartt received his MB BS in 1969,
received his Diploma in Psychiatry in 1971, became a member of the Royal College
of Psychiatrists
in 1972, a member of the Australian and New Zealand College of
Psychiatrists in 1982 and a Fellow of that College in 1983. He said
that he had
been practicing in South Australia since 1980.
Mr Couper-Smartt had his
first and only meeting with Mr Ettridge on 22nd August, 1995 after it had been
arranged by TransAdelaide.
He said that during the course of the one and a half
hour interview on which he based his clinical opinion, Mr Ettridge was
overwhelmed
and pre-occupied with his concerns and kept returning to his current
difficulties.
He said that in order to come to his clinical opinion, he
took a history from Mr Ettridge, observed his conduct, behaviour, language
demeanour during the interview. He confirmed his opinion that there was no
psychiatric condition or disorder from which Mr Ettridge
was suffering. For the
purpose of workers compensation legislation, he believed it was necessary to
provide a diagnosis or a description
of the condition. He said the diagnosis
that best fitted the symptoms that he was confronted with was that of an
adjustment disorder
and an adjustment disorder defined in DSM IV at paragraph
309.24 as “adjustment disorder with anxious mood”.
the essential feature of this disorder is a maladaptive reaction to an
identifiable psycho-social stressor or stressors that
occurred within three
months after the onset of the stressor and persisted for no longer than six
months. He said the severity of
the reaction was not completely predictable
from the intensity of the stressor and to a large extent was dependant upon how
an individual might be. The disorder categorised under paragraph
309.24, namely an adjustment disorder with an anxious mood is one
which is used
when the predominant manifestations are symptoms such as nervousness, worry and
jitteriness and symptoms of that sort
which come and go. When asked whether
these reactions or symptoms were a consequence of external stimuli or a result
of personality
traits, Dr Couper-Smartt said that in Mr Ettridge’s case,
it was the pressure that he was unable to deal with. He said that
it was likely
that in any circumstances, he would have an exaggerated response and would
respond in an obsessive manner, the latter
being related to his personality.
Dr Couper-Smartt said that generally speaking, most personality
disorders were not illnesses as such; rather, there were characteristics
individual’s response to the environment that became so extreme that it
caused difficulties for themselves and for others.
He said this applied to a
range of personality and adjustment disorders and a lot of obsessive and
compulsive personality types
whose intensity of reaction was unreasonable. He
believed that the dysfunction Mr Ettridge was displaying in response to the
he was involved in (and over which he had some control), would
continue while he allowed it to. Such a person would become obsessively
on one or two issues. He said again that Mr Ettridge’s personality type
made it inevitable that the proceedings would
go on as long as they had in order
for him to reach the conclusion that he wanted. He reconfirmed his report and
in particular indicated
that Mr Ettridge was not acting dysfunctionally but
rather was functioning obsessively to the cost of his competence and ability
operate in other areas. He confirmed his view and agreed with Dr Carey that he
shouldn’t be driving. He said he wasn’t
surprised that Dr Carey was
not prescribing any anti-depressants or that Mr Ettridge wasn’t having
any. He said the condition
would not, in any case, respond to such
pharmacological intervention.
Dr Couper-Smartt told Mr Telfer that
neither the issue of the refuelling danger at the Morphettville Bus Depot, nor
the death of his
mother had featured in the interview. The major issue in August
1994 was litigation, not the refuelling or unsafe work practices
and that he
couldn’t remember having a lengthy technical discussion with Mr Ettridge
than it being an example or work safety,
it was better seen as an example of an obsessive response by someone feeling
they were being
On the issue of Dr Carey’s certificates,
Dr Couper-Smartt acknowledged the nature of the terminology but said it was a
description
not a diagnosis.
When cross-examined by Mr Ettridge, Dr
Couper-Smartt said that his reference to him not suffering from a psychiatric
disorder that
resulted from work experience, but rather to his obsessional and
dogged personality, he was referring specifically to his work environment.
other words, it was his belief that Mr Ettridge was not suffering from any
psychiatric problems that arose from his work environment.
Mr Ettridge asked Dr
Couper-Smartt about commendations that he got for being a good driver and in
what way he assessed them. He
said he was not surprised as Mr Ettridge’s
personality type would be very much focussed (to the point of obsession) with
delivery and doing a good job. He said it was just another statement
On a re-examination by Mr Telfer,
Dr Couper-Smartt was asked whether the current alleged psychiatric condition, if
it existed, could
in any way be linked with the episode of “stress”
that was accepted by Review Officer Russell in 1993 as having occurred
and 19th March, 1993. Dr Couper-Smartt answered categorically “No”
that it was definitely a new condition brought
on by new circumstances and that
there could be no real connection between the two.
Dr Carey was not
It was Mr Ettridge’s submission that his current condition
described by Dr Carey as anxiety/depression/hostility and which was
unnecessary and stressful litigation in pursuit of entitlements, was a
continuation of the “stress induced anxiety”
which Review Officer
Russell had found, arose out of employment in particular the serving of a
bankruptcy notice and consequent legal
proceedings for the 18th and 19th March,
1993”. Mr Ettridge argued that that was the “high point” of
his depression
and anxiety and that while he returned to work, there was no
evaporation of the anxiety state from which he was suffering at that
said I should accept Dr Carey’s diagnosis over Dr Couper-Smartt’s as
his treating GP has seen him on a regular
basis and that nothing had changed
since 1993 as he was continuing to litigate and the unreasonableness of
TransAdelaide in forcing
him to litigate was shown in the number of times that
determinations had been made in his favour. He also argued that because
TransAdelaide
had not contested the finding of Review Officer Russell, they were
now estopped from challenging a claim which was caused by similar
and related
circumstances. He said that he had no desire to remain in this condition of
being stressed and no desire to continue
litigating; he only wanted to get his
entitlement and be rid of the whole system.
Mr Telfer submitted that in
order for Mr Ettridge’s claim to succeed, it had to be shown pursuant to
Section 30A of the Act
that there was an illness or disorder of the mind, that
it was incapacitating, that employment was a substantial cause of the disability
and that the other tests of reasonableness set out in Section 30A(b) be met.
He said that Dr Carey was not called and did not attend the hearing. He
referred to Dr Couper-Smartt’s description of the words
in the prescribed
medical certificate issued by Dr Carey as being “descriptions, not
diagnoses”. He said Couper-Smartt
should be preferred, not just because
he had provided a comprehensive report, but because he had submitted himself to
examination
and cross-examination and because of his specialist qualifications
in illnesses and disorders of the mind.
Mr Telfer reminded me that Mr
Ettridge had told Dr Couper-Smartt that he didn’t think that he was
suffering from any psychiatric
illness; Dr Couper-Smartt said that Mr Ettridge
did not display any evidence indicative of any psychiatric disorder and that he
had no evidence that he was suffering from any specific psychiatric disorder
that may have resulted from his injury or work experiences.
Mr Ettridge had
agreed that he was not undergoing any medical or psychiatric treatment for his
condition, was not hospitalised and
neither was he taking any prescribed
medicine which he had said he would be reluctant to take in any case. Mr Telfer
said that it
was Mr Ettridge’s obligations and responsibilities under
Section 90 and 31 of the Act to produce evidence and to provide proof
the balance of probability, he was suffering from the condition as alleged in
accordance with Section 30A. He submitted
that in the absence of such proof, Mr
Ettridge had not fulfilled his responsibility and could not be said to be
suffering from any
psychiatric illness.
Mr Telfer went on to examine the
evidence produced by Mr Ettridge in response to the eleven identified stressors
and said that it
was very difficult to reconcile those with Mr Ettridge’s
evidence in chief and for one main reason, there being a variable
emphasis on
the claimed stressors and the statement of the stressors in Mr Ettridge’s
statement to the Panel. He said there
was also discrepancies in individual
stressors for example, the number one stressor in the statement given by Mr
Ettridge in evidence,
was the issue of the refilling station, although in the
handed up statement of stressors, it was number 11 and prior to that, it
to have been hardly mentioned at all in the discussions with Dr Couper-Smartt
and certainly, never appeared at all on the
Claim Form. He said that Mr
Ettridge’s responses were entirely consistent with Dr
Couper-Smartt’s comments about his
obsessional and dogged personality and
the difficulty he has in focussing on more than one issue. Mr Telfer suggested
led to Mr Ettridge’s mis-understanding of individual events and
their interconnectivenes. He said he did not suggest that
Mr Ettridge was being
misleading or dishonest, just confused. He then referred to all of the
documents presented by Mr Ettridge
and found them to be of little or marginal
relevance to the issue at hand, namely whether he was suffering from an illness
or a disorder
of the mind. I accept that submission and find
accordingly.
He went on to deal with the allegations made by Mr Ettridge
under oath of harassment and victimisation and said that in the lack of
particularity as to time, place, person and other details, the allegations were
unsustainable. He said that evidence given by employees
of TransAdelaide,
indicated that they were performing their duties to the best of their ability
guided by the objectives of the organisation
and did not intend to victimise or
harass Mr Ettridge. He submitted that Review Officers and Senior Judicial
Officers, could in
no way be said to be harassing Mr Ettridge or putting
obstacles in his path and no better proof of this was required than the fact
that on occasions, Review Officers and Tribunal members had found in Mr
Ettridge’s favour. Mr Ettridge’s suspicions
bordering on
allegations that there was a conspiracy between employers, Review Officers and
Judicial Officers were absolutely without
foundation.
Mr Telfer said
that Mr Ettridge was acting in a remarkably consistent and focussed manner by
coping with the amount of legal work
that was required with the hearings that he
had initiated and that in this hearing and others, he had demonstrated a
capacity to
concentrate, to present his arguments, to respond to issues that
were raised, to vigorously defend his position and put to in the
long hours of
preparation that was required. Not surprisingly that left little time for
TransAdelaide work and Mr Telfer raised
the question of whether or not Mr
Ettridge was serious about returning to work as a bus driver.
of some particular issues raised by Mr Ettridge, namely estoppel, the nature of
the disability and discovery, Mr Telfer
made the following submissions. He said
the estoppel argument was an ill-founded one and that there was no force in it
as the issues currently before the Review Panel were different in
time and substance and different in the precipitating factors.
He said that the
determination of Review Officer Russell was irrelevant to the current claim, not
just from a legal point of view
but also because of the observations made by Dr
Couper-Smartt that the condition from which Mr Ettridge was suffering, should
itself within six months. He said there was no evidence that the current
claim could be classified as a secondary disability, and
referred to the
evidence of Dr Couper-Smartt about the determination of Review Officer Russell
being for a closed period only of
two days, some two and a half years earlier.
In respect of discovery, Mr Telfer said that it was his belief that the
submissions
of Mr Ettridge were about procedures rather than issues of substance
that the documents had been provided, albeit that some had been
late and others
had not been exactly what Mr Ettridge wanted.
In his final submission, Mr
Ettridge said that he wasn’t fit to drive a bus and that both doctors had
said that and therefore
his claim for compensation ought to be
The issue before me then is whether disability alleged by Mr
Ettridge, namely the anxiety/depression/hostility referred to in the
medical certificates of Dr Carey is an illness or disorder of the mind pursuant
to Section 30A of the Act. If so, then
the worker has to meet two other
criteria, namely that the employment was a substantial cause of the disability
and that it did not
arise predominantly from reasonable administrative action
taken by the employer in a reasonable manner.
The evidence submitted by
Mr Ettridge as to his disability, is quite limited. In short, it relies on the
prescribed medical certificate
of Dr Carey dated 28th June, 1995 and Dr
Carey’s hand written letter of the 10th February, 1996 quoted at the
beginning of
this determination which records his observation of “the
increasing distress” of Mr Ettridge. I note that Mr Ettridge
undergoing no treatment programme with Dr Carey or any other practitioner, and
is receiving and desires no medication for his
condition. I also note that Dr
Carey was not called by Mr Ettridge in order to provide some more clinical
substance to the general
descriptions which he had put on the prescribed medical
certificates and that Mr Ettridge told Dr Couper-Smartt that he didn’t
think he was suffering from any psychiatric illness.
I note the actions
taken by TransAdelaide in seeking a written report from Dr Carey and arranging
an independent psychiatric examination
from Dr Couper-Smartt. I note that Dr
Couper-Smartt provided a six page report to TransAdelaide which was subsequently
with the determination to Mr Ettridge and which is available to the
Panel. Dr Couper-Smartt also made himself available for examination
cross-examination and in doing so confirmed his report and indicated that he
could find no evidence that Mr Ettridge was suffering
from any specific
psychiatric disorder that may have resulted from his injury or working
experience. As Dr Couper-Smartt was asked
by TransAdelaide to provide a
description of Mr Ettridge’s condition, he did so in these terms.
“The correct description of Mr Ettridge’s current condition
is not easy to define although it would probably be reasonable
to refer to it as
adjustment disorder with anxious mood, as this is defined as DSM 4
However, as Dr Couper-Smartt said in his written report
and in evidence, this is not a specific psychiatric disorder but it is rather
more specific description of a condition which on Mr Ettridge’s part is
more than likely to have arisen because of his obsessive
and dogged personality.
Dr Couper-Smartt accepted that a stressor which may have given rise to the
feelings of anxiety that Mr Ettridge
says he has, could well be, and is most
likely to be, the litigation in which he is involved. However, he said that he
was not dysfunctional,
rather that his obsession with a particular aspect of his
life was decreasing his functional capacity in all other areas. There
the end no other information upon which I could rely in coming to my findings
and I found Dr Couper-Smart’s report and
evidence compelling.
therefore find that on the basis of evidence before me and on the balance of
probability, that Mr Ettridge is not suffering from
an illness or a disorder of
the mind either now or on the 28th June, 1995 and is therefore not entitled to
compensation pursuant
to Section 35 of the Act for a disability that is alleged
under Section 30A of the Act.
However, I do note the observation of Dr
Carey in all of his prescribed medical certificates. I also note the
observation of Dr Couper-Smartt
at page 5 of the report in which he says,
“I agree with Mr Ettridge and Dr Carey that he is currently unfit for work
operator because of his intense pre-occupation with his conflict and
litigation against his employers... Given his degree of pre-occupation
problems I would agree that he is medically unfit to work as a bus operator for
TransAdelaide at the present time”.
I therefore find that Mr Ettridge is
incapacitated but not because of a compensable disability being an illness or
disorder of the
In making these findings, I have determined that
the alleged injury would not have been a secondary disability or disease. It
Mr Ettridge’s argument that the medical certificates issues by Dr
Carey and the determination of Review Officer Russell constitute
a causal and
medical link between the first instance of stress which was rejected by
TransAdelaide and accepted by Review Officer
Russell and the second incident of
stress which is the current claim. I cannot accept that argument.
that the evidence of Dr Couper-Smartt in this regard is compelling and I also
find that there has been no subsequent or intervening
claims by Mr Ettridge for
stress, there has been no treatment programme and no medication regimen and that
there has been in effect
a return to work for substantial periods of that time.
I also find myself in agreement with the finding of Review Officer Russell
page 6 of her determination (93-0563; [1993] SAWCRP 563) that in the case that
she was dealing with, the distress arose out of
employment in particular the
serving of a bankruptcy notice and consequent legal proceedings. This finding
was much more specific
than the general claim of stress induced anxiety caused
by litigation trauma over the past few years which is the claim now being
by Mr Ettridge.
Section 30A places some limitations on disabilities being
illnesses or disorders of the mind and the circumstances under which they
compensable. The first of those is whether employment was a substantial cause
of the disability. I find in this case and
based on the evidence particularly
of Dr Couper-Smartt but also of Mr Ettridge himself and on the balance of
probability, that directly,
the employment was not a substantial cause of in
this case, the alleged disability. Despite Mr Ettridge’s assertions that
he initiated nothing that TransAdelaide in the first instance did not get
correct, the decisions of TransAdelaide and subsequently
of Review Officers,
Presidents and Deputy Presidents of the Workers Compensation Appeal Tribunal and
indeed the Supreme Court, have
been made as a consequence of initially,
applications made by Mr Ettridge for compensation for compensable disabilities
arising out
of injuries which occurred at work. The applications for review and
the appeals that have subsequently been taken do not bear directly
nature of Mr Ettridge’s employment. Even if he were able to show a direct
causal relationship of the kind required
by Section 30A(a), a further test that
is provided in sub-section (b) relates to the reasonableness of the action and
the reasonableness
of the way in which the action was taken by the employer.
Although Mr Ettridge alleged in his statements and submissions that there
seemingly deliberate attempt by TransAdelaide and by the Review Panel members
and by the Tribunal members to subvert, harass,
victimise, obstruct and hinder
his pursuit of what he believed his entitlements were, the allegations did not
result in any substantive
particulars which would enable such allegations to be
taken seriously.
Dr Couper-Smartt completed his report by saying that Mr
Ettridge could be expected to make a full and complete recovery once “the
stress” is removed or when a satisfactory adjustment to changed life
circumstances has been made. The decision as to how long
and in what manner
proceedings are to continue, is one that is primarily Mr
Ettridge’s.
DETERMINATION:
I confirm the decision of
TransAdelaide made on 7th September, 1995.
Pursuant to Section 92a of the
Act, I determine that the worker is not entitled to costs as a result of legal
representation or of
representing himself in these proceedings and that any
entitlement to disbursements in relation to these proceedings be determined
accordance with the observations of His Honour Deputy President Cawthorne in the
Ettridge and the State Transport Authority
published on 25th August, 1995;
[1995] SAWCAT 127.
Should there be any dispute
submissions made by Mr Telfer
should there be any dispute after a lodgement of claim by Mr Ettridge, I will
the matter further.
Any appeal against this determination must be
lodged with the Workers’ Compensation Appeal Tribunal within one month of
receipt of this determination. Enquiries about appeals may be directed to
the Registrar of the Tribunal, Riverside Centre, North
Terrace, Adelaide,
(Phone: 207.0999) and forms for appeal are available from the same
Review Officer
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (105 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter