URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCA/2025/108.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
PATRICK v THE STATE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA [2025] SASCA 108 (25 September 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Court of Appeal: Civil)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
PATRICK v THE STATE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
[2025] SASCA 108
Judgment of the Court of Appeal
(The Honourable President Livesey, the Honourable Justice Bleby
and the Honourable Justice Stanley)
25 September 2025
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS - STATUTORY APPEALS FROM
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITIES TO COURTS
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - FREEDOM OF INFORMATION - REVIEW OF DECISIONS - OTHER
STATES AND TERRITORIES
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - FREEDOM OF INFORMATION - EXEMPT DOCUMENTS - CABINET
AND EXECUTIVE COUNCIL DOCUMENTS
Appeal against a decision of the President of the South Australian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (‘Tribunal’), affirming
a decision of the
Ombudsman to refuse access to documents pursuant to the
Information Act 1991
(SA) (‘FOI Act’).
The applicant sought documents relating to the Northern Water Supply Project
from the Department of the Premier and Cabinet (‘Department’)
the FOI Act. The Department identified 18 documents in response to the
application. The Department determined that the documents
were exempt from
release under cl 1(1)(a) and cl 1(1)(e) of the FOI Act on the grounds that they
were prepared specifically for submission
to Cabinet and/or would disclose
information concerning deliberations or decisions of Cabinet.
The applicant sought an internal review by the Department and then an
external review by the Ombudsman. Both affirmed the Department’s
in substance. The applicant then sought review of the Ombudsman’s decision
by the Tribunal. This appeal concerns the
Tribunal’s order affirming the
Ombudsman’s decision, in relation to documents 6, 14 and 15.
The grounds of appeal complain that the President erred in finding Documents
6, 14 and 15 to be exempt from disclosure on the basis
15, as an attachment to a document submitted to a Cabinet taskforce meeting, had
been specifically prepared for submission
to Cabinet, pursuant to cl
15 contained matter that would, if disclosed, disclose information concerning a
deliberation or decision of Cabinet in the
sense in which that expression is
used in cl 1(1)(e);
6, as an attachment to a document submitted to a Cabinet taskforce meeting, had
been specifically prepared for submission
to Cabinet, pursuant to cl
6 contained matter that would, if disclosed, disclose information concerning a
deliberation or decision of Cabinet in the
sense in which that expression is
used in cl 1(1)(e); and
14 contained matter that would, if disclosed, disclose information concerning a
deliberation or decision of Cabinet in the
sense in which that expression is
used in cl 1(1)(e).
Held (by the Court), dismissing the appeal:
word ‘concerning’ in cl 1(1)(e) of the FOI Act extends the reach of
the exemption beyond documents the disclosure
of which would disclose the actual
deliberations or decisions of Cabinet.
disclosing information that is the subject matter of Cabinet deliberations may
be exempt if it is identifiable as the subject
matter of Cabinet deliberations.
Identification
may be made on the face of the document or by reference to publicly available
extrinsic information which, when read
together with the document, reveals
material to be the subject matter of Cabinet deliberations.
15 is exempt from disclosure as it was specifically prepared for consideration
by the Cabinet (cl 1(1)(a)) and its disclosure
would disclose information
concerning Cabinet deliberations (cl 1(1)(e)).
6 is exempt from disclosure as it was specifically prepared for submission to
Cabinet pursuant to cl (1)(a) and its disclosure
would disclose information
concerning Cabinet deliberations (cl 1(1)(e)).
14 is exempt from disclosure as its disclosure would disclose information
concerning Cabinet deliberations (cl 1(1)(e)).
Information Act 1982
Freedom of Information Act 1989
(NSW) sch 1 cl 1(e);
Freedom of Information Act 1991
; sch 1 cll 1(1)(a), 1(1)(e), 1(1)(f), 1(2)(a);
Information Act 1982
Infrastructure SA Act 2018
Legislation Interpretation Act 2021
South Australian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
, referred to.
Accident Compensation Commission v Croom
[1991] VicRp 72
[1991] 2 VR 322
Attorney-General (SA) v Seven Network (Operations) Ltd
(2019) 132 SASR
Commonwealth v Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
[2000] FCA 453
(2000) 98 FCR 31
Commonwealth v Northern Land Council
(1991) 30 FCR 1
Commonwealth v Northern Land Council
[1993] HCA 24
(1993) 176 CLR 604
Contractors Pty Ltd and Hansen Yunken Pty Ltd v South Australia
[2024] SASCA
Daycorp Pty Ltd v Parnell
[2011] SADC 191
Department of Premier
and Cabinet v van Holst Pellekaan
[2018] SACAT 56
Department of Treasury
and Finance v Mullighan
[2021] SACAT 28
Egan v Chadwick
[1999] NSWCA 176
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings
[2012] HCA 55
(2012) 250 CLR 503
Harbors Corporation (Qld) v Vessey Chemicals Pty
(1986) 12 FCR 60
Hospitals Contribution Fund of Australia v Hunt
(1983) 76 FLR 408
Howell v Macquarie University
[2008] NSWCA 26
Information Technology Group Pty Ltd v Department of Information Technology
Services (SA)
(1997) 192 LSJS 54
Koowarta v Bjelke Petersen
Ku-ring-gai Council v Garry
[2017] NSWCA 54
(2017) 95 NSWLR 1
Ltd v Commonwealth
(1974) 129 CLR 650;
New South Wales v Public Transport
Ticketing Corporation
[2011] NSWCA 60
News Corporation Ltd v National
Companies and Securities Commission
(1984) 1 FCR 64;
Northern Land
Council v The Commonwealth
[1990] FCA 275
(1990) 24 FCR 576
Patrick v South Australian
Fire and Emergency Services Commission
[2022] SACAT 17
Project Blue Sky
v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
Rann v SA Water
& Baker (No 2)
(1996) 187 LSJS 438
Sankey v Whitlam
[1978] HCA 43
Searle Australia Pty Ltd v Public Interest Advocacy Centre
[1992] FCA 241
Secretary to the Department of Infrastructure v Asher
[2007] VSCA 272
Secretary, Department of Treasury and Finance v Dalla-Riva
[2007] VSCA 11
(2007) 26 VAR 96
Sobh v Police Force of Victoria
[1994] VicRp 2
[1994] 1 VR 41
South Australia v Brokenshire
[2015] SADC 68
Commonwealth
[2012] FCAFC 169
(2012) 206 FCR 309
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
Warren v Chief Executive Officer,
Services Australia
(2024) 305 FCR 268
Zeitouneh v Police (SA)
, considered.
PATRICK v THE STATE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Court of Appeal – Civil: Livesey P, Bleby and Stanley
This is an application for leave to appeal against a decision of
the President of the South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(‘the Tribunal’), pursuant to
South Australian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(SA) (‘SACAT Act’). The
President substantively affirmed a decision by the Ombudsman to refuse the
applicant access to
documents sought from the Department of the Premier and
Cabinet (‘Department’) pursuant to the provisions of the
of Information Act 1991
(SA) (‘FOI Act’).
Department identified 18 documents in response to the initial application under
the FOI Act. The amended grounds of appeal concern
only four of these, being
Documents 6, 11, 14, and 15. In the course of preparing for the appeal, the
Department became aware that
Document 11 was already in the public domain. It
provided that document to the applicant. This appeal is therefore concerned only
with Documents 6, 14 and 15.
applicant’s Notice of Appeal complains, broadly, that the President erred
in concluding:
effect, that documents 6 and 15 had been specifically prepared for submission to
Cabinet and therefore exempt pursuant to cl 1(1)(a)
of Schedule 1 to the FOI Act
(Grounds 1 and 3); and
documents 6, 14 and 15 contained matter that would, if disclosed, disclose
information concerning a deliberation or decision
of Cabinet in the sense in
which that expression is used in cl 1(1)(e) of Schedule 1 to the FOI Act
(Grounds 2, 4 and 5).
1 of Schedule 1 provides, relevantly:
(1) A document is an exempt document—
(a) if it is a document that has been specifically prepared for submission to
Cabinet (whether or not it has been so submitted);
(b) if it is a preliminary draft of a document referred to in
paragraph (a)
(c) if it is a document that is a copy of or part of, or contains an extract
from, a document referred to in
paragraph (a)
(e) if it contains matter the disclosure of which would disclose information
concerning any deliberation or decision of Cabinet;
(f) if it is a briefing paper specifically prepared for the use of a Minister in
relation to a matter submitted, or proposed to be
submitted to Cabinet.
(2) A document is not an exempt document by virtue of this clause—
(a) if it merely consists of factual or statistical material (including public
opinion polling) that does not—
(i) disclose information concerning any deliberation or decision of Cabinet;
(ii) relate directly to a contract or other commercial transaction that is still
being negotiated; or
(ab) merely because it was attached to a document described in
subclause (1)
(b) if 20 years have passed since the end of the calendar year in which the
document came into existence.
appeal raises issues of construction of cl 1(1)(e) and the application of that
clause, and of cl 1(1)(a), to the three documents.
8 June 2023, the applicant, jointly with Eyre Peninsula Seafoods, applied to the
Department of Premier and Cabinet (‘the
FOI request’) pursuant s 13
of the FOI Act requesting documents relating to:
ministerial briefings received by the Department of Premier and Cabinet (either
for the Department or the Premier) since 21 March
2022 that relate to a
Desalination plant to meet Port Lincoln’s immediate water needs.
correspondence received from or sent to the Minister for Climate, Environment
and Water since 21 March 2022 that relate to a Desalination
plant to meet Port
Lincoln’s immediate water needs.
substantive reports/briefs generated by Infrastructure SA in relation to the
Northern Water Supply Project.
Date range - 21/03/2022 to 08/06/2023
documents sought by the applicant in these categories relate to the Northern
Water Supply Project (‘the Project’).
The Department indicated that
it held 18 documents answering the request. The Project involves planning for
the construction and
operation of desalination infrastructure, water transfer
pipelines and ancillary infrastructure for the supply of water to a range
consumers from the Eyre Peninsula to the Upper Spencer Gulf. The Project
includes a proposal for a desalination plant to service
the City of Port
Infrastructure
SA is a statutory agency and the lead agency in relation to the Project.
Infrastructure SA Act 2018
(SA) provides that the objects of
Infrastructure SA include: (a) to promote such efficient, effective and timely
coordination, planning,
prioritisation, delivery and operation of infrastructure
as is necessary for the economic, social or environmental benefit of the
and (b) to promote the adoption and use of policies, practices, information and
analysis to support sound decision-making
in relation to infrastructure.
Infrastructure SA Assurance Framework
(‘Assurance Framework’)
is a publicly available document. This assumed some significance on the appeal
as providing relevant
context for the characterisation of the documents. The
Assurance Framework articulates Infrastructure SA’s function of reviewing,
analysing and providing advice on a continuing basis to ensure Cabinet can make
informed decisions relating to large major projects.
In this capacity,
Infrastructure SA provided analysis, recommendations and advice to Cabinet and
its committees through the progression
of the Project.
documents relate to planning and proposals before the making of final decisions
by Cabinet in regard to the Project. Documents
1-8, 10 and 15‑18 are
Cabinet Submissions or Cabinet Notes and their attachments. They were considered
at identified meetings
of Cabinet or one of its committees or taskforces. The
documents relevant to this appeal may be described as
Document 6: Strategic Case for Water Supply
Document 14: ISA-02-06 NWSP Desalination Plant Relocation to Cape Hardy
– R1- Final, Attachment to Document 9
Document 15: Report – Northern Water Business Case
respondent submitted that, consistent with the Framework and the processes to be
expected for Government proposals on the scale
of the Project, the documents
reveal the ‘extensive involvement of Cabinet and its committees and
taskforces throughout the
relevant period’. The documents demonstrate that
Cabinet maintained oversight of the development of the Project proposal
the period encompassed by the FOI request. The respondent contended
that it is possible to track the development of the Project by
reference to the
Department Determination
5 July 2023, the Department determined that the documents were exempt from
release on the basis that they were specifically prepared
for submission to
Cabinet and/or would disclose information concerning deliberations or decisions
of Cabinet.
applicant and Eyre Peninsula Seafood sought internal review of the
Department’s determination. On 23 August 2025, following
an internal
review, the Chief Executive of the Department affirmed the original
determination and further determined that various
other exemptions also applied
to the documents.
Ombudsman Review
applicant and Eyre Peninsula Seafoods sought external review of the
Department’s decision by the Ombudsman pursuant to
s 39 of the FOI Act. On
16 May 2024, following the receipt of submissions from the parties, the
Ombudsman substantially upheld the
Department’s determination, varying it
to the extent of determining that Documents 3 and 15 were partially exempt. She
the determination that Documents 1, 2, 4-14 and 16-18 were fully exempt.
The partial exemption was on the basis that some parts of
the relevant documents
were already publicly available. The Ombudsman otherwise upheld the
Department’s determination in respect
of the documents the subject of this
Tribunal Review
applicant applied for further review to the Tribunal under s 40(2)(c) of the FOI
Act. The role of the Tribunal on review was
to reach the correct and preferable
decision in respect of the matter decided by the original decision maker.
respondent filed open and closed affidavits of Ms Elspeth Brown, the Director of
Cabinet Office and Mathew Hardy, Chief Executive
of Northern Water Delivery. Ms
Brown also gave oral evidence. The President summarised Ms Brown’s
open affidavit evidence which
provided context regarding the operation of
Cabinet in South
deliberations and decisions of Cabinet are informed by documents in two broad
categories: submissions and notes. These documents
are prepared on templates.
The submission or note may have attachments which are not part of the template.
The attachments may be
reports, analysis, data or opinions relied upon in the
contentions of the submission or note;
are brought to Cabinet for “approval, noting, direction or
discussion” for a variety of reasons including for
the creation or
changing of state policy positions. A new or changed Government position may
involve issuing instructions for the
drafting of legislation or regulations. It
may entail approval and monitoring of significant projects, approval of
negotiating parameters
and strategies for enterprise agreements, agreeing to an
approach to commercial negotiations, and approving contracts and procurements.
Minister may take a submission to Cabinet to bring to Cabinet’s attention
matters of significance to the community or the
state’s interests, or
which expose the state to financial, legal, operational or reputational
committees are comprised of a subset of the Ministers and meet separately from
the “full” Cabinet. The activities
of Cabinet committees,
sub-committees of Cabinet committees and Cabinet task-forces follow the same
conventions and practices as
the “full” Cabinet in terms of the
manner in which information is provided to the committee, its confidentiality,
the recording of its deliberations;
of deliberations are recorded and include approval of recommendations, approval
of recommendations as amended by Cabinet,
deferral, or withdrawal. The record of
the decision is made on the copy of the submission or note that is retained by
Cabinet office;
only public sector employee to attend Cabinet regularly is the Chief Executive
of the Department of Premier and Cabinet, or his
(References omitted)
applicant submitted to the Tribunal that the Ombudsman erred in concluding that
these documents were exempt pursuant to cl 1(1)(e).
He argued that the decisions
of the Tribunal in
Department of Treasury and Finance v
Department of Premier and Cabinet v van Holst
which the Ombudsman relied, were incorrect. He submitted, contrary to these
decisions, that the scope of protection afforded by clause
1(1)(e) was limited
to documents that recorded the views that will be or have been expressed by a
Minister or Cabinet collectively
in deliberations that take place in the Cabinet
decision-making process, or a Cabinet decision.
, the Tribunal had said,
relevantly:
‘information’ referred to in clause 1(1)(e) and to which the
decision-maker must turn his or her mind, must concern
a Cabinet deliberation or
decision (or several).
Looking to the words of the provision, there is no requirement of any
sufficiency of relationship between the information and a deliberation
decision. There is no constraint on the proximity of the relationship between
the information in the document proposed for release
and the Cabinet
deliberation or decision. It need not “shape” the deliberation or
Proximity is not a relevant criterion.
Again, from a plain reading of the words of the provision, there is no
qualitative aspect of the exemption with respect to the value
of the information
disclosed. It is irrelevant that the disclosure may provide minimal illumination
of the deliberation or decision.
The document need not disclose a deliberation or decision on its face but
need only contain information which if disclosed, would
have the effect that a
deliberation or decision is revealed. That effect may be achieved by the
disclosure of the document without
reference to other information but there is
not basis to confine it so. If the effect is achieved by reference to other
information,
the document will nevertheless be exempt.
President was not satisfied that this approach was wrong. She held that the
words, ‘information concerning’ must
and the construction
contended for by the applicant gave them no work to do. The effect of those
words was to broaden the class of
document to which the exemption applied from
those documents which, on their face, disclose a deliberation or decision of
to those which contain information that concerns a deliberation or
decision of Cabinet.
President made a number of observations in reaching this conclusion. She
considered, consistent with the Full Court’s reasoning
Attorney-General (SA) v Seven Network (Operations)
that there was no basis
for construing the Cabinet exemption in cl 1 of Sch 1 by reference to the
purpose of maximising disclosure.
Further, she rejected the applicant’s argument that the meaning of the
words in cl 1 could be discerned merely from an examination
of the doctrine of
Cabinet confidentiality.
President also found that it was necessary that a document must concern a
deliberation or decision of Cabinet, not merely the
subject matter of such a
deliberation or decision, for it to attract the exemption. She considered that a
document upon which Cabinet
has relied to reach its decision, or which has
informed its deliberations is one that is likely to ‘concern the
deliberation
or decision’. On the other hand, a document that merely
addressed the same subject matter but did not inform Cabinet’s
deliberations would be unlikely to attract the
rejected the applicant’s contentions regarding the construction of
cl 1(1)(e), the President nonetheless considered
whether the documents fell
within the exemption. She affirmed the Ombudsman’s decision. She further
determined that documents
6 and 15 were also exempt under cl 1(1)(a) on the
basis that they were specifically prepared for submission to Cabinet.
turning the questions arising on this appeal, it is convenient to set out the
relevant legislative provisions of the FOI Act.
The legislative
FOI Act provides members of the public with a statutory right to access to
specified documents held by a government agency in
accordance with the Act.
3 provides that objects of the FOI Act
(1) The objects of this Act are, consistently with the principle of the
Executive Government’s responsibility to Parliament—
(a) to promote openness in government and accountability of Ministers of the
Crown and other government agencies and thereby to enhance
respect for the law
and further the good government of the State; and
(b) to facilitate more effective participation by members of the public in the
processes involved in the making and administration
of laws and policies.
(2) The means by which it is intended to achieve these objects are as
(a) ensuring that information concerning the operations of government
(including, in particular, information concerning the rules
and practices
followed by government in its dealings with members of the public) is readily
available to members of the public and
to Members of Parliament; and
(b) conferring on each member of the public and on Members of Parliament a
legally enforceable right to be given access to documents
held by government,
subject only to such restrictions as are consistent with the public interest
(including maintenance of the effective
conduct of public affairs through the
free and frank expression of opinions) and the preservation of personal privacy;
(c) enabling each member of the public to apply for the amendment of such
government records concerning his or her personal affairs
as are incomplete,
incorrect, out-of-date or misleading.
(3) Nothing in this Act is intended to prevent or discourage the publication
of information, the giving of access to documents or
the amendment of records
otherwise than under this Act if it is proper and reasonable to do so or if it
is permitted or required
by or under any other Act or law.
3A sets out the principles relevant to the administration of the Act, which are
to assist in its
construction:
3A—Principles
of administration
(1) It is the intention of the Parliament—
(a) that this Act should be interpreted and applied so as to further the objects
of this Act; and
(b) that a person or body exercising an administrative discretion conferred by
this Act exercise the discretion, as far as possible,
in a way that favours the
disclosure of information of a kind that can be disclosed without infringing the
right to privacy of individuals.
(2) Agencies are to give effect to this Act in a way that—
(a) assists members of the public and Members of Parliament to exercise rights
given by this Act; and
(b) ensures that applications under this Act are dealt with promptly and
efficiently.
12 provides that a person has a legally enforceable right to be given access to
an agency’s documents in accordance
with the Act. Section 13 sets out
requirements of an application to access an agency’s documents.
19 requires that on receiving an application for access to documents, an agency
is to determine whether to grant access to
the documents sought, or to refuse
20 provides that the agency may withhold a document if it is an exempt document.
Schedule 1 of the Act sets out the categories
of documents which are exempt from
disclosure. As discussed earlier, this appeal primarily concerns the
interpretation and application
of cll 1(1)(a) and 1(1)(e) of Schedule 1, set out
The construction of cl 1(1)(e)
first question for determination relates to the proper construction of
cl 1(1)(e) and, in particular, of the phrase, ‘information
any deliberation or decision of Cabinet’. This is, primarily, a question
of scope. It became apparent during the
course of argument that there was
little, if anything, between the parties on the question of construction. The
respondent submitted,
and it may be the case, that the applicant’s
submissions on construction had changed from those made before the Tribunal. In
any event, it is necessary for this Court to indicate its view of the scope of
the exemption in order to explain its conclusions
on the application of the
exemptions to the remaining documents in contention.
general principles governing statutory construction are well established.
Legislation Interpretation Act 2021
(SA) provides that
the interpretation that best achieves the purpose or object of the act is to be
preferred against any other interpretation.
Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings Ltd,
the High Court
This Court has
stated on many occasions that the task of statutory construction must begin with
a consideration of the [statutory]
text. So must the task of statutory
construction end. The statutory text must be considered in its context. That
context includes
legislative history and extrinsic materials. Understanding
context has utility if, and in so far as, it assists in fixing the meaning
the statutory text. Legislative history and extrinsic materials cannot displace
the meaning of the statutory text. Nor is their
examination an end in itself.
(Footnote omitted)
High Court, in
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
The starting
point for the ascertainment of the meaning of a statutory provision is the text
of the statute whilst, at the same time,
regard is had to its context and
purpose. Context should be regarded at this first stage and not some later stage
and it should be
regarded in its widest sense. This is not to deny the
importance of the natural and ordinary meaning of a word, namely how it is
ordinarily understood in discourse, to the process of construction.
Considerations of context and purpose simply recognise that,
understood in its
statutory, historical or other context, some other meaning of a word may be
suggested, and so too, if its ordinary
meaning is not consistent with the
statutory purpose, that meaning must be rejected.
(Footnotes omitted)
starting point of analysis is necessarily the statutory context in which the
exemption appears. As is apparent from the sections
extracted earlier, the FOI
Act provides members of the public a qualified statutory right to obtain access
to certain documents held
by agencies. The legislative scheme is designed to
provide access to information concerning the operations of government in order
to promote openness in government and accountability of agencies. Any disclosure
pursuant to the FOI Act must be taken to be disclosure
to the world at
FOI Act does not create a presumption in favour of disclosure; neither are the
exemptions to be read down so as to maximise the
incidence of disclosure. In
Attorney-General (SA) v Seven Network (Operations)
to which the President
referred, the Full Court observed
... the Act
expressly provides the ‘means’ by which those objects are to be
achieved. These include the recognition that,
in the public interest, there
will be restrictions imposed on access, namely, those restrictions that are
‘consistent with
the public interest (including maintenance of the
effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of
opinions)’.
The restrictions on access countenanced by the Act are
reflected in the exemptions in Sch 1 to the Act. The Attorney-General submits
that it would be a mistake to countenance an approach to the interpretation of
the Act that reads down the exemptions found in Sch
1 in pursuit of a
generalised purpose of disclosure. This approach, described as ‘the
leaning approach’, that is, leaning
in favour of disclosure, has largely
been rejected. The Full Court of the Federal Court in
News Corporation Ltd v
National Companies and Securities Commission (No 4)
(Bowen CJ and Fisher
stated, in respect of the Commonwealth
Freedom of Information
In construing our Act we do not favour the adoption of a leaning position.
The rights of access and the exemptions are designed to
give a correct balance
of the competing public interests involved. Each is to be interpreted according
to the words used, bearing
in mind the stated object of the
This statement has been applied as expressing the correct approach in
interpreting the Act in South
(Some footnotes omitted)
Full Court went on to note the subsequent application of the statement in
in the Commonwealth FOI
and the approach taken
in New South Wales that an exemption should be construed ‘without any
prior inclination to construe
it narrowly, nor any prior inclination to construe
it broadly’.
Court noted that there was authority in Victoria supporting a narrow reading of
the exemptions,
it considered
that by the South Australian FOI Act, the Legislature had ‘adopted a
compromise between competing public interests
and the compromise it has reached
is to be identified and
respected’.
That remains
turn to some observations about the text of the exemption which, for the sake of
convenience, we repeat here:
(e) if it contains matter the disclosure of which would disclose information
concerning any deliberation or decision of Cabinet;
phrase ‘information concerning any deliberation or decision of
Cabinet’ is, by use of the word ‘concerning’,
broad. There is
no textual reason to read the word, ‘concerning’ more narrowly than,
say, the word, ‘regarding’.
respondent compared this drafting with the comparable exemption contained in
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Cth) (at the time it was
enacted) and
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Vic). In both of these Acts, an exemption applied to:
the disclosure of which would involve the disclosure
any deliberation
of decision of the Cabinet, other than a document by which a decision of the
Cabinet was officially published.
(Emphasis added)
formulation has been the subject of judicial consideration.
Secretary to the
Department of Infrastructure v
concerned the
Victorian exemption. Buchanan JA considered that the word
‘deliberation’ did ‘not ordinarily connote
the subject matter
of a debate, but rather the debate
That is, the
exemption was concerned with Cabinet’s treatment of a subject matter. He
readily understand that it is necessary for the protection of an essential
public interest to prevent the disclosure of documents
revealing the views
expressed by members of Cabinet as to a matter and the manner in which Cabinet
treats and uses information placed
before it. I am unable to see, however, that
the disclosure of a document placed before Cabinet, without any indication that
even read the document, let alone how Cabinet dealt with the document,
could jeopardise any public interest.
That is not to say that a document supplied to Cabinet for its consideration
could never be exempt as disclosing a deliberation of
Cabinet. It all depends
upon the terms of the document. At one end of the spectrum, a document may
reveal no more than that a statistic
or description of an event [that] was
placed before Cabinet. At the other end, a document on its face may disclose
that Cabinet required
information of a particular type for the purpose of
enabling Cabinet to determine whether a course of action was practicable or
or may advance an argument for a particular point of view. The former
would say nothing as to Cabinet’s deliberations; the
latter might say a
great deal.
Redlich JA held that a document would not attract the exemption if all it did
was disclose the subject matter on which
Cabinet may have
deliberated.
is perfectly understandable, with respect, that an exemption concerned with the
disclosure ‘of’ any deliberation of
Cabinet would be read as
referring only to disclosure of the deliberation itself. More recently, the Full
Federal Court, in
Warren v Chief Executive Officer, Services
took the same
approach in respect to the now amended, but similarly worded s 34(3) of the
Commonwealth Act, which provides:
A document is an exempt document
to the extent that it contains information the disclosure of which would reveal
a Cabinet deliberation
or decision, unless the existence of the deliberation or
decision has been officially disclosed.
Warren v Chief Executive Officer, Services Australia
, McElwaine J
with the plain meaning of the text, the provision is confined to information
that is contained in a document which would
reveal a deliberation or decision of
the Cabinet. And it is only to that extent that the exemption applies. This
requires focus on
the content of the information that is contained in the
document that is claimed to be exempt.
For the exemption to apply it is that
information which itself must reveal deliberations or decisions of the
The document speaks for itself on that issue. No question of
comparative analysis between the document and another which does contain
deliberation or decision of Cabinet arises. The exemption applies where the
document discloses what Cabinet deliberated on or
decided. The exemption does
not apply where the information in the document concerns a topic that was
deliberated on in Cabinet.
Disclosure of subject matter, usually with
supporting information or recommendations, does not of itself reveal the
deliberation by
Cabinet on that subject or the decision that is made.
document of that type may, however, be exempt on another basis, most notably s
34(1)(a) if submitted to Cabinet for consideration,
or proposed by a Minister to
be so submitted, and if it was brought into existence for the dominant purpose
of submission for consideration
by Cabinet.
(Emphasis added)
text of the South Australian exemption appears, on its face, to apply more
broadly than to resultant disclosures
Cabinet decisions or
deliberations, extending to disclosures
such decisions or
deliberations. The respondent submitted that a plain reading of
‘concerning’ would extend the reach
of the exemption to the subject
matter of deliberation, as well as procedural matters, such as when a topic was
deliberated upon,
and who was present at the deliberation.
have no difficulty in accepting that the use in cl 1(1)(e) of
‘concerning’ indicates a broader reach to the exemption
conferred by the word, ‘of’ in the Commonwealth and Victorian Acts.
However, the analysis does not end there.
First, and consistently with the
observation of Buchanan JA in
, we do not see that the text of cl
1(1)(e) would extend to a document that was placed before Cabinet with no
indication that Cabinet
had even read it. There would be nothing to indicate
that the document ‘concerned’ a Cabinet deliberation.
said that, unlike in the Commonwealth and Victorian Acts, the text of the
exemption would appear to extend to documents the
disclosure of which would
disclose the subject matter of Cabinet deliberations. We cannot see any textual
reason to conclude other
than that the subject matter of Cabinet deliberations,
identified as such, would constitute ‘information concerning [a]
deliberation
... of Cabinet’. This would appear to follow as a matter of
plain reading. In saying that, we respectfully agree with the observation
clause 1(1)(e) is relied upon, the document must be considered to ascertain
whether its disclosure would disclose information
concerning a deliberation or
decision of Cabinet. A document upon which Cabinet has relied to reach its
decision or which has informed
its deliberations is one that is likely to
“concern the deliberation or decision”. A document that merely
addresses the
same subject matter but did not inform Cabinet’s
deliberations or decision is unlikely, without some other connection to the
decision or deliberations, to attract the exemption.
is important to emphasise one matter, however. Assume a document has been the
subject of deliberation by Cabinet. Subject to what
follows, that mere fact
would not exempt it from disclosure unless, upon its disclosure, it would be
that it was the subject of deliberation by Cabinet. Without that
disclosed link, there would be no resultant disclosure of ‘information
concerning any deliberation or decision of Cabinet’.
respondent accepted as much, expressing it pithily in terms that ‘just
because Cabinet receives something, does not itself
mean that the information is
protected’. This is a necessary consequence of the requirement that the
relevant disclosure of
information must occur by reason of the disclosure of
matter in the document.
leads to the next observation. The text is layered. It does not appear to be
limited to where a document itself contains information
concerning any
deliberation or decision of Cabinet. This is indicated by the inclusion of the
words, ‘matter the disclosure
of which would disclose’. Textually,
there is no reason to assess whether a disclosure protected by the exemption
would occur
only by reference to the matter in the document itself. Whether a
disclosure of information concerning any deliberation or decision
would occur is simply a question of
for example, situations may arise where a document contains matter the
disclosure of which will disclose information concerning
Cabinet deliberations
only when read together with other extrinsic publicly available information.
example, Cabinet might deliberate upon a confidential report that was not
prepared specifically for its attention. Without more,
there would be no reason
to think that disclosure of the report would disclose information concerning a
deliberation of Cabinet.
However, if there existed publicly available
information identifying that Cabinet had deliberated upon the report, the
combination
of the content of the report and that publicly available information
would mean that disclosure of the report would disclose the
subject matter of a
Cabinet deliberation.
requires, in respect of the Commonwealth exemption, that the disclosure must be
occasioned by the information in the document itself.
It is not necessary to
offer a concluded view on this approach to the wording in the Commonwealth and
Victorian Acts. It may be that
the wording in the Victorian Act, ‘the
disclosure of which would involve the disclosure’ gives some support to
that reading.
However, cl 1(1)(e) does not, to our reading, contain any such
textual limitation.
does not speak directly to the exemption in cl 1(1)(e), on account of the
obvious difference in wording. On its face, the word ‘concerning’
cl 1(1)(e) indicates a broader application than the word ‘of’.
Textually, cl 1(1)(e) would appear to have a broader
application than simply
where the document discloses the actual deliberation or decision. It appears to
extend to where a disclosure
would disclose the subject matter of Cabinet
deliberations, identified as such. That consequent disclosure might be caused by
existence of publicly available information which, when read together with
the disclosed ‘matter’, demonstrates that
this was indeed the
subject matter of Cabinet deliberations.
is important to emphasise that any extrinsic material called in aid for the
conclusion that disclosure would disclose the subject
matter of Cabinet
deliberations and would thereby attract the exemption in cl 1(1)(e), must be
publicly available. Absent that, there
would be no resultant relevant
disclosure.
are several relevant matters of context. Broadly described, cl 1, which is
headed, ‘Cabinet documents’, is concerned
with pursuing the public
interest in maintaining Cabinet confidentiality. This is not merely the
confidentiality of what occurs in
Cabinet. Clause 1(1)(a) confers an exemption
on documents prepared for Cabinet whether or not they have been actually
submitted to
Cabinet. Clause 1(1)(f) exempts briefing papers specifically
prepared for the use of a Minister in relation to a matter submitted,
proposed to be submitted, to Cabinet. The briefing paper itself need not be put
before Cabinet. The clause, as a whole, pursues
a policy of promoting the free
flow of information and advice to Cabinet, and the frank exchange of views
within Cabinet.
1 embodies a statutory pursuit of the public interest policy that the common law
has long recognised as extending the doctrine
of public interest immunity to
documents that relate to the framing of government policy at a high
In this regard, it is
attracting a public interest
in non-disclosure and thereby attracting protection
from the doctrine of public interest immunity. In
CPB Contractors Pty Ltd and
Hansen Yunken Pty Ltd v South Australia
, S Doyle JA
formulations of the class of documents referred to as Cabinet documents have
been offered in the authorities. However,
the categories of documents that have
been held to attract this head of public interest in confidentiality
that record the deliberations or decisions of Cabinet, including minutes of
Cabinet meetings;
provided to Cabinet for its consideration, including submissions and any
accompanying or attached documents;
which are not themselves ‘Cabinet papers’ within Categories 1 or 2,
but which refer to, or otherwise reveal,
the nature or content of Cabinet
deliberations, decisions or
submissions;
brought into existence within government departments and instrumentalities for
the purpose of preparing submissions to
relating to the framing of government policy at a high level, including
communications between a Minister and the head of
department, or between heads
of department, which relate to Cabinet proceedings and material prepared for
in original)
present purposes, this categorisation acts as a helpful description of the
common law reach of the doctrine of public interest
immunity in respect of the
class of documents described as ‘Cabinet documents’. By reference to
this description, it
can be seen that cl 1(1)(a) of Schedule 1 reflects the
descriptions in points 2 and 4. Clause 1(1)(f) reflects the policy of point
Clause 1(1)(e) would certainly cover point 1. The broader reading of the clause,
posited above, would extend to documents covered
by point 3.
is to do nothing more than observe, as a matter of context, that the broad
textual reading of cl 1(1)(e) has some corollary
in the common law formulation
of categories of documents that are amenable to protection from disclosure by
the doctrine of public
interest immunity. Whether Parliament has chosen to
include that reach in its statutory formulation is another matter. That invites
an inquiry into legislative purpose, considered below. Before turning to that,
however, there is one further contextual matter, being
the exception to the
exemption in cl 1(2)(a).
1(2)(a)(i) and (ab) provide:
(2) A document is not an exempt
document by virtue of this clause—
(a) if it merely consists of factual or statistical material (including public
opinion polling) that does not—
(i) disclose information concerning any deliberation or decision of Cabinet; or
(ab) merely because it was attached to a document described in
subclause (1)
The description in paragraph (a)(i) adopts the same wording as appears in cl
1(1)(e). On its face, it is a curious exception. This
is because if the material
in the document does not ‘disclose information concerning any deliberation
or decision of Cabinet’,
it would appear not to be caught by
cl 1(1)(e) in the first place.
the Legislature has recognised the imperative to ensure that no document can be
exempted simply by attaching it to a Cabinet
Submission or other clearly exempt
This still leaves the
question, however, of the purpose served by expressing that ‘merely’
factual or statistical information
is not exempt, unless it comes within the
terms cl 1(1)(e).
best answer may be that cl 1(2)(a)(i), like cl 1(2)(ab), has been enacted to
provide clarity to the operation of the exemptions
in cl 1. It is difficult to
see that a document that was merely attached to a Cabinet Submission, for no
deliberative purpose, would
for that reason alone be rendered exempt by any part
of cl 1. As it is, cl 1(2)(ab) confirms it is not.
merely factual or statistical information would not, without more, seem liable
to disclose any deliberation or decision
of Cabinet, even if it had been
submitted to Cabinet for deliberation. However, there might be occasions when
such information would
do so. The obvious prospect of this mischief is where
factual or statistical information is read together with other, publicly
information, which shows it to be the subject of Cabinet deliberations
or decision‑making. Contextually, this exception tends
to support a
reading of cl 1(1)(e) that the contemplated disclosure of information may
occur by reason of the existence of publicly
available extrinsic material that
demonstrates the (otherwise benign) matter to have been the subject of Cabinet
deliberation.
the purpose of the exemption, it should be reiterated at the outset that the FOI
Act carries no general purposive indicator that
the exceptions should be read in
such a way as to favour (or not favour) disclosure. Each exemption is to be
interpreted according
to the words used, bearing in mind the legislative
Relevantly, the Object
stated in s 3(2)(b) is for a ‘legally enforceable right to be given access
to documents held by government,
subject only to such restrictions as are
consistent with the public interest (including maintenance of the effective
conduct of public
affairs through the free and frank expression of
opinions)’. This does not encourage any ‘leaning’ one way or
parties referred to the legislative history of the enactment of the FOI Act
against the background of the development by the
Courts of the doctrine of
public interest immunity, as it applies to Cabinet documents. In
the High Court
recognised the breadth of documents associated with Cabinet deliberations that
were capable of attracting public interest
immunity but held that no document
attracted absolute immunity. The attraction of public interest immunity depends
on an exercise
of weighing competing public
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Cth) was enacted in March 1982, and the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Vic) in January 1983. As discussed
earlier, those Acts both exempted ‘documents the disclosure of which would
involve the
disclosure of any deliberation or decision of Cabinet’.
December 1983, a South Australian Interdepartmental Working Party published a
report entitled,
Proposals for Freedom of Information in South Australia
This report
essence of democratic government lies in the ability of people to make choices:
they support or reject. Such
choices cannot properly be made unless adequate information is available. Access
to information is essential
in ensuring that governments are kept accountable.
The accountability of the government to the electorate is the corner-stone of
democracy and, unless access to sufficient information is provided,
accountability disappears. Without access to information individuals
to participate in a significant and effective way in the process of policy
Report encouraged uniformity in Freedom of Information legislation. It
recommended adopting an identical exemption to that enacted
in the Commonwealth
and Victorian Acts.
the mid-1980s, the Courts demonstrated an increasing preparedness to inspect
Cabinet documents, even Cabinet minutes, and to hold
public interest immunity
not to apply.
The applicant
submitted, and it may be accepted:
Certainly, there was a healthy
dose of scepticism towards claims of public interest immunity in respect of
material prepared by public
servants to advise Ministers and indeed Cabinets. It
was against that legal background that the freedom of information legislation
New South Wales and South Australia was enacted.
March 1989, the New South Wales Parliament enacted the
Freedom of Information
(NSW). Clause 1(e) of Schedule 1 exempted documents containing
matter, ‘the disclosure of which would disclose information
concerning any
deliberation or decision of Cabinet’, that is, in the terms subsequently
enacted in South Australia.
August 1990, the Federal Court at first instance delivered judgment in
Northern Land Council v The
Commonwealth
concerned an action to set aside an agreement between the Council and the
Commonwealth on account of, among other allegations,
unconscionable conduct on
the part of the Commonwealth. The Commonwealth discovered, and claimed public
interest immunity over, notebooks
recording the deliberations of Cabinet or
committees of Cabinet. The Court, in a decision ultimately overturned by the
the documents disclosing deliberations of the Commonwealth Cabinet should be
disclosed for inspection by the legal representatives
of the Council.
Full Federal Court heard an appeal from that decision in March 1991, upholding
the decision in September
in April 1991, the South Australian Parliament enacted the FOI Act, which
contained cl 1(1)(e) in its present form, that
is, reflecting the drafting in
the New South Wales Act, rather than in the Commonwealth and Victorian
applicant relied on aspects of this history to emphasise that the FOI Act was
enacted against a background of intention to give
effect to openness,
accountability and responsibility, including accountability of the Executive to
Parliament. For its part, the
respondent relied on this history to infer that
the Parliament’s choice of the word ‘concerning’, reflecting
New South Wales drafting, must be understood to have been a deliberate
legislative choice to extend the operation of the exemption
protection of Cabinet deliberations themselves.
accept that this history shows a deliberate choice to prefer the New South Wales
drafting over the Commonwealth and Victorian
drafting. We are not persuaded that
it goes any further. The parties did not point to any extrinsic material capable
of supporting
an inference that, for example, Parliament was reacting positively
or negatively to the approach of the courts throughout the 1980s.
The respondent
submitted that Parliament’s choice should be given effect by construing cl
1(1)(e) according to its natural
meaning. We would go no further than to say
that there is nothing in the history leant on by both parties to suggest that
‘concerning’ should be accorded anything other than its
natural meaning.
Conclusions on the construction
necessary exercise of construction of cl 1(1)(e) in this case is ultimately
directed to resolving the application of the clause
to certain documents. In
contrast to the approach of the parties below, the Court is not faced with
glaringly contrasting contentions
of construction that it has been asked to
resolve. Rather, the ‘construction’ question requires the Court to
its approach to applying the exemption in its terms. In the present
case, this amounts to an explanation of the scope of application
exemption in cl 1(1)(e) at a level of abstraction that is descriptively
sufficient to resolve the questions of application
of the exemption to the
documents in question.
regard to that need, for the reasons appearing above, we reach the following
conclusions, on the construction of cl 1(1)(e):
the choice of
the word ‘concerning’ extends the reach of the exemption beyond
documents the disclosure of which would
disclose the actual deliberations or
decisions of Cabinet;
information that
is the subject matter of Cabinet deliberations in the sense that it has informed
those deliberations is capable of
being ‘information concerning any
deliberation or decision of Cabinet’;
however, the
mere fact that a document was submitted to Cabinet is insufficient to qualify
the information within it as the subject
matter of Cabinet deliberations;
rather, to meet
the terms of the exemption, the information disclosed by the document must be
identifiable as the subject matter of
Cabinet deliberations; and
identification may be made from the face of the document containing the
information. However, it may also be made from publicly
available, extrinsic
information that, when read together with the document, reveals the material to
be the subject matter of Cabinet
deliberations.
turn to the application of the clause, so construed, to the documents that
remain in contention.
Whether the documents are
is first necessary to consider various publicly available documents that the
respondent incorporated into its submissions. The
first of these is the
Assurance Framework, discussed earlier. The Assurance Framework announces its
purpose as follows:
Infrastructure SA [ISA] has been established under the
Infrastructure SA
[the Act] to improve infrastructure planning, prioritisation,
operation and implementation.
The Act creates a requirement for ISA to:
evaluate proposals for major infrastructure projects by public sector
assess the risks
involved in planning, funding, delivering and managing infrastructure, and the
management of those risks, and
monitor the
delivery of major infrastructure projects and other infrastructure projects
identified in strategies, statements or plans
adopted by the Minister [Premier]
and any other infrastructure project at the request of the
The Infrastructure SA Assurance Framework [ISAAF] fulfills
these roles. It outlines the approaches, requirements and tools to aid
function and deliver benefits for South Australia.
Assurance Framework then sets out ‘ISAAF Benefits’, which are
expressed to include:
is continuingly informed about the status and performance of State
Government-funded major infrastructure projects and programs.
and public authorities undertaking projects/programs are supported with
consistent, independent and expert advice.
and public authorities are better informed and make better decisions about
infrastructure projects and programs.
the heading, ‘ISAAF approach’, the Assurance Framework
The ISAAF utilises the following approaches to meet
requirements and deliver the intended benefits.
infrastructure projects and programs are continuously monitored to provide
Cabinet with transparent and continuous oversight
on how they are being managed
and delivered.
Assurance Framework is expressed to apply to infrastructure projects with an
estimated capital investment value of $50 million
(excluding GST) and above. It
goes on to provide:
Monitoring and assurance reviews are primarily prepared for Cabinet [and/or
any sub-committees] and, therefore, information is deemed
‘SENSITIVE: SA CABINET’. Notwithstanding the above, ISA may release
consolidated and appropriately de-identified
analysis to:
data, analytics, trends, themes and intelligence, and
capacity-building across the public and private infrastructure
Assurance Framework then addresses monitoring and reporting requirements upon
ISA at some length. ISA’s reporting function
includes providing regular
reports to Cabinet.
Assurance Framework also provides for various forms of Assurance Review. One
such type is ‘Gate Reviews’, which the
Assurance Framework describes
as follows:
Gate Reviews are undertaken prior to key decision points
in a project/program’s lifecycle and inform key directions and decisions
1 is termed ‘Options Analysis’. This review occurs when the Options
Analysis phase is mostly complete. Gate 2 is
termed ‘Business Case’.
It occurs prior to an investment decision by Cabinet. Gate 3 is termed
‘Procurement Review’.
It occurs after the investment decision by
Cabinet and prior to the main works procurement phase.
are further Gate Review stages. It is not necessary to go through all of them.
It is sufficient to note that this review framework
‘primarily’ for Cabinet.
second category of publicly available documents the respondent referred to are
meeting notes from various community and stakeholder
meetings. These are
attached to Document 15, the Northern Water Business Case, but the Ombudsman
noted on the external review they
could not be confidential, as they were
already in the public domain. In any event, the respondent pointed to the
following references
in these minutes:
Minutes of the
Northern Water Supply Project Community Reference Group Meeting on 14 December
2022 record:
The business case will recommend a study
site. The decision for a study site will be made by Cabinet when it considers
the business
Minutes of the
Northern Water Supply Project Stakeholder Reference Group Meeting on 15 February
2023 record:
MCA [Multi Criteria Analysis] results will form part of
the Business Case which will be presented to Cabinet to determine whether
what extent the project will be funded, as well as the selection of one site on
which to conduct further studies. Cabinet
will also take into account things
such as environmental work, engineering, stakeholder engagement and feedback in
their deliberations.
The Business Case will be submitted at the end of March
with a decision expected by the middle of the year.
Cabinet’s decision following submission of the Business Case is to fund
further work until mid-2024 ...
third category of publicly available document that the respondent relied on is
the determination of the Ombudsman on external
review. The respondent submitted
to the Ombudsman in respect of Document 15:
I can confirm the
Northern Water Business Case and Business Case summary (Document 15) was
submitted to the Budget Cabinet Committee
for the purpose of consideration on 12
April 2023.
Ombudsman concluded, on this
has confirmed, as above, that document 15 was submitted to Cabinet for
deliberation. I am therefore satisfied that disclosure
of document 15 would
reveal information that concerned a deliberation or decision of Cabinet and
consider that the document is exempt
under clause 1(1)(e).
Solicitor-General, appearing for the respondent, adopted this statement by the
Ombudsman, as a piece of publicly available information
capable of informing
whether cl 1(1)(e) applied to (in particular) document 15, only hesitantly. He
expressly cast this submission
as one of last resort in the event that the
balance of the information available did not establish the exemption. He was
be hesitant.
information provided by the respondent to the Ombudsman about the provision of
the document to the Budget Cabinet Committee was
not previously in the public
domain. There is, of course, no difficulty in an agency providing evidence that
a document had been
submitted to Cabinet in order to support a submission that
it had been specifically prepared for submission to Cabinet within the
of cl 1(1)(a). The circumstances of its provision to Cabinet may assist in
demonstrating just that.
however, that a document contains only factual material and does not indicate on
its face, or by reference to other publicly
available information, that it
contains information the disclosure of which would disclose information
concerning Cabinet deliberations.
For an agency to disclose, following an
application under the FOI Act, that it was submitted to Cabinet, in order to
engage the exemption
in cl 1(1)(e), would raise the prospect of an abuse of the
processes of the FOI Act.
the Solicitor-General observed, publicly available information about documents
held by the executive can change over time. Information
might subsequently
become public in a way that could not be said to involve an abuse of the FOI
Act’s processes. In this regard,
the respondent also relied on a further
statement by the Ombudsman with respect to certain of the other
15 contains an exact duplicate of document 13. While documents 6, 9, 10, 11, 12,
14 and 17 are not precisely duplicated in
document 15, the substance of the
information contained in these documents also appears to be contained in
document 15 and would
potentially reveal a deliberation or decision of Cabinet
if disclosed.
circumstances where the Ombudsman had already upheld the exempt status of
document 15 pursuant to cl 1(1)(e), the potential and
unfortunate effect of this
statement is to reveal something about the matter contained in these other
documents, by reason of the
relationship between that matter and Document 15.
Subject to the consideration of the document itself and publicly available
the Ombudsman’s statement might be the only indicator tending to
suggest that disclosure of the matter in, for example, Document
disclose a deliberation of Cabinet.
incline to the view that confidential information disclosed publicly or in
proceedings subsequent to the application could not
be relied on to demonstrate
that disclosure of a document would disclose information concerning any
deliberation or decision of Cabinet
within the meaning of cl 1(1)(e).
Section 12 of the FOI Act confers on a person a present, ‘legally
enforceable right to be
given access to an agency’s documents in
accordance with’ the Act. This suggests that whether a document contains
the disclosure of which would disclose information concerning any
deliberation or decision of Cabinet must be assessed as at the
time of the
initial application. Of course, this does not prevent an agency from relying on
affidavit material to demonstrate, for
example, that a document was prepared
specifically for submission to Cabinet, and is therefore exempt under cl
reasons appearing below, however, it is not strictly necessary to decide the
effect of a subsequent disclosure such as that by
the Ombudsman in this case. It
raises a difficult question of construction as to whether events subsequent to
an application under
the FOI Act can render a document exempt.
turn to the documents the subject of this appeal. This being an appeal hearing,
it is first necessary to note the decision of
the Tribunal. As noted above, the
President relied on two affidavits of Ms Elspeth Brown, Director, Cabinet
Office, one open and
one closed. The closed affidavit described the connection
between each document and the processes of Cabinet.
President expressed her determination as
Tribunal has reviewed documents 6, 9 to 15 inclusive, and 17. The Tribunal has
had regard to the Closed Affidavit of Ms Brown,
in which she describes the way
in which each document is connected to a particular decision or deliberation of
Cabinet. As was explained
in the hearing by counsel for the respondent, in the
presence of the applicant, this was done by way of a table.
In her evidence, Ms Brown provided further information in relation to the
relationship between particular documents and particular
Cabinet sub-committee
or taskforce meetings. She provided this information in the hearing in the
presence of the applicant.
It was her evidence that document 6 went to a meeting of the Cabinet
taskforce as an attachment to a Cabinet submission to the taskforce.
expressed the view that in relation to document 6, the agency should have
claimed exemption pursuant to clause 1(1)(a) as well
as 1(1)(e) in its
determination. She acknowledged that document 6 had the same characteristics as
document 1, which was a document
found by the Ombudsman to attract clause
Ms Brown told the Tribunal that documents 9, 11, 12, 13, 14 did not go to a
Cabinet taskforce meeting, but each of them informed the
content of document 10,
which went to a Cabinet taskforce meeting and was the subject of a claim under
clause 1(1)(a).
It was also Ms Brown’s evidence that document 15 went to a Cabinet
taskforce meeting as an attachment to a submission. On that
basis, it was her
view that document 15 properly attracted clause 1(1)(a) as well as clause
1(1)(e), even though clause 1(1)(a) was
not claimed at the time.
Having reviewed the documents, having considered Ms Brown’s affidavit
and oral evidence, and having regard to the construction
of clause 1(1)(e)
reached, I am satisfied that each contains matter that would, if disclosed,
disclose information concerning a deliberation
or decision of Cabinet. Each of
the documents is therefore exempt pursuant to clause 1(1)(e) and I affirm the
Ombudsman’s decision
in respect of each of them.
considering whether the Tribunal erred, we have had regard not only to the
publicly available information as discussed above,
but to the closed affidavit
of Ms Brown. For the reasons already discussed, and as the Solicitor-General
accepted, the closed affidavit
cannot inform the exemption under
cl 1(1)(e). It is capable, however, of informing the claimed exemptions
under cl 1(1)(a). Because
of the nature of the documents and the
objections, our reasons addressing the status of each document are necessarily
Document 15: Report – Northern Water Business Case,
dated 4/4/2023
document is extremely large. On the face of the document itself, it is clear
that it was prepared specifically for consideration
by Cabinet and that its
disclosure would disclose information concerning Cabinet deliberations.
Comparing this document against the
Assurance Framework and, for that matter,
the Community Reference Group Meeting Minutes of 14 December 2022, as well as
the Stakeholder
Reference Group Meeting Minutes of 15 February 2023,
further confirms these conclusions. The document is exempt from disclosure
to cll 1(1)(a) and 1(1)(e).
Document 6: Strategic Case
for Water Supply (undated)
is apparent from the face of the document, when read together with the Community
Reference Group Meeting Minutes of 14 December
2022, as well as the Stakeholder
Reference Group Meeting Minutes of 15 February 2023, that disclosure of the
document would disclose
information concerning deliberations of Cabinet, in the
sense of disclosing material that informed Cabinet deliberations. We consider
that it is exempt under cl 1(1)(e).
Brown gave evidence that Document 6 went to a meeting of the Cabinet Taskforce
known as the ‘Hydrogen and Upper Spencer
Gulf Cabinet Taskforce’.
For the reasons discussed above, and consistently with the
Solicitor-General’s concession, we
do not consider that fact to be
relevant to an assessment of the applicability of cl 1(1)(e).
Brown could not speak to the intentions of the author of the document. However,
its provision to the Cabinet Taskforce, its authorship,
the Assurance Framework
and certain confidential extrinsic material together invite a conclusion that
Document 6 was specifically
prepared for submission to Cabinet within the
meaning of cl 1(1)(a). We hold that it is exempt from production on that basis
Document 14: ISA-02-06 NWSP Desalination Plant Relocation
to Cape Hardy – R1- Final, Attachment to Document 9, dated
respondent made no claim under cl 1(1)(a) in respect of this document, limiting
its claim to cl 1(1)(e). There is consequently
no call to consider any
confidential extraneous information. The respondent admitted that its case that
the disclosure of this document
would disclose a deliberation of Cabinet was
‘piecemeal’.
the first instance, the respondent relied on various aspects of the document
itself, being the title, the stated purpose of the
document and the stated
‘scope and methodology’. These matters set out the subject matter of
the document. The respondent
then directed attention to the conclusion stated in
the document.
respondent submitted that having regard to the nature, size and scale of the
project, as well as the publicly available minutes
decision‑making role of Cabinet, the content of the document and the
significance of the option that the document
considers, it is apparent that
disclosure of the document would disclose information concerning a deliberation
of Cabinet.
is important to be clear that the exemption in cl 1(1)(e) protects
‘information’ concerning Cabinet deliberations,
which we have held
to include subject matter that has informed Cabinet deliberations. For the
reasons discussed above, a proposition
that certain information, regardless of
whether the document in which it appears was placed before Cabinet, must have
informed Cabinet
deliberations can be inferred by indirect means. In this
instance, that inference tends to arise from:
the express
purpose and scope of the document;
stated in the conclusion on p 11 of the document;
the monetary
amounts expressed to be associated with that conclusion; and
the publicly
available information about the role of Cabinet in monitoring and approving
infrastructure projects of this size.
regard, in particular, to the role of Cabinet in determining a study site as
disclosed by the publicly available minutes,
we infer that disclosure of
Document 14 would disclose information that has informed Cabinet deliberations.
That conclusion is, effectively,
a circumstantial inference. We are satisfied,
however, having regard to the contents of the document, that it is sufficiently
The document is exempt pursuant to cl 1(1)(e).
reaching this conclusion, we have not had regard to the statement by the
Ombudsman with respect to this document, discussed earlier.
For the reasons
given earlier, we have considerable doubt that otherwise confidential
information disclosed subsequent to the application,
could be relied on to
support a claim for exemption. However, it is not necessary to express a final
view in that regard.
grant leave to appeal but dismiss the
Order of the Tribunal at
[2021] SACAT 28.
[2018] SACAT 56.
Department of Treasury and
Finance v Mullighan
[2021] SACAT 28
Project Blue Sky v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
Order of the Tribunal at
(2019) 132 SASR 469.
Order of the Tribunal at
Order of the Tribunal at
Order of the Tribunal at
[2012] HCA 55
(2012) 250 CLR 503
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
(2019) 132 SASR 469.
Attorney-General (SA) v
Seven Network (Operations) Ltd
(2019) 132 SASR 469
at [67]-[68].
Corporation Ltd v National Companies and Securities Commission
(1984) 1 FCR
Corporation Ltd v National Companies and Securities Commission
(1984) 1 FCR
Information Technology Group Pty Ltd v Department of Information Technology
Services (SA)
(1997) 192 LSJS 54
at 60–61 (South Australian District
Daycorp Pty Ltd v Parnell
[2011] SADC 191
Zeitouneh v Police
South Australia v Brokenshire
[2015] SADC 68
Brokenshire
) where Judge McIntyre said, relying on
“The assessment of whether disclosure would be contrary to the public
interest involves the objective balancing of factors
relevant to the public
interest. This is an even balancing exercise; there is no presumption in favour
of disclosure”.
Australia Pty Ltd v Public Interest Advocacy Centre
[1992] FCA 241
(1992) 36 FCR 111.
Howell v Macquarie
[2008] NSWCA 26
(Campbell JA, Spigelman CJ and Bell JA
agreeing), referred to in
Attorney-General (SA) v Seven Network (Operations)
(2019) 132 SASR 469
Attorney-General (SA) v
Seven Network (Operations) Ltd
(2019) 132 SASR 469
at [71] fn 110, referring
Accident Compensation Commission v Croom
[1991] VicRp 72
[1991] 2 VR 322
at 323 (Young
Sobh v Police Force of Victoria
[1994] VicRp 2
[1994] 1 VR 41
at 60–1 (Ashley
Secretary, Department of Treasury and Finance v Dalla-Riva
[2007] VSCA 11
Attorney-General (SA) v
Seven Network (Operations) Ltd
(2019) 132 SASR 469
at [71]-[72].
[2007] VSCA 272
(2007) 19 VR 17.
Secretary to the
Department of Infrastructure v Asher
[2007] VSCA 272
(2007) 19 VR 17
Secretary to the
Department of Infrastructure v Asher
[2007] VSCA 272
(2007) 19 VR 17
Secretary to the
Department of Infrastructure v Asher
[2007] VSCA 272
(2007) 19 VR 17
(2024) 305 FCR 268.
Warren v Chief Executive
Officer, Services Australia
(2024) 305 FCR 268
Order of the Tribunal at
Rann v SA Water
& Baker (No 2)
(1996) 187 LSJS 438
Sankey v Whitlam
[1978] HCA 43
(1978) 142 CLR 1
at 39 (Gibbs ACJ).
CPB Contractors Pty Ltd
and Hansen Yunken Pty Ltd v South Australia
[2024] SASCA 130
also [140]-[150] (Livesey P and David JA).
at 39 (Gibbs
Northern Land Council
at 614-615 (Mason CJ, Brennan, Deane, Dawson,
Gaudron and McHugh JJ);
Spencer v Commonwealth
[2012] FCAFC 169
(2012) 206 FCR 309
) at [32] (Keane CJ, Dowsett and Jagot JJ).
at [42]-[43]
(Keane CJ, Dowsett and Jagot JJ);
New South Wales v Public Transport
Ticketing Corporation
[2011] NSWCA 60
Public Transport Ticketing
[50] (Allsop P, Hodgson JA and Sackville AJA agreeing);
Ku-ring-gai Council v
[2017] NSWCA 54
(2017) 95 NSWLR 1
Ku-ring-gai Council
) at [80] (Basten JA,
Macfarlan JA agreeing).
Egan v Chadwick
[1999] NSWCA 176
(1999) 46 NSWLR 563
) at [70] (Spigelman CJ, Meagher JA
Commonwealth v Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
[2000] FCA 453
(2000) 98 FCR 31
) at [42]-[43] (Black CJ, Tamberlin and
Sundberg JJ);
at [42]-[43] (Keane CJ, Dowsett and
Ku-ring-gai
at [80] (Basten JA, Macfarlan JA
Lanyon Pty Ltd v
Commonwealth
(1974) 129 CLR 650 at 653 (Menzies J);
(Gibbs ACJ);
at [32], [42]-[43] (Keane CJ, Dowsett and Jagot JJ).
at 39 (Gibbs
at [32], [42]-[43] (Keane CJ, Dowsett and Jagot JJ).
As to this, see
v South Australian Fire and Emergency Services Commission
[2022] SACAT 17
(Hughes P).
Attorney-General (SA) v
Seven Network (Operations) Ltd
(2019) 132 SASR 469
at [68]-[69].
[1978] HCA 43
(1978) 142 CLR 1.
Sankey v Whitlam
[1978] HCA 43
(1978) 142 CLR 1
at 58 (Gibbs ACJ).
Interdepartmental Working
Proposals for Freedom of Information in South Australia
December 1983), p8.
Interdepartmental Working
Proposals for Freedom of Information in South Australia
December 1983), p31.
See ALC Ligertwood,
Australian Evidence (Butterworths, 1988) at [5.98]; S McNicol,
(Law Book Company Ltd, 1992), 407-408;
Harbors Corporation
(Qld) v Vessey Chemicals Pty Ltd
(1986) 12 FCR 60
Hospitals Contribution
Fund of Australia v Hunt
(1983) 76 FLR 408
Koowarta v Bjelke
(1988) 92 FLR 104.
[1990] FCA 275
(1990) 24 FCR 576.
Commonwealth v Northern
Land Council
[1993] HCA 24
(1993) 176 CLR 604.
Commonwealth v Northern
Land Council
(1991) 30 FCR 1.
Determination
, 2023/04968, 16 May 2024 at [28].
Determination
, 2023/04968, 16 May 2024 at [34].
Order of the Tribunal at
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (514 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter