URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAET/2025/115.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
South Australian Salaried Medical Officers Association v Chief Executive, Attorney General's Department [2025] SAET 115 (15 October 2025)
South Australian Salaried Medical Officers Association v Chief Executive,
Attorney General's Department
[2025] SAET 115
AUSTRALIAN EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNAL
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN SALARIED MEDICAL
OFFICERS ASSOCIATION
CHIEF EXECUTIVE, ATTORNEY GENERAL'S
South Australian Employment Court
Fair Work Act 1994
ET-23-02253
HEARING DATE:
19 September 2025 with written submissions 26
September 2025
JUDGMENT OF:
Her Honour Deputy President Eaton
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Industrial dispute proceedings pursuant to
Fair Work Act 1994
– Application by respondent to strike out
a paragraph in the applicant’s Statement of Issues and Contentions which
orders for the determination of the dispute – Whether orders
would be beyond power – Whether order on determination of
dispute is an ‘award’ subject to provisions in s 90 of the FW Act
– Whether relief proposed by applicant
prohibited by s 90(2)(a) –
Whether criteria for strike out met – HELD – Tribunal’s
exercise of dispute resolution
either party – Limitation on orders identified in s 22(3) – Orders
only on persons represented before SAET or summoned to conference
– ‘Award’ in context refers to industrial instrument
regulating employment arrangements more broadly – Regulatory powers and
limitations identified in FW Act separately to those
for dispute resolution
– Orders available to the Tribunal in the exercise of its dispute
resolution jurisdiction are wider
in scope, but narrower in persons bound, than
those available in the exercise of its jurisdiction to regulate industrial
via the creation and variation of industrial instruments –
Section 90 of the FW Act does not apply to orders determining an
dispute – Application for strike out refused.
Regional Council v Australian Services Union, SA & NT Branch
Conditions of Employment for DECS and DFEEST (TAFE) Employees
Decision No 2
[2010] SAIRComm 7
Clerks (SA) Award
[2000] SAIRComm
Clerks (SA) Award Casual Provisions Appeal Case
(2001) 107 IR 355
[2001] SAIRComm 7
R v Industrial Commission of South Australia: Ex Parte
Master Builders Association of South Australia Incorporated
(1981) 26 SASR
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr
Respondents: Mr W Ambrose
Solicitors:
Applicant: South
Australian Salaried Medical Officers Association
Respondents: Minter Ellison
decision is on an application for directions filed by the respondent on 1 August
2025, which initially sought that these industrial
dispute proceedings be
dismissed as misconceived and lacking in substance; or in the alternative that
the Tribunal answer as a preliminary
question whether the relief sought by the
applicant is beyond power.
the commencement of the hearing on 19 September 2025, the respondent sought
leave to file an amended application for directions
which proposed a further
alternative direction that paragraph 25 of the applicant’s Statement of
Issues and Contentions (‘SIC’)
be struck out. By consent of the
applicant, the South Australian Salaried Medical Officers Association
(‘SASMOA’), I
accepted the amended application.
a short break in the hearing, the respondent’s counsel advised me that he
had been instructed to proceed only on that
part of the amended application
which sought the strike out of para 25 of SASMOA’s SIC. Consequently,
that is the only question
which was left for me to determine.
respondent’s contention is that the Tribunal, sitting as an industrial
relations commission, does not have the power to
order the relief identified by
SASMOA in para 25 of its SIC, so that paragraph should be struck out and such
relief not considered
in the determination of the dispute.
this is a strike out application, the question of whether such relief may be
available precedes any evidence and consideration
of the merits of the
respective positions of the parties to the dispute.
SASMOA filed a Notification of an Industrial Dispute (‘the
Notification’) pursuant to s 7 of the
Fair Work Act 1994
(‘the FW Act’) on 16 May 2023 in relation to a dispute about
administrative resourcing for respiratory and sleep consultants
engaged in the
Department of Respiratory, Sleep Medicine and Ventilation at the Flinders
Medical Centre (‘the Department’).
Consultants
within the Department have certain rights to engage in private practice within
the Department. The terms of that arrangement
are contained in a memorandum
called the Department of Health Private Practice Agreement 2008 (‘the
PPA’), which includes
an obligation on the respondent to provide
sufficient administrative support to enable the PPA to operate as intended.
notification was filed on Form A45, a form prescribed by the then
Australian Employment Tribunal Rules 2022
forms for the commencement of court proceedings or other forms of civil
litigation, this form does not ask what form of relief
is being sought. It asks
at section 5 DETAIL OF DISPUTE for the following details “Summary of
matters in dispute or aggrieved
including any industrial action taken or
threatened (attach additional pages if necessary).”
this form was attached Annexure 1, which included paragraphs 17 & 18 under
the heading “Outcome Sought” as follows:
applicant seeks redress of the backlog of billings to be submitted, and ongoing
administrative support to Respiratory and
Sleep Outpatient Services
18. Specifically that all potentially billable sleep, lung function studies
and outpatient encounters with named referrals to be processed
over the next 4
was then a long period of conciliation and negotiation during which some issues
were resolved, with the remainder referred for
hearing and determination on 24
December 2024. There were then several adjournments by consent to allow for
further negotiations
which were still ongoing.
4 April 2025, as the first step in the preparation of the dispute for hearing
and determination, I made orders for the parties
to each file a SIC to clarify
what issues remained in dispute and the contentions of each in relation to those
SIC filed by SASMOA on 8 May 2025 included paragraph 25 which reads
the inadequacy of the level of administrative support provided to the
Department, the respondent should be ordered:
provide 6 FTE additional ASO2 administrative staff to the Department on an
ongoing basis, being the additional staffing resources
necessary to enable the
Department to operate efficiently and to enable the respondent to meet its
obligations under the private
practice arrangements;
25.2. in the alternative:
25.2.1. to commission an independent review of the level of administrative
support required for the efficient functioning of the Department
in particular
by reference to private practice billings, patient bookings, patient attendance
and patient documentation available
to the Department;
25.2.2. in respect of the independent review, consult with the applicant on
the terms of reference of the review prior to it being
commissioned;
25.2.3. in respect of the independent review, require the reviewer to report
back within four months of the review being commissioned;
25.2.4. to undertake to provide the level of resources recommended by the
independent review;
25.2.5. pending the outcome of the independent review, employ the equivalent
of two FTE ASO2-level administrative support, to be provided
to the Department,
over and above the current level of approved administrative resourcing.
can be seen, the relief stated by SASMOA in its SIC is quite different from that
stated in the Notification. The difference is
easily understood in the context
of this being an industrial dispute in which the parties have engaged in
prolonged negotiations
between the date of the Notification and the date of the
respondent in its SIC contended that the relief proposed by SASMOA is not
available. It said:
relief sought at [25] of the SIC is relief that is beyond the Tribunal’s
power. Such relief is prohibited by s90(2) of the
determining
an industrial dispute invokes the Tribunal’s award making function;
relief sought is directed at the composition of the respondents workforce; and
Tribunal does not have the power to order the relief sought.
the alternative to [1] above, the relief sought by the applicant ought not be
entertained by the Tribunal. Ordering such relief
would be inconsistent with
s90(2) of the FW Act and the operation of the Act as a whole. In exercise of its
discretion in s11(2)
to deal with the industrial dispute, the Tribunal ought not
entertain an order for relief of a kind it could not order in making
respondent’s SIC did not propose any relief of its own, nor any other
proposal for resolution of the dispute.
respondent’s contention at paragraph 1 of its SIC is a summary of the
basis for its strike out application.
Tribunal is granted the power by ss 41(1)(a) and 41(2) of the
Australian Employment Tribunal Act 2014
(‘the SAET Act’) to
strike out a proceeding, including if it believes that the proceeding is
“misconceived or lacking
in substance”, the ground relied upon by
the respondent. This is supplemented by r 50 of the
South Australian
Employment Tribunal Rules 2024
(‘the Rules’) which provides that
“at any time during a proceeding a Presidential member may make such
or orders necessary to achieve the fair and expeditious resolution of
a proceeding, including but not limited to ... (v) dismissing
or striking out a
proceeding or part of a proceeding”.
Consequently,
the power is not limited to striking out the whole of a proceeding but includes
any part of a proceeding. In this case,
at issue is paragraph 25 of
SASMOA’s SIC.
Employment Tribunal (‘SAET’) by s
7 of the FW Act, which is the
first section in Ch 2, Pt 1, entitled
Conferral of jurisdiction, declarations
. I will set out s 7 in full for the context of the arguments put
7. SAET has the jurisdiction conferred by this Act –
a) to adjudicate on rights and liabilities arising out of employment; and
b) in relation to industrial matters-
(i) to approve enterprise agreements regulating remuneration and other
industrial matters: and
(ii) to make awards regulating remuneration and other industrial matters; and
(iii) to hear, determine and regulate any matter or thing arising from or
relating to an industrial matter; and
settle and resolve industrial disputes.”
relation to industrial matters and “any other
matter or thing arising from
an industrial matter”. For convenience – it has an adjudicative
proceedings were filed by way of a Notification of Industrial Dispute, thereby
invoking the dispute resolution jurisdiction.
11, also in Ch 2, Pt 1, governs the jurisdiction to settle and resolve
industrial disputes as follows:
(1) SAET (constituted as an industrial relations commission) has jurisdiction to
settle and resolve industrial disputes.
(2) In exercising its dispute settlement jurisdiction SAET may deal with a
dispute as it considers appropriate including by any of
the following:
(a) conciliation or mediation;
(b) making a recommendation or expressing an opinion;
(c) arbitration.
power of the Tribunal under s 11 then remains wide. The referral for
determination having been made, the further conduct of the
dispute could involve
any of the measures in s 11(2), but is not limited to those measures.
said, the jurisdiction conferred on the Tribunal sitting as an industrial
relations commission is different from that conferred
on the Tribunal sitting as
the Court. It does not include any exercise of judicial power.
2 of Ch 2 is entitled
Processes associated with industrial matters and
, and is concerned with procedural matters.
Relevantly,
it includes a requirement at s 18(2)(b) that the substance of an application and
the day and time it is to be heard must
be “communicated to all persons
who are likely to be affected by a determination in the proceedings or their
representatives”.
19 requires the Tribunal to have regard to the dispute settling procedures in
any award or enterprise agreement that binds
the parties in considering when and
how it will exercise it powers in relation to an industrial dispute.
20 and 21 refer to the conciliation process and voluntary and compulsory
conferences.
22 deals with how disputes are referred for determination and at s 20(3)
limits the orders which may then be made in the following
(3) an order of SAET on a reference under subsection (1)
(a) is binding only on persons represented before SAET or summoned to appear at
the conference; and
(b) if the parties to the industrial dispute are bound by an enterprise
agreement, may not affect the terms of the agreement.”
FW Act Section 90(2)(a)
3 of the FW Act is entitled Employment. Within Ch 3 there is
Part 1, General
Conditions of employment
which sets out minimum standards for all employees
covered by the FW Act, then
Part 2 Regulation of industrial matters by
enterprise agreement
, which sets out the powers and processes associated
with enterprise agreements, then
Part 3 Regulation of industrial matters by
, which sets out the powers and processes associated with awards.
90 is the first of ten sections in Div1 – Awards Generally, itself the
first of four divisions in Pt 3:
to regulate industrial matters by award
(1) SAET may make or vary an award about remuneration and other industrial
(2) However—
(a) SAET cannot regulate the composition of an employer's workforce except in
relation to the employment of juniors and apprentices;
(b) if there is an inconsistency between an award and an enterprise agreement,
then, while the agreement continues in force, the
agreement prevails to the
extent of the inconsistency.
(3) SAET may provide in an award for remuneration, leave or other conditions of
employment that are more favourable to employees
than the standards that apply
Part 1 Division
(4) SAET may refrain from hearing, further hearing, or determining an
application for an award binding only one employer or two or
more employers who
together carry on a single business or for variation of such an award for so
long as SAET—
(a) considers that, in all the circumstances, the parties concerned should try
to negotiate an enterprise agreement to deal with
the subject matter of the
application; and
(b) is not satisfied that there is no reasonable prospect of the parties making
such an agreement.
(5) An award may be made or varied on a provisional or interim basis.
(6) In making or varying an award, SAET is not restricted to the specific relief
claimed by the parties, but may include in the award
provisions SAET considers
necessary or appropriate.
(7) Before SAET makes or varies an award, it must take reasonable steps to
ensure that all persons who are to be bound by the award
have been given a
reasonable opportunity to appear and be heard before SAET.
(emphasis added)
this section is concerned with the exercise of powers which sit within the
Tribunal’s regulatory jurisdiction and, in
particular, the regulatory
power in s 7(b)(ii) to make awards.
linchpin of the respondent’s argument is that the word ‘award’
in s 90 includes orders made in the resolution
of industrial disputes. It
points to the definition of award in s 4(1) as “an order of the SAET
regulating remuneration or
other industrial matters”.
says this means that when exercising its arbitral power to resolve an industrial
dispute by way of orders regulating the future
conduct of parties, the Tribunal
makes an ‘award’. It argues that the relief referred to by SASMOA
in para 25 of the
SIC would require orders of that kind and consequently s 90
relevantly limits the Tribunal’s powers in this matter. In particular,
order that it employ a certain number of administrative staff in the Department
would be an order regulating the composition of
its workforce and therefore
prohibited by s 90(2)(a).
Conversely,
SASMOA submits that s 90 read in context is concerned with making or varying
those industrial instruments which are referred
to as awards, and is neither
concerned with nor limiting of the dispute settling power in s 7(c).
Respondent submissions
respondent submits that as the current dispute was referred for determination
under s 22 of the FW Act the Tribunal, acting as
an industrial relations
commission, does not exercise judicial power, but rather arbitral power
‘to ascertain and declare,
but not enforce’ the determined rights
and liabilities of the parties.
then argues that the Tribunal’s arbitral power in s 11 is only concerned
with the future regulation of the parties. It does
not extend to the
adjudication of the parties’ rights and obligations as at the date of
proceedings, or the making of binding
declarations in relation to same, with
such power being judicial power that is restricted by s 26A of the SAET Act
to the South Australian
Employment Court. Contrastingly, the Tribunal’s
arbitral power does not permit it to issue general declaratory relief. Further,
while the Tribunal may form an opinion about the legal rights and obligations of
the parties, such opinions may only be formed as
a necessary step “in
arriving at the conclusion as to what their future regulation ought to
be’, and are not binding
these limitations, the respondent submits that the arbitration ‘is not,
and can never be, a freestanding inquiry as to
the genesis and progress of the
industrial dispute’ but is defined by the ultimate relief
Without such limitation,
the Tribunal risks exercising judicial power by ascertaining, declaring and
enforcing rights at large, as
opposed to merely forming an opinion as a step to
determining the appropriate orders for the regulation of parties’ future
respondent therefore submits that the outcome sought the applicant in an
arbitration is significant, assisting not only with procedural
fairness but also
in defining the extent and scope of both the dispute itself and the
Tribunal’s task in resolving it. In the
current application, the relief
sought by SASMOA is contained within and limited to what is set out in its SIC.
The operation of s 90(2) of the FW Act
respondent submits that the relief sought by SASMOA is ‘clearly captured
by the prohibition contained in [s
It argues that
orders requiring the respondent to either employ new staff members directly, on
an interim basis, or consequential
to a review clearly involve the regulation of
the ‘composition’ of the respondent’s workforce.
respondent referred to determinations of the former South Australian Industrial
Relations Commission as authority that clauses
that define when an employee
would be a term or casual employee did not infringe the scope of the prohibition
in s 90(2), however
clauses that require employers to employ employees or
stipulate the number of employees of a particular classification or class to
employed, would. It highlighted the following authorities.
Conditions of Employment for DECS and DFEEST (TAFE) Employees Decision No
the Commission dealt
with disputes relating to the regulation of various categories of employees
within the education sector. The
relevant union argued that the employing bodies
were over-utilising temporary contracts, resulting in improper levels of
employment, and proposed model provisions that defined the categories
of casual and fixed term or task employment and provided for
conversion from
those types of employment to ongoing employment. The Commission rejected the
employer’s argument that the imposition
of such an award would be
inconsistent with s 90(2) of the FWA, on the basis that the provision:
...does not mandate the engagement of employees, the numbers of employees to be
engaged, the classification of the employees to be
engaged, the duties to be
performed (provided that they fall within the classification held by the
relevant employee) or the location
where they will be
the relevant provisions merely prescribed the circumstances in which casual and
fixed term or task employees may be
The award was therefore
found not to regulate the composition of the employer’s workforce.
Clerks (SA) Award
application was brought by the relevant union to vary the Award as it related to
casual and part-time employees and to redefine
these categories of employees and
limit the circumstances in which they could be employed. In granting some of the
requested variations,
the presiding Deputy President dismissed the argument that
such an award amounted to an infringement of s 90(2)(a) of the FWA. While
that the Commission could not regulate the number or proportion of employees of
each classification that an employer could
employ or should be assigned
‘at a particular workstation’, the Deputy President held that it was
well within the Commission’s
ability to define the categories of
full-time, part-time and casual
employment.
the variations to the Award made by the Deputy President in that matter were
overturned on appeal, the Full Commission upheld
the reasons of the Deputy
President in relation to the operation of s 90(2)(a) in these
circumstances.
respondent relied on these authorities as support for its argument that the
relief sought by the applicant would result in an
award that fell squarely
within the prohibition outlined in s 90(2)(a) of the FW Act and should be struck
out in accordance with
of the Rules.
Applicant’s Submissions
primary submission is that how the Tribunal sees fit to resolve an industrial
dispute is a matter for it to determine
in the exercise of its jurisdiction.
also argues that the Tribunal’s power to dismiss proceedings (including
part thereof) under s 41 of the SAET Act, is an exceptional
power that case law
dictates is reserved for only those cases that are so obviously untenable that
they cannot succeed. It submits
that the current dispute is not such a
it claims that the relief referred to in its SIC is not beyond the jurisdiction
of the Tribunal.
submits that neither of these two arguments are so obviously untenable as to
warrant denying its members the assistance of
the Tribunal in considering its
proposed relief in resolving the dispute.
The Tribunal’s industrial dispute jurisdiction
submits that the respondent has fundamentally misconceived the industrial
dispute jurisdiction of the Tribunal. It notes that
under this jurisdiction, the
Tribunal has wide power to resolve disputes affecting the employer and employee
relationship, with the
breadth of this power said to assist the Tribunal’s
protective role in preventing “the serious impact on the community
industrial dislocation arising from such
It points to s
11(2) of the FW Act granting the Tribunal jurisdiction to deal with industrial
as it considers appropriate
’ as supporting this
contention.
of this ‘public protective jurisdiction’, SASMOA argues the Tribunal
is not and has never been confined to merely
granting the relief sought by the
parties to a dispute.
referred to
Master Builders
in which the Supreme Court found that some of
the relief sought by the union was too broadly cast and if granted in those
terms would
be beyond jurisdiction, but concluded that it was “within the
power of the Commission to make any determination on the [union’s]
application which it thinks is proper and which is within its
The application of s 90
contests the notion that by settling the dispute the Tribunal makes an
‘award’ within the meaning of s 90 of the
FW Act, such that
s 90(2) necessarily applies. It argues that s 90 distinguishes between
the forms of award contemplated therein
and enterprise agreements. For example,
sub-s (2)(b) provides that in the event of inconsistency, an enterprise
agreement prevails
over an award. Further, sub-s (4) permits the Tribunal to
refrain from hearing or determining an application for an award if it considers
that the parties should try to negotiate an enterprise agreement.
this context, SASMOA contends that s 90 contemplates ‘a particular
form of industrial instrument which is distinct from an
enterprise agreement,
and is certainly distinct from a determination settling an industrial dispute
between parties bound by an already
existing enterprise
agreement’.
SASMOA submits
that the dispute is therefore not governed by s 90 and that the Tribunal’s
powers are in turn not limited by
SASMOA argues that the relief it seeks would not be precluded by s 90(2)
anyway. While it agrees that the starting point in
considering the operation of
the subsection is the statutory language, it argues context is an important
factor in this consideration.
relies on the dictionary definition to demonstrate that the
‘composition’ of a workforce does not refer its size
or the number
of employees comprising it, but rather how it is structured or combined.
Similarly, the definition of ‘regulate’
is identified as ‘to
control or direct by rule’. Together, this produces an interpretation of s
90(2) that precludes
an award from regulating the way in which a workforce is
structured, such as the proportions of different types of employees to be
employed (for example, the ratio of supervisors to supervised staff). SASMOA
submits this interpretation is consistent with the qualification
relating to the
employment of juniors and apprentices, given the practical difficulties that may
eventuate if the ratio of experienced
staff to apprentices or juniors is not
contends that it is unlikely that the legislature intended to prohibit awards
from requiring an employer to provide additional
resources when many industrial
award provisions that have been the subject of arbitration cause employers to
engage additional staff
in order to meet the required conditions. In particular,
the applicant highlights provisions relating to amounts of leave, limitation
hours and the provision of breaks. On the respondent’s construction, these
routine provisions could not be made the subject
of an award under the FW Act.
regard to the case authorities cited by the respondent, SASMOA emphasised the
phrasing used by the Deputy President in
Clerks (SA) Award
above), being that s 90(2) prohibited regulation of ‘how many or what
proportion of persons of each classification’
should be employed, or
‘how many or what proportion’ of those persons should be assigned at
a particular time.
statement was agreed with and adopted by the Full Commission on
and also in the matter
Conditions of Employment for DECS and DFEEST (TAFE) Employees Decision No
where the Full Commission
imposed industrial conditions limiting the workload of education staff whilst
‘clearly cognisant
of the fact that those limits may require the
government to employ additional
reference by the Deputy President in the
Clerks SA Award
proportions in each classification or assigned at a particular time, not numbers
of employees per se.
these reasons, the applicant contends that the respondent’s application
for directions should fail and seeks orders for
the programming of the hearing
and determination of the dispute.
Consideration
respondent has effectively applied for the Tribunal, sitting as an industrial
relations commission, to determine on a strike out
application its jurisdiction
in relation to a form of relief proposed by SASMOA to settle the ongoing dispute
between them, prior
to any evidence being filed or considered.
the hearing I queried whether this was an abstract exercise of interpretation of
s 90 of the FW Act, which would be a question
of law and a matter for the
Tribunal sitting as a court, not as an industrial relations commission.
Following the hearing I made
orders for the parties to file any submissions on
this question, which they both did.
this question their submissions, although differently expressed, were in accord.
Ultimately I have accepted that what I am being
asked to do, is make a decision
on whether or not, sitting as an industrial relations commission, I have the
orders for the relief proposed by SASMOA. Making a
decision on the limits of my jurisdiction is appropriate in order to complete
the Tribunal’s dispute resolution function that is required in this
have also accepted that it is appropriate for me to do so on the application to
strike out part of SASMOA’s SIC, which application
is itself a part of the
ongoing dispute.
want to be clear that I do so because I consider it the most expeditious path to
resolving the dispute, in accordance with s 3(1)(h)
of the FW Act. The
respondent has asked, as a matter of procedural fairness, to know in advance of
filing its evidence whether the
orders proposed by SASMOA are among the possible
outcomes of the determination.
do not accept the respondent’s argument that the scope of relief available
in the exercise of the Tribunal’s dispute
resolution powers is limited by
the outcome sought or proposed by either party in their SICs.
this were so, in the circumstances of this matter where the respondent did not
propose any alternative outcome in its SIC, the
Tribunal would have no option
other than to grant or deny the orders proposed by SASMOA, whether or not that
had the effect of resolving
the dispute.
dispute notifications to SAET are not the same as inter partes civil litigation
proceeding by way of application for specified
relief with grounds detailed in
formal pleadings.
wide scope of the Tribunal’s dispute resolution powers conferred by ss
7(c) and 11 of the FW Act contain no hint of such
limitations. The Tribunal is
charged with an active role in the resolution of industrial disputes,
specifically not limited to the
processes identified in s 11. In the course of
any of those processes, options may emerge from the evidence, from the parties
from the Tribunal itself as to appropriate measures to resolve the
can be seen from the evolution of this matter, the course of industrial disputes
can be fluid. A particular outcome proposed at
commencement may no longer
feature when proceeding to determination.
the parties to an industrial dispute each have a view on how the dispute should
be resolved. It is the conflict between
those positions which the Tribunal is
called on to resolve. The purpose of SICs in an industrial dispute is for the
parties to confirm
for the Tribunal and each other the positions they hold in
that conflict as it proceeds to determination, in order to facilitate
resolution of the dispute.
adopt the reasoning of the Court in
Master Builders
that the Tribunal has
the power to determine an industrial dispute on whatever terms it thinks fit and
that are within jurisdiction.
consider this to be consistent with the purpose of granting the dispute
resolution jurisdiction to the Tribunal. As properly identified
by SASMOA, that
is to protect the community as far as possible from the serious impact of
industrial dislocation which might otherwise
arise from such disputes.
referred to earlier, the Tribunal sitting as an industrial relations commission
does not have the jurisdiction conferred by s 7(a)
to adjudicate on rights and
liabilities arising out of employment. Those are matters requiring the exercise
of judicial power and
are for the Tribunal sitting as the South Australian
Employment Court.
as an industrial relations commission the Tribunal has both the regulatory
resolution jurisdiction
conferred by s 7(c).
formed the view that the Tribunal is not limited in the exercise of its dispute
resolution function to the relief sought by
either party, I am left with the
question of whether, as the respondent submits, determining an industrial
dispute invokes the Tribunal’s
award making function and, if it does,
whether that prohibits the relief proposed by SASMOA.
exercise of the dispute settling jurisdiction of the Tribunal is covered
specifically in ss 18 to 23 inclusive of the FW Act.
The only reference to
awards here is in s 19 which directs the Tribunal to have regard to the dispute
settling provisions of a relevant
award in how it goes about its own dispute
settlement process.
only express limitation to an order of the Tribunal on a determination of an
industrial dispute appears in s 22(3), where it prescribes
that such an order is
binding only on persons represented or summonsed to appear before the Tribunal,
and may not affect the terms
of an enterprise agreement which binds the
this means is that the orders contemplated by the FW Act for the resolution of
industrial disputes cannot have general application,
as an order that creates an
award will do, nor may they change an enterprise agreement. Section 22(3)
specifically excludes regulatory
orders of the kind contemplated by the FW Act
for the making and variation of awards and enterprise agreements, which may bind
other than those who applied for or responded to them.
creation and/or variation of awards and enterprise agreements are separately
governed in the later specific parts of the FW Act
– Ch 3, Pt 2 in
relation to the regulation of industrial matters by way of enterprise agreements
and Pt 3 in relation to regulation
of industrial matters by award.
there is a corresponding limitation to that on dispute resolution orders not
affecting the terms of an enterprise agreement.
Section 82(1) of the FW Act
states that an enterprise agreement cannot limit the Tribunal’s powers of
conciliation or its powers
to settle industrial disputes between the employer
and employees bound by an enterprise agreement. The dispute settling power and
the regulatory power are clearly separated.
distinction is confirmed by the difference between the requirement in s 18 that
the substance of an application be communicated
persons likely to
affected by
a determination
”, and s 90(7) which requires the
Tribunal to “take reasonable steps to ensure that all
persons who are
to be bound by the award
have been given a reasonable opportunity to appear
and be heard before SAET.”
the case of industrial dispute proceedings, the key reference is to persons
likely to be
affected by
a determination, with orders binding only on
those who are represented or are summoned in relation to that particular
dispute. There
is further the specific prohibition on exercising its regulatory
power in relation to an extant enterprise agreement.
the case of the exercise of its regulatory jurisdiction in relation to awards,
the requirement is for notice to persons who are
award. Persons who do not appear, and are not represented will still be bound
by that award if they come within its coverage.
An obvious category of such
persons are those employed after an award takes effect.
orders available to the Tribunal in the exercise of its dispute resolution
bound, than those
available in the exercise of its jurisdiction to regulate industrial matters via
the creation and variation of
industrial instruments.
the limitation on who those orders may bind is taken into account, it makes
sense that the scope of orders available in the determination
of an industrial
dispute is not limited in the same way as it is in the exercise of the
regulatory jurisdiction.
are orders with a different purpose, which is to determine a specific dispute
between identified persons who have been represented
or summoned. They are
therefore not subject to the limitations on the exercise of the Tribunal’s
power to regulate industrial
matters by way of orders which create or vary
industrial instruments.
the word “regulate” is not defined in the FW Act, in context it
appears to relate to its power to make orders which
bind persons more broadly
than those who have appeared or been represented before it.
conclude that s 90 of the FW Act does not apply to orders that the Tribunal may
make in the exercise of its dispute resolution jurisdiction.
found that s 90 does not apply, I do not need to decide whether the relief
proposed by SASMOA would be excluded by s 90(2)(a).
have nevertheless summarised the arguments on that question as they were put to
me and I have formed the opinion that they are sufficiently
complex that they
would warrant full consideration in the light of the factual circumstances to
which they would relate. Had I reached
a different conclusion about the
application of s 90, I would still have refused the strike out application to
enable that full consideration
respondent’s application to strike out paragraph 25 of the
applicant’s Statement of Issues and Contentions is
Respondent’s Outline of
Submissions (26 August 2025) [11], citing
Port Pirie Regional Council v
Australian Services Union, SA & NT Branch
[2014] SAIRComm 3
Respondent’s Submissions
[2010] SAIRComm 7.
[2000] SAIRComm 41.
Ibid [196(1)].
Clerks (SA) Award Casual
Provisions Appeal Case
(2001) 107 IR 355
[2001] SAIRComm 7
It is noted that the
respondent has cited r 51(v) in its submissions. This is presumed to be an
Applicant’s Outline of
Submissions (8 September 2025) [10]-[11].
Ibid [13] citing
Industrial Commission of South Australia: Ex Parte Master Builders Association
of South Australia Incorporated
(1981) 26 SASR 535
Applicant’s
Submissions [20].
Clerks (SA)
(n 9) [196(1)].
Clerks (SA) Award Casual
Provisions Appeal Case
(n 9) [90].
(n 4) [58].
Applicant’s
Submissions [32]-[33].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (309 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter