URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAEOT/2014/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:56:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HALIMEE v SANTARELLI T/A SEASIDE SALON [2014] SAEOT 6 (23 October 2014)
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
(District Court Administrative and
Disciplinary Division)
to comply with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting
publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person
using material in the judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed
to the Registry of the Court in which it was generated.
v SANTARELLI T/A SEASIDE SALON
[2014] SAEOT
Judgment of Her
Honour Judge Cole, Member Ms H Jasinski and Member Ms A Bachmann
HUMAN RIGHTS -
DISCRIMINATION - DIRECT DISCRIMINATION
The complainant alleges discrimination by the respondent, in the course of
her employment, on the ground of pregnancy. The complainant
was employed by the
respondent as an apprentice hairdresser from November 2011 until June 2012. On
19 March 2012, the complainant
informed the respondent that she was pregnant.
The complainant alleges thereafter the respondent unlawfully discriminated
her, contrary to
sections 85T
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
(SA) (“the Act”). The respondent denies the allegations.
Held: Complaint partially proved. The respondent’s conduct towards the
complainant changed upon learning that the complainant
was pregnant. This change
in conduct, combined with the respondent’s attempted termination of the
complainant’s employment,
constituted unlawful conduct under the Act. The
complainant is awarded damages in the sum of $5,000.
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
, referred to.
SANTARELLI T/A SEASIDE
[2014] SAEOT 6
10 October 2012, the Commissioner for Equal Opportunity referred to this
Tribunal a complaint made under the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
(“the Act”) by Kate Halimee against Loretta Santarelli, trading
as Seaside Salon. In her complaint, Ms Halimee alleged
Ms Santarelli discriminated against her, in the course of her employment,
on the ground of pregnancy. Ms Halimee was employed
by Ms Santarelli
as an apprentice hairdresser from November 2011 to 4 June 2012.
the trial of the matter, evidence was given in the complainant’s case by
Ms Halimee and Ms Lee and evidence was given in
the respondent’s
case by Ms Santarelli and her father, Mr Santarelli.
Act provides, in s 85T:
85T—Criteria for establishing discrimination on
other grounds
(1) In this Part—
discriminate
(c) discriminate on the ground of pregnancy; or
discrimination
has a corresponding meaning.
(4) For the purposes of this Act, a person discriminates on the ground of
(a) if he or she treats a woman unfavourably because of her pregnancy or
potential pregnancy; or
(b) if he or she treats a pregnant woman unfavourably because she does not
comply, or is not able to comply, with a particular requirement
(i) the nature of the requirement is such that a substantially higher
proportion of women who are not pregnant comply, or are able
to comply, with the
requirement than of those who are pregnant; and
(ii) the requirement is not reasonable in the circumstances of the case;
(c) if he or she treats a pregnant woman unfavourably on the basis of a
characteristic that appertains generally to pregnant women,
or on the basis of a
presumed characteristic that is generally imputed to pregnant women; or
(d) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of an attribute of or a
circumstance affecting a relative or associate of the
other, being an attribute
or circumstance described in the preceding paragraphs.
Act further provides, in s 85V:
85V—Discrimination against applicants and
(1) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against a
(a) in determining, or in the course of determining, who should be offered
employment; or
(b) in the terms or conditions on which employment is offered.
(2) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against an
(a) in the terms or conditions of employment; or
(b) by denying or limiting access to opportunities for promotion, transfer or
training, or to other benefits connected with employment;
(c) by dismissing the employee; or
(d) by subjecting the employee to other detriment.
The Factual Background
Ms Santarelli
opened the Seaside Salon on 1 October
The Seaside Salon was then,
and is now, a hairdressing salon which offers, in addition to hairdressing
services, spray tanning,
solarium tanning and waxing. Ms Santarelli is a
qualified hairdresser. She is now 25 years old. She said, in evidence, that
she was 14 years old she left school and began her hairdressing
apprenticeship. She worked for 18 months in a salon in Payneham,
and then for a
further six months at a different salon. She completed about 18 months at TAFE.
Her evidence was that her apprenticeship
was “signed off early”
because she had taken on a responsible role at the salon she was working in at
the time. She
said that, at a time when an apprenticeship usually took four
years, hers was signed off in about two years. She said that an apprenticeship
in hairdressing presently takes three and a half
After her apprenticeship
finished, Ms Santarelli worked at another salon in the city. In 2008, she
was involved in a car accident,
in which she was injured. She received a
compensation payment in relation to that accident. With the assistance of her
she set up the Seaside Salon at Glenelg.
began working at the Seaside Salon, as an apprentice hairdresser, in November
2011. By that time she had undertaken 15
months of training as a hairdresser at
the Clip Joint. The basis of Ms Halimee’s employment by
Ms Santarelli was that Ms Halimee
was a second year apprentice who
would progress to being a third year apprentice after six months.
Ms Halimee was paid $347.41 per
week, after
Ms Halimee was employed at the Seaside Salon, Serina Lee, a qualified
hairdresser, was also employed there. Another hairdresser,
Deborah Smith,
worked there one day per week. Ms Santarelli’s mother, Vicki
Santarelli, sometimes worked there, and so did
Ms Santarelli’s
fiancée, Tony Sawlwin.
the early months of Ms Halimee’s apprenticeship, a friendship
developed between Ms Halimee, Ms Santarelli and Ms Lee.
Ms Halimee moved in with Ms Lee. Sometimes, after work,
Ms Santarelli would take Ms Halimee, and sometimes others, out to
Ms Santarelli said that this continued after she discovered that
Ms Halimee was pregnant. Ms Halimee said that it stopped as soon
she told Ms Santarelli that she was
19 March 2012, Ms Halimee told Ms Santarelli that she was pregnant.
The baby was due in mid November.
allegations of unlawful discrimination which are the subject of this matter
relate to the period of time between 19 March 2012
Ms Halimee’s
employment at the Seaside Salon ceased, and her apprenticeship was signed off as
completed, on 4 June 2012. Both
she and Ms Santarelli were paid about
$4,000 upon the completion of the
apprenticeship.
Ms Halimee’s
son was born in November 2012. At the time that she swore her affidavit of
15 July 2013,
had not worked since her employment at Seaside Salon ceased. She received
Commonwealth parental leave payments up until
July 2013. At the time of trial,
Ms Halimee was studying to obtain a Bachelor of Applied Social Science
(Youth Work), a course which
she began in 2014.
Ms Halimee’s Complaint
Initial confidentiality
told Ms Santarelli that she was pregnant on 19 March 2012.
Ms Halimee alleges that she asked Ms Santarelli to keep her
confidential, but that Ms Santarelli did not do so, and instead discussed
it with other employees very shortly after being
told. Ms Santarelli
admits that she discussed it with Ms Lee, her mother and
Mr Sawlwin.
Ms Lee’s evidence that Ms Santarelli discussed the pregnancy
with her, and asked “What are we going to
Ms Santarelli
denied that she said this.
prefer Ms Lee’s evidence.
order to succeed in her complaint, Ms Halimee has to show that the
behaviour that she complains of is unlawful under the Act.
We have considered
whether Ms Santarelli’s conduct in discussing Ms Halimee’s
pregnancy with Ms Lee, Mr Sawlwin and Mrs
Santarelli constituted
discrimination on the grounds of pregnancy by the subjecting of the employee to
a detriment, contrary to s
85V(2)(d) of the Act. We do not consider that
it does. In our opinion the remark made by Ms Santarelli to Ms Lee,
quoted above,
does not constitute discrimination on the grounds of pregnancy
pursuant to s 85V(2)(d). Ms Halimee asked Ms Santarelli to keep
pregnancy confidential. However, there is no evidence that
Ms Santarelli undertook to do so. Employers commonly discuss
in the workplace and to their families. We understand that
Ms Halimee wished, at the time that she told Ms Santarelli that she
pregnant, not to be discussed by Ms Santarelli. However, that does not
mean that Ms Santarelli’s failure to comply with that
constituted a detriment to Ms Halimee within the meaning of the Act, and we
do not consider that it does so.
Dizzy Spell in March
was Ms Halimee’s evidence that she had a dizzy spell on about
31 March 2012 and had to sit down for five to ten minutes.
time, Ms Santarelli was showing Ms Halimee how to shave a
customer’s head. It was Ms Halimee’s evidence, in
affidavit, that after she withdrew from the instruction on account of her
Ms Santarelli
came through to where I was sitting and said words to the effect that she did
not know what to do with me, and, how
can she keep me?
evidence, Ms Santarelli said that the customer was her cousin, who was
Ms Halimee’s dizzy spell lasted for the rest of the day, and that the
customer waited for hours for the haircut to be
finished, but that eventually
Ms Santarelli finished the haircut because it was clear that
Ms Halimee was not going to do
Ms Halimee denied
Ms Santarelli went
on to say that Ms Halimee frequently refused to “do clients”,
and wanted to come into work and look
at Facebook all day on the
This evidence sat
oddly with a statement Ms Santarelli made earlier in her
you express any concern in any forum about Ms Halimee’s
because we had other staff to back it up, so it wasn’t going to be an
going with the affidavit.
I never stated that – about not continuing to be employed. She was quite
a good staff member at the start and I didn’t
believe that –
it’s hard to find good staff so I wouldn’t want to let her go, but
she seemed to think I was against
her all the time when I
believe Ms Halimee’s version of this incident. We do not believe
Ms Santarelli’s version. However, by itself, this
incident does not
constitute unlawful conduct under the Act. It is, however, relevant to the
issue of Ms Santarelli’s state
of mind in relation to subsequent
Spray Tanning and phone call
the beginning of her employment at the Seaside Salon, Ms Halimee undertook
the task of spray tanning customers. On about 4 April
Ms Halimee noticed that when she used the spray tanning machine she felt
nauseous and dizzy. It was Ms Halimee’s evidence
that she discussed
the issue with her doctor, Dr Simona Fischer, and Dr Fischer advised
her not to do spray tanning any more. A
medical certificate was subsequently
provided. It was dated 11 April 2012 and it
Please note Kate is not able to do spray tans until
further notice.
Ms Halimee and Ms Lee said that there was a warning on the spray tan
bottle which said “do not use if
Ms Santarelli denied this, but did not produce a bottle of the tanning
fluid when requested to do so.
telephoned Ms Santarelli in the evening of 4 April 2012,
on Ms Santarelli’s mobile phone. Ms Halimee gave the
account of the telephone call, in her
evening, I telephoned Ms Santarelli on her mobile telephone, to let her
know that I could not continue to undertake this duty.
I called her as soon as
I knew I should stop spray tanning because I had a spray tanning appointment the
next morning and I wanted
to let her know as soon as possible about not being
able to take the appointment.
knew she was going out to dinner that evening but it was common for us to talk
on the telephone after hours.
Ms Santarelli’s
response was angry and rude. She told me that I was making it up, that I was
using the pregnancy as an excuse
to avoid the work and that if I could not
perform these duties she would look to terminate my apprenticeship.
was very upset by this response and Ms Santarelli and I had an altercation
over the telephone. The conversation had been heated
and I felt she was being
unfair, telling me she would terminate my job and that I was making things up,
so I was angry and said “fuck
off” and hung up.
did not think she had her telephone on speaker when we had this
conversation.
Ms Santarelli
gave her version of this incident in her
what happened that night I was out for dinner with family and friends.
Kate rang me telling me that she couldn’t do spray
tanning no longer,
but it was a family function and I said like “We’ll talk about it
tomorrow” because I hated
talking about work after hours. But Kate
didn’t want to wait until the next day, so she started yelling at me.
She told me
– she called me a, can I?
say what she said.
called me a fucking bitch and then she hung up on me. But I didn’t have
it on loudspeaker but she was yelling at me that
loud that people all around me
could hear.
you say that you thought she was using her pregnancy as an excuse to avoid the
you say that if she couldn’t perform her duties you would look to
terminate her apprenticeship.
the only words I said to her were “Can we speak about this tomorrow at
work?” but she wouldn’t.
what did you do the next day. You see in para. 30 what she alleged you
her answer to Ms Halimee’s complaint, Ms Santarelli said that
Ms Halimee called her “a stupid bitch” in the course
conversation.
denied this.
the day following this telephone conversation, Ms Santarelli gave
Ms Halimee a letter, which
I am writing to you about your conduct during your
employment with SeaSide Salon (the employer).
I am advising you that your conduct has been unsatisfactory, and that immediate
improvement is required. In particular you were
advised that you are not
respecting management and using unethical language.
After considering the situation it is expected that your conduct improves and
specifically that you start showing the appropriate
respect to management and
comply with all discussions from senior staff without debate and if any problems
are to arise you are required
to bring they up with senior staff privately and
not in front of clients.
This is your first and final warning letter. Your employment may be terminated
if your conduct does not improve immediately.
If you wish to respond to this formal warning letter please do so by replying in
responded, in writing, in the following
Dear Loretta,
I am writing in response to the warning you issued on Thursday April
I am pleased that we have come to a verbal resolution of the situation and I
look forward to continuing my apprenticeship at your
establishment.
In reference to the incident described in the warning, I would like to assert
that the incident did not take place in front of clients
but rather outside
working hours and over the phone.
We mutually agree that conflict or matters relating to work conditions need to
be discussed at a time when clients are not present.
I ask therefore, that such
conversations are carried out in private and preferably at a pre-determined
Your response to me: “you’re making it up” when I told you
products surprised me.
I would like to reassure you that I do indeed feel dizzy when I use the product
to spray tan clients. I
know that this is a direct result of my pregnancy as I
did not feel this way before becoming pregnant. I am concerned about your
statement that if I don’t spray tan clients you would look at terminating
my contract. My apprenticeship is not exclusively
dependant on spray-tanning; I
am at the Salon to complete my hairdressing qualification.
I have worked at seaside for six months. My record shows that I am committed
and dedicated, I have had one sick day and that is
when I needed to go to
hospital and by the following working day I was back at work.
I can’t help but feel that since I have informed you about my pregnancy,
your attitude towards me has been negatively impacted.
I sincerely hope that this is not the case and that I would be given the
opportunity to continue to enjoy my work at the Salon and
continue to actively
contribute to a supportive and cohesive environment.
Ms Santarelli
denied that Ms Halimee’s pregnancy played any part in her decision to
give Ms Halimee a warning letter.
said, in her affidavit, that “extreme” and “volatile”
language was common among the workers in the
salon. Ms Halimee said, in her
language that she had used in the telephone conversation was milder than
language used by other employees to Ms Santarelli,
but those other
employees had not been warned.
Ms Santarelli
said that Ms Halimee had been hired, in part, in reliance on her ability to
spray tan. Ms Halimee said that that was
not her understanding; she
believed that she was hired as an apprentice hairdresser and she implied,
in evidence, that it was her
understanding that her experience in spray
tanning was incidental.
evidence in Ms Halimee’s case fell well short of establishing as a
fact that it is unsafe for a pregnant woman to operate
spray tanning apparatus.
We accept, however, that this was Ms Halimee’s belief when she
telephoned Ms Santarelli on 4 April
inference arises from this series of events that Ms Santarelli held
concerns about the impact Ms Halimee’s pregnancy would
have on her
ability to perform all of the tasks she was accustomed to perform in the Salon.
We do not accept that Ms Santarelli
was offended or embarrassed by
Ms Halimee’s language during that telephone call. It seems to us
that the primary motivation
for the warning was concern about the impact of
Ms Halimee’s pregnancy upon the running of the salon, and a desire to
a situation where Ms Halimee’s employment could be terminated
should future events lead Ms Santarelli to the view that this
27 April 2012
Thursday 26 April 2012, Ms Halimee worked at Seaside Salon for 13
hours. She said that she had only one half hour
That evening, she told
Ms Santarelli that she felt unwell and may be unable to come to work the
following day. She had a migraine,
which she did not consider to be related to
her pregnancy.
Ms Halimee’s account of what happened next, from her
next morning I was still unwell and at about 7.30am I sent Ms Santarelli a
text message to say I could not come in. At 8.30am
I called to make sure she
had received my message but she swore into the telephone and told me I had no
choice but to come in for
my first client. I believe she was still at home, and
my call had woken her.
made me feel very uneasy and I went to work because I wished to avoid
I was still unwell I left work at lunchtime and went home and fell asleep and
did not see my doctor.
attended work on Saturday 28 April 2012 when Ms Santarelli asked for my
medical certificate for the previous afternoon and I told
her I did not have
told me that I would have to produce one, and again she said that she was sick
of hearing about my pregnancy and that I was using
my pregnancy as an excuse,
even although I had not said I was unwell because of my
Ms Santarelli
agreed that she told Ms Halimee that Ms Halimee needed to produce a
sick certificate for her time off, but she denied
that she mentioned
Ms Halimee’s pregnancy in this
Ms Santarelli
did not believe that Ms Halimee was sick. She said that Ms Lee told
her that Ms Halimee had gone
There was no evidence
to support this.
was no evidence that Ms Halimee was the only employee who was required to
provide a sick certificate for an absence. It has
therefore not been
established that, in itself, this incident was discriminatory. It is, however,
further evidence of the mindset
that Ms Santarelli was developing towards
Ms Halimee.
3 and 4 May 2012
1 May 2012, Ms Halimee consulted Trainee and Apprenticeship Services,
a State government agency, which referred her to the Commissioner
Opportunity. On Wednesday 2 May 2012, Ms Halimee obtained a
certificate from her general practitioner, who provided her
with a medical
certificate saying that she was unfit to work until Saturday 5 May 2012 on
account of “medical condition”.
Ms Halimee said that she was
suffering from stress.
Ms Halimee was absent from work on 2 May 2012. However, on 3 May
2012, Ms Halimee contacted Ms Santarelli and told her that she
4 May 2012, but Ms Santarelli did not attend
at the appointed time.
Instead, they met in the afternoon of that day. In her affidavit,
Ms Halimee said:
that meeting I explained my concerns about Ms Santarelli’s attitude
and the lack of training and I asked her what I could
do to change her feelings
towards me and what was needed for me to successfully complete my
apprenticeship.
Ms Santarelli
did not accept any responsibility for the problem; she said she had no
suggestion about how things could be remedied
because she did not think there
was a problem. She told me that I could not complete my apprenticeship because
I did not have the
necessary skills.
Ms Santarelli
agreed that, at that stage, she indicated that she would not be prepared to sign
off on Ms Halimee’s apprenticeship.
At that stage, in her opinion,
Ms Halimee did not have the necessary skills to be a fully qualified
hairdresser.
16 May 2012
was required to attend TAFE for training as an element of her apprenticeship.
Throughout her employment at Seaside Salon,
she attended TAFE in the City of
Adelaide. On 16 May 2012, Ms Halimee was at TAFE in the City, when,
at 11:00am, Ms Santarelli telephoned
her and directed her to return to the
salon. Ms Halimee said that she would have to catch the bus, which would
take time. Ms Santarelli
told her not to bother, but to go home instead,
but that she would not be paid for the day.
Ms Halimee’s
general practitioner gave her a medical certificate saying that she was unfit to
work from 18 May to 25 May 2012
inclusive, on account of
condition”.
Ms Halimee said that the medical condition was stress and
19 May 2012, whilst she was on sick leave, Ms Halimee went out for
breakfast with friends. Ms Santarelli found out about
It was put to us, on
Ms Halimee’s behalf, that there was nothing surprising about
Ms Halimee seeking the company of supportive
friends when she was
experiencing stress in her workplace.
Thursday 24 May 2012, Ms Santarelli gave Ms Halimee a letter
purporting to dismiss her from her
employment.
I am writing to you about the termination of your
employment with Seaside Salon.
April 2012 you met with Manager Loretta Santarelli. In
that meeting you were advised that your conduct was unsatisfactory and that
immediate improvement is required.
In particular you were advised that you were not respecting management, using
very unethical language, not respecting and complying
with discussions from
senior staff and that any conversation regarding your employment are not to be
held in front of customers.
You were told to improve or your employment will be terminated.
We consider that your performance/conduct are still unsatisfactory and have
decided to terminate your employment for the following
reasons above.
Based on your length of service, your notice is one week. Therefore your
employment will end on 1
You will also be paid your accrued entitlements and outstanding remuneration,
including superannuation, up to and including your
last day of employment.
If you wish to respond to this letter please do so by replying in writing and we
will provide feedback.
evidence, Ms Santarelli said that she could not recall giving
Ms Halimee this
the Training Advocate would contact Ms Santarelli.
The records of the
adviser in the office of the Training Advocate who dealt with Ms Halimee,
Ms Nunn, were tendered in Ms Halimee’s
Ms Nunn recorded on
24 May 2012:
I rang Kate re follow up from last week. Client
hasn’t attended work cos of sick certificate, but is now on annual leave
requested by employer). Kate has tried contacting the employer her about
training and has requested a list from the employer of
what she needs to do to
complete Certificate, but employer hasn’t responded. Would like OTA to
responding to the client. Client provided work
no.... Kate also advised me that she feels uncomfortable looking for a job and
telling employer she’s pregnant (as she claims she’s been
advised by people in the industry not to) and has contacted
employers but upon
informing them of her pregnancy, they advised her it would not be possible to
transfer there. Kate now looking
to get signed off.
Kate’s annual leave continues til next Thursday 31 May, but will go
to TAFE to complete last module. TAFE have advised her
that she is ready to be
signed off once employer approves it. I asked Kate about being signed off given
that last week she didn’t
feel confident enough. Kate replied that now
that she’s been away from her employer, she’s feeling more
I advised Kate that the OTA would contact employer to discuss possibility of
25 May 2012, Ms Nunn recorded that she had spoken to
Ms Santarelli, who expressed reluctance to sign off Ms Halimee’s
apprenticeship.
On 30 May 2012, Mr Loizi, of the office of the
Training Advocate, recorded the following conversation with
Ms Santarelli:
Loretta owner of Seaside Salon – Kate’s
employer, telephoned to inform that she has reconsidered the option of sign off
of Kate’s TC and asked whether it was possible for the sign off to be
arranged ASAP. I offered information regarding credit
for recognition to prior
experience and competency achieved and a variation to TC will need to be
completed prior to the TC signed
off. I offered to assist in the process of
sign off and to attend any meeting with Kate and Loretta though it a good idea
and agreed.
Loretta agreed that Kate did not need to return to work tomorrow
because the sign off will be effective from the same day –
31/05/2012 and agreement was made for an appointment for Monday 4/06/2012 at
2.30pm at the salon to sign the documents.
Loretta thanked me for my help and I
offered to contact Kate and inform her of the agreed arrangements and Loretta
thanked me for
then recorded the following conversation with
Ms Halimee:
I telephoned Kate and informed her of the offer from
Loretta to sign off her TC. I told Kate that she was not required to attend
work as the sign off will be as at Thursday 31/05/2012 and there was an
arrangement to meet with Loretta at the salon on Monday 4/06/2012
Kate was very happy with the offer and stated that she will be able to complete
her training at TAFE next week.
4 June 2012, the apprenticeship papers were signed by Ms Santarelli
and Ms Halimee and Ms Halimee’s employment by Ms Santarelli
came to an end. Both Ms Halimee and Ms Santarelli were paid
approximately $4,000 by the State government
said that she did not ask to have her apprenticeship signed off. She said that
she was in no rush to complete her
This sits oddly with
the records of the office of the Training Advocate tendered in her own
After dismissal
registered as a job seeker with Centrelink and looked for work after she was
dismissed, but she did not obtain another
position. Her son was born in
November 2012.
Ms Santarelli’s Defence
Ms Santarelli
said, in evidence, that Ms Halimee was often reluctant to
“do clients”, wished to be on Facebook on the
“all day” and would claim not to be well enough to help with the
This was denied both by
Ms Halimee and by Ms Lee.
Ms Santarelli’s
case was that Ms Halimee’s conduct was the cause of the deterioration
of their employment relationship,
and that her pregnancy was not the cause of
that deterioration. There was an incident on 30 April 2012 when a customer
who had very
long hair came in to the salon for a cut and blow-dry. The
customer was sneezing, and appeared to Ms Halimee to be ill.
was reluctant to work on the customer’s hair for very
long, because she feared becoming ill. Ms Halimee said that she asked
Ms Santarelli for help, but Ms Santarelli refused to help her, so
Ms Lee stepped in and helped her. Ms Santarelli said that
refused to work on the client and said that if
Ms Santarelli made her do it “I’m killing her baby”.
Ms Santarelli
said that the customer had hay fever, and that her own client
only wanted her to do her hair, so that she could not swap with
Ms Santarelli
made a number of allegations about Ms Halimee’s conduct in her
private life, none of which were substantiated
by any evidence, and none of
which are relevant to the claim the subject of this matter. We reject those
allegations.
Ms Santarelli
said that Ms Halimee was not “bringing an income in” because
she was not “doing
However, the
records which Ms Santarelli produced were incomplete, internally
inconsistent, and, we find,
unreliable.
Ms Lee said
that they did not reflect the volume of work that she
In any event, they did not
show that Ms Halimee was not “bringing an income in”. They
seemed to show that she serviced
fewer customers than the fully qualified
hairdressers, but that she was a strong performer in relation to the sale of
Ms Lee, in her evidence, confirmed that Ms Halimee was the
strongest product seller in the
Ms Santarelli said
that she was unable to produce most of the relevant records of Seaside Salon
because the salon was broken into
in February 2014 and a lot of paperwork was
stolen, including Ms Halimee’s time book. In cross examination,
Ms Santarelli
conceded that Ms Halimee brought into the salon, by way
of takings, far more than she was
cross examination, Ms Santarelli, having conceded that Ms Halimee
earned money for the salon, said that she dismissed her because
wasn’t helping at the salon much” and she had a bad
She repeated her
earlier claim that Ms Halimee liked to be on Facebook on the computer at
work. In all of the previous pleadings
and correspondence, this allegation had
never been raised. It was raised for the first time by Ms Santarelli in
evidence. Ms Lee,
in cross examination from Ms Santarelli, said that
Ms Halimee’s performance “toward the
Ms Lee could not recall complaining to Ms Santarelli that
Ms Halimee would not mop the
Ms Santarelli
produced a list of allegations against Ms Halimee that she said she had
compiled over time.
bad mouthing to clients and in front of
- Hardly any attendance at work
- Refusal to come to work from TAFE on extra day
- Not listening and obeying senior staff
- Attitude and swearing to employer
- Not doing any training
- Refused to mop floor
We will deal with the allegations in the list in turn.
“Bad mouthing”
cross examination, Ms Santarelli said that she could not recall the name of
the client to whom Ms Halimee had “bad mouthed”
the salon. She
said that the client was the wife of her aunt’s cousin, that her aunt had
passed on the story to her and that
she had later met the client at her
aunt’s house and the client had told her the
Ms Santarelli’s evidence on this point was highly implausible, and we
do not believe it. There is no credible evidence of
Ms Halimee “bad
mouthing” the salon.
“Hardly any attendance at work”
Ms Santarelli
said that Ms Halimee often called in sick. She said that Ms Halimee
“was hardly there”.
However, when pressed, Ms Santarelli’s memory was very poor regarding
this issue.
On the evidence,
Ms Halimee, in fact, had medical certificates for all but one day of
her absences.
“Refusal to come to work from TAFE on extra
prefer Ms Halimee’s version of the events of 16 May 2012, when
Ms Santarelli required her to leave the training at TAFE and
come to the
Salon. We find that Ms Santarelli’s behaviour on that day was not
reasonable. Ms Santarelli gave no explanation
as to why she required
Ms Halimee to abandon her training at TAFE on 16 May 2012.
“Not listening [to]and [not]obeying senior
staff”/”Refused to mop floor”
is no credible evidence that Ms Halimee did not listen to or obey senior
staff, or that she refused to mop the floor. There
is evidence that she swore
at Ms Santarelli over the phone on 4 April 2012 in the conversation
that this occurred in the context of a work
relationship which was also a social relationship between two women of a similar
and did not constitute misconduct as an employee. There is no credible
evidence that Ms Halimee had a bad attitude to her employment.
“Not doing any training”
is no evidence that Ms Halimee was “not doing any training”.
We accept that she was unable to finish the clipper
Ms Santarelli’s 9 year old cousin because she felt dizzy.
Ms Santarelli
said that she was declared bankrupt in March 2014. No other evidence regarding
that was forthcoming. Seaside Salon
is still trading. Ms Santarelli said
that she was on maternity leave. She said that the salon had never paid her a
wage, but that
she had been in receipt of Centrelink payments
throughout.
She said that she
ran the salon as a
Credibility
are unable wholly to believe the evidence of Ms Santarelli or
Ms Halimee.
Ms Santarelli’s
conduct through much of the trial was unusual. She repeatedly attempted to
delay the proceedings, twice causing
an ambulance to be called to deal with her
complaints about her health, and repeatedly asserting that she was experiencing
odd symptoms
which should bring about the adjournment of the
On the first occasion,
the proceedings were, indeed, adjourned at her request. When, on the second
occasion, the paramedics could
not find a problem with her health, and the
matter continued, Ms Santarelli’s symptoms eventually abated.
Ms Santarelli made
implausible statements about things that she claimed to
have been told by Court staff and by officers of the Legal Services
Commission.
Clearly, the
accounting records of the Seaside Salon are a mess. Ms Santarelli claimed
that this was partly on account of a burglary,
which she implied had been
carried out by two former staff members. Ms Santarelli had a tendency,
from time to time, to say whatever
she thought would suit her case in the
moment. At times, her memory was very poor. At other times, she seemed
quite frank and her
recollection seemed good. We take into account the
fact that Ms Santarelli represented herself and clearly found the
extremely stressful.
presented well in evidence. She had the benefit of counsel. However, in
respect of the question as to whether she wished
her apprenticeship to be signed
off, her evidence was inconsistent with the telephone records tendered in her
case. We believe the
telephone records, which are consistent with the events of
the time, including the signing off of the apprenticeship by both parties.
believe that the relationship between Ms Halimee and Ms Santarelli was
far more complex than an employee/employer relationship,
having regard to the
evidence of their initial friendship and their relative ages.
Discrimination
bears the onus of proving unlawful discrimination on the balance of
probabilities. Having regard to all of the evidence
of the employment
relationship between Ms Santarelli and Ms Halimee from 19 March
2012, when Ms Halimee told Ms Santarelli she was
pregnant, until
4 June 2012, when the apprenticeship was signed off, we find that
Ms Santarelli changed her attitude to Ms Halimee
on account of her
pregnancy. We find that, once she knew Ms Halimee was pregnant, she
treated her, in the work context, with an
element of suspicion and distance
which had not previously been present between them. This led, ultimately, to
the attempted termination
of the employment relationship by Ms Santarelli.
That change in behaviour, and the attempted termination, constituted unlawful
contrary to s 85V(2)(d) of the Act. The actual termination of the
employment relationship, however, did not occur solely on account
Ms Santarelli’s attitude. Ms Halimee clearly decided in May
2012 that she would prefer to have her apprenticeship signed
off, and her
employment terminated, than to attempt to redeem her relationship with
Ms Santarelli. It is clear from the records
of the office of the Training
Advocate that it was Ms Halimee’s decision to seek the signing off of
her apprenticeship which
set in motion the ultimate, valid, conclusion of her
employment.
Ms Halimee,
at trial, claimed damages as follows:
of income of $9,000 being 26 weeks at $347.41 per week, the period of 26
weeks representing the balance of what was expected
to be her apprenticeship at
the commencement of her employment with Ms Santarelli.
loss of income in the sum of $1,000.
on account of injury to feelings.
Ms Halimee and Ms Santarelli were paid $4,000 upon the signing off of
the apprenticeship. They would have received this sum
six months later,
had the original employment contract remained on foot. Ms Halimee
signed the document ending her apprenticeship
and therefore her
employment.
Ms O’Connor
argued that Ms Halimee should be compensated for the loss of her career as
a hairdresser on account of the fact
that, although she had paperwork to say
that she was fully qualified, she did not feel confident enough in her work as a
hairdresser
to apply for positions. Given Ms Halimee’s complicity in
the signing off of her apprenticeship, we reject this argument.
note that no medical evidence was adduced in the matter, so that there is no
medical evidence as to what the “medical condition”
cited on the
medical certificates for Ms Halimee was, and there is no evidence that
there is any psychological injury to Ms Halimee
arising from
Ms Santarelli’s conduct.
all of the circumstances, an award of damages in the sum of $5,000 representing
injury to feelings, is the appropriate award.
There will be an order
accordingly.
Transcript p 288.
Transcript p 286.
Exhibit C2, paras 3-6.
Transcript p 227.
Exhibit C2, paras 69-70.
Exhibit C2.
Transcript p 89.
Exhibit C7, para 49.
Transcript p 89.
Exhibit C2, paras
Transcript p 91.
Transcript pp 20-21.
Transcript pp 91-92.
Transcript p 90.
Ms Santarelli was
going through Ms Halimee’s affidavit and responding to the
allegations in it.
Exhibit C1, p 15.
Transcript p 79.
Exhibit C2, paras
Transcript pp 92-93.
Exhibit C16.
Transcript p 22.
Exhibit C1, p 27.
Exhibit C1, p 28.
Exhibit C2, para 30.
Transcript p 24.
Exhibit C2, para 38.
Transcript p 23.
Exhibit C2, paras
Transcript p 95.
Transcript p 295.
Exhibit C2, para 47.
Exhibit C2, paras
Transcript p 98.
Exhibit C1, p 17.
Exhibit C2, para 63.
Transcript pp 186-187.
Exhibit C1, p 29.
Transcript p 99.
Exhibit C1, pp 44-63.
Exhibit C1, p 54.
Exhibit C1, pp 49-50.
Exhibit C1, p 49.
Exhibit C2, paras
Transcript pp 21-22.
Transcript p 92.
Exhibit C16, p 3;
Transcript pp 45-47.
Transcript p 99.
Exhibit R6.
Transcript p 77.
Transcript p 78.
Transcript p 122.
Transcript p 139.
The end of her
employment.
Transcript p 83.
Transcript p 83.
Exhibit C11.
Transcript p 150.
Transcript p 238.
Transcript p 239.
Transcript p 113.
Transcript p 116.
Transcript p 69.
Transcript pp 13,
Exhibit C1, p 37.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (233 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter