URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWLRP/2010/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Johnson Steel Fabricators v WorkCover [2010] SAWLRP 10 (26 November 2010)
[2010] SAWLRP 10
WORKCOVER LEVY REVIEW PANEL
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
R.C. & M.L.
JOHNSON PTY LTD t/as
JOHNSON STEEL FABRICATORS
(Employer No.
E1575205 -- File Reference 2010-0004224)
(Applicant)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION
OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
Member P.G. Eblen
Member T.M.
Member R. Donnelly
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED 26 NOVEMBER
Application for review -- supplementary levy -- claims history of employer
taken into account in calculating levy -- other criteria
that might have
resulted in remission of levy or reduction in supplement not applied -- exercise
of statutory discretions -- discretion
to be exercised fairly and honestly in
accordance with statutory purposes -- decision-maker not simply to consult own
economic interests
in deciding whether to exercise statutory discretion --
whether decision not to exercise a discretion is reviewable -- whether blanket
decision not to exercise discretion permissible without considering individual
cases fairly and honestly -- whether obligation on
WorkCover to investigate --
procedural fairness -- matters uniquely within knowledge of applicant -- not
unreasonable to expect employer
will bring relevant matters to attention of
WorkCover if favourable exercise of discretion sought and produce evidence to
review -- ordinary situation is that employers pay appropriate base
levy rate -- to justify remission of levy, circumstances should
be demonstrated
that take employer out of the ordinary -- observations as to funding
implications and quantum of remissions that
should be expected in a successful
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
Cases referred to:
D&V Services v. WorkCover
[2006] SAWLRP 8
SkyCity Adelaide v. WorkCover
[2008] SAWLRP 9
Kioa v. West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
Cooper Vision v. WorkCover
[2007] SAWLRP 8
R. v. Anderson: ex parte Ipec-Air
[1965] HCA 27
113 CLR 177
Re Becker and Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1977] AATA 12
(1977) 32 FLR 469
Chiropractors Association & Perry v. WorkCover
Corporation
[1999] SASC 470
Quark Technologies and Hocking v. WorkCover Corporation
[1997] SASC 6367
(1997) 70 SASR 153
194 LSJS 299
Robbins v. Harbord and GMH
[1994] SASC 4571
SouthLink v. WorkCover
[2009] SASC 175
(2009) 104 SASR
Henderson’s Automotive v. WorkCover (No. 2)
Leveda v. WorkCover (No. 2)
[2004] SAWLRP 6
Community Living v WorkCover
[2006] SAWLRP 1
Adventure Tours v. WorkCover
[2007] SAWLRP 2
Spiel v. WorkCover
[1992] SASC 3523
(1992) 58 SASR 45
Skilled Engineering & Ors v. WorkCover (No. 2)
[2001] SAWLRP 11
Camms Group v. WorkCover (No. 2)
[2008] SAWLRP 4
Benchmark Healthcare v. WorkCover (No. 2)
[2009] SAWLRP
Appearances:
Mr Mr C.A. Sargent of counsel with Ms J.P. Asmussen for the
applicant employer.
Mr S. Makai, Mr G. Batchelor and Ms R. Korotcoff for the
respondent WorkCover.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
This is the
determination of an application, dated 21 September 2009, seeking a review
pursuant to
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
") of a levy decision made by the WorkCover Corporation of
South Australia ("WorkCover") dated 5 June
, at the relevant time,
provided as follows (so far as is relevant):
Review of levy,
penalty interest or fine
(1) Where an employer considers that a decision of the
Corporation as to--
the fixing or assessment of a levy;
the imposition of penalty interest or a fine;
the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead
to the imposition of a supplementary levy,
is unreasonable, the Board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a levy,
penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined
by the Board, by the Board itself, or by a committee or
person to whom the Board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the Board has an
absolute discretion as to whether
it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the Board may--
alter a levy or an assessment;
quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
vary a condition imposed by the Corporation. ...
This Panel is the Board’s delegate
under the section: see the
WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002
amended (for the current version, see
South Australian Government
, 29 October 2009,
, on which the
employer’s argument was focused, at the relevant time provided (so far as
is relevant):
Adjustment of levy in relation to individual
(1) The Corporation may, in relation to a particular employer,
having regard to all or any of the following matters--
the adequacy or inadequacy of measures taken by the employer to
reduce the incidence of work related traumas;
the incidence or costs of claims in respect of compensable
disabilities suffered by the employer’s workers (disregarding claims
class excluded from the ambit of this paragraph by regulation);
the rehabilitation facilities or services for disabled workers
provided by the employer, or the absence or inadequacy of such facilities
services provided by the employer;
the employer’s practices as to the retention, employment or
re-employment of disabled workers (and in particular, any failure
employer’s part to provide, in accordance with this
, employment to a
worker who has suffered a compensable disability in the employer’s
employment);
such other matters (whether similar or dissimilar to those
referred to above) as the Corporation considers relevant,
grant to the
employer a remission of the levy that would be otherwise payable or impose on
the employer a supplementary levy (as the
case may require). ...
The Board of
WorkCover has set out parameters for the exercise of discretions under
by its officers. This is referred to as the "levy adjustment scheme". The
version that was current at the time of the subject reviewable
decision was the
Board determination set out in the
South Australian Government Gazette
26 July 2007, at p.3191 ("LAS07"). This was superseded by a further Board
determination set out in the
on 20 August 2009, at p.3712
("LAS09"). We will refer to these documents as
The employer’s application
Under paragraph
, it will be observed, an employer’s claims history may be taken into
account in assessing the employer’s levy, by the
granting of a remission
or the imposition of a supplement. After, it seems, several years of no or only
minor claims and enjoying
significant remissions of levy under this provision,
the employer sustained a single large claim in October 2007, which, through
operation of LAS07, has caused for the 2009-2010 financial year the loss of any
remission and the imposition of a 35% supplement
(2.65% of remuneration), which
has caused the industry base rate of 7.5% of remuneration for the classification
314101 Structural Steel Fabricating
to be adjusted to a total levy of
10.125% of remuneration. To these the statutory Occupational Health Safety &
Welfare registration
fee and Goods & Services Tax are
At one stage, an argument as to the
status of the October 2007 claim was foreshadowed, that is to say, whether it
should have been
categorised as a claim for a secondary disability, which is a
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Amendment Act 1995
, section 34(3). However, this argument was not pursued at
the hearing: we were told that the employer had been unable to discover
accident, in which a bundle of steel apparently fell on a worker’s ankle,
had occurred.
We are left, therefore, to
review the assessment as
Panel has acknowledged on previous occasions the apparent harshness of the
result when a significant remission of levy is lost
in a single year,
particularly if it is replaced by a supplement under WorkCover’s so-called
"bonus/penalty scheme" (which
is a sub-division of the levy adjustment scheme
dealing with claims histories taken over a rolling two-year window). For
D&V Services v. WorkCover
[2006] SAWLRP 8
"As the Panel said in the recent case of
Tiger Crane v. WorkCover
[2006] SAWLRP 5
, the dollar levy actually
payable can vary widely from one year to another if claims experience results in
a significant remission
being lost and a supplementary levy being added (or
). On the other hand, remissions, when applicable, can
significantly ameliorate the burden of the levy payable and, as such, offer
considerable benefit to the containment of the costs of the individual employer.
The aim of the so-called ‘Bonus/Penalty
Scheme’ is to be revenue
neutral in terms of the revenue needed by the Compensation Fund each year to
discharge WorkCover’s
responsibilities. The only way supplementary levies
could be made smaller would be to make remissions correspondingly smaller.
"Certainly, when a remission of 17% as the employer enjoyed in 2005–6
is lost and replaced by a supplementary levy of 27% in
2006–7, a dramatic
effect is observed. We appreciate that such a large turnaround can seem to an
individual employer as negating
the objective, referred to in section
(v) of the Act, of establishing a scheme that ensures
employers’ costs are contained within reasonable limits so that the impact
of employment-related disabilities on South Australian businesses is minimised,
but the significance of the use of the plural in
that objective should not be
overlooked. The focus is on the containment of the costs of employers generally,
rather than the costs
of each individual employer. The only way of eliminating
swings from year to year of the kind experienced by this employer would
WorkCover to refrain from exercising the discretions conferred by section 67
altogether -- which can hardly have been the
intention of Parliament, given that
the conferral of the discretion is plainly a part of the Act. Indeed, it may be
thought that
the prospect of such swings is a central part of the incentive to
take steps to reduce the incidence of industrial injuries that
section 67 is
aimed at providing."
We acknowledge that, in a no-fault
scheme such as that created by the Act, individual employers will sometimes
perceive that the claim
that has led to a supplement being applied was not one
that any useful steps could have been taken to prevent. Indeed, these sorts
anomalies may have been among the factors that led WorkCover to effectively
abandon the bonus/penalty scheme at the end of June
2010 (see LAS09, at p.3713
and 3714). Although we appreciate that it will not seem a satisfactory response
from the point of view
of employers experiencing such swings from remission to
supplement, we can only reiterate what the Panel said above. Such swings
inherent in the scheme. An employer who has had the benefit of remissions in the
past must accept that this was funded from a
pool contributed to by other
employers upon whom supplements had been imposed. The starting point in each
year must be the base levy,
easy as it is to overlook that when accustomed to
the cash flow benefit of repeated
remissions.
The apparent harshness of the
supplementary levy was not, however, the main focus of the submissions of Mr
Sargent for the employer.
The employer’s
of the submissions was that WorkCover had acted unfairly by having regard only
to paragraph
of section 67(1) in imposing the supplement. Mr Sargent
said that the employer was entitled to have its circumstances considered
relation to all of the available criteria, which he said would result in the
softening or neutralising of the supplement imposed
in relation to its claims
record for the 2-year window period. He contended that WorkCover was under a
duty to fully investigate
the employer’s circumstances, akin to the duty
outlined by the Panel in
SkyCity Adelaide v. WorkCover
, at [21]–[25]. This process would reveal favourable material
relevant to the other criteria enumerated under section 67(1).
connection, he referred generally to
Kioa v. West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
Cooper Vision v. WorkCover
[2007] SAWLRP
The failure to fully examine
the employer’s position under section 67 went to the concept of
reasonableness under section 72,
Mr Batchelor, for WorkCover,
pointed to the use of "may" in section 67, which he said conferred an absolute
discretion on WorkCover.
He pointed out that of the various elements of LAS07,
only Elements 1 and 2 related to the possibility of remissions. Elements 3
related solely to supplements, and the employer, because of its size, was not in
the category for consideration under Element
Discretionary decision
In the opening words of section 67 of
the Act, the word "may" appears. This word operates to confer a discretion on
WorkCover. But
a few things need to be reiterated about the exercise of
statutory discretions in general.
are gone, if they ever existed, when the use of the word "may" in a statutory
provision indicated that a statutory decision-maker
could do as he liked, which
the use of expressions like "absolute discretion" seems to imply. In
Anderson: ex parte Ipec-Air
[1965] HCA 27
(1965) 113 CLR 177
said at [10], p.189:
"It is a general principle of law, applied
many times in this Court and not questioned by anyone in the present case, that
a discretion
allowed by statute to the holder of an office is intended to be
exercised according to the rules of reason and justice, not according
opinion; according to law, and not humour, and within those limits within which
an honest man, competent to discharge
the duties of his office, ought to confine
Sharp v. Wakefield
[1891] UKLawRpAC 8
[1891] AC 173
, at p 179. The courts,
while claiming no authority in themselves to dictate the decision that ought to
be made in the exercise of
such a discretion in a given case, are yet in duty
bound to declare invalid a purported exercise of the discretion where the proper
limits have not been observed. Even then a court does not direct that the
discretion be exercised in a particular manner not expressly
required by law,
but confines itself to commanding the officer by writ of mandamus to perform his
duty by exercising the discretion
according to law:
Cuming Campbell
Investments Pty. Ltd. v. Collector of Imposts
(1938) 60 CLR 741
750, 751, 755, 758. A case for the granting of mandamus on this principle exists
where the officer has taken into account matters
‘absolutely apart from
the matters which by law ought to be taken into consideration’:
[1898] UKLawRpKQB 81
[1898] 1 QB 802
, at p 806;
Randall v. Northcote
Corporation
(1910) 11 CLR 100, at pp 109, 110 , or has acted for a
purpose other than that for which the discretion exists:
Conservation and Irrigation Commission v. Browning
(1947) 74 CLR 492, at
pp 496, 498, 499, 500, 504, or has accepted another's direction as to the way in
which the discretion should
be exercised:
R. v. Stepney
Corporation
[1901] UKLawRpKQB 209
[1902] 1 KB 317
Simms Motor Units Ltd. v. Minister of
Labour and National Service
[1946] 2 All ER 201
[1909] HCA 46
(1909) 9 CLR 140."
Brennan P (as he then was) commented on
this passage in
Re Becker and Minister for Immigration and Ethnic
[1977] AATA 12
(1977) 32 FLR 469
the language of Kitto J. is expressed as confining the considerations which may
legitimately govern the exercise of discretion,
the concepts reveal the width
and variety of factors which might legitimately be taken into account. The
subject-matter, scope and
purpose of the statute conferring the discretion may
mark the boundary of relevance (
Murphyores v.
Commonwealth
(1976) 50 ALJR 570 at 579) but within the boundary the
honest decision-maker may legitimately fashion his views and determine the
exercise of his powers without constraint. Where a policy-maker forms a policy
to govern or effect the exercise of his statutory
discretion, the policy must
conform to law. Otherwise decisions taken pursuant to the unlawful policy may be
set aside ... The tribunal
which reviews a decision taken pursuant to an
unlawful policy could not affirm the decision -- at all events, not for the
which led to the making of the decision."
accepted that in a high-volume decision-making environment, where a designated
decision-maker ("the Corporation") necessarily
acts through servants or agents,
policy guidelines for the exercise of a discretion may be necessary, but the
ultimate decision must
be the result of an independent assessment of all the
circumstances and not the uncritical application of policy:
Chiropractors
Association & Perry v. WorkCover Corporation
[1999] SASC 470
[39]. There is no room for blanket policies that a particular discretion will
not be exercised at all, in advance of proper consideration
of any application,
for that would be to close the decision-maker’s mind to any application
that did not conform with its general
Quark Technologies and
Hocking v. WorkCover Corporation
[1997] SASC 6367
(1997) 70 SASR 153
194 LSJS 299.
In exercising a statutory discretion conferred for a public
purpose, a decision-maker is not entitled simply to consult its own (economic
other) interests:
Robbins v. Harbord and GMH
[1994] SASC 4571
(1994) 62 SASR 229.
The Full Court in
SouthLink v. WorkCover
[2009] SASC 175
(2009) 104 SASR 172
construed LAS07 and LAS06 extensively without adverting to their validity. The
parties in that case seem not to have been in dispute
Panel has more than once indicated its view (before being stripped of "the power
to review a decision of
the Corporation on a matter of law going to the validity
of that decision" in 2007) that LAS07 and its predecessors seemed to be
of the kind of permissible policy guidelines referred to by the case law as
reasonable in a high-volume decision-making
environment, so long as they were
not adhered to so slavishly as to preclude fair and honest consideration of the
merits of an individual
case as demanded by the legislation. See, for example,
Henderson’s Automotive v. WorkCover (No. 2)
[2005] SAWLRP 2
D&V Services v. WorkCover
Cooper Vision v.
. Similar observations were made by the Panel in relation to
the discretion conferred by section 66(5)
Leveda v. WorkCover
[2004] SAWLRP 6
Community Living v WorkCover
[2006] SAWLRP 1
, and in relation to adherence to WorkCover’s National Head
Office guidelines in
Adventure Tours v. WorkCover
[2007] SAWLRP
"There is no suggestion that the criteria comprising
WorkCover’s National Head Office guidelines are unlawful as such. However,
the function of such guidelines is to facilitate the exercise of the discretion,
not to fetter it. A policy that required such slavish
adherence that
decision-makers were effectively precluded from turning their minds to the
underlying purpose of a discretion and
the merits of an application would no
doubt be problematic. It is to be noted, however, that the final line of the
guidelines themselves
in this case instructs that each application is to be
assessed on its merits."
Is a decision not to exercise a discretion a decision?
The first question to consider is
whether a decision not to exercise a discretion under section 67 (or under some
parts of it) is
a decision capable of review under section 72. One view is that
it is not, because no decision has been made. The Panel considers
a decision: a decision
to exercise a discretion is as
surely a decision as a decision to exercise it.
Moreover, under section 72, the
circumstance that activates an employer’s right to lodge an application
for review is the employer’s
belief that a decision of the Corporation as
to the fixing or assessment of a levy (etc.) is unreasonable. It does not matter
the employer’s belief is itself reasonable or justified. The
outcome of the review itself will establish that. The point is
that if the
employer considers the assessment it has received to be unreasonable, as the
employer in the present case certainly does,
Parliament has declared it will be
entitled to a review by the Board or its delegate. The exercise or non-exercise
of the discretion
under section 67 is simply one of the components by which the
overall assessment has been arrived at -- but often an important one.
scheme of the Act, it is difficult to see how the way in which section 67 has
been applied in a particular case could sensibly
be divorced from a review of
the final assessment of a levy.
tenable to say that there is no reviewable decision if the employer has not in
fact been sent a levy assessment at all.
the present case, the complaint is
that section 67 has not been
applied at all. It is that consideration under section 67 has been confined to
the one factor that is
adverse to the employer, whereas consideration of other
criteria might have led to a result more favourable to the
This is an argument that has to
be permitted to be made. Just as a blanket policy not to exercise a discretion
at all is not permissible
(see Cox and Debelle JJ, Perry J concurring, in
Quark Technologies
, referred to above (paragraph [18])), a policy
confining consideration to adverse matters and excluding consideration of
potentially
favourable matters cannot be acceptable where fair and honest
consideration,
limited to "simply to consult[ing] its own interests",
is required (see King CJ, Mohr and Nyland JJ concurring, in
, also referred to above (paragraph [18]), at paragraph [25] of
His Honour’s judgment).
Parliament says that WorkCover may grant a remission or impose a supplement,
having regard to all or any
of the enumerated matters
, it does not mean that WorkCover should pick and choose according to
what will give the best result for the Compensation Fund. It
Parliament has recognised that one or more of the enumerated matters may not be
relevant in all circumstances, and WorkCover
should give fair and honest
consideration to those that are relevant and act on those that it is persuaded
are appropriate. A statutory
decision-maker may, after giving fair and honest
consideration to the available material under each relevant criterion, decide
exercise of the discretion is not warranted. What he or she must not do is
refuse to give that fair and honest consideration at all,
or confine it to just
one or a few of the criteria, or refuse to exercise the discretion when
warranted by the fair and honest consideration
he or she has
We conclude that if an employer
makes known to WorkCover that it considers itself entitled to a remission (or a
lower supplement)
on the basis of any of the matters set out in section 67(1),
WorkCover, or on review, this Panel, must give fair and honest consideration
that submission. Refusing to consider the matter at all, or considering only
selected criteria, is not an option. We do not think,
however, that WorkCover,
or this Panel, is required by procedural fairness to go digging for such matters
"on spec", as it were,
just in case they exist. Procedural fairness requires
fair and honest consideration of matters known or put to the Corporation, not
matters unknown to it. It is not unreasonable to expect an employer which
believes itself entitled to consideration, especially after
receiving a
supplement as in this case, to bring to the attention of WorkCover the matters
it thinks ought to be considered.
Obligation to
investigate?
Mr Sargent told us the employer had been
operating since 1965 in a high-risk industry with a very good track record
regarding claims.
This should, he said, serve to ameliorate the significant
claim in October 2007, which had a disproportionate effect because of the
comparatively small remuneration total of the
No evidence, or submissions, were
produced in relation to safety training or procedures or rehabilitation
facilities, or any of the
other matters dealt with by section
Mr Sargent asked the Panel to set a
policy as to how these matters were to be considered and to give WorkCover an
opportunity -- and
a direction -- to consider and investigate. Without such
guidance from the Panel, he said, an employer could not know what it needed
establish. Again, this was said to flow from considerations of procedural
fairness and due process arising from
Mr Batchelor contended that
with 50 000 registered employers, it was not practicable for WorkCover to
investigate each employer’s
circumstances individually each year for the
assessment of levy rates. He said it was not necessary, and would be unlikely to
useful information. He referred to Safe Work Australia’s
Compendium of Workers’ Compensation Statistics Australia 2007-08
(published January 2010, available online), and said that, according to that
survey, there were 13.5 serious claims
1 000 workers across Australia in 2007-08, which would indicate that it was
unlikely that such a small employer as the applicant
would have many serious
claims in any event. Mr Sargent and Ms Asmussen confirmed that the employer has
a total workforce of 13,
being 10 process workers and 3
administrative.
We do not accept the
analogy made by Mr Sargent with the Panel’s approach in
Adelaide v. WorkCover
, referred to above (paragraph [12]). In that case,
the Panel considered that questions relating to the medical circumstances of
of the employer’s workers could not satisfactorily be answered
without further investigation, mainly of a medical nature, and
WorkCover to seek appropriate further evidence. Indeed, it held WorkCover had a
duty to investigate the secondary or primary
status of a disability at the
outset. In the present case, however, the matters to which the employer seeks to
have WorkCover to
have regard, presumably, are those listed in section 67(1):
the adequacy or inadequacy of measures taken by the employer to reduce
incidence or work-related traumas, the rehabilitation facilities or services for
disabled workers provided by the employer, and
the employer’s practices as
to the retention, employment or re-employment of disabled workers, as well as
any other matters
the employer thinks WorkCover should find relevant.
All of these are matters uniquely within
the knowledge of the employer itself, and the only investigation possible by
WorkCover would
be to send someone out to the employer’s premises to ask
the employer about them. With respect, we are firmly of the opinion
undertake such enquiries routinely would be an absurd diversion of
WorkCover’s personnel and administrative resources
-- which are paid for
by the very levies in question, and which it is in the interests of all
employers to conserve -- when the employer
could just as conveniently supply the
information and/or evidence it thought relevant, leaving WorkCover to follow up
only if some
question arose from the material first
The situation is not different once
a matter comes before this Panel on review. We do not think the circumstances
activate the duty
referred to by Olsson J in
Spiel v. WorkCover
[1992] SASC 3523
(1992) 58 SASR 45
, even assuming (as we are inclined to do) that the duty is
relevant to a review under section 72.
Given that the list of criteria for the
exercise of the discretion under section 67 appears in the section itself, we
cannot think
those criteria should come as a surprise or that any spelling out
of what needs to be demonstrated is
The Panel is always sensitive to
the position of small employers who cannot be expected to have the resources to
develop a detailed
knowledge of the levy review system, especially if
unrepresented, and where an employer is represented in proceedings before this
Panel we endeavour to exercise the greatest restraint in running up
employers’ legal bills. We are keenly aware that this is
a jurisdiction
where legal costs are not recoverable. For this reason, for example, we usually
require WorkCover, not the employer,
to prepare books of documents for hearings
(with the employer invited to contribute anything additional it might think
should have
been included; or where an employer is represented, inviting
representatives to confer on inclusions). However, where the outcome
of a review
is crucially dependent on the Panel’s acceptance of evidence in the
possession of the employer and thought by the
employer to be persuasive, it does
not seem too much to expect that the employer should actually present that
It seems to us that, in meeting
that expectation, any employer should aim to show more than simple compliance
with the requirements
Occupational Health, Safety and Welfare Act
and applicable regulations. That is a legal requirement of that
legislation, to be complied with for that reason. Such compliance
see, and to be encouraged. But it is not something to be specially rewarded by
the granting of a remission of levy under
It is to be remembered that the
ordinary position under section 66 of the Act is that an employer pays the base
levy applicable to
its industry classification. Anything that an employer
contends should be rewarded by the Panel by the granting of a remission should
reasonably be expected to be, and be demonstrated to be, out of the ordinary, in
excess of what the average employer is doing, and
warranting the special
recognition of a remission under section
We merely add that the bonus/penalty
scheme, now ended under LAS09, was unique in providing, through the imposition
of penalties (supplements),
a funding source for bonuses (remissions), as the
Panel pointed out in
D&V Services
(paragraph [9] above). The
consideration the present applicant now seeks would not be funded except out of
the general revenue of
the Compensation Fund.
The Panel has acknowledged since its
earliest years the desirability of avoiding, as far as possible, disturbance of
the financial
balance of the WorkCover scheme through its decisions: e.g.,
Skilled Engineering & Ors v. WorkCover (No. 2)
[2001] SAWLRP
Henderson’s Automotive v. WorkCover (No. 2)
D&V Services
Camms Group v. WorkCover (No. 2)
[2008] SAWLRP 4
(and other cases relating to extending time to review levy
decisions from closed years);
Benchmark Healthcare v. WorkCover (No.
[2009] SAWLRP 17.
This caution arises from one of the objects of the
Act being "to ensure that the scheme is fully funded on a fair basis" (section
). In some cases, it has been appropriate to pose the somewhat
crude question in relation to a decision the Panel was urged to make:
where’s the money coming from?
mention this because we perceive it as unlikely that employers in less
meritorious circumstances are going to lodge applications
to review their levy
assessments because they think their circumstances warrant a supplementary levy.
Unlike the situation with the
bonus/penalty scheme, there is no pool to draw on
to fund remissions. Accordingly, any remissions the Panel was persuaded to grant
would be likely to be quite modest, perhaps striking some as token in their
Conclusions
We do not propose to direct WorkCover to
undertake any investigations in this matter for the reasons we have explained;
that, we must observe that, even if we were disposed generally to
order investigations in such matters, there is no indication in
the material put
before us that there is anything out of the ordinary to investigate in this
That being the case, the application
for review must stand or fall on the evidence and submissions before the Panel.
That evidence
and those submissions do not persuade us that any circumstances
exist that merit the granting of a remission of levy or a reduction
supplementary levy already imposed by
Indeed, one member of the Panel
observed that the employer’s claimed inability to identify the cause of
the accident in October
2007 fails to inspire confidence that it could not
happen again.
The application for review
must be dismissed.
Determination
For these reasons, pursuant to our
powers delegated under section 72 of the Act, we confirm the reviewable decision
of 5 June 2009.
Trudy Minett
Bob Donnelly
Defined as those lodged in the reference
year and accepted for compensation by the date the data are extracted and which
a death, a permanent incapacity, or a temporary incapacity with an
absence from work of one working week or more. (See definitions,
p.89 of the
. The raw statistic is at p.vii (Summary of findings).)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (186 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter