URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCAT/1998/36.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:09:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
David Pond v Workcover Corporation v MMI Workers Compensation SA Ltd (Wunda Joinery) [1998] SAWCAT 36 (10 December 1998)
WORKERS COMPENSATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
In the matter of an appeal by
the worker, against a
determination of a
REVIEW OFFICER
dated the 5th day of June 1998, which
also concerns
WORKCOVER CORPORATION/MMI WORKERS COMPENSATION SA LTD (WUNDA
the employer.
(No. 26W of 1998)
In the matter of an appeal by
CORPORATION/MMI WORKERS COMPENSATION SA LTD
(WUNDA JOINERY)
the employer,
against a determination of a
REVIEW OFFICER
dated the 5th day of June 1998, which also concerns
the worker.
(No. 33W of 1998)
His Honour Deputy President G.M. Thompson
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED THE 10TH
DAY OF DECEMBER
Appeal by Worker
claims - Whether demeanour critical in finding
of credit - Cross Appeal by Corporation extension of time - Review Officer
concurrently as Arbitration Officer -
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1986
Cases Cited:
Devries v. N.R.C.
(1993) 177 C.L.R. 472.
Taylor v. B.H.P. Limited
Jones v. Hyde
[1989] HCA 20
(1988-89) 85 A.L.R. 23.
Karchinsyk v. WorkCover/GIO
A.33/1998).
Keen v. W.R. and C.C.
S.6519.2 (28 February 1998).
Santos v. WorkCover Corporation
S6839 (F.C.
September 1998).
Appearances:
J.K. Warren for the Appellant.
Dr. P.M. Salu for the Cross Appellant and Respondent.
The worker lodged an appeal against a determination of the Review Officer that
the worker has no permanent disability as a result
of a compensable thoracic
spine injury sustained in January 1995.
An appeal has been lodged by the Corporation (by way of a cross-appeal) against
the determination of a Review Officer that the worker
has a 12% loss of the
full and efficient use of the neck and cervical spine resulting from a
compensable disability suffered in January
The Review Officer also determined `I vary the decision dated 19/6/96 to accept
the worker's claim for a lower thoracic spine disability
and to determine that
he is incapacitated for work by that disability for a closed period from 6/2/95
to 20/2/95 only.'
(1) The Worker's appeal:
The Review Officer set out the various factors that led to that conclusion.
Counsel for the Appellant accepts that if the findings depend to any
substantial degree on the credibility of a witness the finding
unless the trial judge has failed to use or has palpably misused the advantage
of seeing and hearing the witnesses. However
it is submitted that is a
principle that applies only in cases where the judgment is founded upon the
demeanour of the witness -
not in cases where the credibility of the witness is
derived from the consideration or the context of the evidence -
(1993) 177 C.L.R. 472 per Deane and Dawson J.J.
That may be, so but the Appellant on appeal still bears the onus of
demonstrating that the finding of credibility - which is doubtless
foundation for the selection of what particular evidentiary material is
characterised as persuasive - has been arrived at erroneously.
was not confined to `demeanour' by Olssen J. in
Taylor v. B.H.P. Limited
(S6183). The Appellant proceeds to submit that given that the Review Officer
did not expressly rely on the worker's `demeanour' in
reaching a finding on
credibility - the Appellant was not precluded or hindered from examining the
text of the judgment to ascertain
if it properly represented the evidence.
The facts of this matter are relatively clear.
Prior to 1987 the worker was troubled with a painful thoracic spine. His
general practitioner Dr. Columbo, considered referring
him to a pain clinic.
Instead the worker underwent surgery described as a right subcostal and
eleventh intercostal nerve neurolysis
plus resection of the eleventh and
twelfth rib tips. This occurred on 1st September 1987.
On 14 June 1995 Dr. Columbo wrote to WorkCover:-
`Mr. Pond consulted me on 6/2/95, he stated that about 2 weeks prior to seeing
me he had built a pergola and shovelled concrete
at work. The following day he
developed a painful lower thoracic back especially on the right side. At time
the pain was sharp and
"shooting" from the right lower thoracic back to the
umbilicus. His lower thoracic pain had been constant for about 10 days prior
seeing me and was interfering with his sleep despite several treatments from
the chiropractor. ...
I felt that as the result of his work duties Mr Pond had strained his lower
thoracic back (especially on his right side) and aggravated
his pre-existing
right sided thoracic 11 nerve root lesion, which is most likely a
Neurofibroma.'
The Review Officer took the view that whatever happened in 1995 was a closed
period aggravation of that long standing condition.
That `congenital' pathology was diagnosed by Professor Peter Reilly, `as
probably a benign cystic lesion associated with T11 nerve
root and was
responsible for the pain in the groin of which the worker was at that time
complaining (June 1993)'. That condition
and the diagnosis pre-dated the 1995
claim for compensation.
The 1987 surgery did not cure the painful condition. On 14 November 1987
some two and a half months after the surgery Dr. Columbo's
notes show that
the worker complained that
`he was good for a while after surgery - but now almost as painful as
At. p.437 Dr. Columbo said this:-
`Q. I'll take you to your notes of 8 February 1995.
Q. Still having throbbing pain on the right side of his spine, the right lower
thoracic back. Shoots at the umbilicus and groin
and testicles three to six
times a day. Has pain going through testicles before with it. ...
A. That's correct.
Q. ... that's an indication, isn't it, that it's the same sort of pain that
he's experienced in the past.
A. It's a recurring pain.
Q ... the present pain that Mr Pond is suffering is simply another
manifestation of what he's been going through over a period
A. Well, that's what you're trying to say. That's correct.
Q. Do you agree with that.
A. Not necessarily.
Q. What part of it do you agree with.
A. Well I agree that he did have a - he does have a neurofibroma and that he
was having pain and he is still having pain though
I don't totally agree that
it was same as it was then as it now necessarily. ...
Q. Indeed the base of the pain, being the neurofibroma - ... if you get it bad
it will have the same symptoms that he's been suffering
all along, shooting
pains through to the groin.
A. That would be so. I mean a neurofibroma would cause radiating pain from the
disputing that fact. I think
it's a fact that - I mean it has done that and is still doing it. I don't know
necessarily it may be
exactly the same, I'm not sure but certainly the pain is
aggravated by lifting and working.'
`... do you concede that it may be that the present symptoms that he's got are
merely another manifestation of his earlier underlying
A. They're similar.'
And at P.448:-
`... All I can say is that basically he does have some of the symptoms he had
before but, in addition to that, I think it's not
totally and purely consistent
with a neurofibroma because he's obviously a heavy manual worker and he would
have experienced sort
of other sort of backache as well.'
It was critical to the worker's case that the condition post January 1995 was
essentially different from that from which he suffered
prior to January 1995 -
or that the post January 1995 condition was a permanent aggravation of the pre
existing condition.
The gravamen of the Appellant's complaint is that the Review Officer reached a
conclusion adverse to those propositions by erroneously
ignoring the worker's
complaint that the pain after 1995 was descriptively dissimilar to that of
1987-95. i.e. `the latter was more
severe - it was a red hot shooting pain -
the earlier pain was a pulling sensation more like a toothache and it was not
restricting.
After 1995 the pain is completely different now. It's now a
jamming red hot pain that shoots around down into my groin. It's now
different thing.' (p.190).
The Review Officer did not accept Dr. Columbo's opinion that the pain was
different either in origin or in location which might
have supported the thesis
of a different origin. Dr. Columbo was accepted that in February 1995 there was
a closed period of disability
that was work caused. There is no explicit
finding as to whether that disability was an aggravation of a pre existing
condition -
or a completely fresh injury, but it is tolerably clear that the
Review Officer treated that closed period as an aggravation of the
condition. That is not an issue in this appeal which is concerned with
The Review Officer obviously did not accept Dr. Brian Cohen's final views
Report (5/9/96) p.582 which were taken to be a revised
version of views
previously expressed (Report 14.12.95 p.573) that the thoracic pain noted in
December 1995 was caused by the congenital
As far as Dr. Cohen's views were concerned - it is my view the Review Officer
was correct. The plain and ordinary meaning of his
first report of 5 December
1995 is that the thorac pain - all of it - has a congenital origin. Dr. Cohen
later described the seat
of the pain as being in the mid thoracic area - a
diagnosis different from Dr. Columbo -
The Review Officer found that in his evidence the worker minimised the extent
of the pre-1995 pain.
In 1987 it was sufficiently acute to lead to surgery after consideration of
treatment at a Pain Clinic. After surgery the pain returned
pre-operative level.
I do not think the Review Officer misconstrued the evidence. The worker's case
was that his later pain was not just a different
in kind, but that after 1995
it had a different pathological origin.
Even so Dr. Cohen said (p.387):-
`Q. And in terms of your examination can you say what if any objective signs
there were of disability of the thoracic spine excluding
the lesion at T11-12
(the pathological condition).
A. There were no objective signs. They were all subjective.'
The critical part of Dr. Columbo's evidence is at p.437-438 and is quoted
The Review Officer was not obliged to accept all or any part of
Dr. Columbo's evidence. The Review Officer's reasoning was that
Dr. Columbo's evidence depended upon complaints of pain made by the
worker. The conclusion drawn by Dr. Columbo was subject to the
validation of
the patient's input. However that input was modified by the patient's
historical reconstruction. The Review Officer
found the worker to be a
` "persuasive historian" and his accounts made sense to Dr. Columbo who
has developed his opinion based on the significance given
by the worker to
various accounts and symptoms."
The Review Officer's conclusion was legally open, precisely because the Review
Officer found as a fact that there was no difference
in the pre 1995 and post
1995 condition(apart from the closed period) and that no permanent loss of
function had been generated
by the 1995 incident.
The debate then proceeds to the next level of abstraction, which is whether it
was open to the Review Officer to reject the alleged
"difference" in pain. Such
a conclusion is quintessentially a question of fact and the conclusion is
intertwined with the weight
attached by the Review Officer to the worker's own
evidence. The conclusions drawn by the Review Officer from this assessment,
its effect on the evaluation of Dr. Columbo's evidence was open.
The views of Dr. Cohen were not discussed at any length, other than to note
that his initial views were different from Dr. Columbo's.
In my view the whole of the medical evidence was treated fairly and in a
fashion that was open to the Review Officer.
I am not entirely convinced that I have the power to revisit the findings of
fact. My concern is founded upon what fell from McHugh
Jones v. Hyde
[1989] HCA 20
(1988-89) 85 A.L.R. 23
at 27: (quoted by Parsons J. when faced with a
similar problem in
Karchinsyk v. WorkCover/GIO
A.33/1998).
`It is true that the learned judge did not expressly rely on the demeanour of
the plaintiff in making his findings of primary fact.
But this does not mean,
that an appellate court is in as good a position as the trial judge to
determine the primary facts of the
case. When a trial judge resolves a conflict
of evidence between witnesses, the subtle influence of demeanour on his
determination
cannot be overlooked. It does not follow that, because the
learned judge made no express reference to demeanour and credibility,
played no part in his conclusion: see
Martin v. Option Investments (Aust)
Pty. Ltd. (No. 2)
[1982] VicRp 45
[1982] VR 464
This Tribunal should be cautious about the subtle influence of demeanour and
it should consider the Review Officer's decision in
the light of the advantage
in seeing and hearing the witnesses.
Keen v. W.R. and C.C.
S.6519.2 (28 February 1998) per Lander J..
`I think whilst the appeal to the Tribunal is a rehearing ... the Tribunal's
power given by
do not allow it to be said that it is necessarily
bound to accept primary finding of fact made by a Review Officer. In most
circumstances
it would. But it does have the power to draw its own conclusions
of fact from the documents even without hearing the evidence.'
This view seems to be a refinement of a more restrictive view of the Tribunal's
function embraced by Olssen J. in
Taylor's Case
On the view that I do have the power to re-examine questions of fact, whatever
the real cause of the 1987 problem was, it was certainly
of sufficient
importance to induce surgery. That is far more serious than the workers
description of that pain as being `equivalent
to a toothache' or `an annoyance'
or `that he goes to the doctor because of an inquiring mind" or "rating it on a
pain scale of 1-10
to less than 1'.
The pre-1995 pain had returned at least once in an acute form before the
worker's current injury.
The pain was subjective in Dr. Cohen's view.
The matter could have been put beyond any doubt had the Appellant called
Professor Reilly before either the Review Officer or the
Workers Compensation
Appeal Tribunal. Professor Reilly is the Head of Neurosurgery at the Royal
Adelaide Hospital and a Neurosurgeon
of international reputation.
In June 1993 Professor Reilly diagnosed the pre-1995 pain as caused by a
`benign cystic lesion'. He re-examined the appellant on
21 April 1995 - 8
months before Dr. Cohen and noted `a recent recurrence of right loin and groin
pain'. There was a MRI Scan on 20
March 1995. Professor Reilly was in an
excellent position to give an opinion on the causality of the complaints after
1995 - because
in 1993 he examined and correctly diagnosed the source of the
pain that had existed since 1987.
I am not saying that the fact that Professor Reilly was not called, exposed the
Appellant to a
Jones v. Dunkell
comment - but the differential diagnosis
and the evidence may well have become clearer had the Review or the Tribunal
the benefit
of Professor Reilly's views.
I can see no reason for interfering with the Review Officer's findings. I
therefore dismiss the appeal.
(2) The Corporation's cross-appeal seeks to disturb the finding of 12 per cent
loss of the efficient use of the cervical spine.
First there is a question of an extension of time.
The Determination was made on 4 June 1998 but the cross-appeal was not lodged
until 4 September 1998 which was in fact less than
a month after an
amended notice of appeal had been lodged but about two months after the time
for lodging an appeal had expired.
The Corporation says that it was not necessary to obtain an extension of time
because the original notice put the neck condition
in issue in a notice of
appeal that was to say the least opaque. It is said that only after the amended
notice was filed did it became
clear that the neck was not an issue in the
worker's appeal - and therefore the Corporation if it had dissatisfaction had
to manifest
that, by way of a cross-appeal.
I do not accept that construction. In my view the Corporation's appeal should
have been filed within time. It is about two months
out of time.
I propose to grant an extension of time. There is a long history of this
Tribunal taking the view that an extension of time sought
for a cross-appeal
out of time will be granted more easily, unless the Appellant would suffer an
injustice by being taken by surprise
or otherwise - e.g. if the point had not
been clearly raised at the Review. That philosophy accords well with the view
of the Full
Santos v. WorkCover Corporation
S6839 (F.C.
September 1998) i.e. that the discretion will be exercised when to do
so is in the interest of justice.
The issue of the neck was extensively ventilated at the Review. It would be
contrary to the interests of justice if the Corporation
was denied the
opportunity of its appeal rights.
The Corporation complained that the passage at p.682 of the Review Officer's
judgment does not accurately reflect the evidence.
`In relation to his neck and cervical spine I note that the worker's history of
neck pain and restriction is generally consistent
with the medical records that
his neck disabilities before 1993 (namely 1985 and two occasions in 1992) were
temporary in nature
being aggravations of his pre-existing degenerative
condition of the cervical spine which had no permanent effect on the
functioning
of the cervical spine. However since the January 1993 incident his
complaints have been persistent and suggestive of a permanent
problem. I have
reached this conclusion principally on the evidence of the worker and
Dr. Columbo.'
The Review Officer assessed the disability at 12 per cent loss of function.
The general grounds of the Corporation's complaint is that:-
1. Dr. Columbo evidence is mistaken.
`Q. ...... are you of the view that he has a permanent disability as far as
his neck is concerned.
A. ... I am of the view that he has a permanent disability regarding his neck
Q. Now, from whatever cause that may be, what would you assess that disability
A. From whatever cause, taking into account the degenerative or arthritic
component, I would say he has on estimate about a 25
per cent disability in
regard to his neck.
Q. Of that 25 per cent permanent disability, what if any percentage could you
ascribe to the 1993 incident.
A. I would say about 15 per cent.
REVIEW OFFICER
Q. So 15 per cent due to his 1993 and 10 per cent due to what.
A. I would say due to pre-existing changes.'
There were motor vehicle accidents that led to at least temporary whip-lash
conditions in March 1990 and perhaps 1995 and further
neck incidents of
November 1991, March 1991. In Dr. Columbo's report of (9.7.86) p.570b:-
`Mr Pond stated that for years he has had a tendency to develop stiff, aching
neck and upper shoulders with heavy lifting. Also
his neck tends to click at
On any view of the medical history of the pre-1993 condition of the cervical
spine - one has to reach the conclusion that there
was a pre-existing
degenerative condition that with various exacerbations produced a permanent
impairment before the advent of the
subject work injury.
Dr. Cohen's initial report of 11 December 1995 at p.574:-
`... he had a previous complaint in his neck and would have some stiffness and
soreness with the heavier work, but it would ease
up reasonably quickly. This
had been so for a number of years. There had been no specific injury. I
understand it would be close
to ten years that he had the complaint.'
The Review Officer discounted Mr. Humble's views being produced partly by an
unsatisfactory history.
The Review Officer dealt with Professor Reilly's statement (Report 18/4/98
p.591) that after 1993 the worker did not complain of
pain in the neck. However
in the history given to Professor Reilly this appears:-
`He told me that he had suffered neck pain for more than 10 years. He noted the
tendency for the right side of the neck to lock
The history given to Professor Reilly was ignored even though it is quite
consistent with the history obtained from the notes of
the general
practitioner. There could be no reason for discounting that history.
The finding of no permanent effect of the pre-1993 condition is at odds with
all the medical evidence and not open.
The course adopted by the Review Officer was to embrace the permanent loss of
function certified by Dr. Cohen at 12 per cent flowing
from the work incident;
that assessment itself was predicated on the factual basis that there was
permanent pre-1993 impairment -
but that 12% was the loss independent of the
pre 1993 impairment. To adopt that assessment, but to ignore the factual basis
The question is what to do with the cross appeal. It seems to me that the dicta
indicates, that in the resolution of any
conflict at a trial much depends upon the `atmosphere generated by the whole of
the evidence'.
It is not open to the Tribunal to retry the matter on paper -
`which is of course totally in discord with well settled principle'
This does not sit particularly easily with the remarks of Lander J. in
Keen's Case
which have been quoted above.
If I was unencumbered with only those two views which are prima facie
conflicting as to what approach I should take, I would probably
substitute a
figure less than 12 per cent.
However special circumstances exist in this case that make the return of this
matter the Review Officer more than usually feasible.
The order that I propose to make is that the assessment of the Review Officer
be set aside and the matter be returned to the Review
Officer for further
consideration.
The reason I make that order is because the matter has to go back in any event.
The fourth determination of the Review Officer was that
`I vary the decision dated 19/9/96 to accept the worker's claim for lower
thoracic spine disability and to determine that he was
incapacitated for work
by that disability for a closed period from 6/2/95 to 20/2/95.'
The Appellant submitted and the Respondent demurred but faintly that that
determination was outside the power of the Review Officer.
The Review Officer heard this (complex and long standing) matter, both as a
Review Officer and as an Arbitration Officer of the
Workers Compensation
Tribunal. I make no comment as to whether there is power to do that.
Nevertheless, that course was both concurred
in by the parties and indeed urged
upon the Review Officer from the best motivation, which was to save costs and
to bring the matter
to a speedy conclusion.
Nevertheless that above `determination' now appealed against must be a finding
of an Arbitration Officer of the Workers Compensation
Tribunal only - even
though it is the same person as the Review Officer making the decision. This
proposition was accepted by both
parties and I do not propose to adumbrate on
the reasons why it is so - other than to say that the view is obviously
I note that (although it is of no concern of mine) the Arbitration Officer has
circulated a draft of the proposed orders to the
parties and sought submissions
on them - as a function of the Workers Compensation Tribunal.
The matter will be concluded by the Arbitration Officer making the appropriate
orders. This may well have the regrettable result
of prolonging the matter
because it is possible that it will then go on to a Judicial Determination and
wind its way through the
appeal process appropriate to the Workers Compensation
Tribunal. That is unfortunate but that is the net result of the Act. I have
alternative but to quash that determination.
In those circumstances returning the issue of the
assessment of the
neck to the Review Officer will not be attended by any undue delay.
The final orders I make are:-
1. The Respondent's cross-appeal against the
determination of 12 per
cent loss of efficient use of the neck and cervical spine is set aside. The
matter is returned to the Review
Officer to make a finding on the basis that
the permanent loss of efficient use of the function of the cervical spine is to
be assessed
after proper allowance been made for the permanent impairment that
existed prior to 1993.
2. The appeal against the Review Officer's finding that the worker has no
permanent disability as the result of a compensable thoracic
spine disability
is dismissed.
3. The Review Officer's determination to vary the decision of 19 June 1996 to
accept the worker's claim for a closed period only,
is quashed.
I order that the Respondent pay the Appellant's costs.
In accordance with the requirements of section 93 of the
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
the parties are notified that if a
party wishes to apply to the Full Supreme Court for leave to appeal against any
part of this decision
which raises a question of law, such appeal must be
instituted within one month after a party who is entitled to appeal receives
notice of this decision.
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are respectfully requested to note the provisions of the Supreme Court
Rules 96.04(a) and 97.05 which require that in the
event of an appeal a copy of
the Notice of Appeal filed in the Supreme Court is to be served upon `the
proper officer of the Court
or Tribunal below'.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (38.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter