URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRComm/2017/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Papagni v Chief Executive, Department of the Premier and Cabinet (Department for Health and Ageing) [2017] SAIRComm 7 (25 May 2017)
Papagni v Chief Executive, Department of the Premier and Cabinet
(Department for Health and Ageing)
] SAIRComm 7
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION (SA)
PAPAGNI, John
CHIEF EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT OF THE PREMIER AND CABINET (DEPARTMENT FOR HEALTH
AND AGEING)
S 202 Reference of Question for Determination by the
5422 of 2016
HEARING DATES:
28 February and 1 March 2017
JUDGMENT OF:
Deputy President KM Bartel
DELIVERED ON:
17 May 2017
CATCHWORDS:
Referral of a dispute to the Commission for determination - Refusal of
employer to convert temporary employee to permanent status
- Whether applicant
had “reasonable expectation of ongoing employment - Application of
relevant Award clause considered - Circumstances
surrounding applicant’s
engagement on temporary contracts considered - Structural change within storage
and distribution services
considered -
- Applicant satisfied
eligibility requirements for conversion to permanent status - Ss 105A, 202
Work Act 1994
Public Sector Act 2009
Fair Work Act 2009
Clarke v Mid North Coast Health Service,
Matter No. IRC 4263 of 1998,
1 October 1999
Gollan v Rural City of Murray Bridge
SAIRComm 27
Timmins v St Vincent Gulf Fisheries and Investments Pty
[2003] SAIRComm 54
Cranwell and Others v Australian Medical
Deputising Services Pty Ltd,
Print I.20/1999, 28 April 1999
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr S Blewett
Respondent: Mr A
Solicitors:
Applicant: United Voice (Agent)
Respondent: Crown
Solicitor’s Office
Introduction
26 September 2016 the Industrial Relations Commission of South Australia (the
Commission) was notified of a dispute by United Voice
on behalf of Mr John
Papagni (the applicant).
subject matter of the dispute notification (the notification) concerned the
employer’s failure to convert the applicant’s
employment from
temporary to permanent status. The dispute was the subject of voluntary
conferences in October and November 2016
and then referred for determination by
the Commission in accordance with s 202 of the
Fair Work Act 1994
applicant was first engaged under a temporary contract of employment on 3
February 2014 and has at all times been employed by
the Chief Executive,
Department for Health and Ageing (DHA), based at the Repatriation General
Hospital (RGH). The declared employer
for public sector employees under the
Fair Work Act 1994
(the Act) is the Chief Executive of the Department of
the Premier and
purposes of this decision, DHA will be referred to as the employer or the
respondent.
applicant seeks an order from the Commission that the employer convert his
employment status to permanent full time in accordance
with cl 3.4 of the
South Australian Government Health Etc. Ancillary Employees Award
Award). Clause 3.4 deals with temporary employment and is found in Part 3 of the
Award dealing with “Terms of
Engagement”:
Clause 3.4 Temporary Employment
3.4.1 A temporary employee is one engaged to work for a constant number of
hours per week on a part-time or full-time basis for
a fixed term of at least
one month’s duration.
3.4.2 This type of employment must
be supported by a written contract of employment which clearly specifies the
commencing and finishing
dates of the period of employment.
3.4.3 A temporary fixed term contract of employment cannot be extended.
Where an employer wishes to retain the services of an employee
beyond the expiry
date of a fixed term contract, the employer may offer the employee a new fixed
term contract for the period the
employee is required. Any such new contract
must also specify the commencing and finishing dates of the period of
employment.
3.4.4 Any temporary employee who has been engaged on one or more separate
contracts of employment by an employer (which may include
periods of employment
on a casual basis), such that the employee has been continuously employed
without a break (other than for approved
paid or unpaid leave purposes) for at
least 12 months, and who has a reasonable expectation of ongoing employment, is
eligible to
elect, in writing, to convert to permanent part-time or full-time
(as appropriate) employment.
3.4.5 The employer of an eligible employee must notify the employee in
writing of the provisions of 3.4.4 prior to the expiration
employee’s current contract.
3.4.6 Any eligible employee who does not make an election as provided for in
clause 3.4.4 within 4 weeks of receiving the written
notice in 3.4.5 or before
the employee’s current contract ceases, whichever is the earlier, will
cease to be an employee at
the expiration of that current contract.
3.4.7 Upon receiving a written notice of election from an eligible employee
pursuant to clause 3.4.4, the employer must, within 4
weeks of receiving such
notice or prior to the expiration of the employee’s current contract,
whichever is the earlier, indicate
in writing whether the conversion to
permanent employment is, or is not, agreed to. Where the conversion is not
agreed to, the employer
must provide written reasons for same.
3.4.8 Where an employee’s election to convert to permanent employment
is not agreed to and the employee considers that in not
agreeing the employer
has acted unreasonably, the employee may seek to have the dispute resolved
through the Grievance and Dispute
Settling Procedure set out in clause 7.1.
3.4.9 Where an eligible employee’s election to convert to permanent
employment is agreed to:
(a) the hours of duty that will apply under the new, permanent contract of
employment will be the average of the ordinary hours worked
by the employee
during the 12 month qualifying period specified in clause 3.4.4, or as otherwise
agreed between the employer and
the employee;
(b) hours worked in respect of a special event/s or other
“one-off” project/s, particularly (but not only) where the
for such an event/s or project/s is separate and independent funding that is not
controlled by the South Australian Government
and is provided for the specific
event/s or project/s only, will not be included in calculating the preceding 12
months average hours
even if such special event/s or project/s extends beyond 12
(c) appropriate working arrangements, including the configuration of the
hours of duty, will be determined by the employer having
regard to the
employee’s patterns of employment during the 12 month qualifying period
and operational requirements.
3.4.10 For the purposes of this clause, “employer” means a
hospital or a health centre, incorporated under the
SA Health Commission Act
; or the Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science; or the Department
of Health.”
operation of cl 3.4 is generally agreed between the parties, including the
an eligible
employee can apply to convert to permanent full time or part time
employment;
the employer of
an eligible employee must notify the employee in writing of their ability to
elect to convert to permanent employment
prior to the expiration of the
employee’s current contract;
the employee has
to satisfy three criteria to be eligible, being: engagement under one or more
separate contracts; continuous employment
without a break (other than for
approved leave) for at least 12 months; and a reasonable expectation of ongoing
employment;
the respondent
has a discretion whether to agree or not agree to an eligible employee’s
election to convert to permanent employment;
the respondent
must provide written reasons to the employee in the event that the election is
refused; and
an employee has
the right to dispute the decision utilising the dispute settling procedure of
the Award, if the reasons for refusal
are viewed as unreasonable.
applicant gave evidence. The respondent called two witnesses. Mr Smith is
the Assistant Director of Health Support Services (HSS)
in Procurement and
Supply Chain Management (PSCM) within DHA. Mr Swann has held the position
of Director, Procurement for SA Health
since July 2014. He is second in charge
to the Chief Procurement Officer, Ms Lees, and acts in this capacity in her
absence. The
evidence of all witnesses was credible and is accepted unless
otherwise indicated.
witness statement for Dean Revill was admitted by
Mr Revill is
the applicant’s line manager. He holds the position of HSS Manager
Southern, which incorporates the RGH. He has
responsibility to ensure that the
warehouse functions in the hospitals within his area operate efficiently. Mr
Revill is also responsible
for managing HR issues including contract management,
replacing staff and backfilling. Mr Revill reports to Mr Smith.
Revill stated that the various structural changes, including the closure of the
Royal Adelaide Hospital (RAH) and RGH and proposed
changes to storage and
distribution services, were common knowledge among staff and/or had been
discussed with them.
The relevant facts
facts relevant to a determination of this dispute are generally agreed between
the parties.
applicant has at all times been engaged as a Distribution Officer, Level WHA 4
under the Award and the
South Australian Public Sector Wages Parity
Enterprise Agreement: Weekly Paid 2015
(the Agreement)
performed by the applicant falls within PSCM, which is a division of DHA.
Immediately
prior to his commencement in February 2014 the applicant had been engaged by
Challenge Recruitment for approximately 12
months, also performing the work
of a Distribution Officer at the RGH.
applicant is regarded by his managers as a dedicated and competent
He has been
engaged for a period extending beyond three years under a series of five
temporary employment contracts as follows:
3 February 2014
to 2 February 2015 (12 months) (the first contract)
2 February 2015
to 30 June 2015 (4 months) (the second contract)
1 July 2015 to
15 April 2016 (9 months) (the third contract)
16 April 2015 to
30 November 2016 (7 months) (the fourth contract)
1 December 2016
to 30 June 2017 (7 months) (the current contract).
work undertaken by the applicant is commonly understood as storeperson’s
work. His main duties include the picking and packing
of items from the bulk
store at RGH for delivery to imprests at different locations within RGH. The
selected items would be scanned,
and this process would automatically generate
replenishment orders to the central distribution store at Camden Park.
applicant undertakes Distribution Officer work from time to time at Flinders
Medical Centre (FMC) and the terms of his employment
provide that he may be
transferred to other locations to perform work appropriate to his
classification.
The application for permanency
16 May 2016, in the currency of the fourth contract, the applicant requested
that he be converted from temporary to permanent employment
in accordance with
cl 3.4.4 of the Award. This request was refused by Ms Sue Lees, Executive
Director PSCM and Chief Procurement
Officer, on 27 May 2016. Ms Lees
acknowledged that the applicant satisfied the eligibility requirements regarding
engagement on one
or more separate contracts and continuous employment for at
least 12 months, but stated that “...
on the balance of probability, it
cannot be accepted that you have a reasonable expectation on ongoing employment
as is also required
matters were relied upon by Ms Lees in reaching this view. Firstly, contract
staff had been advised that only temporary contracts
could be provided due to
changes to storage and distribution services. These changes were identified as
the opening of the new Royal
Adelaide Hospital (nRAH) and the expected
implementation of supply chain reforms. These matters are dealt with below.
Ms Lees referred to the terms of the temporary contracts that expressly state
The renewal of the fixed term contract should not be perceived
as creating an expectation of further temporary employment by PSCM
expiry date of the
is convenient to note at this point that I do not accept that reliance on this
term of the contract is a valid reason to reject
the applicant’s
contention that he had a reasonable expectation of ongoing employment. The very
basis of the ‘election
to convert’ provision in cl 3.4 requires
certain criteria to be met which are independent of the terms of the temporary
To construe otherwise would be to render the ‘election to
convert’ provisions nugatory.
27 June 2016, United Voice sought a reconsideration of Ms Lees’ decision.
It was contended that, notwithstanding the foreshadowed
changes to storage and
distribution services identified by the employer, there were emerging employment
opportunities within the
centralised distribution store and under certain
Transforming Health initiatives. Ms Lees was advised that the applicant was
to work at other locations, in different positions, and to obtain
qualifications.
Quinton Swann, who was the Acting Executive Director, PSCM, at the time he
reconsidered the applicant’s election to convert
to permanent status. Mr
Swann concluded that the applicant could not satisfy the requirement that he has
a reasonable expectation
of ongoing employment. He referred to the explicit term
of the applicant’s contract that it should not be perceived as creating
expectation of further temporary employment and that this provision has been
reinforced to all temporary employees by PSCM management
on numerous occasions.
He stated that he was unable to accommodate the applicant’s request to
transfer to other work/locations
as he was engaged on a temporary contract to
fulfil the specific vacancy of Distribution Officer at the
the time, Mr Swann was in receipt of advice from the Human Resources department
that PSCM should consider certain matters when
deciding whether to convert the
applicant to permanent status, including that:
employees displaced by the opening of the nRAH should be given priority
placement in any available positions;
there are 26
other weekly paid temporary contract staff in PSCM who have been engaged on
temporary contracts for longer periods than
the applicant and “
of principles of fairness and equity, these staff should be given priority
consideration for any further contracts - if
The circumstances surrounding the applicant’s
engagement on temporary contracts
are several developments that are or were expected to occur in the future that
underpinned the applicant’s engagement
under a series of temporary
contracts. From 2012 a “direct to imprest system” was proposed to be
introduced. This system
involves the storage, picking and packing of bulk goods
at a centralised distribution centre which are then delivered to hospitals
“just-in-time” system. The bulk stores located at the individual
hospitals would be closed leading to a reduction
in the Distribution Officers
required at each
2014 a new procurement system (Oracle) was progressively introduced across sites
and was introduced at the RGH in 2015. Oracle
was the technology platform that
would support the direct to imprest system. The introduction of this system, and
the reduced number
of Distribution Officers that would be required, was the
rationale for the applicant’s first contract.
centre was not capable of supporting the proposed
direct to imprest system. A
Distribution Centre Investment Project (DCIP) was established to support the
necessary upgrades.
term of the applicant’s second contract, ending on 30 June 2015 was
determined as a result of a decision taken by PSCM to
synchronise the end dates
of all Distribution Officer temporary contracts, and was not related to any
particular event or the direct
to imprest system. There was an expectation by
applicant that a further temporary contract would be offered at or before the
expiry of the second contract.
opening of the nRAH and the closure of the RAH was cited as the rationale for
the third contract, ending April 2016. Warehousing
services at the nRAH are to
be undertaken by a private provider and accordingly there will be existing
permanent Distribution Officers
at the RAH who will need to be relocated to
other hospitals. The evidence of the employer’s witnesses was not
consistent as
to whether the closure of the RAH was relevant to the
applicant’s employment status but it was agreed that it would have no
direct impact on his employment. The applicant maintains that it is irrelevant.
Nonetheless, it is agreed that the subsequent delays
in the anticipated opening
date for the nRAH and closure of the RAH were the rationale for the fourth
contract ending in November
2016 and the current contract ending in June
some stage after October 2016, DCIP was put on hold, and at the time of the
hearing it was not known when, in what form or if this
project would
Significantly,
the RGH is proposed to close in December 2017 as part of the State
Government’s Transforming Health initiatives.
Mr Smith described this
eventuality as “highly
The applicant’s evidence
applicant was aware of the anticipated changes that formed the basis of the
temporary contracts that were offered. From early
2015 he was aware that the RGH
was to close in late 2017; the closure of the RAH would result in the relocation
of permanent employees
to other locations; and the direct to imprest system, if
and when introduced, would require a reduced number of Distribution
applicant acknowledged that he received no guarantee or indication from
management that his employment was likely to continue
beyond the expiry date of
each contract (other than in relation to the second contract). He was aware
however that no RAH employees
would be relocated to the RGH and that therefore
his employment would not be impacted by the closure.
applicant also understood that any permanent employees displaced as a result of
these developments had priority for placement
in any vacant positions. As a
temporary employee he understood that he could only obtain a permanent position
if there was a vacancy
after all displaced permanent employees were
applicant indicated that he expected to be relocated after the closure of the
RGH as there would be opportunities for further
employment at the Queen
Elizabeth Hospital (TQEH), the Lyell McEwin Hospital (LMH), FMC and at the
centralised distribution
that the number of temporary contract Distribution Officer positions across
metropolitan hospitals exceeded the number
of displaced permanent staff and that
there would be vacancies as a result of retirements and other
applicant accepted that this ‘expectation’ was not based on any
indications or undertakings from management; rather,
it was based on the fact
that he was a good employee and that he hoped they would look after him. He said
that FMC were happy with
the work he had undertaken when placed there from time
to time and he expected to be relocated
The evidence of Paul Smith
Smith prepared a document showing the current breakdown of staff by employment
status and classification as at three points in
time: the actual figures at the
time the document was prepared (February 2017); the anticipated figures as at
the opening of the
nRAH (expected June 2017 when the document was prepared); and
the anticipated figures on the implementation of the direct to imprest
(estimated to be between July 2017 and July
relevant data for Distribution Officers, is as follows:
Direct to imprest System
document showing a breakdown, by location, of the anticipated staff requirements
when the nRAH opens was also
following evidence in relation to the proposed placement of Distribution
Officers upon the implementation of Transforming Health
initiatives was provided
by Mr Smith:
There are two permanent Distribution
Officers in addition to the applicant’s temporary position. The permanent
positions will
be relocated when RGH closes.
There are six permanent Distribution Officers, five temporary
Distribution Officers and some agency staff. Three permanents have nominated
be relocated to FMC and one has already moved there on the departure of one of
the FMC temporary positions. The remaining three
permanent employees will be
relocated to TQEH and Gawler Health Service. Mr Smith proposed, although it has
not as yet been accepted,
that of the five temporary staff at the RAH, three
would relocate to other sites to replace agency staff and two would not be
Two temporary positions at FMC will go to make way for the two
permanent staff relocating from RAH. Other temporary contracts will
be continued
and a process will be undertaken to identify which employees would maintain a
temporary contract and which employees
would not be offered a further contract.
Hampstead Rehabilitation Centre
): This facility is planned
to close, although not in the immediate future. There is one permanent
Distribution Officer who will be
Smith’s evidence is that the rationale for the applicant’s first
contract was the expected transition to the direct
to imprest system. As the
logistical problems with the distribution centre became apparent, the rationale
for this contract fell
acknowledged that the closure of the RAH would not affect the applicant, since
the RGH was not an option for relocation of permanent
staff. It was likely that
the applicant’s contract would be renewed after June 2017 because the work
undertaken by the applicant
would still be required.
Smith stated that if the applicant was made permanent he would have to be
relocated when the RGH closed and this would remove a
potential position for a
displaced permanent Distribution Officer, unless a new position became
available. He conceded that it was
conceivable that the current staffing profile
may change between now and the date of closure of the RGH.
documents were attached to Mr Smith’s statement including minutes of the
“PSCM Consultative Forum” held
on 14 January 2016. The attendees at
this meeting included Mr Smith and representatives from unions including United
Voice. There
was an update on the work currently being undertaken on the DCIP
and advice that further temporary contracts to November 2016 will
be offered to
employees who were on temporary contracts expiring in April
minutes of a meeting of PSCM Stores Staff on 1 February 2016 attached to Mr
that he advised employees about the new contracts as
“Contracts will be issued to all existing staff on
temporary contracts with a current expiry of 16/4/16 - the original date
The new contracts will expire November 2016 exact date to be included in
contract offered to existing temporary contracted employees.
These contracts do
not guarantee ongoing employment and are subject to further review by PSCM on
the future fte numbers required
to operate at sites. The Health Distribution
Investment Review Project will also determine the final numbers to be kept at
to meet the new business system.”
minutes record Mr Smith’s advice to the employees that:
a number of
existing temporary contracts at FMC will expire with no new offer of a
the process for
identifying which current temporary employees would leave FMC was still to be
finalised and would be subject to consultation
with the relevant unions and
affected employees;
RAH staff would
not be relocated to the RGH or Hampstead Rehabilitation Centre.
The evidence of Quinton Swann
Swann identified that, in reconsidering the applicant’s election to
convert to permanent status, he took into account the
initial application and
consideration; subsequent correspondence between the parties; the relevant terms
of the Award; the circumstances
and duration of the applicant’s temporary
employment contracts; and the pending closure of the RGH.
significance in his consideration was the nature and impact of the pending
projects and the fact that the applicant had been kept
informed as to their
status through regular management briefings. He also considered that United
Voice had failed to advance any
grounds in support of its contention that the
applicant had a reasonable expectation of ongoing employment.
Swann maintained that:
there were other
employees who had been engaged on temporary contracts longer than the applicant
and that they should be given priority
for permanent status;
United Voice was
using the application for conversion of the applicant to permanent status as a
test case for other temporary contract
employees; and
the conversion
of the applicant would create a precedent that would be “financially and
operationally
undesirable”.
regard to this last point, Mr Swann indicated that unless there was a sufficient
‘buffer’ of temporary employees it
would likely result in excess
permanent employees who would be kept on in a supernumerary capacity. It was his
view that having a
pool of temporary employees enabled the workforce to be
reduced at different points in time as different eventualities
I understand Mr Swann’s evidence, the three dot points above reflected his
views but did not influence his decision, which
was made on the narrow issue of
whether the applicant had a reasonable expectation of ongoing employment. He
also stated that he
equated “an expectation of ongoing employment”
with “an expectation of permanent
employment”.
Swann assessed that if the DCIP proceeded it would most likely not have an
impact until early to mid-2018, but that the project
was currently on hold. He
stated that the closure of the RGH is dependent on the expansion of FMC and the
relocation of Glenside
Ward 17, but is still estimated to proceed in December
questioned about the acceptable duration of employment under a series of
temporary contracts, Mr Swann acknowledged that contracts
could not continue
without limit and that projects need to have a reasonably foreseeable end date.
However, he stated that PSCM could
not ignore the impact of the
Submissions
party provided a written Outline of Argument, supplemented by oral submissions
at the hearing.
United Voice
Blewett, for the applicant, addressed each of the three operational changes that
were identified by the employer as impacting on
PSCM and on the
applicant’s expectation of ongoing employment. In relation to the closure
of the RAH, he submitted that:
there would be
no direct impact on the applicant’s employment and Mr Smith conceded that
the applicant’s employment would
continue beyond the closure of the
the closure
would have minimal impact on the number of temporary Distribution Officers
engaged with PSCM (38.6 FTE before the closure
and 34.1 FTE after the
there was a
proposal to relocate three temporary employees from the RAH. This is significant
to the applicant’s situation because
it indicates that the closure of the
RGH doesn’t automatically mean the loss of employment. This also goes to
the applicant’s
expectation that he would be relocated on the closure of
the RGH because he is a good employee.
relation to the direct to imprest model, Mr Blewett submitted that:
Swann’s evidence it was unlikely to have an impact until 2018; Mr Smith
considered that it would be 2018-2019;
the strategy was
never sufficiently advanced to enable an assessment of its impact;
the applicant
was not aware of DCIP at the time he made his election to convert to permanent
status. He understood that there was
an aspiration for a direct to imprest model
and that it would lead to a reduction in the number of temporary Distribution
Blewett acknowledged that the closure date of the RGH at the end of 2017 had
been consistent since its announcement. It was understood
that two permanent
Distribution Officers at RGH would be relocated at this time. However, he argued
this did not
mean that the applicant’s employment would automatically end at that time
and at best the closure of the RGH presented
a risk to the applicant’s
future employment;
there was no
barrier to relocating the applicant, especially in light of management
recognising that he was a good employee;
there would
still be a number of temporary Distribution Officers required at other sites at
the end of 2017 and it was reasonable
to assume that there would be a level of
turnover. Two positions were vacated between November 2016 and February
Blewett submitted that as a result of the February 2016 meeting with Mr Smith,
the applicant was aware that:
two temporary
Distribution Officers at FMC would not have their contracts renewed to make way
for displaced permanent Distribution
Officers from the RAH;
other temporary
Distribution Officer positions would remain and may potentially increase in
number as a result of the expansion of
FMC and increased bed capacity;
he would be
offered a further contract until November 2016 at the expiry of his current
contract and that this would not guarantee
any further contract after this
was submitted that the Commission needs to assess whether the applicant had a
reasonable expectation of ongoing employment as at
May 2016 based on what was
known to the applicant at that time and what he could reasonably expect to occur
in the future based on
what was known. In this regard Mr Blewett argued that the
applicant’s evidence that he held a “hope” of future
employment was semantics only and in any event, pertained to the period after
the closure of the RGH.
Blewett invited the Commission to make two findings. The first finding is that
the applicant had a reasonable expectation, in May
2016, that he would have
ongoing employment until the closure of the RGH. The second finding is that the
applicant, in May 2016,
had a reasonable expectation that he would secure
further work as a Distribution Officer upon the closure of the RGH.
second finding was open on the basis of the applicant’s belief that he was
a well-regarded employee and there would be a
substantial need for temporary
Distribution Officers at multiple sites at the time of closure of the RGH. Mr
Blewett argued that
while there remained a risk to his continued employment from
the direct to imprest model at some future point in time, the timing
indeterminate and the impact upon the workforce was not known. Accordingly, the
direct to imprest model did not present a risk
which was substantial enough to
undermine the applicant’s expectation of ongoing employment for a
significant period of time.
the event that the Commission concludes that only the first finding can be made,
it was argued that this still constitutes “ongoing
employment” for
the purpose of cl 3.4 of the Award and that such a conclusion is supported by
other clauses of the Award dealing
with similar subject matter. Mr Blewett
submitted that:
requires the election to convert to be made in the currency of the current
contract and in that context “ongoing
employment” means employment
continuing beyond the expiry of the current contract;
the period of
time contemplated by “ongoing employment” would not be minimal but
would not necessarily require employment
for an indefinite period;
always be some uncertainty on the part of a temporary employee about the
longevity of employment beyond the term of the
existing contract because it is a
temporary contract;
the evident
preference of the Award maker is for more secure tenures of employment and this
is also manifest in cl 3.2 and cl 3.3
of the Award concerning the
conversion of additional hours worked by a part time employee to permanent hours
and the conversion of
casual employees to permanent status, respectively.
the case of conversion from casual to permanent status, the eligibility
requirements include a “reasonable expectation of
employment” as well as a 12 month qualifying period during which the
engagement is on “a regular and systematic
basis”. In the case of
conversion of additional hours of a part time employee the requirements include
“a reasonable
expectation that the need to work such additional hours will
be ongoing” as well as a 12 month qualifying period.
Blewett argued that “ongoing employment” in these contexts would not
mean an expectation of the employment or the additional
hours continuing for a
period beyond a further 18 months, as the employer is seeking to apply in this
case. It would mean beyond
the expiry of the current individual contract, in the
case of a causal employee, or beyond the current period of the additional hours,
in the case of a part time employee.
contended that more secure tenures of employment is also the evident intent of
the government in respect to public sector employment,
which deprecates the use
of temporary contracts for an extended period of time. Section 45(3)(d) of the
Public Sector Act 2009
(the PS Act) provides that employment under one or
more fixed term contracts will not exceed a total of two years. While the
is not covered by the PS Act, the Government policy in relation to
weekly paid employees adopts this
acknowledging that Government policy documents are not determinative of the
present application, Mr Blewett argued that the
policy gives force to the
submission that ongoing employment in cl 3.4.4 of the Award means ongoing beyond
the expiry of the current
temporary contract.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent’s position is that the applicant did not have a reasonable
expectation of ongoing employment. This was the case
when he made the election
in May 2016 and in the months that followed while the matter was under
reconsideration and United Voice
was advocating on his behalf.
Keane, for the respondent, submitted that the test for “reasonable
expectation” is an objective one taking into account
all known factors. At
the time of the applicant’s election there were significant structural
changes underway which would reduce
the required number of Distribution
Officers. While there were delays in relation to some of these changes, such as
the date of closure
of the RAH, there was never any suggestion that the closure
would not proceed.
Keane contended that “ongoing employment” means more than a
temporary opportunity for a further period of employment
prior to the
implementation of imminent change.
argued that the applicant couldn’t have had a reasonable expectation of
employment at other sites given the structural changes
underway that would
impact on the required number of Distribution Officers. In any event, the
reasonable expectation must relate
to the current position held by the
applicant, that is, temporary Distribution Officer at the RGH, not the position
Keane contended that it cannot be correct that the expectation of ongoing
employment relates to an expectation of ongoing employment
in an alternative
position. This is supported by cl 3.4.9 of the Award which enables the employer,
if an application to convert to
permanent status is agreed, to identify
appropriate hours of duty and the appropriate configuration of hours of duty
having regard
to the previous pattern of employment during the 12 month
qualifying period.
addition, if the expectation of ongoing employment related to an alternative
position, then one or more other employees could base
their application for
permanency on the same position. It was argued that such an interpretation would
be unworkable in practice
and therefore cannot be correct.
Accordingly,
the reasonableness of the applicant’s expectation cannot be divorced from
his current position. As at May 2016,
the nRAH was due to open in November 2016,
the RGH was due to close in December 2017 and DCIP was on the table: all these
bear on the “reasonableness” of the applicant’s
expectation of ongoing employment. There would be no sense in dismissing
commercial realities and converting the applicant to permanent status only to
make him redundant.
test in the present case is that the expectation must be reasonable and must be
of ongoing employment. Mr Keane submitted that
“expectation” is more
than a hope and must be a strong belief, and it must be the worker’s
expectation at the relevant
time. Changes to the closure date of the RAH and the
delays with DCIP occurred after the time of the election and are not relevant
the applicant’s expectation at the relevant time.
reasonable expectation is not about possibilities, such as the possibility that
there may be a temporary vacancy elsewhere because
of natural attrition. There
needs to be a foundation for the belief that a further position will be
available; some encouragement
to believe that this is likely to occur.
Keane argued that it is not for the applicant’s advocate to construct a
reasonable expectation following an examination of
facts at the hearing and that
United Voice cannot retrospectively create an expectation on the part of the
applicant. The applicant
acknowledged a “hope” of being engaged
beyond the closure of the RGH, but he did not have an expectation of continued
employment beyond this event.
Keane contended that the meaning to be attributed to the term
“ongoing” is not defined and is to be taken from the
circumstances
and context in which it is assessed. “Ongoing” in the context of a
temporary employee’s expectation
of further employment will have a
different meaning to “ongoing” in the context of a casual
employee’s expectation
of further employment, because of the different
employment relationship.
clarified that the respondent doesn’t maintain that ongoing employment
equates to permanent employment, and to the extent
Mr Swann expressed a
contrary view he was in error. However the error is of no consequence in the
circumstances of this case in any
was submitted that the applicant’s position is probably no different to
many other temporary Distribution Officers with the
same or more service and
similar competence. It would not be appropriate for the applicant to get
preferential treatment over other
employees in a similar position.
Keane accepted that the applicant’s employment was probably safe until the
closure of the RGH but argued that he had no reasonable
expectation of
relocation after this event.
referring to the applicant’s initial election for conversion to permanent
noted that he referred to his engagement on an ongoing basis since February
2014, but did not provide any basis for his
expectation of ongoing employment
nor did he reference any of the structural changes. Similarly, the letter from
United Voice seeking
a reconsideration of the employer’s decision failed
to address the issue of reasonable expectation and instead focussed on
fairness and the possibility of positions for the applicant going forward.
this case there is a foreseeable end date to the employment and the
applicant’s future employment was always constrained
by the closure of the
RGH and other developments. Mr Keane submitted that this is not a case where the
employer has exercised its
discretion arbitrarily; the evidence of Mr Smith in
particular makes clear that the employer is doing its best to keep on top of
staffing levels as a result of the structural changes and to keep employees
informed. The applicant had and continues to have an
entitlement to apply for
vacant positions.
if the respondent is wrong in relation to the applicant’s reasonable
expectation, Mr Keane contended that the respondent
had reasonable grounds on
which to refuse the application for permanent status as a result of the
following operational changes:
the closure of
the RAH and the requirement to relocate permanent Distribution Officers;
the prospective
closure of the RGH and the requirement to relocate permanent Distribution
the proposed
direct to imprest system which will reduce the number of Distribution Officers
required by the Department;
the need to
accommodate permanent employees.
Submissions in reply
reply, Mr Blewett submitted that:
the requirement
to have “a reasonable expectation of ongoing employment” entails the
applicant forming a combined view
account the facts before and after December 2017. It is natural to have a
greater degree
of belief in the shorter term prospects and less certainty about
the longer term prospects of ongoing employment. When the applicant
convert to permanent status in May 2016, he stated that it could be reasonably
expected that there will be a need for
him to work full time hours on an ongoing
it is not open
to the employer to argue that it had reasonable grounds to refuse the
applicant’s request; the case has been
approached on the basis that the
applicant either did or did not have a reasonable expectation of ongoing
employment;
reconsideration of the application for conversion was attended by errors: he
equated an expectation of ongoing employment
with an expectation of permanent
employment; he proceeded on the basis that there had been numerous discussions
involving the applicant
only been one discussion in February 2016; he approached his consideration on
the basis that granting the claim would open the floodgates for further claims
by other temporary employees; and he thought the closure
of the RAH was relevant
to the applicant’s employment;
the applicant
was engaged as a Distribution Officer with PSCM and his engagement was not
confined to RGH. The applicant worked at
FMC from time to time and his contract
enabled the employer to transfer his employment to other metropolitan hospitals.
Having structured
the position with this flexibility for the employer’s
benefit, it cannot now disavow the basis on which the applicant was engaged
considering his application for conversion;
the respondent
decided to engage nearly 50% of its workforce on temporary contracts and while
this may have been justified in the
circumstances it also brings with it an
entitlement for these employees to seek permanent status.
Consideration
scheme of cl 3.4 of the Award, as it pertains to the conversion of temporary
employees to permanent status, enables an “eligible”
employee to “elect” to be converted. A temporary employee is
“eligible” if they satisfy the three
criteria in cl 3.4.4. An
election to convert to permanent status by an eligible employee may result in,
but does not guarantee, conversion
to permanent status. The employer retains the
right to refuse an election from an eligible employee, but it is implicit in cl
that the grounds on which such an election is refused must be
reasonable.
the present matter, the cases of both sides were limited to whether the
applicant satisfied the eligibility criteria of “a
reasonable expectation
of ongoing employment”.
“reasonable expectation of ongoing employment” must be held by the
employee at the time of making the election for
conversion to permanent status.
The test of whether an expectation is reasonable is an objective one, to be
based on the facts and
other relevant circumstances known to the applicant at
employment” is not the same as permanent employment in the context of cl
3.4 of the Award. The “reasonable
expectation of ongoing
employment”, is one of the requirements to be met in order to be eligible
to elect to convert to permanent
employment, i.e. permanent employment is the
outcome, not the requirement.
85 I am of the view that “ongoing” employment means
“continuing” employment. This is consistent with the
meaning of the
and its use
elsewhere within the Award. For example, cl 9.3.1.4, dealing with the
entitlement of eligible casual employees to parental
leave, defines an eligible
casual employee by reference to employment on a regular and systematic basis for
“several periods
of employment” or on a regular and systematic basis
for an “ongoing period of
employment”.
view of cl 3.4.6, which requires that an election to convert to permanent status
must be made during the currency of the temporary
contract, a reasonable
expectation of ongoing employment means a reasonable expectation of continuing
employment beyond the expiry
of the employee’s current contract. There is
no reason to import any additional requirements or qualifications in relation
the expected duration of the ongoing employment other than that which the
particular circumstances may necessitate in any given
to Mr Blewett’s submission, in my view, the use of the term
“reasonable expectation of ongoing employment”
in cl 3.3 of the
Award concerning the conversion of a casual employee to permanent status, does
not mean ongoing employment beyond
the current, single casual engagement. The
structure of this clause is concerned not only with a qualifying period of 12
months service
but with a particular pattern of engagement during this period.
In this context I consider that a reasonable expectation of ongoing
means an expectation that the employment would continue on the same or similar
is consistent with the view that the reasonable expectation of ongoing
employment in cl 3.4 pertains to ongoing employment on
temporary contracts as
per the 12 month qualifying period. In each case, the stated basis of the
employment, whether as a casual
employee or as a temporary contract employee
with an identified end date, serves only to establish the application of cl 3.3
3.4 as the case may be. In both cases the relevant clause looks beyond the
employer’s characterisation of the employment relationship.
at May 2016, the applicant’s current contract expired in November that
year in accordance with the expected closure date
of the RAH, notwithstanding
that he had been advised that no permanent staff from the RAH would be relocated
to the RGH. I interpose
that cl 3.4.3 enables the employer to offer a new fixed
term contract “...
for the period
the employee is
” and it is arguable that a correct application of this
provision would have led to a temporary contract for the applicant that
until the closure of the RGH. It appears that the synchronisation of the end
dates of all temporary contracts in 2015 may
have also synchronised the stated
basis for the end date. In any event, the applicant held a reasonable
expectation that his employment
would continue beyond November 2016.
as at May 2016, the applicant’s most recent advice about the planned
direct to imprest model was that this project would
determine the final numbers
of Distribution Officers required at each site. This generalised advice had been
given to the applicant
since his first contract over two years earlier. His
contract in May 2016 was not linked to the implementation of the direct to
model and no time frames for implementation of this model had been
these circumstances I do not regard this matter to be of sufficient certainty to
constitute an event that would limit or curtail
the applicant’s
expectation of ongoing employment as at May 2016. A workable operational
facility had yet to be developed;
once it was developed the numbers of
FTE’s required would have to be determined; once the FTE requirement was
determined there
would be a process of consultation with affected employees and
relevant unions; and then a further process would be undertaken to
required positions at the centralised distribution facility. At best, the direct
to imprest system was a future event with
an indeterminate date, which had only
a remote likelihood of being introduced before the RGH closed.
other matter which was known to the applicant as at May 2016 was the closure of
the RGH in late 2017. The applicant had known
since February 2015 that his
position at the RGH would cease at that time.
applicant’s knowledge, as at May 2016, of events and employment
opportunities beyond the closure of the RGH was less certain.
I find that he was
aware that:
the opportunity
for continued employment was subject to the existence of a vacant temporary or
permanent position after the relocation
of permanent employees displaced by the
closure of the RAH and RGH and other Transforming Health initiatives;
there would be
the continuing engagement of temporary employees at other sites including FMC,
TQEH, WCH and LMH, with a possible increased
requirement for Distribution
Officers at FMC; and
there was likely
to be a reduction in overall Distribution Officer positions when the direct to
imprest system was introduced.
terms of the applicant’s engagement may also be relevant in considering
his expectation or otherwise in relation to ongoing
employment beyond the
closure of the RGH. It is agreed that the position he filled, and is filling is
that of temporary Distribution
Officer at the
contract of employment is not restricted in this way. For example, the offer of
employment for the fourth contract, in operation
as at the date of the
applicant’s election, is an offer of temporary employment in the role of
Distribution Officer in
Neither the
offer of employment, or the specific terms and conditions set out in a document
attached to the offer, makes mention
of the location of the position.
Role Description provided to the applicant for the position of Distribution
Officer, was a generic one, which includes the following
condition”:
“Depending on work requirements the
incumbent may be transferred to other locations across SA Health to perform work
appropriate
to classification, skills and capabilities either on a permanent or
temporary basis subject to the relevant provisions of the
Public Sector Act
for Public Sector employees or the
SA Health (Health Care Act)
Human Resources Manual
[HR Manual] for Health Care Act
employees.”
Accordingly,
there are several factors that weigh in support of the applicant’s
argument that his position was WHA 4 temporary
Distribution Officer with PSCM. I
note that the 12 month qualifying period in cl 3.4.4 is not restricted to
employment in the same
position and cl 3.4.9(b) of the Award contemplates that
the qualifying period may be served in different positions where the temporary
employment is based around fixed term “one-off” projects. This leads
to a conclusion that the ongoing employment does
not necessarily have to be in
the same position as that held at the point of election and it is not difficult
to imagine situations
which justify such a conclusion. The circumstances of each
case will need to be taken into account and in the present matter I consider
that the reasonable expectation of ongoing employment is not necessarily limited
to the Distribution Officer position at the RGH.
such as the age profile of the relevant workforce and the likelihood of
vacancies arising through natural attrition; the number
of FTE temporary
Distribution Officer positions that will remain after the closure of the RAH;
and the applicant’s work ethic,
are matters that increase the likelihood
that he may find employment elsewhere within PSCM. These factors must be must be
against the applicant’s knowledge of the potential impact of the
direct to imprest model as understood in May 2016.
applicant had in excess of two years’ employment at May 2016 and a
reasonable expectation of ongoing employment for a further
18 months. The policy documents applicable to weekly paid employees in the
public sector concerning fixed term contracts
evince an intention that such
contracts will be limited in their combined duration.
is limited case law and discussion around the use of temporary contracts that is
of assistance. It is clear that such contracts
can be legitimately used to meet
the operational requirements of the employer. Temporary contracts are not to be
used as a mechanism
to circumvent the benefits and legal entitlements that
attach to ongoing employment, including access to statutory unfair dismissal
provisions and potential redundancy benefits.
law which deals with a “reasonable expectation of ongoing
employment” generally concerns the eligibility of a casual
employee to
access the unfair dismissal jurisdiction of the Commission and the equivalent
The relevant legislative provisions
in the State and Commonwealth are based on establishing that past employment for
the requisite
period was on a regular and systematic basis and that there is a
reasonable expectation of ongoing
employment.
my view the reasoning in
decisions which all concluded that the casual employees had a reasonable
expectation of ongoing employment,
can be distinguished from the approach
to be taken in the present case. The requirement for a reasonable expectation of
ongoing employment
on the part of a casual employee seeking to access the unfair
dismissal jurisdiction, is directed to whether there is a termination
initiative of the employer, not to the proper characterisation of the
relationship. As such, the period of the “ongoing
employment” beyond
the event of the dismissal is of limited if any significance in these
Clarke v Mid North Coast Health Service
employee was engaged under a series of fixed term contracts, however the
circumstances in
bear little relationship to the present matter
beyond this fact. Commissioner Cambridge concluded that there was no legitimate
for the contracts; they were not observed in practice; and the employer
utilised the fixed term contracts as a device to misrepresent
the true nature of
the employment relationship. In contrast, I am satisfied that the employer in
the present case has at all times
acted in good faith and observed the terms of
the temporary contracts.
employer, as at February 2017 had 46 FTE permanent Distribution Officers and
38.6 FTE temporary Distribution Officers. It is apparent
that the employer
structured its workforce with a high proportion of temporary employment to take
into account the impact of the
various Transforming Health initiatives as well
as the proposed direct to imprest system. In particular, PSCM sought a level of
employment that could make way for displaced permanent employees,
which was its priority. The evidence suggests that the applicant’s
election for conversion to permanent status was resisted by the employer, in
part, on the basis that it would reduce the available
positions for displaced
permanent employees.
cases presented by the parties focussed on whether the applicant had a
reasonable expectation of ongoing employment and I am not
required to consider
whether the employer had reasonable grounds to refuse the applicant’s
conversion to permanent status.
In my view, the broader issue around the use of
temporary contracts as a means of prioritising existing permanent employment in
circumstances
of actual and potential significant operational change, raises
important issues which are worthy of separate consideration. Such
including the implications for other temporary and permanent Distribution
Officers of any conversion to permanent status
for the applicant, are not
relevant to his eligibility under cl 3.4.4 of the Award.
the circumstances of this case, the applicant had a reasonable expectation of
ongoing employment until December 2017, with a realistic
possibility of ongoing
employment for a period beyond that date. I conclude that this is sufficient to
satisfy the eligibility requirement
in cl 3.4.4 of the Award.
noted, cl 3.4 does not explicitly qualify the period of ongoing employment but
is impliedly qualified to mean ongoing employment
beyond the expiry of the
current contract. It must also mean a reasonable expectation of ongoing
employment under one or more temporary
contracts. At May 2016, the applicant
could reasonably expect ongoing employment under at least one further temporary
acknowledged by Mr Swann, even in circumstances where the relevant position has
a known ‘end date’, the duration of
the temporary employment must
still have an element of reasonableness to
This must be
correct having regard to the government’s policy settings concerning
temporary employment. It is also self-evident
that the more distant the
‘defining event’ that will signal the end of the current position,
the more likely it is that
circumstances will change including the composition
and nature of the relevant workforce and the opportunities for alternative
employment.
That is, the more distant the event, the less likely that it will
necessarily lead to the end of the employment.
it is correct that, as Mr Keane put it, the applicant’s employment horizon
was always constrained by the RGH closure,
this was not an imminent event in May
applicant seeks the following order of the Commission:
from 14 days after the date of this Order, the Respondent shall convert the
Applicant’s fixed term contract to
a permanent full-time contract on
similar terms, or as agreed, in accordance with clause 3.4 of the
Australian Government Health Etc. Ancillary Employees Award
the case proceeded on the basis that the only outstanding issue bearing on the
applicant’s conversion to permanent status
was his eligibility under cl
3.4.4 of the Award, the order as sought is issued with this decision.
view of my observation in para 104, above, and the potential for further
applications for permanent status by temporary Distribution
Officers within
PSCM, it would be useful for the parties to give some consideration to, and to
discuss, the broader processes underway
in storage and distribution services. I
acknowledge that these discussions will be facilitated once the fate and/or form
are determined.
The Industrial Relations Commission of South Australia hereby Orders:
on and from 14 days after the date of this Order, the Respondent shall convert
the Applicant’s fixed term contract to a permanent
full-time contract on
similar terms, or as agreed, in accordance with clause 3.4 of the
Australian Government Health Etc. Ancillary Employees Award
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
It is the practice of this Commission to publish its reasons for decision in
full on the Internet. If any party or person contends
that these reasons for
decision should not be published in full the party or person must make an
application within seven days of
the delivery of these reasons. The application
shall be by an Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should
addressed to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within
the time specified these reasons will be published
in accordance with the
Commission’s usual practice.
Section 4(1)(a)
Fair Work Act 1994
; Reg 4(c) of the
Fair Work (General)
Regulations
Ex R5 Annex
Ex R5 Annex
Ex R5 Annex
Ex R5 Annex
Ex R5 Annex
Ex R1 at paras 48,
paras 12, 13; tr
An earlier document prepared in November 2016 was also admitted (Ex R2).
Ex R1 Annex
Ex R5 at [11.10] and [11.17]; tr
73, 77, 81.
Conditions of Employment for Weekly Paid Employees
2013; Ex A5:
Commissioner’s Determination 1:
Merit, Engagement, Assignment of Duties
and Transfer of Non-Executive Employees
, 1 September
Shorter Oxford Dictionary
defines ongoing (
in progress, continuous, current.
phrasing is used in cl 3.3 of the Award. “Ongoing” also appears in
the Award level definitions in cls 1.7.5,
1.7.6, 1.7.7, 1.7.8 in the phrase
“an opportunity to participate in ongoing skills
Save for the limited work he performed on an
basis at FMC.
Ex R1 Annex
105A(2)(b)(ii) of the Act;
Section 384(2)(a)
Fair Work Act 2009
Gollan v Rural City of Murray Bridge
[2003] SAIRComm
v St Vincent Gulf Fisheries and Investments Pty Ltd
[2003] SAIRComm 54.
and Others v Australian Medical Deputising Service Pty Ltd
Print I.20/1999,
28 April 1999.
Matter No. IRC 4263 of 1998, 1 October
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (320 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter