URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASC/2025/169.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:05:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SAUTH THI v POLICE [2025] SASC 169 (8 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Magistrates Appeal: Criminal)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
SAUTH THI v POLICE
[2025] SASC 169
Judgment of the Honourable
Justice Gray
8 October 2025
MAGISTRATES - APPEAL AND REVIEW - SOUTH AUSTRALIA - APPEAL TO SUPREME
CRIMINAL LAW - APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - APPEAL AGAINST SENTENCE - GROUNDS
FOR INTERFERENCE - SENTENCE MANIFESTLY EXCESSIVE OR INADEQUATE
CRIMINAL LAW - SENTENCE - RELEVANT FACTORS
CRIMINAL LAW - SENTENCE - SENTENCING PROCEDURE - MATERIAL RELEVANT FOR
DETERMINING APPROPRIATE SENTENCE - VICTIM IMPACT STATEMENTS
CRIMINAL LAW - SENTENCE - SENTENCING ORDERS - CUSTODIAL ORDERS - HOME
DETENTION ORDERS
CRIMINAL LAW - SENTENCE - SENTENCING ORDERS - NON-CUSTODIAL ORDERS -
SUSPENDED SENTENCE OF IMPRISONMENT
This is an appeal against a sentence imposed by a magistrate on 22 May 2025
in respect of three counts of aggravated assault, contrary
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA). Two counts of assault were
against one complainant, and the remaining count against another complainant.
Both complainants
were, at the relevant times, in a relationship with the
The appellant was sentenced to imprisonment for 13 months and 18 days, with a
non-parole period of 3 months to be served in custody.
The appellant complains that numerous process errors were made in fixing
sentence, including,
, the regard that the learned Magistrate
to uncharged acts referred to in a victim impact statement of the second
complainant. The
sentence is said to be manifestly excessive and that it ought
to have been suspended, or, alternatively, ordered to be served on
The respondent conceded error, but, notwithstanding the process errors,
submitted that the sentence was not manifestly excessive and
was appropriate in
all the circumstances, save that a reduction on account of the time spent in
custody should now be made.
Held, allowing the appeal and resentencing:
provisions of the
Sentencing Act 2017
(SA) make plain that a sentencing
court must receive a victim impact statement as presented by a victim, and it
then falls to the
sentencing court to have regard to only relevant material: at
2. On a re-exercise of the sentencing discretion:
2.1. A sentence of imprisonment is the only appropriate penalty: at [41];
2.2. Notwithstanding the youth of the appellant, his rehabilitative efforts,
and his lack of antecedent history, given the seriousness
of the offending,
there is not good reason to suspend the sentence: at [60]; and,
2.3. Imposition of a home detention order meets the punitive and deterrent
aims of sentencing, as well as promoting rehabilitation
of the appellant, and,
in light of the circumstances of this case, is appropriate and would not affect
public confidence in the administration
of justice: at [67].
The appellant is resentenced as follows:
1. A sentence of imprisonment of 9 months and 14 days is imposed;
2. No non-parole period is fixed under
s 47(5)(a)(i)
Sentencing Act
sentence is to be served pursuant to a home detention order, imposed under
Sentencing Act 2017
(SA), commencing 8 October
Observations as to the use of victim impact statements made:
at [17]-[23].
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Legislation Interpretation Act 2021
Magistrates Court Act
Sentencing Act 2017
Victims of Crimes Act 2001
(SA) s 10, referred to.
[2000] SASC 259
(2000) 77 SASR 469
Attorney-General
(SA) v Tichy
(1982) 30 SASR 84
R v Bakewell
(New South Wales Court
of Criminal Appeal, Gleeson CJ, McInerney and Studdert JJ, 27 June 1996);
Chow v Director of Public Prosecutions
(1992) 28 NSWLR 593
[1981] HCA 31
(1981) 147 CLR 383
[2011] SASCFC
(2011) 111 SASR 245
Donnelly v Police (SA)
Elliot v Harris (No
(1976) 13 SASR 516
[2006] SASC 18
R v Franceschini
[2015] SASCFC 116
(2015) 123 SASR 396
Green v The Queen; Quinn v The
[2011] HCA 49
(2011) 244 CLR 462
[2005] NSWCCA 282
[1999] NSWCCA 111
; (1999) 46 NSWLR 346;
R v Horstmann
[2010] SASC 103
Josefski v The Queen
[2010] NSWCCA 41
(2010) 217 A
[2003] SASC 237
R v Kreutzer
[2013] SASCFC
Lane v The Queen
[2020] SASCFC 82
R v Liddy (No 2)
(2002) 84 SASR 231
Miller v The Queen
[2014] NSWCCA 34
[1998] 4 VR 235
[1992] FCA 626
(1992) 64 A Crim R 381
Porter v The
[2008] NSWCCA 145
PWB v The Queen
[2011] NSWCCA 84
A Crim R 305
Rendic v The Queen
[2021] SASCA 23
(2021) 138 SASR 214
R v Schultz
[2010] SASCFC 47
[2014] SASCFC 131
Siganto v the Queen
[1998] HCA 74
; (1988) 194 CLR 656;
Police (SA)
[2022] SASC 64
[2007] NSWCCA 269
[1971] VicRp 16
[1971] VR 147
Wood v Samuels
(1974) 8 SASR 465
R v Zefi; R v
[2017] SASCFC 121
(2017) 129 SASR 161
, considered.
SAUTH THI v POLICE
[2025] SASC 169
Criminal: Magistrates Appeal
Introduction
matter concerns an appeal against sentence. The appellant contends that the
learned Magistrate made a number of process errors
in imposing sentence. The
appellant contends that these errors require that the appeal be allowed, the
sentence quashed, and the
appellant resentenced.
respondent concedes that there were process errors in the sentencing process and
that this Court should resentence the
Those process errors
, the regard that the learned Magistrate had to the
victim impact statements, including regard had to uncharged acts which were
to in the victim impact statement of the second complainant.
parties differed in their submissions as to the appropriate exercise of the
discretion on resentence. The appellant submitted
that whilst a term of
imprisonment may be imposed, the sentence should be suspended, or in the
alternative, the appellant should
be permitted to serve his sentence of
imprisonment on home detention. The respondent submitted that on a re-exercise
of the sentencing
discretion a similar sentence as that imposed by the learned
Magistrate should be imposed.
learned Magistrate considered both suspension and entrance into a home detention
order but deemed that good reason did not exist
to warrant suspension, and that
it would affect public confidence in the administration of justice if the
appellant was permitted
to serve the term of imprisonment on home detention. The
learned Magistrate considered the appellant needed to spend time in custody
having regard to the gravity of the offending. A head sentence of 13 months and
18 days’ imprisonment was imposed, with a non-parole
period of 3 months,
both commencing from the date of sentence.
Background and
submissions
appellant entered pleas of guilty in the Mount Barker Magistrates Court in
relation to aggravated assaults against two separate
complainants, whom I will
refer to as the first complainant and the second complainant. Each of those
offences was aggravated by
virtue of the fact that the appellant was, or was
formerly, in a relationship with each complainant. Two informations were before
the Court containing charges against the appellant.
first information, dated 4 March 2024, alleged five offences of aggravated
assault against the first complainant. A sixth count
of aggravated assault was
later added. The appellant entered pleas of guilty to two counts of aggravated
assault alleged to have
taken place on 15 November 2021 and 26 January
2022. The remaining counts were
second information, dated 13 February 2024, charged the appellant with an
offence of assault, which was subsequently amended
to include a second,
alternative charge of aggravated assault relating to the same conduct on
9 October 2022. A plea of guilty was
entered to the aggravated assault
and the basic assault was withdrawn on 16 August 2024. This offending was in
relation to the second
complainant.
learned Magistrate imposed sentence on 22 May 2025. The learned Magistrate
noted that the appellant’s behaviour was violent,
aggressive and abusive
toward the first complainant, and the appellant behaved in the same way toward
the second complainant. Her
Honour also took into account the uncharged acts
which were withdrawn as counts against the appellant, to deprive the appellant
the leniency he may have otherwise been afforded for an isolated occasion of
learned Magistrate heard the victim impact statements of both the first
complainant and the second complainant. Her Honour remarked
complainants were terrified of the appellant and brave for reporting the matters
to police, and that he had threatened both
of their friends and family members.
Her Honour also stated that both complainants were lucky to have left their
relationships with
the appellant.
appellant submitted that a victim can place whatever matters they wish to in a
victim impact statement, but it was the duty of
the sentencing court to take
into account only relevant matters, and to disregard anything which ought not
bear upon sentence.
The appellant
submitted that the learned Magistrate, in considering that the appellant had
threatened the safety of the family and
friends of the second complainant, took
into account an irrelevant
the circumstances of this case, the respondent conceded that the uncharged acts
or allegations contained in the victim impact
statement of the second
complainant, relating to threats upon family and friends, and the perpetuation
of ongoing abuse against that
complainant, ought not have been taken into
account by the learned Magistrate.
Further, it was conceded that the inclusion of what amounted to uncharged
offending contained within the victim impact statement,
which was not agreed
between parties, in circumstances where the victim impact statement was not
provided in advance to the appellant’s
solicitor, was
inappropriate.
Submissions on resentence
appellant submits that the sentence imposed on him was manifestly excessive in
the circumstances. There appears to be no complaint
as to the imposition of a
term of imprisonment, rather, it was submitted that the learned Magistrate ought
to have found that there
was good reason to suspend the sentence. In the
alternative, it is submitted there is a very strong case to order that the
serve the sentence of imprisonment pursuant to a home detention order.
The appellant submits that any sentence imposed should be
reduced by seven days
taking into account time spent in custody and a further reduction should be
imposed allowing for time spent
on home detention bail. The appellant indicates
that in the event of a term of imprisonment being imposed in excess of 12 months
then a non-parole period will need to be
respondent submits that on resentence the sentencing discretion should be
re-exercised, but that the exercise of that discretion
should yield the same
sentencing outcome, save for the reduction of seven days taken into account for
time spent in
Consideration
a process error is established, the appellate court should resentence or remit,
unless the appellate court considers, having
regard to the re-exercise of the
sentencing discretion, that the sentence imposed by the sentencing court was
appropriate, despite
the presence of an
For the reasons that
follow, I differ in my view as to the appropriate sentence to impose on
resentence.
therefore must consider whether to resentence or remit the matter. In my view,
it is appropriate in the interests of finality of
litigation and the interests
of justice to resentence the appellant.
imposing sentence, I take into account all of the submissions referred to by the
parties on resentence. I also have regard to
the material provided to the Court
concerning resentence. I have had regard to the Home Detention Order
Suitability Report and to
the evidence of the author of that report,
particularly in relation to the question of the suitability of home
to victim impact statements
victim of an offence is entitled to have injury, loss or damage suffered as a
result of an offence considered by a sentencing court
before passing
A central matter
raised at the hearing of this appeal concerns the regard that this Court should
have to the victim impact statement
submitted by each complainant in the lower
A purpose of the
Sentencing Act 2017
(SA) (‘the Act’) is to
provide the mechanism for a voice to be given to victims in the sentencing
process. In my view,
this legislative intent is clear from an ordinary reading
of the statutory provisions.
Section 16(1c) of the Act
provides that a victim impact statement should
be received by the Court although material contained in the statement may be
to the sentencing process. The statutory language also makes clear
that nothing in the section requires a court to have regard to
material in determining
14(1) of the Act, on an ordinary reading of the wording of that provision, read
in the context of other relevant legislative
provisions,
indicates that,
in addition to providing a voice to victims in the sentencing process, a victim
impact statement may inform a sentencing
court about the impact of the injury,
and any loss or damage suffered by the victim as a result of a defendant’s
criminal conduct
on the victim and any of the victim’s family.
The purposes of a victim impact statement as described above, based upon an
ordinary reading of the statutory
provisions,
is consistent with
legislative intent expressed in the second reading speech of the Honourable Kyam
impact statements give victims of crime the important opportunity to provide a
sentencing court with a personal statement about
the impact of injury, loss or
damage suffered by them as a result of that crime. These statements may be
considered by the court
when determining the sentence for an offence and often
have a significant restorative and therapeutic value for victims of crime.
provisions of the Act are not prescriptive as to how a victim impact statement
is to be taken into account.
The impact of an injury, and the impact of loss or damage caused by a
defendant’s criminal conduct at common law have always
been regarded as
relevant matters for a court to consider in the exercise of the sentencing
discretion.
Gleeson CJ, Gummow,
Hayne and Callinan JJ in
Siganto v The Queen
The undoubted
proposition that a sentencing judge is entitled to have regard to the harm done
to the victim by the commission of the
matters inform a sentencing court’s discretion concerning the gravity and
impact of the criminal conduct. The legislative
provisions are consistent with
and do not derogate from the common law
principles.
A sentencing court
is entitled at common law to consider the damage, harm or loss occasioned to the
victim, but cannot take into
account circumstances of aggravation which would
have warranted a conviction for a more serious
A sentencing court
would generally, in imposing sentence, only have regard to the consequences of
an offence that were intended
or could reasonably have been
matters referred to in a victim impact statement can, also, for example, inform
the sentencing court about the seriousness of
the offence and the appropriate
nature of any conditions to be imposed, such as, a term of a bond or a condition
of a home detention
Victim impact statements will, in most cases, only be relevant to the extent
that they concern the factual basis upon which an offender
The provisions of
make clear that a sentencing court must receive a victim’s
statement, even if the statement contains other irrelevant
have had regard to the impact of the injury, loss and damage suffered by both
complainants resulting from the appellant’s
admitted criminal conduct
referred to in both complainants’ victim impact statements.
respect of the victim impact statement made by the first complainant, I note in
particular that the first complainant was in a
1-year relationship with the
appellant which commenced when she was aged 16 years, and that that
relationship took away her happiness
and her confidence. She experienced
significant fear of the appellant. Her mental health has been extremely
affected as a result
of the offending, and she encounters trust issues,
particularly with other relationships. These issues followed her into her
relationship. The offending also left her with significant physical
injuries which require ongoing treatment and continue to cause
respect of the victim impact statement made by the second complainant, I note
that the offending against her led to her physically
sustaining a burn and has
specifically caused her great stress and fear of the appellant. The stress
placed upon her has led to
stress upon her family as they have tried to support
her in the aftermath of the offending.
The offending
appellant is to be sentenced for three offences of assault contrary to
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA). Each offence is
an aggravated form of the offence pursuant to
section 5AA(1)(g)
complainant was a person with whom the appellant was, or was formerly, in a
relationship. The maximum penalty for each offence
is three years’
imprisonment.
Two offences were
committed against the first complainant; the first on 15 November 2021 at
Andrews Farm, and the second on 26 January
2022 at Gumeracha. A third
offence was committed against the second complainant on 9 October 2022 at
applicable maximum discount on account of the appellant’s plea of guilty
impose sentence on the basis of the following agreed factual
first instance of offending against the first complainant took place at the
appellant’s house in Andrews Farm on 15 November
The first complainant and
the appellant had an argument over dinner that the first complainant had made.
The appellant grabbed
the first complainant around the waist, lifted her up off
the ground, and threw her onto the tiled floor. She experienced pain,
was crying as a result. The first complainant got up and pushed the appellant
to get him away from her as he was standing
over her but somehow, she ended up
back on the ground. She was on the ground when the appellant began to kick her
in the legs, hip
and abdomen. The first complainant curled up into a foetal
position and began to cry. She states that once she felt the kicking
stop, she yelled at the appellant. The appellant smashed her phone on the
ground. He walked up to her and grabbed her
by the hair and dragged her by the
hair across the floor for about five minutes. The first complainant got up
and walked away once
the appellant let go. She began to pack her bag to leave.
The appellant pushed her into a wardrobe door. He held her against the
stop her from leaving but she managed to push the appellant off and leave
shortly after. The first complainant experienced
some bruising and sought
medical treatment in relation to that
second offence against the first complainant took place on
26 January 2022. The appellant contacted the first complainant on
that day to say her belongings were ready for collection from his address in
Gumeracha. When she arrived the first complainant grabbed
her belongings. As
she was trying to leave in her car, the appellant grabbed her keys and phone and
hit her in the face. This caused
her lip to split and
was part of the agreed factual basis that the offending of 15 November 2021
and 26 January 2022 were not isolated incidents of
violence. They occurred
in the course of a relationship between the appellant and the first complainant,
which relationship extended
from at least October 2021 until February 2022 and
in which there were other incidents of violence.
offending against the second complainant occurred on 9 October 2022 at Gumeracha
at the appellant’s house.
On that night, the second complainant argued with the appellant about her
visiting friends. During the argument the appellant grabbed
both of the second
complainant’s arms by the wrists and pushed her towards and onto the bed
in his bedroom. He then held her
down. There was a heater beside the bed. It
was switched on. Whilst holding her down and during the scuffle, the second
complainant’s
right leg hit the heater which was very painful. It caused
some redness. It did not cause a big burn but there was some redness
The second complainant eventually managed to push the appellant away with her
free arm. She ended up on the floor on
the other side of the bed. The
appellant got on top of her so she could not move and pinned her with both hands
on her upper chest
and neck area. The second complainant struggled to breathe.
She panicked and could not recall how long she was pinned down but
“it felt like
in mitigation
was submitted that there are a number of protective factors which operate to
support the appellant in the future. These include
his gainful employment, his
lack of antecedent history, and that he enjoys a supportive family unit.
in mitigation was placed upon the appellant’s youth and consideration that
his life is ahead of him, and that this
offending is a brief departure from the
lifestyle he wishes to lead. Reference was also made to the passage of time
since the last
am satisfied that the appellant’s youth is relevant and mitigatory.
Rehabilitation should be a prominent consideration in
fixing sentence for young
As was stated by
R v Schultz
courts recognise that not only are the young and immature more prone to
ill-considered conduct, but youthful offenders also have
great potential for
rehabilitation. Further, incarceration may have an impairing, rather than
deterrent, effect.
particularly so in the case of a first
appellant submitted that he had engaged in a course of rehabilitative treatment,
namely the Abuse Prevention Program, which is
run through the Courts
Administration Authority. A report dated 19 May 2025 is before this Court
regarding the appellant’s
participation in that
report is favourable and supports the proposition that the appellant has engaged
in a course of meaningful rehabilitation. I
take that matter into account. The
only area of concern raised by the report is the appellant’s attendance.
There are numerous
instances of recorded non-attendance due to work commitments.
It is important at this juncture to note that the appellant’s
rehabilitation is reliant upon consistent engagement in programs, and that these
programs need to take priority over work commitments.
appellant relies upon a letter of apology to the complainants, and I take that
into account.
Sentence imposed upon resentence
impose penalties for each of the offences individually as set out below.
consider a sentence of imprisonment is the only appropriate penalty in the
circumstances of this case.
the first in time offence against the first complainant, I impose a sentence of
4 months’ imprisonment. I reduce that
by 10% on account of the
timing of the plea to 3 months and 19 days’ imprisonment.
the second in time offence against the first complainant, I impose a sentence of
5 months’ imprisonment. In my view, this
sentence reflects the
gravity of the escalation of the appellant’s conduct against the first
complainant. I reduce that by
10% on account of the timing of the appellants
plea to 4 months and 16 days’ imprisonment.
respect to these two offences against the first complainant, in the exercise of
my discretion, there should be some degree of
concurrency having regard to the
commonality of the victim, the conduct, and the general timeframe within which
the offences were
The two offences occurred in the context of a relationship. It was agreed that
this relationship was characterised by other incidences
of violence. This
operates to limit the leniency that the appellant may otherwise have been
direct that the sentence of imprisonment for the second offence be served
concurrently with the sentence for the first offence
to the extent of 1 month.
the offence against the second complainant, I impose a sentence of
5 months’ imprisonment. The sentence of imprisonment
for 5 months
takes into account the matters referred to in the course of these reasons and
reflects the severity of the offence which
was committed against a second
victim. I reduce that sentence by 10% on account of the timing of the plea to 4
months and 16 days’
imprisonment. I direct that the sentence be served
wholly cumulatively on the sentences imposed above.
results in a head sentence of 11 months and 21 days.
reduce the head sentence by 7 days on account of time spent in
to 11 months and 14
days’ imprisonment.
then apply a further reduction in sentence of 2 months on account of time spent
on home detention bail pending determination of
this appeal.
results in a head sentence of imprisonment of 9 months and 14 days.
regard to the principle of totality, standing back and considering the sentence
as a whole, I do not find that the sentence
is crushing, or that it does not
reflect the overall criminality of the conduct engaged in by the
As a result of the
sentence of imprisonment being less than 12 months, I do not fix a non-parole
appellant submits that there is good reason to suspend the sentence pursuant to
s 96 of the Act. In that regard, the appellant
relies upon the
appellant’s engagement in rehabilitative programs, his youth, his support
network and his stable employment.
respondent submits that the sentencing objectives of personal and general
deterrence will not be met by a suspended sentence
bond. It remains the
position of the respondent that an immediate custodial term of imprisonment is
appropriate.
a sentencing court is of the view that there is good reason to suspend depends
on an evaluative judgment of all of the circumstances,
including both the
circumstances of the offending and the circumstances of the appellant. The
seriousness of the offending is also
relevant in making such a
determination.
appellant comes before this Court with no criminal history. He is a first-time
offender, and this matter is his first interaction
with the criminal courts. He
was only 19 years old and had just turned 20 at the time of the most recent
offending. He is currently
23 years of age. He was and still is a young man.
As I have mentioned earlier in my
the youth of an
offender is a factor to be considered in mitigation.
have given very serious consideration to the question of whether the sentence
should be suspended. I note that a suspended sentence
remains a sentence of
imprisonment and a deterrent.
take into account in assessing the question of whether to suspend the sentence
all of the matters put by the appellant’s
counsel in support of the
submission that the sentence should be suspended. I consider both matters
relevant to the offence, as
well as those personal to the appellant.
offending is serious offending. It involves offences of violence against two
young women.
the good reason test calls for a consideration of all of the submissions
advanced by the appellant in favour of suspension,
those matters are not to be
considered in the abstract and divorced from the other circumstances of the
regard to the objective seriousness of this offending, involving domestic
violence against two young women, together with
the need for specific and
general deterrence, I am, in the exercise of my discretion, even having regard
to the appellant’s
youth and lack of prior engagement with the criminal
justice system and other matters put by his counsel, unable to find good reason
to suspend his sentence.
then turn to consider the question of whether the sentence should be served on
paramount consideration of a sentencing court when determining whether to make a
safety of the
A home detention
order must not be made if the making of such an order would or may affect public
confidence in the administration
have considered all of the matters referred to in the Home Detention Order
Suitability Report, and the evidence of the report writer.
Whilst, considering
all those matters together, they were not adverse to the potential of home
detention, they could not be said
to have been highly favourable.
premises at which the appellant seeks to reside upon this Court ordering the
sentence of imprisonment be served on home detention
is deemed suitable for
electronic monitoring.
determining whether to impose a home detention order, I take into account all
matters raised by counsel and considered above,
including in the context of
determining whether there was good reason to suspend the sentence.
I have in the exercise of my discretion determined that there is not good reason
to suspend and that a suspended sentence
bond would not meet the objectives of
personal and general deterrence, and would not underscore the seriousness of the
which the appellant committed, a home detention order may serve to
meet these objectives, as well as support rehabilitation and the
continuation of
a lifestyle which is prosocial.
consider that the punitive aims of sentencing, in addition to supporting the
rehabilitation of the appellant and supporting a prosocial
lifestyle, are met by
the imposition of a home detention order. Therefore, pursuant to s 71 of the
Act, I impose a home detention
order with the conditions set out in the Home
Detention Order Suitability Report. This includes residing at the proposed
with leave from the address permitted only at the discretion of the
Department for Correctional Services, and the usual firearm conditions.
further order that the appellant undergo any treatment or rehabilitation
programs including programs to address domestic
violence as reasonably directed
by his supervising officer.
also include a condition, in respect to the condition regarding treatment or
rehabilitation programs, that the appellant must obey
directions to attend such
programs despite work commitments. Of note in the Abuse Prevention Program
report was the number of absences
due to work commitments. Imposition of such a
condition will operate to support rehabilitation and aid in the prioritisation
rehabilitation over work.
direct that the sentence of imprisonment and home detention order commence from
Conclusion and orders
appeal is allowed.
appellant is resentenced to imprisonment for 9 months and 14 days commencing
today. The sentence of imprisonment is to be served
on home detention pursuant
Sentencing Act 2017
Appeal Transcript dated 8
August 2025 (‘AT1’) at T4.19-35 and T39.17-20.
The respondent concedes that
the decision of the learned Magistrate should be set aside and the sentence of
imprisonment reduced
to allow for time served in custody.
The factual matrix concerning
the withdrawn charges was agreed to form part of the factual matrix for the two
offences to which
pleas were entered: see Appellant’s Written Submissions
(FDN 6) (‘AWS1’) at [16].
AWS1 at [61].
AWS1 at [53]-[55].
AT1 at T36-9. See further
PWB v The Queen
[2011] NSWCCA 84
(2011) 216 A Crim R 305
(RS Hulme J, Harrison J agreeing).
Sentencing Act
s 47(5)(a).
The respondent accepts that it
is open to the Court to give credit for time spent on home detention bail, but
this is not an obligation:
R v Franceschini
[2015] SASCFC 116
(Nicholson J, Bampton and Lovell JJ agreeing);
Zefi; R v Jakaj
[2017] SASCFC 121
(2017) 129 SASR 161 (Kourakis
and Lovell JJ);
Teasdale v Police (SA)
[2022] SASC 64 (Blue
R v Horstmann
[2010] SASC 103
(Kourakis J). See also,
R v Kreutzer
[2013] SASCFC 130
(Kourakis J).
Suitability Report dated 28 August 2025 (FDN 13). See also Appeal Transcript
dated 4 & 18 September 2025
(‘AT2’) at T29-42.
Victims of Crime Act
Victims of Crime Act
Sentencing Act 2017
See further,
[2002] SASC 306
(2002) 84 SASR 231
(Mullighan J).
Legislation
Interpretation Act 2021
s 16(1)(a).
Minster for Aboriginal
Affairs, Attorney-General and Minister for Industrial Relations and Public
South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates,
Legislative Council, 11 April 2024, 5349 (Kyam
Maher, Attorney-General).
See further
[2007] NSWCCA 269
(Basten JA, Latham J at [59] agreeing);
Sentencing Act 2017
[1971] VicRp 16
at 150-1 (Winnecke CJ, Pape and Lush JJ);
[1992] FCA 626
(1992) 64 A Crim R
at 384-5 (Burchett, Miles and O’Loughlin JJ).
Siganto v the Queen
[1998] HCA 74
; (1988) 194 CLR 656 at 665-6,
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne
and Callinan JJ)
Rendic v The Queen
[2021] SASCA 23
(2021) 138 SASR 214
, [5]-[6], [9] (Lovell JA, Kelly P
agreeing). See generally
Green v The Queen; Quinn v The Queen
(2011) 244 CLR 462
(French CJ, Crennan and Kiefel JJ).
R v De Simoni
(1981) 147 CLR 383
at 389 (Gibbs CJ, Mason and Murphy JJ agreeing);
(New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal, Gleeson CJ, McInerney
and Studdert JJ, 27 June 1996) (Gleeson CJ, agreeing with Studdert
and McInerney
Josefski v The Queen
[2010] NSWCCA 41
(2010) 217 A Crim R 183
(James J); 195,
[38]-[39] (Howie J, Davies J agreeing);
[2000] SASC 259
(2000) 77 SASR 469
See generally, as to the
seriousness of the offence,
[1999] NSWCCA 111
; (1999) 46 NSWLR
(Spigelman CJ, Wood CJ at CL, Newman, Hulme and Simpson
JJ agreeing as to that matter).
The Court when sentencing
is not necessarily bound by the facts as the parties have agreed them. There
are however, circumstances
in which the requirements of procedural fairness mean
that the parties should be informed of any intention to go outside of any agreed
facts and be given an opportunity to deal with them: see
Chow v Director of
Public Prosecutions (NSW)
(1992) 28 NSWLR 593
at 606 (Kirby P);
[2005] NSWCCA 282
(Studdert, Bell and Latham JJ);
Police (SA)
[2014] SASC 193
(Kourakis CJ);
Sentencing Act 2017
Sentencing Act 2017
See generally,
Porter v The Queen
[2008] NSWCCA 145
(Johnson J, Bell JA and McCallum J agreeing);
Miller v The Queen
[2014] NSWCCA 34
(Johnson J, Harrison and Adamson JJ agreeing).
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
s 20(3)(b).
AT2 at T8.15-24.
AT2 at T11.29-12.10.
Appeal Book
(‘AB’) at 38 (Transcript of Proceedings,
Commissioner of Police v
Tony Sauth Thi
(Magistrates Court, MCCRM-24-008447 and MCCRM-24-005633,
Magistrate Martin, 22 May 2025) at 2 (‘Magistrates Court
Transcript’)).
AB at 38 (Magistrates Court
Transcript at 2).
AB at 40 (Magistrates Court
Transcript at 4).
AB at 40 (Magistrates Court
Transcript at 4).
AB at 40 (Magistrates Court
Transcript at 4).
(Blue J, Nicholson and Bampton JJ agreeing).
R v Schultz
SASCFC 47 (White
, David and Peek JJ).
R v Schultz
(White J, David and Peek JJ agreeing).
(2011) 111 SASR 245
(Gray, Sulan and Blue JJ),
[1998] 4 VR 235
at 241 (Batt JA, Phillips CJ and
Charles JA agreeing).
AB at 31 (Abuse Prevention
Program Final Report dated 19 May 2025).
Attorney-General
(SA) v Tichy
(1982) 30 SASR 84
at 93 (Wells J, King CJ and Cox J
Between 22 May 2025 and 29
Lane v The Queen
[2020] SASCFC 82
(Livesey J (Livesey and Kelly JJ agreeing with
Sentencing Act 2017
s 47(5)(a)(i).
(Perry J, Gray and Layton JJ agreeing).
At paragraph [33].
Elliot v Harris (No 2)
(1976) 13 SASR 516
at 527 (Bray CJ, Bright J agreeing);
Wood v Samuels
at 468 (Walters J)
(Debelle J, Nyland and Gray JJ agreeing).
(Perry J, Gray and Layton JJ agreeing).
Sentencing Act 2017
Sentencing Act 2017
s 71(2)(a).
Suitability Report dated 28 August 2025 (FDN 13).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (411 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter