URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACAT/2025/71.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:53:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Coscia Investment Pty Ltd v Reese [2025] SACAT 71 (20 August 2025)
Coscia Investment Pty Ltd
Jerry Reese
NEUTRAL CITATION
Coscia Investment Pty Ltd v Reese
[2025] SACAT 71
Senior Member McEvoy
20 August 2025
HEARING DATES
18 July 2025
SACAT FILE NO.
2025/SIR000171
ON REVIEW FROM
Member Pfitzner (5 June 2025, 2025/SH004005)
The applicant landlord sought internal review of the Tribunal’s
declaration that the rent payable under a residential tenancy
agreement is
excessive pursuant to
Residential Tenancies Act 1995
Tribunal determined that a 63.04% increase in rent from $230 to $375 was
excessive and fixed the rent payable at $300 per week.
The landlord submitted that the original decision was neither correct nor
preferable. The landlord’s agent informed the Tribunal
that it had
received advice from a licensed valuer that market rent was $375 per week. The
agent provided further evidence on internal
review regarding the rent charged
for sixteen comparative properties. The agent also told the Tribunal that the
rent has been increased
to $375 for other tenants in the complex where the
property was located and that the other tenants had accepted this increase.
the agent submitted that the tenant does not pay for water use or
charges and that his rent had only increased by $40 a week over
seven years,
whereas rent has generally increased in Adelaide by 10.5% since September 2023,
and 24% since 2020.
The respondent tenant submitted that the appropriate rent was $275 per
week. He told the Tribunal that the property is a bedsit and
therefore, the
properties provided by the landlord were not comparable. He argued that the fact
that all of the premises were rented
at the increased price was of no relevance,
and that his rent should not be calculated on the basis of the requirements of
the landlord’s
Held, setting aside and substituting the order under review:
The Tribunal is
satisfied the evidence establishes that $375 per week is a reasonable benchmark
for a small bedsit premises with a
bathroom and kitchen facilities;
Tribunal’s view, the following factors lead to a conclusion that the
proposed rent increase appears to establish a rent
that is not excessive for the
premises: it is similar to the rent payable for comparable premises; similarly
unrenovated premises
are rented at that rate; the landlord proposes to upgrade
the premises with no increase in rent; and is responsible for some of the
Taking into
account all of the factors which appear to establish that the proposed rent
would be supported as appropriate if the property
was made available on the open
market, the impact of any ‘disproportionate’ rent increase becomes
less relevant to the
determination of whether the rent is excessive;
Even taking into
account the significantly high increase in rent for the tenant, the Tribunal is
satisfied that the proposed rent
for these premises is not excessive;
The Tribunal is
satisfied that the original Order subject to review should be set aside and
directs that the rent for the premises
is set at $375 per week.
Internal Review - Residential Tenancy – Tenant application -
Excessive Rent - Disproportionate
LEGISLATION CONSIDERED
Residential Tenancies Act 1995
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
CASES CONSIDERED
[2016] SACAT 19
REPRESENTATION
Ms G D’Andre and Ms M Alexandrou, I-Manage Property Investments, in
Mr P Coscia and Mr D Coscia, Coscia Investment Pty Ltd, in person
The respondent in person
REASONS FOR DECISION
Set aside and substitute decision (H&C)
Made under the
South Australian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
s 70(6)(c)(i)
Findings of the Tribunal
is the determination of an application for the internal review of an order made
by the Tribunal on 5 June 2025 in matter number
2025/SH004005 (the original
Order), amended by a further “slip rule” order of the same
the original Order the Tribunal Member declared the rent charged for the
premises ($375 per week) to be excessive, pursuant to
s 56(1) of the
Residential Tenancies Act 1995
(the RT Act), and ordered that the rent be
fixed at $300 per week from 6 June 2025.
application is made under
South Australian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(the SACAT Act). The Tribunal addresses
applications of this nature in two stages. First, the Tribunal will determine
whether leave
should be granted. Second, if the Tribunal grants leave for the
internal review application, then the Tribunal will review the decision
the previous Tribunal hearing.
Issue 1: Should leave be granted for the internal review
application?
70(1a) of the SACAT Act provides that an application for internal review may
only be made with leave of the Tribunal. The
applicant, as the person who has
applied for internal review, has the responsibility of demonstrating that the
discretion to grant
leave should be exercised in their favour.
Tribunal adopts the approach as set out by Justice Parker in
[2016] SACAT 19
(at para 14) in determining whether permission should be
...the Tribunal should take the same approach to the exercise of its discretion
to grant permission for an internal review as is
taken by the Supreme Court when
it decides whether or not to grant permission for a civil appeal. The overriding
principle is always
the interests of justice. The ordinary approach is that
permission will only be granted where an appeal is reasonably arguable and
subject matter is of sufficient substance to justify consideration. A failure of
the first instance decision-maker to give adequate
reasons will require
permission to be given.
this matter, I consider that leave should be granted. I note the agent, Ms
D’Andre, was present at the original hearing,
and the Tribunal Member gave
detailed reasons for her decision. Nevertheless, at this hearing the landlords
attended with Ms D’Andre
and were able to provide additional information
and evidence to the Tribunal which had not been available at the original
Ms D’Andre also provided some additional and detailed information
concerning comparative rental properties for the Tribunal
to take into account.
This was not available at the original hearing, when the comparator properties
were provided at that hearing
by the tenant, Mr Reese, and other properties were
sourced after the hearing by the Tribunal Member. Further, I am satisfied that
in the interests of a clear consideration of the application of s 56 of the
RT Act, it is useful to grant leave in this matter.
Issue 2: Should the previous decision be affirmed, varied or
70 of the SACAT Act requires the Tribunal to adopt the following approach when
conducting an internal review:
(a) it must examine the initial decision in light of the evidence or material
before the Tribunal at the time that decision was
(b) it may, as it thinks fit, allow further evidence or material to be
presented to it;
(c) it must reach the correct or preferable decision; and
(d) it must have regard to, and give appropriate weight to, the decision of the
Tribunal at first instance.
D’Andre told the Tribunal the original decision was neither correct nor
preferable, as a comparison of similar properties
made it clear that the market
rent for the premises was $375 per week, not $300 per week as set by the
original Order. She did not
agree that the comparisons provided from the earlier
hearing, and upon which the original order was based, were correct in
determining
if the rent charged was excessive.
was agreed that the subject property occupied by Mr Reese has the following
(a) It comprises a “bed sit”, as a single room divided by a large
cupboard, with a bedroom area, a kitchen and a combined
living/dining area.
There is a separate bathroom. There is no door between the living area, the
kitchen, and the bedroom.
(b) The bathroom has a shower, toilet and basin, and fittings for a washing
machine. There is also access to two coin operated washing
machines elsewhere on
(c) The floor space of the whole of the premises is 36 square meters
(d) The premises forms part of a complex of 24 units, which are all occupied.
All units are of the same plan and size. Some of the
units have been renovated,
but not the subject unit.
(e) Split system air conditioner
(f) Oven with two top hot plates
(g) No on-site parking
Reese’ premises have not had any updates or renovation since the
commencement of his tenancy. Although the premises was originally
owned by the
Blind Welfare Association, Mr Reese has not had his rent subsidised, but paid
the rent advertised publicly by the former
landlord. At the time the premises
were purchased by the current landlord, Mr Reese was paying rent at $230 per
landlords told the Tribunal they had purchased the complex in early 2025. They
said they were committed financially to keeping
the premises in full occupancy
at market rent. They said, as part of obtaining the mortgage arrangements for
the purchase, a licenced
valuer had advised them and the bank providing the
mortgage loan that market rent for the premises was $375 per week. It was on
basis the mortgage was obtained. Accordingly, they had given notice of an
increase in rent to this amount to all occupants, and where
vacant premises were
advertised for rent, it was at this rate.
the original Order, the Tribunal Member had reference to the agent’s
evidence that there was a high demand for the units
in the complex which had
been advertised at $375 per week; the rent paid by another tenant in the
complex, who occupied premises
apparently the same as Mr Reese’ premises,
which had similarly not been subject to any upgrades, at $230 per week; some
comparative
premises, some details of which were provided by Mr Reese; and some
broadly comparable premises identified by the Tribunal Member
after the hearing,
from public websites.
Tribunal Member is entitled to inform herself as she considers appropriate (see
s 39(1)(b) of the SACAT Act), and I do not consider
it inappropriate for
the Tribunal Member to have made her own investigations concerning comparative
premises for the purposes of
determining the original matter, but I note this
meant the agent or landlord had no opportunity to comment on her consideration
these comparative premises.
Comparative premises
the hearing of this application for review, the agent provided details of 16
different premises for comparison of the rent with
the subject premises. They
are as follows:
(a) The recently rented premises in the complex, all rented at $375 per week:
; “bed sit” premises; equipped kitchenette; separated
bedroom/living area, but no door between them; separate bathroom
with space and
connections for laundry facilities; split system air conditioner; on street
parking; all renovated or to be renovated
(b) Karoomba Avenue Greenacres: $375 per week; 35m
; bedsit/studio
units with kitchen, but shared laundry facility; no on-site parking; no
separation of bedroom/living and kitchen area
(c) Hender Avenue Klemzig: $400 per week (2025); one bedroom; no yard; no
parking; unrenovated, built 1972
(d) Collins Street Enfield: $225 per week (2019); 48m
; upstairs; no
yard, no parking
(e) Collins Street Enfield: $380 per week (2024); 48m
; renovated;
separate bedroom; upstairs unit; overhead fans; no yard, no parking; shared
(f) Nelson Road Valley View: $370 per week; 46m
(g) Student accommodation Kent Town: $320 per week; one bedroom with double bed
and bar fridge; separate bathroom; access to kitchen
and common room with TV,
laundry and outdoor facilities. This is in a former motel.
(h) William Street Norwood: $470 per week; 38m
; separate bedroom;
kitchen/living area; separate bathroom; upgraded; on street parking
(i) Lindsay Avenue Valley View: $490 per week; one bedroom unit; no parking;
open kitchen/living area
(j) Payneham Road Glynde: $400 per week; parking with roller door; bathroom
The agent also provided some details of other one bedroom premises, all
rented around $350 – 400 per week. In addition, the
following were
referred to:
Blythe Street
Clearview: $350 per week; two studio apartments in rear of established house; no
separate bedroom; no oven; small bathroom;
not furnished
Horrocks Street
Walkerville: $600 per week; 46m
; 1 bedroom unit; off street parking,
small rear yard
Aistrope Street
Modbury: $450 per week; unrenovated; one bedroom; carport
Lesley McIntyre
Avenue Salisbury: $470 per week; self-contained unit at rear of house
Conyngham Street Glenunga: 20m
; bedsits, no separation of living and
bedroom areas; variously $420 per week (renovated with oven); $325 with no oven;
no oven; double storey, former motel.
note the Tribunal Member identified some other premises for comparison. These
included a “superior” premises (separate
bedroom, larger, car
parking and shared back yard), available for $390; and another
“superior” premises with land size
, and modern
kitchen with dishwasher and full oven, available for $490 per week. She also
considered some two-bedroom units in an
adjoining suburb, all of which appeared
superior to the subject premises and which were available in the range of rent
$450 per week.
D’Andre told the Tribunal a consideration of these comparative premises
demonstrated that the rent charged for the subject
premises was not excessive.
She said that none of the comparative premises was an exact comparator, but she
submitted the subject
premises was superior to premises (2), which is also
rented at $375 per week, as it was slightly larger; there was a separation
the bedroom and kitchen/living area; and a washing machine can be
installed in the premises. Premises (3), at $400 per week, has
bedroom. Premises (4) and (5) are significantly larger (48m
have separate bedrooms, and the most recent rent is $380 per week. The other
premises are rented at higher rates or are of
a significantly different nature
so as to reduce the comparison (such as the student accommodation). The second
group of premises
are also different in nature (e.g. former motel premises), and
there is less detail available in respect of the available facilities
arrangements.
D’Andre told the Tribunal that when the other premises in the complex were
advertised at the new rent of $375 per week, they
were all very quickly taken
up, and there is a waiting list of tenants who are prepared to pay the increased
rent. This applies whether
the premises are renovated or not. The landlords
stated they intended to renovate all the units. Fourteen of the unrenovated
are rented at $375 per week.
D’Andre also told the Tribunal that Mr Reese did not pay for water use or
water charges, and this had never been the case,
and was not proposed. His rent
had increased by $40 per week over seven years. He had been offered an upgraded
premises: he was not
required to move out while this was undertaken, but he
could move to another unit already renovated while this work was being done.
D’Andre told the Tribunal seven tenants had vacated when the rent had
increased, and the remaining tenants had agreed to
pay the increased
D’Andre confirmed at this hearing that in her view the rent of $375 per
week was a reasonable market rent and there had been
no trouble renting the
premises at this rate.
D’Andre told the Tribunal rents generally had increased in Adelaide by
10.5% since September 2023, and by 24% since 2020.
landlords emphasised to the Tribunal that the assessment of the market rent had
been made by a licenced valuer, taking into account
market conditions. The
pre-existing rent had not represented market rent for the premises.
Mr Reese’ case
Reese told the Tribunal he did not accept that any of the premises submitted as
comparators provided appropriate comparisons. He
said his premises are not a
one-bedroom unit, but a studio or bedsit: there is no separate bedroom. He said
that no renovation would
change this and it would remain a 36 square metre
bedsit. Mr Reese told the Tribunal his rent had only increased by very small
$5 or $10 a week, since he had lived in the unit (from October 2018,
not 1998 as stated in the original Order), and the new landlord
had proposed an
enormous increase. He said he did not accept the rent in other premises was of
any relevance in determining if the
rent is excessive: he told the Tribunal
people will pay whatever they need to for a rental, but this did not mean the
rent was not
excessive. He told the Tribunal the rent had to be
“fair”. He submitted that the appropriate rent for the premises was
$275 per week.
Reese submitted he should not have to be responsible for the landlord’s
capacity to pay the loan negotiated to purchase the
property, and his rent
should not be calculated on this basis.
Reese said he did not need his premises to be upgraded, and he was not prepared
to move out while an upgrade occurred, and he should
not pay for an upgrade by
an increase in his rent.
Consideration by the Tribunal
reviewing a Tribunal Order, the Tribunal is required to determine if the
original Order constitutes a correct or preferable decision.
Section 70(4) of
the SACAT Act enables the Tribunal to take additional evidence or material into
account in conducting a review,
as well as the evidence and material before the
Tribunal when it made the original Order.
have taken into account the original Order and the evidence, material and
submissions before the Tribunal Member in making the original
Order, as well as
the additional material she refers to in the original Order. In addition, I take
into account the new evidence
and material presented by the agent in the hearing
before me, as well as the additional submissions made by the agent, the
and the tenant.
56 of the the RT Act addresses the issue of excessive rent and empowers the
to declare that the rent payable under a residential tenancy
agreement is excessive
(see s 56(1)). Section 56(2) of the RT Act sets
out 10 factors the Tribunal must have regard to in considering if rent is
(a) the general level of rents for comparable premises in the same or similar
localities; and
(b) the estimated capital value of the premises at the date of application;
(c) the outgoings for which the landlord is liable under the agreement; and
(d) the estimated cost of the services provided by the landlord and the tenant
under the agreement; and
(e) the nature and value of the furniture, equipment and other personal
property provided by the landlord for the tenant’s
(f) the state of repair and general condition of the premises; and
(fa) the estimated cost of goods and services provided under any domestic
services agreement collateral to the residential tenancy
agreement; and
(fb) if the rent was purportedly increased under s 55(2a) – whether the
tenant was put under undue pressure to agree to the
increases; and
(fc) without limiting paragraph (fb), if the rent has been increased –
whether the increase was disproportionate considering
the amount of rent
payable; and
(g) other relevant matters.
56(3) of the RT Act provides that:
If the Tribunal finds ... that the rent payable under a residential tenancy
agreement is excessive, the Tribunal may –
(a) fix the rent payable for the premises and vary the agreement by reducing
the rent payable under the agreement accordingly; and
(b) fix a date (which cannot be before the date of the application) from which
the variation takes effect; and
(c) fix a period (which cannot exceed one year) for which the order is to
remain in force.
Tribunal Member noted various matters with respect to the other factors referred
to in s 56, but effectively focussed on the factor
in s 56(2)(a) (the
general level of rents for comparable premises) as of principal significance.
This was the only factor in respect
of which evidence and submissions were made
at this hearing.
reference to s 56(2)(f), the Tribunal Member noted that the premises are in
worn but functioning and reasonable condition, and
that they had not been
upgraded during the tenancy, nor recently renovated. With respect to
s 56(2)(fc), she noted that the proposed
increase from $230 per week to
$375 per week “represents a 63.04% increase and represents therefore a
significant increase
proportional to the rent payable” (see para. 30 of
the original Order).
Tribunal Member referred to the agent’s evidence given at that hearing
that the landlord intended to upgrade all the units
in the complex and that the
rent increase reflected appropriate rent for the upgraded premises. She stated
that the agent’s
view expressed at the original hearing was that in their
unrenovated condition the premises “would be worth about $300 - $320
week” (para. 31).
was not supported by the agent’s evidence at this hearing, where she
stated that 14 unrenovated units at the complex had
been advertised and rented
at $375 per week.
Tribunal Member concluded in the original Order that the rent of $375 was
excessive “taking into account all the relevant
factors and particularly
the comparative rental properties available, the proportional increase and the
agent’s evidence and
knowledge of the rental market”. She considered
a “fair rent” to be “no more than $300 per week” (see
para. 32 of the original Order).
“The general level of rents for comparable premises in
the same or similar localities” – s 56(2)(a)
Tribunal now has before it some more focussed evidence concerning rents for
other premises. This information was provided by the
agent at this review
hearing and was not before the Tribunal Member at the original hearing. Pursuant
to s 70(4) of the SACAT Act
I am able to take this new evidence into
account, and I do so.
additional evidence provided by the agent was of varying quality in terms of
detail, and this limits its use. The agent obtained
the comparative information
from information available online, and in respect of some premises, the
information was quite extensive,
but in respect of others was relatively bare.
In addition, current rents were not always available, only the rent at which the
were last advertised or rented. Nevertheless, the information provides
some basis for comparison.
Reese objected to comparisons being made where the premises were significantly
larger than his premises of 36m
, and I accept this is a relevant
premises I consider to represent the closest comparators to the subject premises
are the following:
(a) The recently rented premises in the complex, all rented at $375 per week.
These are identical to Mr Reese’ premises, other
than that some have been
renovated, and the evidence is that all the other premises, whether renovated or
not, are rented out at
$375 per week, with a waiting list and significant
interest in the availability of the premises at that rent.
(b) Karoomba Avenue Greenacres: $375 per week. These premises are slightly
smaller, at 35m
, with only a shared laundry facility, but otherwise
very similar, as a “bedsit/studio”.
(c) Hender Avenue Klemzig: $400 per week. These premises have a separate
bedroom, the overall size is not known.
premises elsewhere in the complex are directly comparable as they are identical
in size. Some have been renovated, and were more
up to date, with clean paint
and new floor coverings. Other premises in the complex have not been renovated,
but all are rented at
$375 per week. The premises at Greenacres appear similar
as a bedsit, but marginally inferior (slightly smaller, only capacity for
laundry facilities), and these are also rented at $375 per week; and the
premises at Klemzig are superior, with a separate
bedroom, and cost $400 per
premises appear to support a market rent of $375 per week for premises of the
size and amenity of Mr Reese’ premises.
that have cheaper rent are quite different in nature. These are the student
accommodation at Kent Town ($320 per week), in
a former motel, where there is
shared access to a kitchen, living area and outside area, and a double bed and
bar fridge provided;
and Collins Street Enfield, where rent was $225 per week in
2019. These premises are larger, at 48m
and seem likely to have a
separate bedroom, but are upstairs. Other premises in the same complex, at Unit
7, were rented for $380
per week in 2025, and have a separate bedroom, a shared
laundry only, and no air conditioner, only overhead fans. At Blythe Street
Clearview two studio apartments with no separate bedroom (size unknown) are each
rented at $350 per week. These do not have ovens,
and are situated at the rear
of an established house.
premises identified above in these reasons appear to be less comparable. I do
not consider the other premises identified by
the Tribunal Member in the
original Order as relevantly comparable: the new evidence at this hearing has
provided more useful information.
Considering
the other factors referred to in s 56(2) of the Act, I note that in respect
of Mr Reese’ tenancy, the landlord pays
for the water use and water supply
charge (see s 56(2)(c); and the premises have not been upgraded for some
time, and certainly not
during Mr Reese’ tenancy, but Mr Reese indicated
he was not concerned about this, and the landlord stated that it was intended
upgrade the premises, and they were prepared to do so while Mr Reese maintained
his tenancy (see s 56(2)(f)). Mr Reese did not
suggest there were any
issues concerning the condition and state of repair of the premises, and the
Tribunal Member described their
condition in the original Order as “in
worn but functioning and reasonable condition”.
final consideration identified in s 56(2) of the RT Act which is applicable
in this matter is set out in s 56(2)(fc), namely
, if the rent has been
increased – whether the increase was disproportionate considering the
amount of rent payable
Reese’ rent was $190 per week at the commencement of his tenancy. At the
time the landlord gave notice of the increase in
rent to the amount before the
Tribunal ($375 per week), his rent was $230 per week. The agent and landlord
told the Tribunal that
the rent had been kept artificially low over a lengthy
period of time as a result of various benefits payable to the former owner.
Reese told the Tribunal he had never received any rebates or supports for his
rent in the past, and that what governed the previous
determination of rent should not be assumed by the Tribunal.
Tribunal Member assessed the proposed increase in rent from $230 per week to
$375 per week as representing an increase of 63.04%
and described it as “a
significant increase proportional to the rent payable”. I accept her
assessment in this respect.
It is a very large proportional increase in the rent
my view, none of the factors referred to in s 56(2) of the RT Act as
relevant in determining of the rent charged for the premises
is excessive is in
itself determinative. The matters identified in considering those factors need
to be balanced against each other.
relevant information establishes, in my view, the following matters. The
proposed rent seems to be fairly consistent with that
charged for comparable
premises (in a similar area, about the same size, and comprised by bedsit
(single room) accommodation, with
its own fully equipped kitchen, laundry
fittings and facilities available, and a separate bathroom); the premises are
unfurnished;
they are not renovated, but the landlord proposes to undertake
renovations without increasing the present proposed rent, and the
premises are
at the moment, “in worn but functioning and reasonable condition”;
the landlord bears the cost of water
use and supply, with the tenant paying any
other household costs, such as electricity; and the rent has been historically
small irregular increases, and the proposed increase is
proportionately very significant, and high in relation to the rent payable.
these considerations must be balanced together to determine if the proposed rent
is excessive.
am satisfied the evidence establishes that $375 per week is a reasonable
benchmark for small bedsit premises with a bathroom and
kitchen facilities. This
is demonstrated by a consideration of the rent payable for comparable premises.
I also accept the agent
and landlords’ evidence that there is a waiting
list for premises in the complex, and that there was no difficulty in renting
the premises, whether or not renovated, at this amount. In my view the market
provides a strong indicator of the appropriate rent
note Mr Reese’ submission that people pay this rent, even though in his
view it is excessive, because they have no choice.
This may be true, but this is
the working of the market: with scarcity or high demand, prices increase. The
same principle applies
in relation to rents. Section 56 of the RT Act is
concerned with the issue of excessive rents, not rent control, which the RT Act
does not establish.
are some other relevant factors, which I have referred to above, to consider in
the context of s 56 of the Act. The premises
are not furnished, and the
landlord provides no services, but the landlord does pay for water use and
supply charges. This may be
a necessary arrangement because of the arrangements
for the supply and recording of water use at the complex, but it is a relevant
matter in the context of the rent payable (that is, what is received in exchange
for the payment of rent). The premises are in a
reasonable, if worn, condition,
but the landlord is prepared to upgrade and renovate them without an increase in
the rent. Mr Reese
did not want the premises upgraded, but if this occurs, this
will not increase the rent payable (this does not mean the rent cannot
increased in the future, but only in accordance with the requirements of the RT
my view, all these factors lead to a conclusion that the proposed rent increase
appears to establish a rent that is not excessive
for these premises. It is
similar to the rent payable for comparable premises; while the premises have not
recently been upgraded,
similarly unrenovated premises are rented at that rate,
and the landlord proposes to upgrade the premises with no increase in rent;
the landlord bears some of the outgoings.
I accept that the proposed rent increase is significant and high in proportion
to the rent payable. The increase is about
63% of the rent payable. Is the size
of the proposed increase in rent in itself sufficient to establish the
conclusion that the rent
is excessive?
my view, taking into account all the other factors which appear to establish
that the proposed rent ($375 per week) would be supported
as an appropriate rent
if the premises were made available for rent on the open market, and are likely
to be rented at that amount
payable per week, the impact of any
“disproportionate” rent increase becomes less relevant to the
determination of whether
the rent is excessive. The proposed increase is very
significant to an existing tenant, such as Mr Reese, but in my view the proposed
increase brings the rent payable into line with rent payable for comparable
premises, reflecting the low rent, and the small rent
increases, which Mr Reese
has had since the commencement of his tenancy. The proposed increase is not
disproportionate to the rent
payable in respect of comparable premises, or to
increases in accordance with the market over the past few years. I accept the
of Ms D’Andre that Adelaide rents had increased by 10.5% since
September 2023, and by 24% since 2020. Mr Reese’ rent
had increased by a
total of $40 per week over a period of seven years.
my calculation, if regular market increases as referred to by Ms D’Andre
had applied to Mr Reese’ initial rent of $190
per week since 2019, the
rent payable now for these premises would in any event be in the vicinity of
$375 per week.
Accordingly,
even taking into account the significantly high increase in rent for Mr Reese,
and considering the matters referred to
above, I am satisfied that the proposed
rent for these premises is not excessive.
these reasons, I am satisfied that the original Order subject to this review
should be set aside, and that a different order should
am satisfied that the proposed rent increase does not establish an excessive
rent for these premises. I note that the increase in
rent payable was to apply
from 6 June 2025. Taking into account these proceedings, I will direct that the
rent for the premises at
$375 per week applies from 28 days from the date of
this order.
Orders of the Tribunal
Tribunal grants leave to apply for internal review.
set aside the order of the Tribunal made on 5 June 2025 and substitute the
following orders instead:
the proposed rent of $375 per week for these premises is not excessive, and
shall apply in respect of these premises from 28 days
after the date of this
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.26 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter