URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACorC/2025/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:54:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CHEESMAN, Trevor Allan ([2025] SACC 19) [2025] SACorC 19 (3 July 2025)
CORONERS COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
TREVOR ALLAN
[2025] SACC 19
Inquest Findings of his Honour State Coroner
3 July 2025
CORONIAL INQUEST
Examination into the cause and circumstances of the death of a 70-year-old
man who died in hospital whilst the subject of an Inpatient
Treatment Order. Mr
Cheesman had undergone complex craniofacial surgery, complications of which led
to further medical issues and
the onset of delirium, which necessitated the
treatment order. The inquest examined the circumstances of the imposition of the
order, and the appropriateness and adequacy of his treatment and care
whilst in hospital.
Allan Cheesman, aged 70 years of Sheidow Park, died at the Flinders Medical
Centre on 31 July 2021 as a result of complications
arising from
craniofacial resection and orbital exenteration for right sinonasal
adenocarcinoma.
Circumstances
of death as set out in these findings.
recommendations made.
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
TREVOR ALLAN
[2025] SACC 19
Introduction
Trevor Cheesman was born on 28 January 1951. He was 70 years old at the time of
his death on 31 July 2021. He and his wife Gillian
had been married for about
45 years. They had two children: Mark, Mrs Cheesman’s son from a previous
relationship, who was
later adopted by Mr Cheesman, and Matthew.
his life, Mr Cheesman worked in various jobs, including working for Penfolds
Wines and the Department for Housing and Construction.
At the age of about 45
years, he suffered a back injury and commenced on a disability pension.
was experiencing a lot of headaches, which he raised
with his general
practitioner, Dr Daljit Janjua.
19 March 2021, Mr Cheesman consulted an optometrist who referred him to the
Flinders Medical Centre (FMC) the following day. Mr
Cheesman was found to be
suffering a right sinonasal adenocarcinoma, an aggressive cancer behind his
nose, which was growing into
the space behind his
23 June 2021, Mr Cheesman underwent complex surgery at FMC to remove the
surgery was conducted on 28 June 2021 to address significant complications of
the surgery, and Mr Cheesman was admitted to
the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) for
21 July 2021, Mr Cheesman was moved from the ICU to a ward. During this period,
he developed significant delirium which necessitated
the imposition of an
inpatient treatment order (ITO) pursuant to the
Mental Health Act
Cheesman died in hospital on 31 July 2021.
Cause of death
reference to FMC records, Dr Jane Alderman of Forensic Science SA undertook a
pathology review in consultation with senior specialist
forensic pathologist, Dr
John Gilbert. The cause of death suggested following that review was
‘complications arising from
craniofacial resection and orbital
exenteration for right sinonasal
adenocarcinoma’,
which I find
to have been the cause of Mr Cheesman’s death.
Mr Cheesman was a person subject to an ITO, his death is deemed to be a death in
custody, as defined in
Coroners Act 2003
. Accordingly,
an inquest into his death is mandatory pursuant to
section 21(1)(a)
Relevant medical history
Cheesman attended the same medical clinic over many years and Dr Janjua took
over his care at that clinic in early 2018. Dr Janjua
described Mr Cheesman's
main medical conditions as prostatic hypertrophy, gastro-oesophageal reflux
disease (GORD), chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) and androgen
deficiency.
May 2021 Mr Cheesman had an optometry appointment following what was described
as sudden onset blurry vision in his right eye,
which had commenced two to three
weeks prior. The optometrist noticed reduced visual acuity in the right eye and
also detected a
right afferent pupil defect, which can be a sign of various
medical emergencies,
so arranged
for Mr Cheesman to be seen the next day at the Flinders Eye Clinic. Following
further investigations, an MRI revealed
a sinonasal mass with extension into the
orbit, with compression of the optic nerve. A biopsy taken from that mass
confirmed adenocarcinoma
of sinonasal origin. Mrs Cheesman recalls they were
told the tumour was very aggressive.
a number of consultations, on 10 June 2021 Mr and Mrs Cheesman attended an
appointment at the FMC Ear Nose and Throat clinic.
The notes reflect that they
were told of the options resulting from a multidisciplinary team meeting held
two days earlier. It
is recorded that the recommended curative treatment of
craniofacial excision, orbital
exenteration
and free flap
reconstruction, followed by radiotherapy was discussed, as well as the
alternative of palliation.
According to the notes of that meeting, Mr Cheesman expressed a desire to have
the surgery, knowing it was high-risk and that postoperative
radiotherapy would
be required.
a letter to Dr Janjua dated 15 June 2021, providing a summary of the 10 June
2021 appointment, neurosurgeon Dr Vrodos set out the
risks which were discussed
with Mr and Mrs Cheesman. The major risks from a neurosurgical perspective
were injury to the right carotid
artery which can lead to death or stroke,
leak and possible loss of
vision to the (remaining) left eye. Dr Vrodos also advised that the risks of
complicating hematoma, infection
and perioperative issues were discussed.
surgery was conducted on 23 June 2021 and is carefully summarised, together with
its complications, in the pathology review.
The following description of the
surgery and postoperative complications is taken from the pathology review of Dr
Alderman, and I
accept it as an accurate summary.
craniofacial resection and orbital exenteration with free flap reconstruction
and fascial leg graft and fat reconstruction
was planned to be undertaken by
ENT, plastics and neurosurgeons.
The surgery was performed on 23 June 2021 with margins macroscopically clear
but was complicated by significant bleeding from the
orbital apex due to an
avulsed ophthalmic artery and injury to the right internal carotid artery.
Multiple blood transfusions were
required. A CT angiogram postoperatively
showed tapering of the right internal carotid artery, and an established right
infarction which correlated with left hemiplegia. Mr Cheesman
developed a CSF leak from the nose postoperatively.
A lumbar drain was inserted on 25 June 2021. On 26 June 2021 a tracheal
aspirate grew Escherichia coli and was managed with IV antibiotics.
A repeat CT
angiogram on 27 June 2021 showed the right internal carotid injury was
stable. It was thought that the right anterior
and middle cerebral vessels
would be supplied from the left anterior circulation. A new hypo-density in the
right centrum semi-ovale
was thought to reflect a watershed territory cerebral
infarct. Pneumocephalus was also noted and Mr Cheesman was treated with
concentrated
oxygen therapy.
Endoscopic repair of the skull base defect was performed on 28 June 2021
along with a surgical tracheostomy. On 2 July 2021 the lumbar
successfully clamped and was removed on 3 July 2021. On 4 July 2021 progressive
swelling under the flap below the right
orbit was noted. A CT scan and
aspiration of periorbital soft tissue under ultrasound guidance were performed
on 5 July 2021. The
purulent fluid was positive for CSF and another lumbar
drain was inserted. This aspirate was repeated on 9 July 2021 and this time
was not detected. Electrolyte disturbances were managed in ICU along with a
rash on Mr Cheesman's back which required treatment
with topical steroids and
oral antihistamines.
Mr Cheesman was transferred from ICU to the ward on 21 July 2021. In view of
the extensive surgery, complications and pre-existing
comorbidities his
prognosis was
his surgeries, Mr Cheesman was released from the ICU to a ward on 21 July
Inpatient Treatment Order
were changes in Mr Cheesman’s behaviour whilst in hospital. On 24 July
2021 a code black was called when he was extremely
agitated, climbing over the
bed rails and attempting to remove his tracheostomy and nasogastric tube.
Nurses could not de-escalate
the situation verbally and called Mrs Cheesman who
spoke on the phone with her husband, also
unsuccessfully.
practitioner Dr Lily Kent examined Mr Cheesman and concluded that he had a
mental illness; and because of that mental illness,
he required treatment for
his own protection from harm and protection of others from harm; and he had
impaired decision-making capacity
relating to the appropriate treatment of his
mental illness; and there was no less restrictive means of ensuring appropriate
of Mr Cheesman's illness. These conclusions satisfied the
criteria for the imposition of a level 1 ITO, pursuant to
Mental Health Act
, which was then imposed. The ITO was expressed to expire at
2pm on 30 July 2021.
Mental Health Act
required that Mr Cheesman be examined within 24
hours of the making of that order by a psychiatrist or authorised medical
practitioner
so that it may be confirmed or, if the grounds for the order no
longer existed, revoked. If it is not practicable for the examination
within that time, it must occur as soon as practicable thereafter. The
subsequent examination, which should have been undertaken
by the weekend
consultant psychiatrist on duty on either 24 or 25 July 2021, did not occur.
Randall Long, Senior Consultant Psychiatrist and Head of Unit for Consultation
Liaison Psychiatry Services at FMC and the Statewide
Eating Disorder Services
provided a statement,
compiled from the hospital notes, in relation to Mr Cheesman's mental
health and treatment during his admission, and the imposition
of the ITO.
Long examined Mr Cheesman at around midday on 26 July 2021. He diagnosed
delirium, noted symptoms of fluctuating cognition, uncharacteristic
and aggression and distress, including concerns that he was gesticulating with
his fingers mimicking a gun to his head
and that he was significantly frustrated
level 1 ITO,
noting in his ‘statement of reasons’ that Mr Cheesman
exhibited actions, appearance, behaviour, beliefs, history, mood,
thoughts consistent with delirium. He found that Mr Cheesman had
significant risk of harm to himself and others and that
he had impaired
decision-making capacity relating to the treatment of his delirium mental
illness. He concluded there were no less
restrictive means than an ITO
available to provide effective treatment for this mental illness.
Long confirmed the ITO and explained in the ‘statement of reasons’
that the delay in confirming the order was due to
nobody notifying the
Consultation Liaison Psychiatry team or the psychiatrist on call over the
weekend between 24 and 26 July 2021.
his affidavit Dr Long elaborated that there was not a reliable automated
notification system for ITOs and he considered that this
may have been due to
the early rollout stage of the SA Health electronic medical record system, known
as Sunrise. Dr Long stated,
and I accept, that there is now a reliable
automated system to notify duty psychiatrists of ITOs to ensure that reviews
happen within
the required timeframe.
psychiatrist Dr Bonita Lloyd reviewed Mr Cheesman on 30 July 2021 at about
11:45am, prior to the expiry of the level I
ITO, and concluded that it was
appropriate to make a further order for the treatment of Mr Cheesman as an
inpatient (a level 2 ITO).
Dr Lloyd’s notes indicated that Mr Cheesman
was suffering ongoing cognitive impairment consistent with delirium. The level
2 ITO was then appropriately documented, including as to Dr Lloyd’s
satisfaction that Mr Cheesman met the criteria in
section 25(2)
for the imposition of that order.
am satisfied that the level 1 and level 2 ITOs were appropriately imposed, with
the criteria for the imposition of those orders
having been met. The failure to
review the level 1 ITO within 24 hours did not affect its validity and, in this
instance, given
the reported rectification of the issue which led to that,
requires no action by way of coronial recommendation.
Cheesman’s concerns
her statement, Mrs Cheesman expressed concerns about her husband’s
treatment. I have carefully considered these concerns.
to COVID-19 restrictions Mrs Cheesman was unable to see her husband from 18 to
24 July 2021 and it was during this time that Mr
Cheesman was moved from the ICU
to a ward. On 24 July 2021 Mrs Cheesman was able to get an exemption to be able
to visit her husband
and observed him getting very upset and trying to pull out
tubes and cords. This was the day upon which the first ITO was imposed.
later visits she noted that his distress and agitation continued, and she felt
that the standard of his care decreased once he
was moved from the ICU.
noted that on 28 July 2021 she found Mr Cheesman in a chair in the presence of
two male nurses, and that Mr Cheesman had soiled
himself. There were other
occasions when she saw that he had soiled himself and perceived that he was not
being appropriately cleaned
Cheesman was concerned about Mr Cheesman being moved without her being told, and
that he was placed in a room or rooms which were
not of the standard of his
previous accommodation.
is unsurprising that loved ones would be concerned if a patient is not
immediately cleaned after soiling themselves, as would be
ideal in every case.
Pressures of work in a busy hospital may mean that this is not always possible,
and I observe that these concerns
arose during and proximate to peak COVID
shutdown, when it also may not have been possible to improve on telephone
communications
and accommodation issues which arose. It was outside the scope
of the inquest to resolve these specific complaints and I have not
through the evidence to do so.
Further observations regarding
cause of death
have set out the important details in Dr Alderman’s pathology review of
Mr Cheesman’s surgery and hospital treatment
which highlighted that,
in view of the extensive surgery, complications and his pre-existing
comorbidities, Mr Cheeseman’s
prognosis was guarded.
have also considered the post-operative treatment and care of Mr Cheesman,
including the use of antipsychotic and sedative medications
prescribed to assist
with his ongoing issues of delirium. There is no evidence of electrolyte
derangement connected with the use
of these medications, noting Mr
Cheesman’s normal renal and liver functions, as tested on 30 July 2021.
prescription and administration of olanzapine, which was temporally connected to
Cheesman’s death, was in accordance with
protocol and he was appropriately
monitored after administration of that medication.
have also considered the possibility of extension of stroke as being a factor in
Mr Cheesman’s death, but again there is insufficient
evidence in the
medical records to raise this beyond speculation.
investigation
Mr Cheesman was a person in custody at the time of his death, an investigation
into his death was conducted by Detective Brevet
Sergeant Micheal Clarke on
behalf of the State Coroner. A copy of Detective Clarke’s investigation
report was tendered to
Clarke obtained and reviewed witness statements and records, as has also been
done in the course of this inquest, and found
no issues with the lawfulness of
Mr Cheesman being placed under the ITOs. He noted Mrs Cheesman’s
concerns but identified
nothing to suggest that medical staff had failed in
their duty of care to Mr Cheesman, or that they contributed in any way to
agree with Detective Clarke’s assessment of these
Conclusions
find Mr Cheesman was lawfully in custody at the time of his death.
Cheesman underwent surgery which was delicate, complicated and high-risk, as an
alternative to palliation for an otherwise terminal
condition. The
complications which occurred were within the range of known potential
complications, which were explained to Mr and
Mrs Cheesman beforehand.
find there were no failings by the medical staff that led to Mr Cheesman’s
Recommendations
I make no recommendations in this matter.
Keywords: Death in Custody; Inpatient Treatment Order; High-Risk Surgical
Exhibit C1, paragraph 7 (as
described by Mrs Cheesman)
Exhibit C2a
Affidavit of Nahal
Saboohian, Exhibit C4
Exhibit C5, Annexure
Cerebrospinal
Exhibit C2a, page
Exhibit C7, FMC Medical
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (265 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (154 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter