URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAOmbFOI/2023/2022.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:02:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
[2023] SAOmbFOI (02) [2023] SAOmbFOI 2022 (6 March 2023)
Determination
External review - section 39
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Mr Greg Griffin
Attorney-General's Department
Ombudsman reference:
Agency reference:
Determination:
The determination of the agency is
the effect of which is
I confirm the
agency’s determination in relation to redactions made pursuant to clause
agency’s determination in relation to documents claimed to be exempt by
virtue of clause 12 as set out on page 16
agency’s redactions made to documents pursuant to clause 17(c) as set out
on page 16 below.
Date of Ombudsman’s determination:
6 March 2023
Issues considered:
Secrecy provision
Whether documents would infringe privilege of
Exemption clauses relied upon:
Legislation considered:
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Work Health and Safety Act
Application for access
application under the
Freedom of Information Act 1991
) the applicant requested access from the agency to:
1. A copy of the full report of SafeWork SA into the Adelaide Football Club
Training Camp 2018convened on the Gold Coast, Queensland
between 29 January 2018
to 2 February 2018 (the Camp).
2.Copies of any and all correspondence between Mr Jenkins and the Adelaide
Football Club and/or SafeWork SA pertaining to the Camp
and/or the SafeWork SA
investigation into the Camp.
3.Copies of the following other documents in relation to the Camp and/or the
SafeWork SA investigation into the Camp, being:
3.1. the request for SafeWork SA to conduct the investigation into the
3.2. all correspondence between SafeWork SA and any party as to the scope of
any SafeWorkSA investigation into the Camp;
3.3. all correspondence to and from any person invited to or requested to
provide evidence to SafeWork SA in the investigation;
3.4. all statements taken by SafeWork SA both in draft and final from persons
interviewed in the SafeWork SA investigation;
3.5. all draft versions of the SafeWork SA Report;
3.6. all correspondence between the Adelaide Football Club, the Australian
Football League and SafeWork SA (AFL) pertaining to the
SafeWork SA
investigation including any suggested amendments to any draft Report provided to
them for review or comment.
ease of reference, procedural steps relating to the application and the external
review are set out in Appendix 1.
external review is within the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman as a relevant review
authority under section 39 of the FOI Act.
Provisional
determination
provided my tentative view about the agency’s determination to the
parties, by my provisional determination dated 2 February
2023. I informed the
parties that subject to my receipt and consideration of submissions from the
parties I proposed to vary the
agency’s determination.
applicant, agency and interested party provided submissions in response. I have
considered these submissions below.
The applicant’s
applicant disagrees with my view that the agency’s description of
documents is in accordance with section 23 of the FOI
We submit that these findings are at odds with the findings at paragraphs 14,
16 and 17 as it cannot be said that particularisation
of the documents as
requested will render the schedule of documents exempt if the description is
simply administrative – which
Identifying who sent an email and/or document and who received the email
and/or document does not fall within the ambit of section
271(1) as this is not
information gained or received “
exercising any power or function under
.” The only possible time the description may
be “exempt” would be if it identified a person who was otherwise
to the Inspector except for information he/she had obtained exercising
his/her powers under the WHS Act.
agency is not required to produce a schedule of documents; it is not a feature
of the FOI Act. In any event, given that the document
is not a document
‘within scope’ of the access application, I have no jurisdiction
pursuant to section 39(11) to determine
the applicant’s contention about
the schedule of documents.
applicant could raise a complaint with me pursuant to the
Ombudsman Act 1972
in relation to the agency’s administration of the matter, but I
foreshadow I would be unlikely to consider that further given
I do not agree
with the applicant’s submission for the reasons given above and in my
provisional determination, the substance
of which is repeated in this
determination.
applicant has asked that I address the following issue:
In addition the Internal review has indicated that document 203 titled
“Investigation Summary Draft” is in fact the full
report of SafeWork
SA into the Adelaide Football Club Training Camp 2018 (being document 1 sought
by the FOI Application)(the SafeWork
SA report).
Not only does this seem unlikely given the use of the word
“Draft” but also means that if in fact that is the full (final)
report then the Agency has failed to identify the “draft reports” as
requested by dot point 3.5 of the FOI Application
and thus has failed to make a
determination on those documents.
Whilst we understand from the Provisional Determination that the content of
the draft reports will not be disclosed, this does not
mean that it cannot be
identified how many draft reports were created and to whom they were sent to
(accepting of course that if
they were sent to a person who was otherwise
unknown to the Inspector except for information he/she had obtained exercising
powers under the WHS Act then such person’s name would be exempt)
the reasons given above I refuse to confirm or deny whether any of the other
documents are, or are not investigation summaries
or drafts of same; to do so
would not be consistent with section 39(15) of the FOI Act.
The agency’s submission
agency advises that it accepts my views in relation to
40, 45, 201 (with the third substantive paragraph redacted), 240, 241, 242,
244, 31a, 261, 262 and 263. Subject to any third-party
submissions I also accept
the determination as it pertains to paragraph 2, page 2 of document 65a, and
pages 2 and 3 of 65a.2 (noting
the redactions required in respect of information
agency’s submission focuses on documents 158, 207, 218 and 251.
cannot repeat the agency’s submission as to do so would reveal the
substance of the documents. I appreciate this puts the
applicant at a
disadvantage, notwithstanding, having considered the agency’s submission I
have determined that documents 158,
207, 218 and 251 are exempt as they relate
to issues (and contain information obtained) by inspectors while exercising a
power under
section 160 of the WHS Act.
have therefore determined that documents 158, 207, 218 and 251 are exempt
pursuant to clause 12(1).
Interested third party
submissions
consulted with an interested third party (
) in relation to documents
65a and 65a.2, in consideration that disclosure of the information could involve
a disclosure of information
it considered to be their business affairs, pursuant
to clause 7.
essence, the ITP opposes the disclosure of any information within documents 65a
and 65a.2, save for a few sentences, which would
render the documents
meaningless.
relation to document 65a.2 the ITP submits that disclosure of the document would
undermine the confidentiality expected of the
ITP when it receives information
pursuant to the exercise of its functions. It says that should this information
be released, it
would have an adverse effect on its affairs because, in essence,
people might doubt whether they can speak with the ITP without confidential
information being released. The agency therefore claims the information is
exempt pursuant to clause 7(1)(c)(ii).
do not find this argument persuasive when considering that the nature of the
ITP’s affairs, and its functions, are not explicit,
or even implicit, in
the document. I find it difficult to reconcile that release of the information
could prejudice the ITP at all,
particularly noting that much of the information
has been made public.
the agency has addressed the public interest test implicitly, I consider that
there is a strong argument that the public interest
weighs in favour of
disclosure because:
the document
does not reveal the affairs of the ITP, in fact, the nature of the ITP and its
functions are not explicit, or even in
my view, implicit from the document
interest must also balance against the applicant’s right to have access
subsection 271(3)(a).
most of the
information is already in the public domain.
am therefore not persuaded either document 65a or 65a.2 is exempt pursuant to
the ITP was not consulted in relation to the application of clause 12(1), it has
nevertheless made a submission in relation
ITP contends in relation to documents 65a and 65a.2 that greater redaction is
required in order not to reveal information about
persons other than the
applicant. While I had redacted a version of the document so as not to reveal
the identity of any other person,
the ITP appears to submit that information
be redacted.
I am not persuaded that it is inconsistent with the exception at
271(3)(a) of the WHS Act that information as relayed by a person
anonymous person should be redacted, particularly where that information is
of the view that the redactions strike
the right balance between the exemption at 271(3)(a) and section 271(2).
also note that the agency advised that it accepts my view in relation to
documents 65a and 65a.2, but ‘noting the redactions
required in respect of
information about third parties’. I consider that the agency will
generally be best placed to identify
where information pertaining to its
functions should be exempt. Accordingly, I am not persuaded that further
redactions are required
to documents 65a and 65a.2 in the manner proposed by the
ITP. I note however, that one further redaction is required to the header
page 2 of document 65a.2, so as not to reveal the name of the ITP.
Relevant law
person has a legally enforceable right to be given access to an agency’s
documents in accordance with the FOI
FOI Act provides that upon receipt of an access application, an agency may make
a determination to refuse access where the documents
are ‘exempt’.
Schedule 1 lists various exemption clauses which may be claimed by an agency as
a basis for refusing access.
following clauses of Schedule 1 of the FOI Act are relevant to my external
6—Documents affecting personal affairs
(1) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter the disclosure of
which would involve the unreasonable disclosure of information
concerning the
personal affairs of any person (living or dead).
12—Documents the subject of secrecy provisions
(1) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter the disclosure of
which would constitute an offence against an Act.
17—Documents subject to contempt etc
A document is an exempt document if it contains matter the public disclosure
of which would, but for any immunity of the Crown—
(a) constitute contempt of court; or
(b) contravene any order or direction of a person or body having power to
receive evidence on oath; or
(c) infringe the privilege of Parliament.
conjunction with clause 12(1), the agency has also relied upon
section 271
Work Health and Safety Act 2012
) which states:
271—Confidentiality of information
(1) This section applies if a person obtains information or gains access to a
document in
exercising any power or function under this Act (other than under Part
(2) The person must not do any of the following:
(a) disclose to anyone else—
(i) the information; or
(ii) the contents of or information contained in the document;
(b) give access to the document to anyone else;
(c) use the information or document for any purpose.
Maximum penalty:
(a) in the case of an individual—$10 000;
(b) in the case of a body corporate—$50 000.
(3) Subsection (2) does not apply to the disclosure of information, or the
giving of access
to a document or the use of information or a document—
(a) about a person, with the person's consent; or
(b) that is necessary for the exercise of a power or function under this Act;
(c) that is made or given by the regulator or a person authorised by the
if the regulator reasonably believes the disclosure, access or use—
(i) is necessary for administering, or monitoring or enforcing
compliance with, this Act; or
(ii) is necessary for the administration or enforcement of another Act
prescribed by the regulations; or
(iii) is necessary for the administration or enforcement of another Act
law, if the disclosure, access or use is necessary to lessen or prevent
a serious risk to public health or safety; or
(iv) is necessary for the recognition of authorisations under a
corresponding WHS law; or
(v) is required for the exercise of a power or function under a
corresponding WHS law; or
(d) that is required by any court, tribunal, authority or person having
authority to require the production of documents or the answering of
questions; or
(e) that is required or authorised under a law; or
(f) to a Minister.
section 48, the onus is on the agency to justify its determination ‘in any
proceedings’. This includes the external
review process.
39(11) provides that the Ombudsman may confirm, vary or reverse the
agency’s determination in an external review, based
on the circumstances
existing at the time of review.
Documents in
agency identified 284 documents within the scope of the application, totalling
approximately 3490 pages. The agency provided access
to 24 documents in full, 8
documents in part, and refused access in full to the remaining 252 documents.
Issues in this review
regard to the agency’s submissions and the exemption clauses provided in
Schedule 1 of the FOI Act, it is for me to determine
whether to confirm, vary or
reverse the agency’s determination in regard to the documents in issue in
this external review.
Consideration
Identification of
applicant alleges in their submission that:
Both the initial determination and the Internal Review failed to properly
particularise the vast majority of documents identified
by the Agency which fell
within the scope of the FOI application. This failure deprived our client of any
reasonable opportunity
to make an objective determination as to whether the said
documents are indeed exempt documents or whether any exception to the
proscription
against disclosure may apply. As such our client has been denied
procedural fairness and natural justice in respect of the FOI application.
The enclosed document titled “Internal Review Schedule of
Documents” (the Schedule of Documents) evidences the ground
of review set
23(4) of the FOI Act provides:
(4) An agency is not required to
include in a notice any matter if its inclusion in the notice would result in
the notice being an
exempt document.
Particularisation
of the documents in greater detail would result in the determination and
schedule of documents becoming an exempt
document. It is not uncommon for
agencies to use generalised document descriptors in determinations and schedules
so as to avoid
a determination or schedule becoming exempt.
section 39(15) provides:
(15) A relevant review authority should avoid disclosing in its reasons for a
determination any matter that the agency claims is exempt
matter (whether or not
the relevant review authority agrees with that claim).
Accordingly,
I am obliged not to disclose exempt material, and will adopt the nomenclature
used by the agency in its determination
and schedule of documents.
agency’s determination and schedule of documents are in my view,
consistent with the requirements of section 23 of the FOI
Clause 6(1)
the applicant has not raised an objection to the redaction of matter pursuant to
clause 6(1), for completeness, I have turned
my mind to its application.
am satisfied that the mobile phone numbers of public servants are the personal
affairs of those named. I am satisfied that it would
be unreasonable to disclose
the mobile phone numbers of staff in documents 86 and 96, given the likelihood
that those staff could
then be contacted outside of office hours. I therefore
confirm the agency’s determination in respect of the clause 6(1)
in documents 86 and 96.
majority of the documents within scope have been refused in full on the basis of
clause 12(1), as disclosure would constitute
an offence against an Act, namely,
section 271 of the WHS Act.
is public knowledge that SafeWork SA conducted an investigation into a
pre-season camp undertaken by players and staff of the Adelaide
Football Club in
2018. Besides the fact that the investigation was undertaken and the Adelaide
Football Club was cleared of any wrongdoing
for the purposes of the WHS Act,
SafeWork SA has not published or provided the public with any further
information about its investigation.
As I understand it, this is its standard
agency, in its initial determination advised:
The exempt documents/attachments relate to an investigation conducted by
SafeWork SA inspectors in the course of exercising their
powers and functions
Work Health and Safety Act 2012
(the WHS Act). Section 271 of the WHS
Act makes it an offence to disclose information obtained under that Act except
in specified
circumstances.
Where the exception criteria to section 271 of the WHS Act has been met and
the documents relate to your client, access has been granted
to documents in
part/in full.
In addition, attachments 8a, 8b, 43a, 82a, 83a, 84a, 85a, 86a, 87a, 88a, 89a,
90a, 91a, 110a, 119a, 120a, 120b, 133a, 151a, 156a,
156b, 156c and 159a are
administrative in nature and were not gained by exercising a power or function
under the WHS Act and can
also be disclosed.
As none of the exceptions contained in sub section 271(3) apply to the
remaining documents and attachments listed under clause 12;
I consider it would
be an offence under section 271 of the WHS Act to disclose the exempt material
to you/your client. A copy of
section 271 of the WHS Act is provided for your
information.
agency largely confirmed its position on internal review, though some further
redactions were removed from documents provided
applicant submits that:
...(T)he description of the documents in the Schedule of Documents would seem
to indicate that all documents where the author is described
“SWSA” are documents that have been created by SafeWork SA and
therefore cannot be documents that fall within Clause
12 as the documents cannot
have been obtained or gained by exercising any power or function under the WHS
Act “except to the
extent that they contain information that was obtained
or gained by the relevant SafeWork inspector in exercising his functions under
the WHS Act.” (see Treasury and Finance, Department of 2018/11929
SAOmbFOI 5).
One would question though how the documents could contain such information
because to disseminate that information to someone else
would constitute a
breach of s271 of the WHA Act if its disclosure was not permitted under s271(3)
of the WHS Act. The Internal review
did not address this issue.
In addition the attachments associated with those emails would not be exempt
under Clause 12 unless they too contain information obtained
or gained in
exercising any power or function under the WHS Act and the disclosure had been
permitted under 271(3) of the WHS Act.
Further the SafeWork SA report being sought by our client would also not be
exempt under Clause 12 as it was not a document that was
obtained or gained by
exercising any power or function under the WHS Act. It was a document created by
SafeWork SA.
Without specifically addressing every document in the Schedule of Documents,
the above applies to them as well.
Further any document created by any other person, body and/or entity that was
not obtained or gained by the relevant SafeWork inspector
in exercising his
functions under the WHS Act is also not exempt by virtue of clause 12.
However when one looks at the documents requested in the FOI application a
number of them cannot possibly be caught by s271 of the
WHS Act (eg the request
for SafeWork SA to conduct the investigation into the Camp) and others are only
caught “to the extent
that they contain information that was obtained or
gained by the relevant SafeWork inspector in exercising his functions under the
WHS Act” (eg the SafeWork SA report).
Looking at the SafeWork SA report, it is fair to assume that such a report
would contain information and/or documents that have been
obtained by the
relevant SafeWork inspector in exercising his functions under the WHS Act such
as records of interviews, submissions
etc and as such that information should
not be disclosed. However this information would not be the only content of the
report. The
author would have considered the information and documents he had
obtained and gained and then would have formulated his own opinions
and come up
with recommendations etc. By their very nature such opinions and recommendations
have been created by the author and
simply cannot have been obtained or gained
in exercising his/her powers or functions under the WHS Act.
271 of the WHS Act applies if a person ‘obtains information’ or
‘gains access to a document’ when
exercising any power or function
under the WHS Act. Subsection 271(2) limits the use of the information and
applicant’s submission invites a discussion about whether or not there is
a class of documents which may disclosed as they
can be ‘carved out’
from offending both subsections 271(1) and (2).
am of the view that section 271(1) only applies to the
information and documents; the words ‘obtain’ and ‘gain’
substantively constrain the application of the
section to acts of receipting
information and documents, as distinct from creating
information or
documents. That is not to say that a document created could not be in breach of
subsection 271(2) if the information
obtained is ‘used’. I will
powers and functions of SafeWork SA (referred to in the WHS Act as the
‘regulator’) are extremely broad. For example,
section 153 of the
WHS Act provides that:
(1) Subject to
this Act, the regulator has the power to do all things necessary or convenient
to be done for or in connection with
the performance of its functions.
(2) Without
limiting subsection (1), the regulator has all the powers and functions that an
inspector has under this Act.
SA has many functions, as described by section 152 of the WHS Act. The most
applicable in the context of this matter is subsection
(b), to ‘monitor
and enforce compliance with this Act’.
Additionally,
as noted above, SafeWork SA has all the powers and functions that an inspector
has under the WHS Act. Section 160 and
Division 2 of Part 9 of the WHS Act sets
out the functions and powers of inspectors under the WHS Act. It is clear from
these provisions
that inspectors appointed under the WHS Act have extremely
broad investigative powers. In this context I refer in particular to the
following powers:
powers of entry
(section 163)
inspect, examine and make enquiries at a workplace (section 165(1)(a))
power to require
production of documents and answers to questions (section 171)
powers to copy
and retain documents (section 174)
power to seize
evidence (section 175)
power to seize
dangerous workplaces and things (section 176).
my view, while the powers of the regulator are broad, both the above sections
and divisions narrow the exercise of its powers to
the performance of one of its
‘functions’.
his second reading speech, Minister Russell Wortley, as he was then, said in
relation to section 271 that:
271—Confidentiality of information -
are given broad
powers and protections under the Act. Clause 271 is one of a number of
mechanisms designed to ensure that
are accountable and
credible when they perform functions and exercise powers [emphasis
suggests to me that section 271(1) could be read in relation specifically to the
work of inspectors. In that case, then the transmission
of information or
receipt of documents incidental to the work that an inspector undertakes
(pursuant to their functions) is
going to be protected by section
271. I think this is common sense although I also accept that a plain reading of
section 271(1) does
not evince this position. Notwithstanding, a routine email
from one staff member to another within SafeWork SA, which is not revelatory
information gained, but is otherwise within scope of the access application,
could not attract the protection of 271; the author
may not be exercising a
power or function as described above.
have previously formed the view that information which is of a purely
administrative nature may be disclosed without offending section
271(1) of the
WHS Act, I remain of that view for the above
The agency appears to
accept that this is the case, as it has determined that a number of documents
are purely administrative and
could be released.
Accordingly,
I am of the view that documents 40, 45, 201 (with paragraph 3 redacted) 240,
241, 242 and 244 are also purely administrative
and would not reveal information
obtained or a document gained in the course of the exercise of a power or
function under the WHS
note, with regard to the applicant’s access application, that information
of this type is unlikely to be of interest to them.
is another class of documents which the applicant seeks access too, namely those
The author would have considered the information and documents he had
obtained and gained and then would have formulated his own opinions
and come up
with recommendations etc. By their very nature such opinions and recommendations
have been created by the author and
simply cannot have been obtained or gained
in exercising his/her powers or functions under the WHS Act.
think that the point that the applicant arrives at, which is that information
should be disclosed where the information discloses
an opinion or recommendation
by a SafeWork SA employee is somewhat of a non sequitur. Section 271(1) applies
if a person ‘obtains
information’ or ‘gains access’ to a
document in the exercise of any
power or functions under the WHS Act.
Therefore, wouldn’t the disclosure of that opinion or recommendation still
of information obtained or a document gained by virtue of
the exercise of a power or function under the WHS Act if it were to be
disclosed? In my view the answer is yes. What would be the purpose of section
271(1) if information obtained pursuant to that section
could simply be restated
and disclosed in the exercise of expressing an opinion about the subject matter
of the information obtained?
in the context of this ‘class’ of documents, it is my view that
disclosure of opinion or recommendations would
be a ‘disclosure’ of
the information that is prohibited by section 271(2)(a):
(2) The person must not do any of the following:
(a) disclose to anyone else—
(i) the information; or
(ii) the contents of or information contained in the document;
(b) give access to the document to anyone else;
(c) use the information or document for any purpose.
also construe the terms ‘must not’ in the commencement of subsection
271(2) as inclusive of
disclosure were to occur in the expression of an opinion or recommendation.
also follows that disclosure under the FOI Act would be prohibited by section
271(2)(c) as that would constitute a ‘use’
of the document for
‘any purpose’. I therefore conclude that a document containing an
opinion or recommendation of an
inspector concerning an investigation undertaken
by same is not a class of information that can be disclosed.
applicant submits:
Further given that the SafeWork SA report appears to have been disclosed to
other persons/bodies/entities as discussed in paragraph
10 above, this in our
opinion confirms that at least those parts of the report that contains opinions
and recommendations is not
exempt from disclosure and access should have been
provided to our client.
viewed each of the examples provided by the applicant, I confirm that each
dissemination was not disclosed to any other person/body/agency
not permitted by
section 271(3)(c)(i)-(v). Accordingly, I do not consider that this point adds
any weight to the argument that opinions
or recommendations can be carved out
and disclosed.
applicant submits:
In any event, we say that disclosure to our client of the SafeWork SA report
is permitted under the FOI Application as the report
falls within the exemption
set out in s271(3)(a) of the WHS Act. Our client was a participant in the camp,
made a complaint about
its conduct, was interviewed by a SafeWork Inspector and
implicitly provided his consent to the disclosure of the document by making
FOI Application.
Our client accepts that if the report contains information about other
persons then such information should not be disclosed but that
is all that
should not be disclosed. Any findings, opinions and/or recommendations made in
the report would relate to our client
and therefore in our opinion be
“about” our client and thus disclosure of the balance of the
SafeWork SA report would
fall within the ambit of s271(3)(a) of the WHS Act.
have previously considered the application of section 271(3)(a), which I
appreciate has been cited by the applicant in their
submission.
The following passages
from that determination are relevant to the submission of the applicant:
20. The application of section 271(3)(a) of the WHS Act was discussed by the
District Court of South Australia in the matter of Pages Hire Centre (NSW)
Pty Ltd and Boros v Department of Premier and
). This matter considered the application of the predecessor to the
WHS Act, the Occupational Health, Safety and Welfare Act 1986
(OHSW Act) as it
related to clause 12(1) of Schedule 1 to the FOI Act. However, despite finding
that in that case, the relevant Act
was the OHSW Act, His Honour Beazley DCJ
also examined the application of section 271 of the WHS Act.
21. In discussing the differences between section 55(1a)(c) of the OHSW Act
and section 271(3)(a) of the WHS Act, Beazley DCJ stated:
Under s 55(1a)(c) of the OHSW Act disclosure was permitted when it was made
‘with the consent of the person to whom the information
relates or who
furnished the information’. By contrast under s 271(3) of the WHS Act, the
proscription against disclosure does
not apply in respect of information:
‘about a person, with the person’s consent’. Upon a literal
reading, disclosure
would be permitted under the repealed Act if either the
person to whom it related or the person who furnished it consented.
Such a construction would lead to the unfortunate consequence that the
consent of the very person to whom the information relates,
would not be
required if the informant gave his consent. The informant, of course, will
already be aware of the information. The
person to whom it related may not be
aware at all, and will not know of its contents until it is disclosed to
This may well explain why it was that Parliament restricted the exemption in
the repealing Act to only that person, and deleted the
reference to the person
who furnished the information whose consent must be obtained.
This seems consistent with the attitude expressed by Parliament in s 27(2) of
the FOI Act that an agency must obtain the views of
the person concerned before
access is given.
22. Applying this interpretation of section 271(3)(a) of the WHS Act, the
agency was required to consider to whom the information
in the documents (that
it claimed were subject to clause 12(1) of the FOI Act) related, to ascertain
whether section 271(3)(a) of
the WHS Act applied.
23. The construction of the term ‘about a person’ was also
discussed in Pages Hire Centre. The District Court stated:
It must be construed strictly. If it were construed in the manner suggested
by the appellants, disclosure may never be permitted.
An officer could not be
certain as to all of the potential persons who may have been
‘referred’ to directly or indirectly
in a document. Even if he could
identify them it would be difficult to ensure that all had given their consent.
In my opinion it
ought be restricted to those persons directly concerned, or to
put it in the language of s 271(3) of the WHS Act, limited to information
noted above, the exemption must be construed strictly, and be limited to
information ‘about’ a person. Having viewed
the documents, I am
largely of the view that the agency has applied this section appropriately.
Notwithstanding,
I am of the view that paragraph 2 of page 2 of document 65a and pages 2 and 3 of
document 65a.2 contain information
experiences. Information about other persons can be redacted so the document is
consistent with
the exception at 271(3)(a).
also advise that the applicant is mentioned in some documents but in
circumstances where information about the applicant is fused
together with
information about various people; it is impossible to sever the information
other people and even if it was possible
the document would be rendered meaningless with the level of redactions
applicant submits:
We are also of the opinion that disclosure of the SafeWork SA report would be
permitted under s271(3)(b) of the WHS Act particularly
given the regulators
functions as set out in s152 of the WHS Act.
The camp conducted by the Adelaide Football Club, the subject of the SafeWork
SA report, had significant ramifications for a number
of the participants
involved in the camp including our client. It also had wider ranging
ramifications for the remainder of the teams
in the Australian Football League
(AFL) in the conduct of future training camps.
As such we are of the opinion that the disclosure of the SafeWork SA Report
may assist in the exercise of the regulator’s functions,
particularly
under sections 152(c), (e), (f) and (g).
accept the applicant’s point that disclosure of the report may very well
achieve some of the regulators functions, as outlined
in section 152 of the WHS
Act. But the decision to disclose the report rests solely with SafeWork SA; it
is not within my jurisdiction
as the relevant review authority to suggest that
it should release the report. The agency’s public statement about the
advises that it does not ‘provide detail on investigation matters,
and will not do so in this
I can only presume
that the agency arrived at that decision after a careful consideration of all of
the factors that weigh upon it
successfully carrying out its functions.
Accordingly,
I am not persuaded by the applicant’s submission that the agency has erred
in its application of clause 12(1),
save for the documents identified above. I
therefore confirm the agency’s application of clause 12(1) to the
documents that
I have not identified above.
agency determined that documents 31, 31a, 32, 33, 33a, 36, 36a, 36a.1, 37, 42,
42a, 42b, 46, 46a, 46b, 183, 183a, 188, 188a, 192,
192a, 261, 262, 263, 264, 265
are exempt by virtue of clause 17(c), namely, that to disclose those documents
would infringe the privilege
of parliament.
agency has determined that documents 31, 32, 42b, 46, 46a, 46b, 183, 183a, 188,
188a, 192, 192a were also exempt by virtue of
clause 12, and having viewed those
documents, I confirm those documents as exempt by virtue of the discission about
clause 12 above.
Accordingly, I have examined the remaining 15 documents, being
31a, 33, 33a, 36, 36a, 36a.1, 37, 42, 42a, 261, 262, 263, 264, 265.
agency initially determined that:
The exempt documents are correspondence between the Occupational Safety,
Rehabilitation and Compensation Committee (OSRCC) and SWSA
in relation to
enquiries of the investigation undertaken by SWSA, documents which were prepared
by SWSA for staff to appear before
the OSRCC and extracts of Hansard.
The OSRCC is a Standing Committee of the Parliament established under the
Parliamentary Committee’s Act 1991. Therefore, I consider
disclosure of
these documents will infringe on the privileges of Parliament.
also advised in its internal review determination that:
Your sixth point concerns the application of clause 17 of Schedule 1 of the
FOI Act. In respect of the Hansard records, the FOI Officer
provided the
required information for you to access those materials. This approach is
consistent with maintaining parliamentary privilege.
applicant submits:
The Internal Review also relied upon Clause 17 of Schedule 1 of the FOI Act
in refusing access to 26 documents sought in the FOI Application.
We are of the
opinion that Clause 17 has no role to play in refusing access to such documents.
We are of the opinion that by their very nature the documents cannot be
exempt under clause 17 for the simple reason that the documents
(except for 31a,
36a, 36.1a, 42b, 261, 262 and 263) were created by SafeWork SA and the sending
of them to whomever does not invoke
parliamentary privilege. The use of them in
parliament may well attract parliamentary privilege but this cannot have
occurred prior
to them being used and is therefore not a valid reason for the
documents not to be disclosed.
concept of Parliamentary privilege has developed from Article 9 of the
of Rights 1688
, which states that ‘freedom of speech and debates or
proceedings in Parliament ought not be impeached or questioned in any
place out of Parliament’. The intention behind the privilege is, inter
alia, to allow Parliament to proceed with parliamentary
business without undue
interference.
the Commonwealth, an Act to regulate parliamentary privilege has not been
enacted in South Australia,
however the privilege is preserved in South Australia by
Constitution
which provides:
38—Privileges, powers etc of Council and Assembly
The privileges, immunities, and powers of the Legislative Council and House
of Assembly respectively, and of the committees and members
respectively, shall be the same as but no greater than those which on the
twenty-fourth day of October, 1856, were held,
enjoyed, and exercised by the
House of Commons and by the committees and members thereof, whether such
privileges, immunities, or
powers were so held, possessed, or enjoyed by custom,
statute, or otherwise.
Parliamentary
privilege is generally accepted to cover all words spoken in Parliament. Very
clearly, Hansard extracts will fall within
this category and, unlike legal
professional privilege, parliamentary privilege is absolute and cannot be
I therefore accept that
the Hansard extracts are subject to parliamentary privilege.
said, clause 17(c) does not prevent the disclosure of documents merely because
they are subject to parliamentary privilege, rather
the document will only be
exempt if disclosure would
that privilege. Relevantly, privilege
acts to prevent material being the subject of civil or criminal
of the extracts, documents 31a, 261, 262 and 263 appears to be publicly
available via the South Australian Parliament website.
I appreciate from the
internal review determination that the agency may have provided the applicant
with a link to be able to view
the relevant extracts, without having to disclose
the extracts themselves, so as not to infringe the privilege of parliament. This
suggests to me that the agency takes the view that the extracts as discovered
are confidential and distinct from the extracts which
are already public and
that disclosure of the discovered extracts would somehow
privilege of parliament.
that the information already exists within the public domain, it would stand to
reason that any use of the information which
might infringe the privilege of
parliament would be attributed to the publication of the information rather than
a subsequent release
under the FOI Act.
Additionally,
clause 17(c) specifically refers to the ‘public disclosure’ of
matter. In the matter of
Department of Treasury and Finance v Mullighan
the South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal observed that
‘disclosure’ means:
...a revelation for the first time. However, this is not to be understood to
refer to the document itself but to the information.
If the information, though
not necessarily the document, is within the public domain, to that extent
release of the document containing
the information may not constitute a
disclosure as there may not be a
revelation.
Although the above comments were made in the context of a consideration of
clause 1(1)(e), I consider that they can be equally applied
to clause 17(c). The
information in documents 31a, 261, 262 and 263 cannot be ‘disclosed’
in the sense intended by clause
17(c) as the information has already been
wording of clause 17(c) supports an interpretation that consideration be given
to the contents of the documents, rather than the
documents themselves as the
clause refers to ‘matter’.
Accordingly,
I am of the view that the disclosure of document 31a, 261, 262 and 263 would not
the privilege of parliament. If the applicant has already been
directed to the relevant Hansard extracts, I suspect this point will
little value.
33, 33a, 36, 36a, 36a.1, 37, 42, 42a, 264 and 265 are correspondence between
government officials, and government officials
and a Minister directly related
to House proceedings. In
Re Saffioti and Minister for Transport; Housing
the Western Australian Information Commissioner referred to a decision in
which the UK Information Commissioner listed the types of
information that would
normally fall within the parliamentary privilege exemption,
- correspondence between Members, Officers, Ministers and Government
Officials directly related to House proceedings;
- bills, amendments and motions, including those in draft, where they
originate from Parliament or a Member rather than from parliamentary
another government
department.
Consequently,
I consider that the disclosure of documents 33, 33a, 36, 36a, 36a.1, 37, 42,
42a, 264 and 265 would infringe the privilege
of parliament.
therefore confirm the agency’s application of clause 17(c), save for the
Hansard extracts, being documents 31a, 261, 262 and
263, which I am of the view
should be disclosed in full.
Determination
light of my views above, I vary the agency’s determination in the
following manner:
I confirm the
agency’s determination in relation to redactions made pursuant to clause
I confirm the
agency’s determination in relation to documents claimed to be exempt by
virtue of clause 12, save for:
40, 45, 201 (with paragraph 3 redacted), 240, 241, 242 and
which are purely administrative and therefore,
disclosure would not be a breach of section 271 of the WHS Act
2 of page 2 of document 65a and pages 2 and 3 of document 65a.2 contain
information about only the applicant, and are therefore
not exempt by virtue of
section 271(3)(a), save for the redactions I have made to the document to remove
the names of other persons
I confirm the
agency’s redactions made to documents pursuant to clause 17(c), save
31a, 261, 262 and 263, the disclosure of which would not infringe the privilege
of parliament.
Wayne Lines
SA OMBUDSMAN
Procedural steps
The agency received the FOI application dated 9 August 2022.
The principal officer of the agency determined to extend time to deal with
the application.
On application to this Office, I determined to vary the decision of the
principal officer to extend time to deal with the application,
to 25 October
The agency determined the application.
The agency received the internal review application dated 1 November
The agency varied the determination.
The Ombudsman received the applicant’s request for external review
dated 29 November 2022.
The Ombudsman issued his provisional determination and invited submissions
from the parties.
The applicant provided submissions in response to the provisional
determination.
The agency provided submissions in response to the provisional
determination.
The interested third party provided submissions in response to the
provisional determination.
Freedom of Information Act 1991
https://www.safework.sa.gov.au/news-and-alerts/news/news/2021/investigation-into-adelaide-crows-2018-camp-complete
South Australia,
Reading Speech,
Legislative Council, Thursday 26 February 2022, page 203,
MLC Wortley
Treasury and Finance,
Department of 2018/11929
[2019] SAOmbFOI 5
(22 July 2019)
Treasury and Finance,
Department of 2018/11929
[2019] SAOmbFOI 5
(22 July 2019
[2014] SADC 3.
[2014] SADC 3
at paragraphs
[2014] SADC 3
at paragraph
https://www.safework.sa.gov.au/news-and-alerts/news/news/2021/investigation-into-adelaide-crows-2018-camp-complete
Parliamentary
Privileges Act 1987
Parliamentary privilege and
the common law of parliament: can MP’s say what they want and get away
with it?, Carren Walker,
(2018); Prebble v Television New Zealand Limited
3 All ER 407-20
at [407]; Report relating to the use of or reference to the
records of proceedings of the House in courts, House of Representatives
Committee of Privileges, (1980), page 154.
Parliamentary privilege and
the common law of parliament: can MP’s say what they want and get away
with it?, Carren Walker,
Department of Treasury and
Finance v Mullighan
[2021] SACAT 28
Re Saffioti and Minister
for Transport; Housing
[2012] WAICmr 10
(11 April 2012), [32]. See also
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.14 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter