URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SADC/2025/124.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:55:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v LAWARIK [2025] SADC 124 (21 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
R v LAWARIK
[2025] SADC 124
Reasons for the Verdict of his
Honour Judge Handshin
21 October 2025
CRIMINAL LAW - PARTICULAR OFFENCES - OFFENCES AGAINST THE PERSON - ASSAULT
- CIRCUMSTANCES OF AGGRAVATION AND AGGRAVATED ASSAULTS
In the early morning hours of 17 February 2024, the accused stabbed a man
once to the chest on Rundle Street following a brief interaction.
The incident
was recorded on CCTV. The accused was subsequently charged with aggravated
causing serious harm with intent to cause
serious harm. He elected to be tried
by a judge sitting alone. At the commencement of the trial, the accused pleaded
not guilty to
aggravated causing serious harm with intent but guilty to the
charged alternative offence of recklessly causing serious harm, thereby
admitting that he had deliberately stabbed the alleged victim; that the alleged
victim suffered serious harm within the meaning of
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act
(SA) as a result; that he had no lawful excuse
or justification for stabbing the alleged victim; and that at the time he
the alleged victim, the accused was aware of the substantial risk that
stabbing the alleged victim could result in serious harm and
engaged in that
conduct without adequate justification. The accused's plea was not accepted in
satisfaction of the Information.
The prosecution case at trial was presented essentially by way of agreement.
A number of exhibits and CCTV camera recordings were
tendered by consent. In
light of the accused’s plea to the alternative charge, the sole forensic
contest between the parties
was whether the prosecution had proved beyond
reasonable doubt that the accused intended to endanger the alleged
victim’s life
by stabbing him.
Held: the accused is guilty of aggravated causing serious harm with intent to
cause serious harm. The movements of the accused before
and after the stabbing;
the motion he used to stab the alleged victim; the proximity of the two at the
time of the stabbing; the
force of the stabbing motion, in combination with the
nature and characteristics of the knife used by the accused, proved beyond
reasonable doubt that the accused intended to cause serious harm to the alleged
victim. The hypothesis that the accused may not have
formed an actual intention
to endanger the alleged victim’s life given the speed with which the
incident unfolded was excluded
by the totality of the evidence.
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Evidence Act 1929
ss 34P(2)(a)
(3), referred to.
R v Dookheea
[2017] HCA 36
(2017) 262 CLR 402
(2020) 137 SASR 280
Maxwell v The Queen
(1996) 184 CLR 501;
R v Hillier
[2007] HCA 13
(2007) 228 CLR
R v Baden-Clay
(2016) 258 CLR 308
Shepherd v The Queen
[1990] HCA 56
(1990) 170 CLR 573
Barca v The Queen
[1975] HCA 42
(1975) 133 CLR 82
[1911] HCA 66
(1911) 13 CLR 619
Martin v Osborne
[1936] HCA 23
(1936) 55 CLR 367
[2003] HCA 13
(2003) 212 CLR 299
Stapleton v The Queen
[1952] HCA 56
(1952) 86 CLR 358
R v LAWARIK
[2025] SADC 124
the early hours of Saturday, 17 February 2024, Nicholas Szeitz was stabbed once
in the chest by the accused, Simon Lawarik, on
Rundle Street, Adelaide. The
incident, its leadup and aftermath, was captured on a number of closed circuit
television (CCTV) cameras
in the vicinity.
around 2:50am on 17 February, Mr Szeitz was seated with a companion – a Mr
Distasio - on tables and chairs outside a venue
referred to as Milky Lane, which
is situated next to a nightclub known as Sugar. Mr Szeitz and Mr Distasio had
just acquired some
takeaway food. Mr Szeitz was affected by alcohol. He had been
drinking at a number of venues since around 4:30pm the day before,
but he does
not appear to have been grossly intoxicated.
prosecution case is that as Mr Szeitz and Mr Distasio were seated outside Milky
Lane, a man who was in the company of the accused
and a female associate, had a
brief interaction with Mr Szeitz and / or Mr Distasio as he walked past them.
The man, who I will
refer to as M1, had walked past Mr Szeitz and Mr Distasio
apparently saying something, before stopping and turning around to face
The nature of what appears to be a verbal exchange that followed between,
primarily, Mr Distasio and the male, is unknown but
it does not appear to have
been a friendly one for reasons that will become apparent.
this point, the accused, who had been walking only a short distance behind M1,
arrived at the table where Mr Szeitz and Mr Distasio
were seated. He promptly
lifted his t-shirt and removed a sheathed knife from the waistband of his pants.
He unsheathed the knife
and waved it in the direction of Mr Szeitz and Mr
accused and M1 began to walk away from the table, at which point Mr Szeitz got
up from behind the table and began jogging or
running in the direction of the
accused and M1, who were no more than a few metres from the table. The accused,
still armed with
the knife in his hand, turned slightly to face Mr Szeitz and
struck out at him using a backhand motion with the knife. The knife
Szeitz on the right side of his chest, causing a 2cm stab
accused and his companions then walked off. The accused replaced the knife in
its sheath.
Distasio and Mr Szeitz followed the accused and M1 for a short time before
returning to the area of Sugar nightclub where, ultimately,
bystanders assisted
Mr Szeitz by arranging for an Uber to take him to the Royal Adelaide Hospital.
his admission, Mr Szeitz was found to have a partially collapsed right lung. A
drain was inserted into his chest and a
substantial volume of blood drained. It
is not in dispute that the injuries Mr Szeitz suffered amounted to
‘serious harm’
within the meaning of
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
19 February 2024, the accused was arrested. He was wearing shoes that matched
the shoes being worn by the person responsible for
stabbing Mr Szeitz, as seen
on the CCTV footage.
accused was interviewed by police. He expressed surprise when the allegation
that he had stabbed someone was put to him and,
after being told when the
incident was said to have occurred, said he had no memory of the relevant
Saturday morning.
accused was subsequently charged with aggravated causing serious harm with
intent to cause serious harm (
the primary charge
) contrary to
and, in the alternative, aggravated recklessly causing serious
the alternative charge
), contrary to
accused elected to be tried by a judge sitting without a jury. At the
commencement of the trial, and as he had upon arraignment
in this Court, the
accused pleaded not guilty to the primary charge but guilty to the alternative
prosecution did not accept the plea to the alternative charge in satisfaction of
the Information, and the trial proceeded before
are the reasons for the verdict I now deliver.
sole forensic contest between the parties at trial was whether the prosecution
had proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused
intended to cause serious
harm to Mr Szeitz when he stabbed him in the chest. There was no dispute that
the accused was the person
responsible for stabbing Mr Szeitz; that he did so
deliberately; and that Mr Szeitz suffered serious harm as a result. There was
suggestion that the accused was acting in self-defence or defence of another or
that there was any other lawful excuse or justification
by his plea of guilty to the alternative charge, the accused admitted these
elements of the primary offence and, additionally,
that he was aware of a
substantial risk that stabbing Mr Szeitz could result in serious harm and
nonetheless engaged in that conduct
without adequate
justification.
the prosecution did not accept the plea to the alternative charge in
satisfaction of the Information, something should be said
an accused enters a plea of guilty to a charged alternative that is not accepted
in satisfaction of the Information, the plea
is not ‘withdrawn’ in
the way that it is where a plea is entered to an uncharged alternative and not
accepted by the
prosecution. Rather, the plea to the charged alternative remains
extant or, as is sometimes said, ‘on the court record or file,’
unless and until such time as the accused is convicted or acquitted of the
primary charge.
The trial court
will not administer the allocutus or otherwise act on the plea to the
alternative charge in a manner indicating its
acceptance and a determination of
guilt unless the accused is acquitted of the primary
As a plea of guilty is an
anterior step to conviction, the doctrine of
autrefois convict,
related principles of double jeopardy, are not engaged by the commencement of
the trial on the primary charge unless the trial
court acts on the plea to the
alternative charge by, for example, proceeding to sentence.
the event the accused is convicted of the primary charge, the doctrine of
autrefois convict
will prevent any action being taken on the plea to the
charged alternative. The plea to the alternative offence has no further work
do in that situation.
however the prosecution fail to prove the primary charge, the guilty plea to the
alternative offence remains ‘live’,
and the court may accept and act
on the plea by administering the allocutus and proceeding to sentence for the
alternative charge.
evidence upon which the prosecution rely was put before me by agreement between
the parties. No oral evidence was adduced by
either party.
the course of his opening, Mr M Mott, counsel for the prosecution, tendered by
consent a number of exhibits, including CCTV
footage of the
photographs of Mr
Szeitz’ injuries;
photograph of the location of the incident depicting the position of the CCTV
cameras that recorded the tendered
the record of interview
between the accused and the police
and the knife used by the accused to stab Mr
lengthy statement of agreed facts was also tendered.
summarising the exhibits and agreed facts, and identifying the findings I make,
I remind myself of some fundamental matters.
prosecution bears the onus of proving the guilt of the accused. The standard of
proof is beyond reasonable doubt. The accused
is not required to prove anything.
He is presumed innocent of the charge unless and until the prosecution proves
each element of
the offence beyond reasonable doubt. In this respect, I keep in
mind the comments of the High Court in
R v Dookheea
[2017] HCA 36
(2017) 262 CLR 402
concerning the standard of proof:
...being satisfied of guilt
beyond reasonable doubt does not simply mean concluding that the accused may
have committed the offence
charged or even that it is more likely than not that
the accused committed the offence charged. What is required is a much higher
standard of satisfaction, the highest known to the law: proof beyond reasonable
prosecution case that the accused intended to cause Mr Szeitz serious harm is
circumstantial. The accused’s state of mind
at the time of the stabbing
can only be determined inferentially from other facts I find to be established.
prosecution contend that the only rational and reasonable inference that can be
drawn from the combined effect of the CCTV footage;
the characteristics of the
knife used by the accused to stab Mr Szeitz; the motion used by the accused to
stab Mr Szeitz and the
area of the body to which the stab wound was inflicted is
that the accused intended to cause serious harm to Mr Szeitz.
defence case is that the prosecution have failed to exclude the hypothesis that
the accused acted only recklessly, in accordance
with his plea of guilty to the
alternative charge. The defence argue that the speed with which the interaction
unfolded; the orientation
of the accused’s body in the moments before the
stabbing; the abrupt manner in which Mr Szeitz got up from behind the table
ran in the direction of the accused and M1, which may have produced an
instinctive response from the accused, as opposed to one
accompanied by an
actual intention to cause serious harm; and the fact that only one wound was
inflicted, without any further attempts
by the accused to attack Mr Szeitz,
leave open as a reasonable possibility that the accused did not actually have an
intention to
endanger Mr Szeitz’ life at the time of the stabbing.
assessment of circumstantial evidence is to be conducted globally. Individual
items of circumstantial evidence are not to be discarded
or ignored in the
fact-finding process because, viewed in isolation, they are incapable of
sustaining an inference for which the
prosecution
My task is to identify
the evidence which I accept; the facts which I find established by the evidence
and the rational, reasonable
and logical inferences I am prepared to draw from
those facts and ask whether I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the
intended to cause serious harm. In the circumstances of this case, this
exercise primarily involves analysis of the CCTV footage
and determination of
the inferences I am able to draw from the footage.
considering whether an inference can reasonably be drawn from what I consider to
be established intermediate facts, I am to
have regard to the whole of the
evidence and the facts I find to be proved by the evidence. It may not be
reasonable to draw a particular
inference from one intermediate fact or
circumstance; but such an inference may be reasonably drawn from the combined
effect of the
facts I find to be established.
Intermediate
facts that are not indispensable to proof of an accused’s guilt, need not
be proved beyond reasonable
is a by-product of the burden of proof that the prosecution will have failed to
prove the element of intent to cause serious harm
beyond reasonable doubt unless
any and all reasonable explanations arising on the evidence consistent with the
accused’s innocence
Here, the innocent
hypothesis that must be excluded is that the accused was reckless as to whether
he caused serious harm, as opposed
to having intended to cause serious harm.
is not for the accused to persuade me that an inference or inferences other than
that he intended to cause serious harm should
be drawn and it is not for the
accused to prove any facts in support of a hypothesis consistent with innocence.
Of course, for any
such hypothesis to give rise to a doubt as to the
accused’s guilt, it must be a hypothesis that reasonably arises on the
A circumstantial case is not defeated because it is possible to
articulate an alternative hypothesis, not grounded in the evidence,
would be theoretically inconsistent with
observe further that the process of drawing legitimate inferences is to be
distinguished from an exercise in speculation or guesswork.
An inference
‘must rest upon something more than mere
conjecture’.
enough, if the accused’s state of mind is to be proved by circumstantial
evidence, the conclusion that he acted with
an intention to cause serious harm
must follow as the only rational and reasonable inference that can be drawn from
the subsidiary
or intermediate facts I find to be
established.
the end of the prosecution case, the accused indicated he would neither give nor
call evidence. This was his right, and I draw
no adverse inference from its
exercise. I have not used the accused’s silence as a make weight or to
fill any gaps or deficiencies
in the prosecution case. To do otherwise would
undermine the accused’s right. The fact that the accused elected not to
evidence does not alter the burden of proof which remains fixed on the
prosecution; nor does it affect the weight that must be given
to the presumption
of innocence.
accused did however speak with the police following his arrest on 19 February
2024. During the provision of his arrest rights,
the accused indicated he did
not wish to answer any questions but wanted to hear the allegations against him.
To the extent the accused
did comment on some matters that arose during the
interview, but not others, I do not draw any adverse inference against him or
case advanced on his behalf. Equally, although the accused responded to some
questions asked of him, he did not provide a version
of events to the police. He
was under no obligation to do so. He had the right to remain silent and I do not
draw any inference adverse
to the accused or the case advanced on his behalf
from the fact that he did not provide a positive version of events.
the allegations were put to him, the accused expressed disbelief. He asked for
confirmation as to when the stabbing took place,
and when told, remarked
‘The fuck was I doing on Saturday? See here’s the thing, I
don’t even fucking remember
that Saturday, you know what I mean?’
The accused went on to inquire as to Mr Szeitz’ condition and to express
that he would be ‘alright’. When shown some still images
from the CCTV footage, the accused identified his girlfriend.
the accused said during his interview can be seen as, in any way, an admission
to having acted with the intention of causing
serious harm and I have not so
reasoned. Indeed, nothing said by the accused could be construed as against his
interests. As I have
said, the accused seemed clear that he had no recollection
of what he was doing on the morning of the stabbing and no recollection
fact stabbing Mr Szeitz which, by his plea to the alternative charge, he accepts
no admissions were made by the accused, and the accused did not give evidence at
trial (which may have made his asserted lack
of recollection relevant), the only
relevance of the interview would seem to be the accused’s reaction when
first taxed with
the allegation being one of surprise and disbelief, and,
subject to matters I will turn, to shed light on whether the accused may
been intoxicated at the time of the
That the accused
expressed some concern for the well-being of Mr Szeitz and otherwise appeared to
be taken aback by the allegation
might lend some support to the hypothesis that
he did not intend to cause Mr Szeitz serious harm. However, the accused’s
to hearing the allegations and lack of recollection about the incident
is not mutually exclusive with having formed the requisite
intention at the time
of the incident.
add for completeness that the accused’s asserted lack of recollection
not assist or strengthen
the prosecution case. I do not use it as a makeweight or as lending support in
any way to the prosecution’s
contention that the only rational and
reasonable inference to be drawn is that the accused intended to cause serious
harm when Mr
Szeitz was stabbed. At all times, it remains for the prosecution to
prove the elements of the charge beyond reasonable doubt and,
insofar as the
question of intention is concerned (there being no suggestion that the other
elements of the offence have not been
proved), to exclude any hypothesis
consistent with innocence arising on the evidence.
with the record of interview, the accused was also questioned about a number of
other summary allegations relating to his
possession of a pistol trigger
cross-bow and resisting police at the time of his arrest. It appears he was also
to receive a drug
diversion notice for ‘gear’ that had been located.
With the possible exception of reference to ‘gear’, which
suggest the accused was a drug user and hence may be relevant to whether the
accused was affected by a substance on this particular
night, the additional
allegations put to the accused during his interview are not relevant to the
issue I have to resolve.
accused also made comments during the interview suggesting some experience with
the criminal justice system.
have disregarded these aspects of the interview, which were not suggested by the
defence to have any forensic use in support of
the defence case. I have not
reasoned that, because the accused was alleged to have committed other offences;
or because he appeared
to have some familiarity with the criminal justice
system; or because he may have been in possession of drugs or been a drug user,
that he is a bad person or the sort of person likely to have committed the
offence charged or any other crime. I have not allowed
the fact that the
interview included these matters to influence my assessment of whether the
prosecution has proved its case.
respect to the accused’s acknowledgment that the police may have found his
‘gear’, the only permissible use
of that evidence would be to raise
the possibility, in conjunction with his claimed lack of recollection, the time
of the stabbing
and the accused’s presentation on the CCTV footage, that
the accused may have been affected by drugs at the time of the stabbing.
turn may reflect on whether it has been proved that the accused formed an actual
intention to inflict serious harm on Mr
because an inference as
to specific intent may not be so readily drawn from the conduct of an
intoxicated person as it may from the
conduct of a sober person.
considering the evidence and whether I am satisfied to the criminal standard of
the elements of the offence, I have brought an
open and unprejudiced mind to
bear. I remind myself of the importance of making a decision without sympathy,
prejudice or fear.
Elements of the offence
prove the offence of aggravated causing serious harm with intent to cause
serious harm, the prosecution must prove five elements
beyond reasonable
that the accused deliberately stabbed Mr Szeitz.
by stabbing Mr Szeitz, the accused caused him ‘serious harm’.
Serious harm is defined in
(a) harm that endangers a person’s life; or
(b) harm that consists of, or results in, serious and protracted impairment of a
physical or mental function; or
(c) harm that consists of, or results in, serious disfigurement.
prosecution rely only on limb (a) of the definition of ‘serious
the accused intended to cause Mr Szeitz ‘serious harm’, as defined.
Again, the prosecution rely only on limb
(a) of the definition of ‘serious
the accused acted unlawfully, that is, there was no lawful excuse or
justification for his conduct. No issue of self-defence,
defence of another or
defence of property has been raised by the accused.
the accused used an offensive weapon, namely, a knife, when committing the
I have earlier mentioned, the only element in dispute at trial was what I have
described as the third element of the offence.
There is no dispute that the
other elements have been proved beyond reasonable doubt and that is consistent
with the accused’s
plea to the alternative charge.
of the evidence
turn then to a summary of the evidence, and agreed facts, upon which the
prosecution case relies. It is convenient to set out the
agreed facts in their
entirety as they provide the context for analysis of the CCTV
Statement of Agreed facts
defendant’s full name is Simon Alexander Lawarik. His date of birth is 6
March 1996.
complainant’s full name is Nicholas Graeme Szeitz (
date of birth is 8 May 1999.
investigating officer is Detective Brevet Sergeant Peter Wise.
The Offending
Friday 16 February 2024 from 4.30pm onwards, Szeitz went to a number of
different venues. Throughout the evening, Szeitz consumed
alcohol. He is unable
to recall any detail about the incident.
the evening of 16 February 2024, Szeitz was wearing a beige cap, a cream shirt,
and black shorts.
approximately 2.44am on 17 February 2024, Szeitz and an acquaintance Jack
exited the ‘Distill’ nightclub located at
286 Rundle Street, Adelaide.
approximately 2.50am, Szeitz and Distasio bought some takeaway food and sat on
the benches in front of ‘Milky Lane’
to eat. ‘Milky
Lane’ is located at 272 Rundle Street.
this time, the defendant was walking on Rundle Street in company with another
male and a female. The defendant was wearing
a black shirt, long white pants,
and was carrying a black backpack.
stabbing incident occurred during this period and is captured on seized CCTV
stabbing Szeitz, the defendant continued walking away with his male and female
companions. As the defendant was walking away,
he put the knife back into the
Evidence of Mallory Watson (Watson)
friend Thomas Michael (
) had left the night club so she went to
find him. Michael informed Watson that he was in the Vaughan Place laneway with
someone who
had just been stabbed.
and another friend Paul Richards (
) went to Vaughan Place and saw
Thomas sitting next to Szeitz. Watson observed Szeitz to be wearing a white
shirt which was covered
looked at Szeitz’s wound and saw a small puncture wound. She booked an
Uber using her account and Michael, Richards,
and herself took Szeitz to the
Royal Adelaide Hospital.
Evidence of Dr. Syed Shah (Dr.
Hospital as the remote on-call trauma surgeon. He
attended to Szeitz when Szeitz
presented to the Royal Adelaide Hospital.
Shah could not ascertain the exact nature of the history and circumstances of
how the wound occurred as Szeitz was unable to recall
what occurred.
examination of Szeitz, Dr. Shah ascertained that Szeitz only had a 2cm stab
wound to the right side of his chest. The wound was
as the morning progressed, Szeitz was noted to have light headedness as he was
sitting up from a laying position. Another
CT scan of the chest and abdomen was
performed at 11.47am which revealed that Szeitz’s right lung was partially
12.10pm, a chest drain was entered into Szeitz’s chest with 1000ml of
blood estimated to have drained initially.
chest drain was followed up over subsequent days with chest X-Rays and Szeitz
was treated with high flow oxygen via face mask.
21 February 2024, Mr Szeitz was discharged from hospital.
29 February 2024, the sutures from the right side chest stab wound were removed.
Attendance of Sergeant Darren Lindow at Royal Adelaide
Hospital to check on Szeitz’ condition.
Lindow took photographs at the hospital of Szeitz and his clothing.
Attendance of Detective Brevet Sergeant Peter Wise at Royal
Adelaide Hospital
at the Royal Adelaide Hospital to speak to Szeitz
informed DBSGT Wise that he was unable to recall details of the incident.
Wise obtained a buccal swab from Szeitz using buccal swab is 0000784.
Szeitz’ buccal swab sample was booked into police
property as
SAP2400046177
Wise also seized the following clothing from
Police Property Number
(SAP2400046177)
Description
Cream shirt
Black shorts
Pair of white sneakers
Baseball cap
Attendance of Brevet Sergeant Daniel Cullinan at Royal Adelaide
) Daniel Cullinan is a crime scene investigator.
Hospital and conducted a forensic examination of Szeitz.
Cullinan observed that Szeitz had a stab wound to the right side of his chest.
The injury was initially bandaged and this was
removed briefly by nursing staff
for the examination. BSGT Cullinan observed that the wound had been stitched.
part of the forensic examination. BSGT Cullinan took a series of photos of
Szeitz and his injury. These photographs were compiled
into a photo booklet and
marked with Forensic Register Case Number
photo booklet consisted of 6 photographs with the following
description:
Photo Reference
(1448603-DSC)
Description
Image 001 – Nicholas Graeme Szeitz
Image 002 – Injury to right side of chest
Image 003 – Injury to right side of chest
Image 004 – Injury to right side of chest
Image 005 – Hands of Szeitz
Image 006 – Hands of Szeitz
CCTV Footage
part of his investigation into the stabbing, DBSGT Peter Wise attended various
locations and obtained CCTV footage from those locations.
Owl’ at 10 Vaughn Place, Adelaide. He was allowed
access to their CCTV and
downloaded the footage. The footage was transferred to a disc labelled
and booked into police property as
SAP2400046177
time on the CCTV system for the ‘Howling Owl’ was about 5 hours 30
minutes ahead of the actual time.
at 272 Rundle Street. He was allowed access to
their CCTV and downloaded the
footage. The footage was transferred to a disc labelled
booked into police property as SAP2400046177
time on the CCTV system for the ‘Milky Lane’ was accurate.
) control centre and collected a disc containing Adelaide City
Council CCTV footage. The disc was booked into police property as
SAP2400046177
‘Distill’ night club via email from Steven
Giles (Director of
‘Distill’). DBSGT Wise downloaded the footage to a disc labelled
DISTILL.CCTV
and booked into police property as
SAP2400046177
‘Sugar’ night club to collect CCTV footage
that he had arranged.
Street. DBSGT Hausler was provided a USB containing
the CCTV footage by
‘Sugar’s operations manager Alex Johnston’. After collecting
the USB, DBSGT Hausler handed
it to DBSGT Wise. The USB was booked into police
property as SAP2400046177
Arrest of the
19 February 2024 at about 7.44pm, Brevet Sergeant Andrew Cooper and Detective
Sergeant (DBSGT) Ashwin Menon were driving on Siddal
Road when they saw the
defendant. The defendant was walking and he was also carrying a black backpack.
Ashwin Menon approached the defendant and asked his name. The defendant
confirmed his name and was arrested by DBSGT Menon.
police officers arrived including DBSGT Sarsha Zacher and Brevet Sergeant
Danielle Senior. The black backpack that the defendant
was carrying was searched
by Brevet Sergeant Senior.
the black backpack, Brevet Sergeant Senior located a black handled knife in a
sheath. The knife was seized and booked into
police property as
SAP2400046177
DNA Evidence
20 February 2024 at about 9.12pm, Detective Brevet Sergeant obtained a DNA
sample from the defendant using buccal swab kit number
0002901. The
defendant’s buccal swab sample was booked into police property as
SAP2400046177
1 May 2024, DBSGT Peter Wise deposited the following at Evidence Desk for DNA
Police Property Number
(SAP2700046177)
Description
Buccal swab kit containing swab of Szeitz
Contains DNA reference of Szeitz
Black handled knife in sheath
Located in black backpack carried by the defendant at the time of his
Buccal swab kit containing swab from defendant
Contains DNA reference of defendant
) from Forensic Science SA (FSSA) performed an
examination of the items. Windram examined the black handled knife in sheath
) and observed dark patchy staining on the inner sheath. The dark
patchy stain was described as ‘not blood like’.
took a swab from both sides of the knife blade (3.10-01). She also took a swab
of the inner sheath surface, avoiding the dark
patchy staining (3.02-01).
tests were conducted on both swabs utilising the DNA reference samples provided
by both Szeitz (
) and the defendant (
testing of the swab of both sides of the knife blade (3.01-01) revealed a mixed
DNA profile with two contributors. It was indeterminate
whether Szeitz was a
contributor. The defendant was found to not be a contributor with a statistical
weighting of 2.
testing of the inner sheath surface revealed a mixed DNA profile of three
contributors. Szeitz was found to be a contributor with
a statistical weighting
of >100 billion. The defendant was also found to be a contributor with a
statistical weighting of 6.8
can be seen, as a result of the stabbing, Mr Szeitz suffered a 2cm stab wound to
the right side of the chest and a partially collapsed
lung. He spent four days
in hospital before being discharged.
is no evidence before me as to the force required to cause the injuries that Mr
Szeitz presented with, or which further explains
the nature of the two injuries.
There is no evidence before me as to how the injuries endangered Mr
Szeitz’ life, but the accused
accepts by his plea to the alternative
charge that Mr Szeitz in fact suffered ‘serious harm’ as defined.
note that photographs 1 and 2 of P8 show the location of the stab wound as being
proximate to Mr Szeitz’ right nipple.
footage from three separate cameras was tendered and is the critical evidence
relied upon by the prosecution to establish what
is said to be a targeted strike
to Mr Szeitz’ torso, from which the prosecution say it can be inferred
that the accused intended
to cause serious harm.
P2 is footage recorded by a CCTV camera adjacent to the Howling Owl. The time
stamp on the footage is five and a half hours
ahead of real time.
footage records the accused, a ‘female associate’ and their male
companion, M1, arriving in the area of the Howling
Owl at around 2:49am. M1
thereafter spent a period of time seated on a bench apparently exploring the
contents of or dealing with
an issue relating to his backpack.
accused can be seen removing a few items from an overflowing bin and throwing
them to the ground, walking around the courtyard
and embracing the female
associate. Save for what may be a brief stumble after he throws a number of
items from the bin onto the
ground, there is nothing about his conduct that
suggests he was drug or alcohol affected, at least not to any significant
He appears to have control over his movements and was generally steady
on his feet.
P3 is footage recorded by CCTV cameras outside Milky Lane. The footage records
Mr Szeitz and Mr Distasio emerging from a
shop on Rundle Street at around 2:48am
or thereabouts with takeaway food in hand. They walked back towards the Miky
Lane cameras
in the direction of Vaughan Place (as depicted on P9) and past
Sugar nightclub before taking a seat at tables in the vicinity of
Sugar / Milky
Lane just before 2:50am.
2:50:34am, Mr Distasio, who was then dressing his take-away food, looked up in
the direction of Vaughan Place. Mr Szeitz turned
to his left (and slightly
behind him) just a moment later.
2:50:35am, M1 entered the view of the camera. He walked past the table at which
Mr Distasio and Mr Szeitz were seated at pace
and in very close proximity to the
table. Both Mr Szeitz and Mr Distasio were seated on the footpath side of the
table that ran perpendicular
to Rundle Street.
M1 walked past Mr Distasio, his head appeared to turn in the direction of the
table. At the same time Mr Szeitz can be seen looking
to his left and behind
infer, saying something. His mouth can be seen moving
on the CCTV footage.
2:50:37am, the accused entered the view of the camera together with the female
associate from the Howling Owl footage.
this point, M1, who had walked past the table, stopped and turned back towards
Mr Distasio and Mr Szeitz. He appeared to say something.
2:50:39am and having walked half a metre or so past the table, the accused
stopped as M1 appeared to continue to engage with Mr
Distasio in particular.
2:50:39am, the accused can be seen lifting his black t-shirt and removing a
sheathed knife from his waistband. He immediately
removed the knife from the
sheath with his right hand. The footage indicates he was then perhaps a little
more than a metre –
perhaps a metre and a half – from the table.
accused then swapped the knife into his left hand, in which he was also holding
the sheath. He appeared to have a cigarette in
his right hand.
the knife in his left hand, the accused moved slightly closer to the table and
pointed the knife briefly in the direction of
Mr Distasio. The accused appeared
to be saying something to Mr Distasio.
2:50:42am, Mr Szeitz began to get up from behind the table. The accused was
still looking in the direction of the table.
2:50:43am, the accused lowered the knife and turned to walk away from the table,
with M1 slightly ahead of him.
next portion of the CCTV footage is difficult to describe and my attempt to do
so is really no substitute for the footage. I
have watched the footage a number
of times, however, I have been careful to guard against the risk of
‘repeat viewing’
distorting the reality of the factual scenario
within which I must determine whether the prosecution has proved that the
acted with the intention of causing serious harm. Obviously enough, the
event as it unfolded in real time was over very quickly –
within a matter
of seconds – and did not present the opportunity for micro-analysis,
including from different camera angles.
I have been careful not to allow the
facility of replaying the footage over and over again to distract attention from
the fact that
the incident was over within a matter of seconds.
it is trite, but important to observe, that what must be proved is that the
accused actually had an intention to cause serious
harm to Mr Szeitz
he stabbed Mr Szeitz. It is not a matter of imputing a notional
intention to the accused; nor can I reason that the accused is taken
intended the natural and probable consequences of his conduct. To reason in that
way would subvert the burden of proof and
I have not done
to what is shown by the footage, it can be seen that as Mr Szeitz took to his
feet (at approximately 2:50:43/44am), he
began moving in the direction of the
accused and M1 – then perhaps closer to 2m from the table – at some
speed. He can
be described as beginning to jog or run.
accused’s attention appeared to have been drawn to Mr Szeitz and he began
to turn around (at approximately 2:50:44/45am).
His head was at effectively 90
degrees to his chest, looking back in the direction of Mr Szeitz over his right
Mr Szeitz continued to jog – on the face of the footage at least more on a
direct line to M1 – the accused swivelled
his body such that it was 45
degrees to Mr Szeitz’ path of movement. The accused was looking in the
direction of Mr Szeitz.
2:50:45/46am, the accused can then be seen almost bracing his lower body and
swinging his right hand, in which the knife then
was, in a backhand motion into
Mr Szeitz’ chest. It looks to me as though the accused’s palm may
have been facing up
at the time he inflicted the stab wound, such that the
stabbing motion was a slightly awkward one. He still had a cigarette in his
right hand.
swing of the accused’s arm appears on the footage to take place with some
the time he struck Mr Szeitz with the knife, the accused was looking in his
direction and the two of them were within half a metre
to a metre or so of each
Szeitz was momentarily stopped in his tracks.
accused and M1 walked off down Rundle Street. The accused looked back at Mr
Szeitz briefly before he continued walking.
Szeitz and Mr Distasio followed the accused and M1 down Rundle Street. When Mr
Szeitz got to the entrance of Sugar nightclub,
he appeared to notice that he was
bleeding from his chest. He returned to the table before again heading down
Rundle Street in the
direction of Mr Distasio. He can be seen jogging at one
Distasio and Mr Szeitz then made their way back past Sugar and Milky Lane and
according to the agreed facts, at around 3am, a
number of bystanders took Mr
Szeitz to the Royal Adelaide Hospital.
second camera angle that is part of P2 shows the incident, looking back towards
the direction from which M1 and the accused came.
The quality of the footage is
not as clear as the main camera footage. It is not necessary to further describe
the footage from this
second angle, but I have reviewed it carefully, bearing in
mind the matters to which I previously adverted.
was said at any point of the interactions I have described between the four men
is not the subject of any evidence. It is clear
enough however that whatever
exchange occurred was not friendly.
sequelae to the stabbing is set out in the agreed facts, which I have earlier
summarised and will not repeat.
Intoxication
turning to my analysis of the evidence and the issue for resolution, I say
something about intoxication.
seems clear enough from Mr Szeitz’ movements on the footage in combination
with the agreed facts that he was affected by
alcohol. He does not appear to be
grossly affected by alcohol insofar as he was able to walk and, as I have said,
jog or run, without
falling over. He apparently retained general control of his
movements. When he took to his feet from behind the table, there was
clumsiness to his movement that is not inconsistent with him being intoxicated,
but, as I said, he does not appear to be
grossly impaired. Had Mr Szeitz given
evidence, it would have been necessary for me to deal with the extent to which
his intoxication
might have affected, at the least, the reliability of his
Mr Szeitz did not give evidence and the agreed facts indicate that he is unable
to recall the incident.
submission was advanced by counsel for the accused, Mr T Blake, to the effect
that any inference adverse to the prosecution case
should be drawn on account of
Mr Szeitz not having given evidence.
Distasio was not called to give evidence. He was a material witness and no
evidence was put before me to explain why he was not
However, in
circumstances where the accused admits all but one element of the charged
offence and there is an objective and independent
record of the interaction
(excluding of course what, if anything, was said by those involved), I do not
think much turns on Mr Distasio’s
absence. Nonetheless, I will proceed on
the basis that any evidence from him would not have assisted the prosecution
the accused was affected by alcohol or drugs at the time of the stabbing is not
the subject of any direct evidence. The accused
told police that he could not
remember this particular Saturday morning. He did not say that was because he
was intoxicated. Rather,
he seemed to suggest that he did not really pay
attention to the days of the week.
in the interview, the accused made mention of the police finding his
‘gear’ and reference was made to him receiving
a drug diversion on
that account. To the extent that this exchange might suggest the accused was a
user of drugs, it gives rise to
a theoretical possibility that the accused may
have consumed drugs on this particular morning, but, again, there was no
that he had and the CCTV footage does not suggest that, if he did so,
his faculties were significantly impaired.
the accused were affected by drugs or alcohol at the time of the stabbing, that
would be relevant to my assessment of whether
the prosecution had proved beyond
reasonable doubt that he intended to cause serious harm. Depending on the
circumstances and degree
of intoxication for example, it may be more difficult
to draw an inference of a specific intention accompanying the conduct of an
intoxicated actor than it would be for someone who was unaffected by drugs or
the state of the evidence, and without overlooking that this incident took place
just before 3am on a Saturday morning, I am unable
to say whether it is
reasonably possible the accused was affected by drugs or alcohol, or at least to
any significant degree. As
I have mentioned, his movements do not appear to
reflect intoxication at all or, taking the approach most favourable to him, to
significant degree. Nonetheless, and as will be seen, I will also examine
the evidence on the assumption that the accused may possibly
intoxicated at least to some extent.
combined effect of the CCTV footage, the agreed facts and the accused’s
plea of guilty to the alternative charge, which
involves an admission of the
elements of that offence, satisfies me beyond reasonable doubt that the accused
deliberately stabbed
Mr Szeitz; that he did so without lawful excuse or
justification; and that Mr Szeitz suffered serious harm as a result.
the prosecution has proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused stabbed Mr
Szeitz intending to cause him serious harm
is a more difficult issue to
determine bearing in mind the speed with which the critical events unfolded.
support of this finding, Mr Mott pointed to four features of the incident:
circumstances in which the knife was introduced into the interaction. Not only
was it removed from the accused’s waistband;
it was also removed from its
sheath and pointed in the direction of Mr Distasio and / or Mr Szeitz, in a
threatening or aggressive
strike was made with a degree of precision towards Mr Szeitz’ chest. Given
their closeness to each other, and that the accused
was looking at Mr Szeitz at
the time of the stabbing, it is open to infer that the accused targeted the
characteristics of the knife, which, in contrast to a ‘pen knife’ or
a box cutter, was clearly capable of inflicting
serious injury to any person
against whom it was used.
apparent forcefulness of the strike, which was said not to be a ‘casual
blow’ but, rather, one made with a considerable
degree of force and the
accused’s ‘weight behind it’.
Blake submitted that the prosecution had failed to exclude the hypothesis that
the accused, consistently with his plea, was only
reckless as to whether serious
harm might be caused to Mr Szeitz when he stabbed him.
asked, rhetorically, if the accused intended to cause serious harm to Mr Szeitz,
why did he un-sheath the knife?
Mr Blake submitted that the answer was that the accused intended only to warn Mr
Distasio and Mr Szeitz ‘not to do anything’.
As I understood the
submission, it was that the production of the knife itself lent support to the
defence hypothesis that the accused
intended only to warn against any escalation
of the confrontation. It might be that if that was the accused’s purpose,
have been more readily achieved by producing the knife in its sheath or
revealing the knife in his waistband. In any event, I accept
that the fact that
the accused did not then seek to engage in any actual violence might be thought
to support the possibility that
he produced the knife only as a deterrent or
warning and that he did not then have any intention to cause Mr Szeitz serious
as Mr Blake argued, after producing the knife, the accused turned and walked
way. Mr Blake submitted that it was as he was
re-sheathing the knife, that the
accused must have seen Mr Szeitz get up from behind the table out of the corner
of his eye. Mr Blake
put that ‘the action is a backhand stab into the
chest. It’s not a directed stab into that region. He could have got
anywhere, he could have got a worse result, he could have stabbed him in the
Blake contended that given how quickly the incident unfolded, I would be unable
to infer an intent to cause serious harm beyond
reasonable doubt and that
‘if there was more to it, there could be a question of whether he was even
reckless, but he’s
pled guilty to that charge and I don’t pursue
that any further’.
very prompt production by the accused of a knife from his waistband and the
removal of the knife from its sheath, was a hyper-aggressive
response to
whatever exchange or interaction had then commenced. I accept that the initial
production of the knife may have been
an act of deterrence. However, it was a
threatening gesture and involved the accused immediately escalating the
interaction.
I have earlier remarked, there is no direct evidence before me that the accused
was affected by drugs or alcohol at the time of
the stabbing and the CCTV
footage does not, to me, suggest that, if he was so affected, it was to any
significant degree. Nonetheless,
the accused did tell police that had no
recollection of this particular Saturday morning, which may be consistent with
having been
drug or alcohol affected, and there is some evidence that might
support the inference that he was a drug user.
have therefore evaluated the evidence and the submissions of the parties on the
basis that it is possible that the accused may
have been under the influence of
drugs or alcohol to some extent and brought to bear the observation I made
earlier: that it may
be more difficult to draw an inference of a specific
intention accompanying the conduct of an intoxicated actor than it would be
someone who was unaffected by drugs or alcohol.
the stabbing was apparently a response to Mr Szeitz getting up from behind the
table and moving with some speed in the direction
of the accused and / or M1,
the accused had the knife in his hand in the moments leading up to the stabbing
and the danger the knife
posed as a weapon given its size and the
characteristics of the blade could not have escaped his attention. Nonetheless,
that the fact the accused was moving away and may have been looking to
return the knife to its sheath after the initial interaction
is important. This
lends some support to the submission that, at that point at least, the accused
was not looking for further conflict
or a confrontation.
contrary to the submission of Mr Blake, I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
that when the accused made the decision to
deploy the knife, he was looking at
Mr Szeitz and therefore had the opportunity to identify his target area, even if
only briefly.
The accused was also in close proximity to Mr Szeitz and had
re-positioned his body somewhat in response to Mr Szeitz getting up
from behind
the table. I am satisfied that the blow delivered by the accused was a targeted
strike, directed towards the torso of
Mr Szeitz. That is, I find the blow was
directed towards the centre mass of Mr Szeitz and was therefore an inherently
dangerous act.
The accused may not have intended for the blow to land
where it did, but I am satisfied that he intended to strike Mr
Szeitz in the area of his chest. This was not a blow delivered in
the thick of
an affray involving multiple people, confusion and flailing limbs. It was a
calculated blow with a large knife, delivered
to the chest of an individual who
was within arm’s reach of the accused. The accused employed a deliberate
stabbing motion,
as opposed to a ‘slashing’ motion.
blow was also apparently delivered with some force. The knife was not simply
held out in the direction of Mr Szeitz; the accused
swung his arm at Mr Szeitz,
from a braced position and with speed. He was not in retreat. He had effectively
turned to engage in
what he must have thought was a move towards conflict or
confrontation by Mr Szeitz. The movement of the accused’s arm was
gentle or exploratory. As I have said, it was a motion designed to penetrate Mr
Szeitz’ body with the knife.
was also a calmness about the way in which the accused appeared to re-sheath the
knife and walk off after he stabbed Mr Szeitz.
That may be because he did not
appreciate at the time the seriousness of the injury he had inflicted, but it is
also suggestive of
a degree of control and composure; of ordered thinking.
acknowledge that the accused may have been somewhat startled by Mr Szeitz taking
to his feet and moving with pace in his direction.
However, that was clearly a
product of the accused having removed the knife from his waistband in the first
place and the irresistible
inference is, as I have said, that the accused
interpreted Mr Szeitz’ movement to be a hostile one. That is why he
the incident was over in a matter of seconds (on my analysis, around six to
seven seconds elapsed between the accused producing
the knife and stabbing Mr
Szeitz), and the stabbing occurred within a second or two of Mr Szeitz getting
up from behind the table,
I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the
accused had the opportunity to, and did in fact, form an intention to cause
harm to Mr Szeitz by delivering a blow with a large and dangerous knife
to his chest. The fact that, some days later, the accused
may have expressed
surprise or disbelief about having stabbed Mr Szeitz and hoped that he would be
‘alright’ does not
deny that, at the time he did stab Mr Szeitz, he
intended to cause him serious harm.
I have examined the evidence on the bases that the accused was unaffected by
drugs and / or alcohol and, alternatively, that he
may have been affected by
drugs and / or alcohol. On both scenarios, I am satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that the only rational
and reasonable inference that can be drawn is that
the accused intended to cause serious harm to Mr Szeitz when he plunged the
into his chest, having regard to the nature of the weapon used; what I
find to be the targeted location of the strike; the motion
used by the accused
to inflict the stab wound; the apparent forcefulness of the blow; and the
context within which the accused had
removed and ultimately deployed the
combined force of the evidence and the inferences available from the footage
exclude the hypothesis consistent with innocence
upon which the defence relied,
namely, that the accused was aware that stabbing Mr Szeitz carried with it a
substantial risk of causing
serious harm, but proceeded to do so anyway, without
actually intending to cause him serious harm.
I have earlier said, I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the other
elements of the primary charge are proved by the CCTV
footage, the agreed facts
and the admissions made by the accused’s plea of guilty to the alternative
Accordingly,
the accused is guilty of aggravated causing serious harm with intent to cause
serious harm.
Whether 2cm is referrable to
depth or diameter of the wound is not clear.
Self evidently, the feature of
aggravation (the use of a knife) was not disputed.
(2020) 137 SASR
See generally
Maxwell v The
(1996) 184 CLR 501.
P2 (Howling Owl CCTV footage);
P3 (Milky Lane CCTV footage); P4 (Sugar nightclub CCTV footage).
P5. A transcript of the
interview was also provided as an aide memoire and marked MFIP5A. I bear in mind
that the aide is just that.
The evidence is what I see and hear on the recording
itself and if there is any difference between what is contained in the
and what I see or hear on the recording, I am to act on the basis of
what I see and hear.
R v Hillier
[2007] HCA 13
228 CLR 618
R v Baden-Clay
(2016) 258 CLR 308
Shepherd v The Queen
[1990] HCA 56
(1990) 170 CLR 573
Barca v The Queen
[1975] HCA 42
(1975) 133 CLR 82
R v Baden-Clay
258 CLR 308
, [47], [55].
Peacock v The King
[1911] HCA 66
(1911) 13 CLR 619
Martin v Osborne
[1936] HCA 23
(1936) 55 CLR 367
There was no objection to
the prosecution tendering the interview. The prosecution could not have known at
the time of tendering
the interview that the accused would not give evidence.
Had he done so, the fact that he had asserted a lack of recollection of this
particular morning, could have been an important part of his cross-examination,
and had the prosecution not tendered the interview
as part of its case, it may
have been met with a suggestion that any attempt to cross-examine on the
interview amounted to splitting
[2003] HCA 13
(2003) 212 CLR
This is a permissible use
of the evidence in accordance with s 34P(2)(a) and
Stapleton v The Queen
[1952] HCA 56
(1952) 86 CLR 358
I note in this respect that
the prosecutor told me during his opening that Mr Distasio was contacted by
police but did not give
a statement (T7). I disregard this submission, which was
not supported by evidence or the agreed facts.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (452 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter