URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SALC/2025/89.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:01:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
City of Port Adelaide Enfield v Adrian Conway Galindo t/as Milledge's Distillery [2025] SALC 89 (11 September 2025)
City of Port Adelaide Enfield
v Adrian Conway Galindo t/as
Milledge’s Distillery
[2025] SALC 89
LICENSING COURT
OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
CITY OF PORT ADELAIDE
GALINDO, Adrian Conway t/as MILLEDGE’S
Referral from Commissioner
LC-24-00120
HEARING DATE:
7 July 2025
JUDGMENT OF:
Judge BP Gilchrist
DELIVERED ON:
11 September
CATCHWORDS:
Referral of a noise complaint by the
Liquor and Gambling Commissioner – The complainant is the City of Port
Adelaide Enfield
(the Council) – The Council lodged the complaint
following complaints to it by residents about the noise and disturbance
from Milledge’s Distillery – Milledge’s Distillery
is situated in a former warehouse in Todd Street, Port Adelaide
owner obtained planning approval to convert the building into a distillery, an
office area and a café area –
The owner obtained a production and
sales licence that enables Milledge’s Distillery to sell, for consumption
on and off the
premises, liquor that it produces from a distillery within the
premises and to sell liquor at any time for consumption on the licensed
with or ancillary to a meal provided by it or to a person attending a function
at which food is provided or is seated at
a table – The owner regularly
conducts events in the café area that comprise of live entertainment
– Those events
frequently involve dancing with little evidence of food
being supplied or patrons sitting at tables – The primary complainant
lives in Todd Street across the road from Milledge’s Distillery –
Following a meeting with the primary complainant, the
owner spent more than
$20,000 replacing the doors with thick glass doors, arranged for sound treatment
where the stage area is at
a cost of around $10,000, and implemented sound
controlling measures at a cost of about $3,000 – Noise testing reveals
when the doors of the venue are shut the noise emanating from the premises
is acceptable but when opened, as patrons enter and leave
the premises, it can
be excessive – Following lodgement of the complaint the Council sent a
circular letter to the owners and
occupiers of residential properties in the
vicinity of Milledge’s Distillery seeking support – Only the primary
complainant
has given evidence in support of the complaint – An online
petition conducted by the owner provides some evidence of widespread
support for the venue – The venue is situated in a part of the Council
area that contains many licensed venues and
the history of the premises in
relation to other premises in the vicinity is that it can fairly be regarded as
forming part of a
group of licensed facilities that might be expected to be
offering entertainment, to be adding to the attractiveness of the area,
promoting the live music industry, tourism and the hospitality industry
generally – The primary complainant’s evidence
suggests that his
view as to what amounts to unacceptable noise emanating from licensed premises
does not conform with contemporary
community standards – It is of concern
that some of the promotional material put out in connection with
Milledge’s Distillery
sought to portray it as a late night party venue
– It is also of concern that the venue might from time to time have acted
in a way that is inconsistent with what the liquor licence permits –
However these do not establish that the gateway to the
invocation of s 106
of the Act has been met –
that the complaint that the
noise emanating from the premises is undue has not been made out –
that the application is dismissed –
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
Environment Protection Act
Elliston Apartments v Young Grey Nomads Pty Ltd t/as
Elliston Hotel
[2025] SALC 1
McCarthy v Barbara Anne & Graham John
Cox t/as Lord Exmouth Hotel
[2024] SALC 22
Music Talking Pty Ltd as
Trustee for the Orlando Farese Family Trust v Villis Group Services & Ors
[2011] SASCFC 142
Boettcher v Bacchus Wine Bar Pty Ltd
[2024] SALC
The Palace Gallery Pty Ltd t/as The Palace / Level Up v The
Commissioner of Police for the State of South Australia
[2025] SALC
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr J
Respondent: Mr N Healy
Solicitors:
Applicant: Kelledy Jones
Respondent: Piper Alderman Lawyers
premises can be expected to generate a fair degree of noise, disturbance, and
interference to those who reside, work or worship
in the vicinity. But there are
limits as to what those persons can reasonably be expected to put up with.
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
(the Act) provides a mechanism through which
this can be tested. Section 106(2) of the Act permits the Commissioner of
Police, the
council for the area in which the licensed premises are situated, or
a person claiming to be adversely affected, to lodge a complaint
that can lead
to conciliation, mediation and adjudication that may result in an order against
the licensee resolving the subject
matter of the complaint, that might include
the addition or variation of the conditions of the
Distillery is a licensed premises trading under a liquor production and sales
licence out of premises in Todd Street,
Port Adelaide. Those premises are within
the City of Port Adelaide Enfield council area.
production and sales licence enables Milledge’s Distillery to sell, for
consumption on and off the premises, liquor that
it produces from a distillery
within the premises.
enables it to sell liquor at any time for consumption on the licensed premises
with or ancillary to a meal provided by it
or to a person attending a function
at which food is provided or who is seated at a
residents complained to the City of Port Adelaide Enfield (the Council) about
the noise and disturbance emanating from Milledge’s
Distillery. The
Council resolved to act upon those complaints and has filed a complaint pursuant
to s 106(2) of the Act.
prosecuting this complaint, the Council relies upon the evidence of Mark Niehus,
who lives in Todd Street, almost directly across
the road from a
Milledge’s Distillery. It also relies upon the evidence of the acoustics
engineer, Jason Turner.
Court must now determine whether that complaint has been made out and if so,
what measures should be taken to ameliorate that
noise and disturbance.
Distillery is owned by Adrian Galindo. It is situated in the general vicinity of
the Queen’s Wharf and the
nearby Port River, which are to the west. The
building that it occupies was formerly a warehouse that extends from Todd Street
the north to Timpson Street to the south. Todd Street and Timpson Street run
parallel to each other and run in a roughly east‑west
direction ending to
the east at the junction of St Vincent Street. St Vincent Street is one of the
main streets in Port Adelaide.
few hundred metres to the south of the junction with Todd Street,
St Vincent Street intersects Commercial Road, which is the continuation
Port Road. That intersection is a significant feature of the Port Adelaide area
and was once known as the Black Diamond corner.
area in the general vicinity of Milledge’s Distillery is replete with
heritage listed buildings, as well as the South Australian
Maritime Museum, and
the National Railway Museum. Collectively, with the Queens Wharf, the adjacent
lighthouse, and the river, it
is a tourist area that celebrates the area’s
maritime history.
December 2022, Mr Galindo obtained planning consent to convert the warehouse
into a multi-use facility that would include offices,
a café, and a
distillery.
Galindo’s redevelopment of the building saw the construction of a
distillery which is situated in the Todd Street end of
the building; offices in
the middle; and a café and bar towards the Timpson Road end of the
building. The bar is set up on
the eastern side of that area and a small
unelevated stage area is set up in the north‑western corner.
the building was first redeveloped, the doors leading into Todd Street were
constructed of corrugated iron.
part of Port Adelaide is described for planning purposes as an “Urban
Activity Centre Zone”. It is intended to comprise
of “A cohesive and
legible environment supporting a broad spectrum of regional level business,
shopping, entertainment and
recreational facilities that can cater for large
crowds, smaller gatherings and events over extended
It includes within
its list of the entertainment facilities that it contemplates, hotels and other
licensed premises.
with this, there are many licensed facilities in this area. They include: The 10
Gallon Hat bar in St Vincent Street, just
south of the intersection with
Commercial Road; the Banksia Tree Café and Restaurant, a little further
south along St Vincent
Street; The Port Admiral Hotel, on the north-western
corner of the intersection of St Vincent Street and Commercial Road; Fergie
Mac’s Lounge, a restaurant in St Vincent Street, about 50 metres west of
Timpson Street; the Royal Arms Hotel on the south‑western
Timpson Street and St Vincent Street; and Pirate Life Brewing about 200 metres
further east, in Baker Street.
is also notable that immediately adjacent to Milledge’s Distillery was the
site of the Port Dock Hotel that this Court is
permitted to know was trading as
a hotel until about 2020.
he obtained his liquor licence, Mr Galindo has conducted a range of activities
at the premises. These have included comedy nights,
film nights, and live and
recorded music. Although the licence permits trade until midnight, Mr Galindo
rarely trades after 11.00
Galindo said that the café commences trade at 7.00 am and closes
between 2.00 pm and 2.30 pm each day. He said that it does
alcohol during the day.
said that the café area opens on Wednesday nights for what he called an
“open mic night”. He explained that
is that when someone comes to
perform, and might bring their own musical instrument, such as an acoustic
guitar or ukulele. He said
that this generally attracts an older demographic who
are people from the local community who are either performing or cheering on
their mates. He said that the average age of patrons is around about 70 years.
He said that while they are watching they might have
a toasted sandwich, a bowl
of soup, and a cup of tea or coffee. He said that very little alcohol drinking
occurs. He said that this
event typically goes from about 8.00 pm to
11.00 pm. He said that notwithstanding a crowd capacity of 100, the number
that attend
on a Wednesday night is about two dozen.
Galindo said that once a month, on a Thursday night, the café area is
open for what he described as “the comedy night”.
He said that those
who perform are usually paid performers and that three or four comics might
perform over the course of the night.
He said that the demographic for a
Thursday night tended to be younger, being people in their twenties or thirties
with perhaps some
a bit older. He said that this event also typically goes from
Galindo said that Friday nights were generally very quiet. He said that every
other week on a Friday night, he conducts in the
café area what he
described as “musical bingo”. He explained that someone comes in and
plays a song, and the patrons
then cross the song off on their bingo card. He
said that the patron must identify the band playing the song and if their card
complete, they say “bingo”. He described the music as “soft
rock”, or “yacht rock” such as music
produced by the likes of
Hall & Oates, Gerry Rafferty and Boz Scaggs.
said that on other Friday nights, in the café area, he conducts live
music events that typically comprise of one person
playing a guitar, or
something of that nature, in the north‑western corner.
with Wednesdays and Thursdays, the venue usually closes at 11.00 pm.
Galindo said that the venue has acoustic sessions on Saturday and Sunday
afternoons with a guitar or a ukulele or something of
that nature, but sometimes
they will have some amplification. He said that the type of music then played
was “folky”
or “soft rock”.
said that on a Saturday this would usually commence once the café had
closed at about 2.30 pm and would finish up around
said that sometimes the venue stayed open later with an acoustic session.
Galindo said that the venue has had DJs play there in the past, but that was
some time ago. He said that now patrons play music
from Spotify through a little
boom box as background music. He said that on Saturday nights they ask people to
stop at 11.30 pm at
the latest.
Galindo said that the venue does not engage security or crowd controllers. He
said that he tends to know what number of patrons
will be attending and arranges
staff accordingly. This might involve putting someone on the door, who will take
the tickets and make
sure the door stays shut and no one drinks outside.
Galindo said that in about February 2023, Mr Niehus and his partner came to see
him at Milledge’s Distillery and that they
expressed to him their concern
seriously and accepted
that some level of noise attenuation was required. He
said that this was especially in connection with the doors then in place that
faced into Todd Street. He accepted that they were not adequate to prevent
leakage of noise. As mentioned earlier, these doors were
constructed of
corrugated iron.
Galindo said that he contacted a door specialist and acting upon their
recommendation, he spent more than $20,000 replacing the
doors with thick glass
doors that were imported from Poland.
said that he also arranged for sound treatment where the stage area is. This
comprised of the walls being treated with a Soundchek
plasterboard at a cost or
around $10,000.
said that at a cost of about $3,000 he purchased a 24‑channel mixer, which
is controlled by an iPhone. The effect of this
is, is that if the sound levels
get past a certain level, he can literally pick up his phone and turn the level
of music down. He
said that when external performers are engaged, they are
required to enter a contract wherein they must agree not produce excessive
and to operate through the mixing desk so that the venue can control the level
said that he has put in place a Management Plan for the venue that specifically
addresses the need to prevent unnecessary disturbance
to its residential
neighbours. This requires staff to take reasonable steps to ameliorate noise and
disturbance. He said that staff
are made aware that part of their duties is to
make sure that the door is only opened very periodically and that whenever
not for any length of time; they are to stop people drinking outside;
and they are to request people who are outside to keep the
noise down and not
order their taxi or wait for their taxi there.
Council accepts that Mr Galindo is entitled to run a successful business and it
has no difficulty as a matter of principle in
the venue offering entertainment.
But it contends that the venue generates excessive noise and it has concerns
of patrons in the vicinity of the premises, particularly,
when people are coming and going from the venue and at closing time.
Council’s primary concern relates to how the venue is marketed and
operated, which it contends is inconsistent with the
licence it has, and the
planning approval that it has obtained. It contends that it is promoted and
operates in a manner akin to
a hotel licence whereby the focus is on the
provision of entertainment and that food is very much a second thought. Its case
if the venue traded as was contemplated by the licence and the planning
approval, that is with alcohol only being sold for on premises
consumption to be
sampled with food, and without the live music, it would be unlikely that there
would be any issues regarding the
noise and behaviour of patrons. Its case is
that if Mr Galindo wishes to run the venue as is he should have the proper
licence and
have the proper planning approvals.
Niehus moved into Todd Street in 2019. He said that at that time much of the
surrounding area was barren land and the street itself
was much quieter. He said
that Port Adelaide changed a lot since then, in that it now has more cafes and
restaurants, which he thought
was a good thing.
Niehus said that in 2019, he understood that the building now occupied by
Milledge’s Distillery was a gallery, although he
never saw it operating.
He said that in about late 2022 he became aware from talk around the community
that there was going to be
a potential distillery opening up there, and maybe a
cafe, which he thought that this was a good thing. He said that he was quite
excited about it.
said that the premises began to trade in around September/December 2022. He said
that initially, it only traded as a café,
but by January/February 2023,
there was live music and bands playing. He said that he was surprised by this.
He said that he and
his partner noticed that, when in their upstairs living
area, the music was clearly audible and disruptive. He said that it was not
something they had expected.
said that he and his partner like to sit in their upstairs living area in the
evening on weekends and listen to our own music.
He said that the music from
Milledge’s Distillery was audible over the top of their music. He said
that the bass would vibrate
through the building and sometimes it would vibrate
the window frames.
said that the music was disruptive from about 8.00 pm through to midnight
and that patron noise could continue to 12.45 am. He
said that it was loud
enough to disrupt his television viewing or book reading and would wake him up
if he had gone to bed.
said that after the activities at the premises had changed in about January or
February, he sent an email to the owners in which
he and his partner outlined
their concerns. He said that he and his partner offered an opportunity for them
to sit and talk about
the issues and try to resolve them and that a meeting was
organised to take place at the premises in March 2023. He described the
as a “a positive experience”. He said that the owners were receptive
to their comments and said that they would
address them, that they would look
into installing new doors that would improve the sound, and address, also, the
activity of patrons
on the footpath.
around this time Mr Niehus began documenting activities taking place in and
described as
“Activity Diary Milledge’s Distillation Café &
Venue”. For convenience I shall refer to
this as the Diary. The computer
file has since been converted to a paper document that is 87 pages long, with
multiple entries on
each page. It contains multiple recordings, photographs and
screen shots.
having described the meeting as positive Mr Niehus said:
I felt that – potentially – that at this point, the issues
weren’t going to be resolved, and that I should start
documenting the
activity to present to council initially just to demonstrate what we were
experiencing.
other things Mr Niehus took screen shots of the noise levels recorded on an app
that he had installed on his mobile phone.
He regularly filmed the premises on
his phone and said that he did sound measurements to correspond with the
description with the
videos that he took.
Niehus said that he sent the videos and the sound measurements to
Mr Galindo via email just to demonstrate to him what he and his
were experiencing. He said that he also sent them to the Council.
Niehus then spoke of the new doors being installed in September 2023. He said
that these reduced the noise to a degree, but not
to what he felt was an
acceptable degree. He therefore continued to do sound measurements. He accepted
that the measurements were
not undertaken on special equipment, but thought that
because he used the same device it was a way to show Mr Galindo what the degree
of change was.
Niehus said that despite the installation of the new doors, the noise emanating
from the premises continued to be disruptive, so
much so that it forced him and
his partner to change the way they operated from their home.
said that they began to watch television with the volume at a higher level than
we would normally have it, to drown out the impact,
and would stay up much later
than we would normally because, if they were to go to bed before midnight, it
made it difficult to sleep.
Niehus said that as a result he communicated this to Mr Galindo. He said that
the doors of the premises were often left open and
that he and his partner would
walk across the street requesting that the doors be closed.
said that despite expressing his concerns, nothing changed. He said that he
experiences noise disturbance between three to four
times a week. He said that
this was mainly in the evenings but it also occurred on Saturday and Sunday
afternoons.
cross-examination, Mr Niehus was asked whether he would take up an offer of
having the windows of his home that faced into Todd
Street double glazed. He
said he would not. He said that these windows are their only source of fresh
air, and they are regularly
Niehus said that he had shot over a hundred videos. Some were shown in Court.
Their contents are the subject of the Diary. They
extend beyond issues around
example, the Diary contains an entry of 11 August 2023:
“Milledge’s installed food truck without a permit from
It contains a photograph of the outside of the premises and
records an exchange of an email that he received from the Council that
presumably advised that there was no council permit issued. It contains two
entries on 25 May 2024, one at 3.30 pm, the other at
4.13 pm. Both
record that there were tables and chairs on the footpath with a note that this
was in breach of its outdoor licence,
which approved outdoor dining between
7.00 am and 3.00 pm. It contains as an entry on 6 July 2024, noting a
recording of a table
being set up on the footpath to sell tickets to patrons.
And there is an entry on 28 February 2025, of a table and chair being on
the footpath operating as a box office during the Fringe Festival.
is apparent that Mr Niehus regards music being played before 8.00 pm on a
weekend to be unduly disruptive and that at times, his
surveillance of
Milledge’s Distillery has been intense.
take two examples, the Diary contains entries on Friday, 21 February 2025
that contains recordings of allegedly excessive noise
at 7.17 pm,
7.21 pm, 7.46 pm, and 7.48 pm, and on Sunday, 23 March 2025,
at 3.40 pm, 4.35 pm, 4.42 pm, 5.02 pm, 5.58 pm,
6.17 pm, and 7.37 pm.
Turner conducted music level measurements at the premises on 26 October
2024 between 1.45 pm and 3.30 pm. He said that the music
from an amplified four‑piece band that was playing a soft rock style.
found that the average noise level from music with the door open was
59 dB(a) and that lowest background noise level without music
conducted further measuring on Saturday 30 November 2024, at a time when the
door fronting Todd Street was predominantly closed
time during testing and noted
that the music levels were not clearly audible and could not be accurately
an issue regarding noise emanating from the premises is the opening of the door
facing Todd Street as patrons come and go.
Mr Turner’s evidence
establishes that on occasions when the doors facing Todd Street are open, the
noise levels emanating from
the premises can exceed recommended guidelines.
Turner raised for consideration an airlock mechanism that comprises of two doors
spaced apart to ensure that as a person enters
or exist there will always be at
least one closed door. In cross-examination he accepted that it was easier and
cheaper to incorporate
an airlock mechanism as part of an original design as
opposed doing it retrospectively.
Other evidence
in the material placed before the Court were extracts from GLAM
which the Court is
permitted to know is an online publication that amongst things, promotes new
venues and activities. The GLAM material
states: COMING SOON: Nightlife in the
Port is about to be boosted with Milledges Distillation”, “In the
heart of Port
Adelaide sits an old warehouse that until recently was empty and
lifeless but has since become a hub of activity and shaping up to
be one of the
area’s must‑go new venues”.
publication quotes “Right now, not much in the Port is open past 10.00pm
...We’re going to be the place you go after
dinner and stay late.
We’ve got a late licence so you can expect it to be a bit of a party
publication then adds “With DJs and live bands on the cards, you can bet
your bottom dollar that Milledges will be THE place
to go in the West on a
material also includes images taken within the café area when the
premises are trading that show patrons dancing with no
tables and chairs in
sight, patrons standing with drinks in hand, and patrons partying.
included was a brochure advertising the New Found Sound Festival which was to
take place at multiple venues on 18 January 2025
The venues identified
include many in the general vicinity of Milledge’s Distillery. The
brochure states: “Experience
Live Music Across the Port”. It
identifies the Council as the presenter of the festival.
included was a circular letter sent by the Council to the owners and occupiers
of residential properties in the vicinity of Milledge’s
Distillery. Over
70 letters were sent. Relevantly, the letter read:
The Council is currently investigating the use of Milledge’s Bar and Venue
for live music events and the impact, if any, that
these events have had on the
local amenity. Our current investigation concerns noise generated by the venue
both during the day and
night, and whether you have experienced any disturbance
as a result of this.
In an effort to capture the views of the surrounding residents, the Council is
inviting you, as an owner and/or occupier of a residence
in the local area to
voice any comments and/or concerns in relation to the investigation of
Milledge’s Bar and Venue.
Court was informed that only one recipient of the letter supports the within
was one letter that opposed the complaint. It expressed support for
Milledge’s Distillery, stating that it was a wonderful
business, there was
no significant noise when events were held there, any noise is not excessive and
events never run late into the
include in the material was a report of an online petition that identified the
issue as follows:
Milledge’s Distillery, the much loved live venue in Port Adelaide, is
under threat of closure due to a single noise complaint.
This single complainant
is supported by local council, the City of Port Adelaide Enfield.
Sign below to support Milledge’s in our battle to stay open and continue
operating as the community hub many have come to know
and love over the past few
asserted 1,837 verified signatures.
The parties’ submissions
Roder, counsel for the Council, submitted that I should not have any concern
that I should resist
finding that it had been kept for any other ulterior purpose. He submitted that
I should accept his evidence
that it was a detailed record because
Mr Niehus intended it to be as accurate as possible, consistent with his
experience. He made
the point that had Mr Niehus been more circumspect in his
record keeping he might well have been met with the argument: “Well,
you’ve only written down how many complaints in how many years? It
can’t be that bad”.
added that nothing should be made of the fact that the complaint is only
actively supported by Mr Niehus. In the first place he
is not a sole voice; he
also speaks for his partner. Second, an absence of complaint is emblematic of a
human nature, in that most
people do not tend to complain about things most of
Roder submitted that in this case it was important to recognise that the
premises do not trade under a general and hotel licence:
the licence here is
production and sales licence. Thus, statements in cases to the effect that those
“who reside in the vicinity
of a hotel are expected to put up with noise
at times and at levels that would be regarded as intolerable in other places
the hotel”,
not relevant.
Roder submitted that there was a world of difference between entertainment to be
enjoyed by patrons standing up and without a meal
that might be expected in a
hotel offering live entertainment and entertainment to be enjoyed by patrons
sitting down with table
service or with a meal.
understood him to contend that the Court should be very concerned about how
Milledge’s Distillery was trading and whether
its business model conformed
with the licence that it had obtained.
Healy, counsel for the licensee, emphasised the demographic of most of the
patrons. He submitted that these were not hoons that
are there until all hours,
throwing bottles in the street, and making nuisances of themselves. He added
that the venue is not one
that trades every night, emanating loud music. He
submitted that in fact it has limited trading hours and it has a very limited
Healy sought to draw parallels with
McCarthy v Barbara Anne & Graham John
Cox t/as Lord Exmouth Hotel
concerned an old style hotel in Semaphore which featured live music, that was
described by the Court as “predominantly
soft rock and folk rock, played
at a modest volume”
playing to an audience that the Court described “relatively old and
and that the hotel
traded for very limited
Healy submitted that in evaluating Mr Niehus’s evidence, that included
complains about noise coming from the premises on
Saturday and Sunday
afternoons, I might have the same concerns that I did in
noted that someone who thought it reasonable to complain about noise emanating
from a hotel at 9.26 pm on a Friday night and
10.03 pm on a Saturday
night, had a view about what constitutes excessive noise that does not conform
with contemporary community
Healy submitted that the premises are situated in a vibrant urban area where
live music was to be expected and indeed celebrated
as evidenced by the New
Found Sound Festival that the Council itself was promoting.
then made the point that this was not a case where the licensee had ignored the
concerns expressed by Mr Niehus. To the contrary,
he had expended a considerable
sum of money to appease those concerns.
understood him to contend that any issues regarding strict compliance with the
terms of the licence were not matters of concern
to the Court in dealing with a
complaint of this type.
submitted that the complaint should be dismissed.
Consideration
determining the complaint, the Court must take into account the following
matters prescribed by s 106(6)(b) of the Act:
(i) the relevant history of the licensed premises in relation to other premises
in the vicinity and, in particular, the period of
time over which the activity,
noise or behaviour complained about has been occurring and any significant
change at any relevant time
in the level or frequency at which it has occurred;
(ii) the unreasonableness or otherwise of the activity, noise or behaviour
complained about; and
(iii) the trading hours and character of the business carried out by the
licensee on the licensed premises; and
(iv) the desired future character of the locality in which the licensed premises
are situated as stated in any relevant provision
of the Planning and Design Code
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
(v) whether or not any environment protection policy made under
Environment Protection Act 1993
, or guidelines published by the
Environment Protection Authority established under that Act, applicable to the
provision of live
music on the licensed premises have been complied with; and
(vi) any other matter that the Commissioner or the Court considers relevant.
with all matters to be decided under the Act, regard must be had to the objects
Those objects include facilitating “the responsible development of the
licensed liquor industry and associated industries,
including the live music
industry, tourism and the hospitality
terms of the history of the premises, this case is unlike others before this
Court where the complainant has recently moved into
the vicinity of licensed
premises. In those cases the Court has taken the view that principles along the
lines of “let the
buyer beware”
In contrast to this, here
Mr Niehus lived in his home before Mr Galindo obtained his liquor licence.
it is important to note that s 106(6)(b)(i) speaks of “the relevant
history of the licensed premises
in relation to other premises in the
”. (Emphasis mine) This is important, because it requires the
licensing authority to consider the history by reference to other
premises within the vicinity. Prior to Milledge’s Distillery’s
establishment, there were many licensed premises
in the vicinity. These include
the Port Admiral Hotel, on the north‑western corner of the intersection of
St Vincent Street
and Commercial Road, the Royal Arms Hotel on the
south‑western corner of Timpson Street and St Vincent Street, and Pirate
Brewing, about 200 metres further east, in Baker Street. It is also
significant that in Todd Street, until about 2020, the Port Dock
trading. It was almost directly across the road from where Mr Niehus lives.
the history of the premises in relation to other premises in the vicinity is
that it can fairly be regarded as forming part of
a group of licensed facilities
that might be expected to be offering entertainment, to be adding to the
attractiveness of the area,
and promoting the live music industry, tourism and
the hospitality industry generally.
now turn to consider the unreasonableness or otherwise of the activity, noise or
behaviour complained about. This is a question
of degree that must be adjudged
objectively and by reference to contemporary community standards, having regard
to all the relevant
circumstances.
Healy is right to draw some comparisons between
Like that case
the live music under consideration here is predominantly soft rock and folk
rock, played at a modest volume.
Elliston Apartments
explaining how the words “resides, works or worships in the vicinity of
licensed premises” should be construed, I
made the point that s 106
of the Act is focussed on enabling members of the relevant community, be they
residents, workers or worshippers,
to voice their complaint because
community concern, not just an individual’s
In my opinion, this
also informs how the unreasonableness or otherwise of the activity, noise or
behaviour complained about is to
be evaluated.
accept that from time to time when the doors facing Todd Street are open the
noise levels emanating from the premises can exceed
recommended guidelines and
would be a source of annoyance to those living nearby.
it is also significant that of the 70 or so letters that the Council sent to the
owners and occupiers of residential properties
in the vicinity of
Milledge’s Distillery, only one, Mr Niehus has stepped forward to give
evidence in support of the Council’s
application. Although there is some
uncertainty as to the provenance of the online petition that sought support for
Distillery, the statement of there being 1837 signatures in
apparent support of the venue, cannot be dismissed out of hand. It provides
evidence of widespread community
It evokes consideration
along the lines of legitimate grievances by individual members of the relevant
community about noise and
disturbance needing to yield for the common
this I would add the observation that this Court made in
Boettcher v
Bacchus Wine Bar Pty Ltd
... residents living near licensed premises can reasonably be expected to put up
with levels of noise and disturbance that in the
general community would be
considered excessive, especially when what is involved is live music and
premises that facilitate tourism.
As such, a licensing authority should exercise some restraint before finding
that a complaint made under s 106 of the Act has been
made out, and before
imposing conditions that curtail the activities that can be conducted on
licensed premises.
is also significant that Mr Niehus saw fit to record what he regarded as
excessive noise just after 7.00 pm on a Friday night and
at 3.40 pm,
on a Sunday afternoon. This, and his evidence more generally, left me with the
impression that his view as to what amounts
to unacceptable noise emanating from
licensed premises does not conform with contemporary community standards.
now to the desired future character of the locality in which the licensed
premises are situated, as noted earlier, Milledge’s
Distillery is within a
part of the Council area that is described for planning purposes as an
“Urban Activity Centre Zone”.
That zone, amongst other things, is
intended to support entertainment and recreational facilities that might
comprise of licensed
premises. This is evidenced by the Council’s
promotion of the New Found Sound Festival.
it is also notable that the locality has in recent years been the subject of
much residential development, as evidenced by the
many apartments that were seen
on the Court’s view. With this in mind, it is of concern that some of the
promotional material
put out in connection with Milledge’s Distillery
sought to portray it as a late night party venue. I think the Council is right
to contend that this does not seem apt to describe a business model that can be
inferred to have won planning approval from the Council
on the basis that it was
an entity trading under a liquor production and sales licence that would only be
to selling liquor for on
premises consumption in limited circumstances that
were primarily connected with the provision of a meal.
are no issues arising for consideration under the
Environment Protection Act
sub-placitum (vi) of s 106(6)(b) of the Act the Court can take into account
any other matter that it considers relevant.
with the general discretion conferred upon a licensing authority under the Act,
the reach of this provision it is not without
limitation.
Ultimately, in
determining what is a relevant matter that can be taken into consideration, a
licensing authority must have the Act
firmly in mind. And in connection with
this, special consideration must be given to the objects of the Act.
is notable that the prime object contained in s 3 of the Act is the
regulation and control of the promotion, sale, supply and consumption
In my opinion, it follows that if the licensed premises subject to the
s 106 complaint trades in a way that is inconsistent
with the terms of the
licence that it holds, a licensing authority may take this into account.
said, the gateway to relief under s 106 of the Act is a finding that an
activity on, or the noise emanating from the licensed
premises, or the behaviour
of persons making their way to or from the licensed premises, is unduly
offensive, annoying, disturbing
or inconvenient to a those who reside, work or
worship in the vicinity of the
Thus, for issues
around non-compliance with the terms of the licence, can only relevant
considerations if there is a connection between
the non‑compliance and the
unduly offensive, annoying, disturbing or inconvenient activity or behaviour.
this case, the licence held by Mr Galindo would enable him to conduct a cabaret
style event in the café area of Milledge’s
Distillery, involving
live music, every night of the week, until midnight. Thus, while it is a matter
of concern to the Court that
Mr Galindo might from time to time have acted in a
way that is inconsistent with what his liquor licence permits, that finding does
not, of itself, establish that the gateway to the invocation of s 106 of
the Act has been met.
Distillery is situated in a part of the Council area that contains many licensed
venues that collectively might reasonably
be expected to be the source of some
noise. By contemporary standards, the time at which noise emanating from
Milledge’s Distillery
occurs, is not
By contemporary standards,
the nature of that noise would not be regarded as challenging. The evidence of
the resident that the Council
relies upon in support of the complaint, suggests
that his view as to what amounts to unacceptable noise emanating from licensed
premises does not conform with contemporary community standards.
these matters into account, I find that viewed objectively, the degree of
offence, annoyance, disturbance, and inconvenience
that Mr Niehus and his
partner and others in the Council area are being subjected to by the noise
emanating from Milledge’s
Distillery, falls short of being undue for the
purposes of s 106 of the Act.
these reasons, the complaint is
Section 106(6a) and (7) of the
Section 39(1)(a),(b) and (c) of
Section 39(1)(g) of the
Exhibit (Ex) A1 at 2.
Ex A1 at 215.
Ex A1 at 216.
Transcript (Tr) p 15.
Ex A1 at 269-279.
Ex R2 at 65.
Ex R2 at 41.
Ex R2 at 48.
Elliston Apartments v
Young Grey Nomads Pty Ltd t/as Elliston Hotel
[2025] SALC 1
[2024] SALC 22.
Ibid at [77].
Ibid at [66].
Ibid at [78].
Ibid at [72].
Section 3(2) of the Act.
Section 3(1)(d) of the
Elliston Apartments
Ibid at [72].
[2024] SALC 22.
Ibid at [48].
See s 23 of the Act and
the judgment of Anderson J in
Music Talking Pty Ltd as Trustee for the
Orlando Farese Family Trust v Villis Group Services & Ors
[2011] SASCFC
Elliston Apartments
[2025] SALC 1
[2024] SALC 131.
Ibid at [71]-[72].
The Palace Gallery Pty
Ltd t/as The Palace / Level Up
v The Commissioner of Police for the State
of South Australia
[2025] SALC 70
Section 106(1) of the Act.
Boettcher v Bacchus Wine
Bar Pty Ltd
Ibid at [116], [117] and [127].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (277 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter