URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWLRP/2012/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Longford Cleaning v WorkCover [2012] SAWLRP 6 (26 June 2012)
[2012] SAWLRP 6
WORKCOVER LEVY REVIEW PANEL
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
LONGFORD HOLDINGS PTY LTD
No. E09202509 — file reference 200280603)
(Applicant)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
Member P.G. Eblen
Deputy Member E. Hosking
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED 26 JUNE
Application for review — assessment of levy by WorkCover without
consideration of possible adjustment — employer previously
significant remissions under former bonus/penalty scheme — whether
decision reviewable — nature of discretion
to adjust — role of
policy guidelines — burden on applicants for exercise of discretion
— circumstances of applicant
employer — whether circumstances
sufficient to activate discretion to grant remission —
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Cases referred to:
Salisbury Private Nursing Home v. WorkCover
Quark Technologies and Hocking v. WorkCover Corporation
[1997] SASC 6367
(1997) 70 SASR 153
194 LSJS 299
Chiropractors Association & Perry v. WorkCover
Corporation
[1999] SASC 470
; (1999) 75 SASR 470
Robbins v. Harbord and GMH
[1994] SASC 4571
Ahrens Group v. WorkCover
[2012] SAWLRP 5
Johnson Steel Fabricators v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP
Briginshaw v. Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
Appearances:
Mr C.A. Sargent of counsel for the applicant
Ms S.A. Emmett of counsel, with her Ms A.M. Rogers, for the
respondent WorkCover.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. This is the determination of an application dated 22 October 2010,
pursuant to
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
(“the Act”), seeking a review of a decision assessing the
applicant’s levy rate for the financial year 2010-2011,
embodied in
correspondence from WorkCover dated 4 June 2010.
, at the relevant time, provided as follows:
(1) Where an employer considers that a decision of the Corporation as
(aa) the estimate of remuneration that is to be used for the calculation of a
(a) the fixing or assessment of a levy; or
(b) the imposition of penalty interest or a fine; or
(c) the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead to the
imposition of a supplementary levy,
is unreasonable, the board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a levy,
penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined
by the board, by the board itself, or by a committee or
person to whom the board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the board has an
absolute discretion as to whether
it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the board may—
(aa) alter an estimate;
(a) alter a levy or an assessment;
(b) quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
(c) direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
(d) quash or vary a condition imposed by the Corporation.
(5) An application under this section for review of a decision of the
Corporation—
(a) must, if the decision relates to a class of employer, be made within four
months after notice of the decision was given;
(b) must, if the decision relates to an individual employer, be made within
two months after the employer was given notice of the
unless the Board (or its delegate) allows an extension of time for making the
application.
3. It will be immediately apparent that the application for review was out of
time by about two months. This fact was not adverted
to by the employer in its
application or by WorkCover in its reconsideration of the disputed decision.
Indeed, the reconsideration’s
substantive paragraphs were confined to the
“The employer is seeking a remission of levy under
section 67(1)
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
WorkCover’s ability to make an adjustment of levy in relation to
individual employers pursuant to this section is
discretionary. As such
WorkCover is under no obligation to make a decision to grant a remission of levy
to Longford Holdings Pty
Ltd under this section.
“It is WorkCover’s position that the jurisdiction of the Board or
its delegate pursuant to
of the Act is not enlivened as WorkCover has
not exercised its discretion pursuant to
section 67(1)
or made any decision
which can be the subject of an application for
“WorkCover’s current policy by board determination for
the remission of levies and imposition of supplementary levies
was published in
South Australian Government Gazette
on 20 August 2009 at page 3712.
WorkCover does not propose to consider any request for remission outside of the
operation of the
published determination.”
4. We will return to this argument. Suffice it to say that WorkCover did not
refer to the application being out of time in that letter
or since. Nor did the
employer. It may be that no objection was taken to the time point by WorkCover,
or perhaps no one noticed.
In any event, it is evident that the application was
lodged out of time by a fairly short time (by comparison with some others we
have considered), and well within the levy year the application referred to. In
other words, the application refers to the levy the
employer is still paying
month by month (unless it is an annual payer, as to which we are not informed).
It may even be that an argument
could be constructed that the two months begins
to run with the decision implicitly involved in each payment. In any event, we
not see any prejudice to WorkCover in extending time; it has been perfectly
well able to argue its case. We extend time to the extent
5. Section 67 of the Act, on which, as the reconsideration above makes plain,
the application focuses, at the relevant time provided
(so far as is
67—Adjustment
of levy in relation to individual employers
(1) The Corporation may, in relation to a particular employer, having regard
to all or any of the following matters—
(a) the adequacy or inadequacy of measures taken by the employer to reduce
the incidence of work related traumas;
(b) the incidence or costs of claims for compensable disabilities suffered by
the employer’s workers (disregarding claims of
a class excluded from the
ambit of this paragraph by regulation);
(c) the rehabilitation facilities or services for disabled workers provided
by the employer, or the absence or inadequacy of such
facilities or services
provided by the employer;
(ca) the employer’s practices and procedures in connection with the
appointment and work of a rehabilitation and return to work
co‑ordinator
under Part 3 (including with respect to compliance with any relevant guidelines
published by the Corporation for
the purposes of section 28D);
(d) the employer’s practices as to the retention, employment or
re-employment of disabled workers (and, in particular, any failure
employer’s part to provide, in accordance with this Act, employment to a
worker who has suffered a compensable disability
in the employer's
employment);
(e) such other matters (whether similar or dissimilar to those referred to
above) as the Corporation considers relevant,
grant to the employer a
remission of the levy that would be otherwise payable or impose on the employer
a supplementary levy (as the
case may require). …
6. We have discussed the nature of the discretion conferred by section 67(1)
in a number of recent cases, including
Salisbury Private Nursing Home v.
[2012] SAWLRP 4
, also published today. It is not necessary to
repeat that discussion in detail. Suffice it to say that the ending of the
former bonus/penalty
scheme on 30 June 2010, as foreshadowed in the latest form
of the consolidated scheme for adjustment of levies (LAS09) published
South Australian Government Gazette
on 20 August 2009 at p.3713-4
(Elements A1 and A2), did not have the effect of repealing Parliament’s
enactment of section
67. That provision of the Act cannot be ignored simply
because WorkCover has chosen to abolish its previous policy of automatic
adjustments
flowing from the costs of claims. Further, it is not viable to adopt
a policy of simply refusing to consider applications to exercise
a statutory
discretion conferred under the Act:
Quark Technologies and Hocking v.
WorkCover Corporation
[1997] SASC 6367
(1997) 70 SASR 153
Chiropractors Association & Perry v. WorkCover
Corporation
[1999] SASC 470
; (1999) 75 SASR 470. Fair and honest
consideration must be given to material bearing on the possible exercise of the
discretion,
and a statutory decision-maker is not entitled simply to consult its
own (economic or other) interests in making a decision:
Robbins v. Harbord
[1994] SASC 4571
(1994) 62 SASR 229.
7. As in some of the earlier cases, we make no particular criticism of
WorkCover’s failure to consider exercising its discretion
in making the
reviewable decision of 4 June 2010. The employer had not made it known at that
time that it considered itself entitled
to consideration under section 67 at
that time: after all, it had been accustomed for some years to a situation where
that was done
automatically. But it did make this clear in its application for
review and, in its reconsideration, WorkCover simply declined to
entertain the
point, seemingly asserting that the closure of the former bonus/penalty scheme
freed WorkCover from any responsibility
whatsoever to consider remissions. As we
have made clear in earlier decisions, in particular
Salisbury Private
Nursing Home
at [7]-[8] and [39]-[42], the assessment of the levy is
reviewable, and the applicant’s belief that it is entitled to
consideration
under section 67 is a sufficient ground and must be
entertained.
8. We turn to consider the merits of the application.
Background facts
9. The facts are not contentious. What is
contentious is the conclusions to be drawn from the facts, and the uses to which
those conclusions
are to be put. We take the facts from the documentary material
put before us and the sworn evidence of John Gibbie, managing director
applicant, given at the hearing before us.
10. The employer is a cleaning contractor that employs cleaners to clean
clients’ premises. Its SAWIC (South Australian WorkCover
Classification) is
638701 Cleaning Services
. The clients are other
businesses. The clients’ premises are, by and large, the clients’
own workers’ workplaces.
11. Figures we have been given, going back to 2005, suggest that the base
rate for the
638701 Cleaning Services
industry has been 7.5% of
remuneration (as defined) in each year. Under the bonus/penalty scheme, as it
operated, the employer enjoyed
a significant remission of levy
(“bonus”) each year. In all but two of those years, it was the
maximum bonus (30% of
levy). Some claims costs, not large in the greater scheme
of things, were incurred in 2006-07, and affected the bonus of the following
12. For clarity, we have extracted figures from the tables tendered by the
parties to compile a table showing the claims numbers and
costs for the
applicant over time, as compared with the average of claims numbers and costs
for locations in the cleaning services
industry. These figures cover a full
Employer claims numbers
Employer claims costs
SAWIC average location
SAWIC average location
281/805 = 0.3
$6 469 345/805 = $8 036
280/763 = 0.4
$5 651 029/763 = $7 406
329/734 = 0.4
$8 381 119/734 = $11 418
274/738 = 0.4
$8 519 031/738 = $11 543
293/705 = 0.4
$6 242 137/705 = $8 854
327/705 = 0.5
$7 503 480/705 = $10 643
306/698 = 0.4
$7 393 681/698 = $10 593
322/690 = 0.5
$5 527 936/690 = $8 012
273/683 = 0.4
$2 254 143/683 = $3 300
258/449 = 0.6
$1 983 020/449 = $4 417
13. To keep such figures in perspective, it is useful to know how close to
the “average” the applicant is. A comparison
between the leviable
remuneration declared by the applicant and the total leviable remuneration
declared by all employers in the
SAWIC (divided by the total number of locations in the SAWIC) indicates that
in 2009 the applicant’s declared leviable remuneration
was 4.8 times that
of the “average” location, while in 2010 (a year in which the number
of locations in the industry
seems to have fallen sharply) it was 3.5 times that
of the “average”.
14. In his statement, which Mr Sargent led him through by way of examination
in chief, Mr Gibbie indicated that the company was first
registered in 1987 and
he had been managing director since 1991. He said the “school of hard
knocks” was his qualification.
He said he started his career in the
insurance industry, where he became conscious of the cost of injuries. But he
said injuries
were more than a matter of costs, and referred to workers’
feelings, the replacement of injured workers, and social costs.
He said that was
why he started focusing on being a safe employer. He said morale was hampered
when injuries occurred.
15. He said that under himself as managing director, the company had three
customer service managers, each of whom is responsible
for service delivery plus
one of recruitment, OH&S (occupational health and safety), or hygiene
solutions. Another (named) person
is responsible for maintenance delivery,
internal testing and tagging, and auditing of on-site cleaners’ rooms. He
is a formal OH&S safety committee.
16. He said the applicant employs about 70 staff, the majority of whom are
part time and casual. The staff equate to about 23 full-time
equivalents. Staff
are deployed mainly to various school sites, including Christian Brothers’
College, Cabra, St Mary’s,
Mercedes, Gleeson College, Marymount, and
Catholic Church Insurances and other offices. There are 30-odd different jobs.
staff clean one site; with smaller jobs, there may be one worker to a
site, and that worker may do more than one site. He said the
industry is driven
by price, but the Catholic schools are looking for value for money and take the
view that the cheapest is not
always the best. He tries to charge a fair price
and give workers a fair time to do each job. He said the company has been
at Cabra College for 13 years, and one of the ladies who had commenced
cleaning there in 1999 was still with him.
17. He said the retention rate was better than at many in the industry.
Turnover in the industry can be 30-40% per annum, because
the job is not full
time, and a two-year stay can be a fair amount. A number of his workers had been
with the company for ten years
or more, mainly mature age people who understand
the job he wanted done. His oldest worker was 71 years old.
18. He said staff are paid under the
Cleaning Services Award 2010
staff have a written contract of employment.
19. He referred to audits of cleaning sites, including examination of power
cords, testing of equipment, and labelling. He said risk
assessments were
“probably reasonably informal”. He said there were checklists, and
anything out of the ordinary would
be noted. He said customers would be
notified. Spot checks were conducted of cleaners’ rooms to make sure
electrical and other
items were in order. He said this applied not only to the
applicant’s equipment but items owned by the school.
20. He said that, in relation to recruitment of staff, the applicant does not
do any pre-employment testing. He said the company has
a good relationship with
recruiters and provides work experience through Workskil, CRS and ASK. He said a
“buddy system”
is in place for an employee’s first two weeks,
which we take to mean the new employee is accompanied by an experienced worker
while learning the duties. He said the “buddy” is usually one of the
customer managers or a site supervisor. Evacuation
maps, fire alarms and other
safety measures are shown and explained.
21. He said intellectually disabled persons are also employed such as persons
through a service conducted by Minda Homes. He said
there were currently five
workers with slight intellectual disabilities or workplace injuries on the
books. He said he liked to provide
employment for people who were a bit
disadvantaged, because they usually turn out to be really good workers. Such
workers take a
little bit longer to train, but Commonwealth-funded programmes
22. He also mentioned that the applicant had had a workers’
compensation claim lodged in respect of a worker who slipped and
broke an elbow.
He said the worker subsequently returned to work and claims costs were limited
to $4 253.81; this is clearly the
claim appearing on the 2006 line in the
table above. The worker eventually left 2 years after the injury. The worker
with the $17
claim in 2008 had also left, but returned to employment with the
applicant in 2011.
23. Mr Gibbie also said that workers in the industry were often not treated
well. He referred to a $50 voucher given by his company
to the worker of the
month, and other special awards. One worker put out a fire at a school, and the
employer gave a financial reward,
as did the school.
24. He referred to a workplace medical service engaged for the benefit of
workers. He said if a problem arose, a paramedic would go
out to the job site,
stabilise the problem and take the worker to Outpatients or whatever was
necessary. Advice is also given by
this service. He mentioned one lady (worker)
who thought she was reacting to chemicals. The service was “right onto
suggested testing, and it turned out the worker was suffering an
allergic reaction to her own shampoo. He said he was happy to pay
involved because he didn’t want people “not in the right
25. In response to cross-examination by Ms Emmett as to the obligations owed
by clients to his staff, Mr Gibbie said “we take
the risk”. He said
the school inducts the customer manager and they give some induction to the
workers. He said twice a year
the basics are repeated. The cleaning equipment
was mostly “ours”. Where there is a safety hazard, the applicant
workers to put it on a report form and he gives it to the school to fix.
He said “they’re hot on it as well”.
26. He agreed that there were financial incentives involved in the employment
of the intellectually disabled, but said that money
was not really a
consideration. He said “we will end up with the wrong person if we just go
for the subsidy”.
27. In response to a question from the Panel about the ability of some of the
workers to deal with paperwork, he said there was always
someone working around
them, and the applicant had not had a hazard with the intellectually disabled
people. He said job support
officers go through safety manuals with them, and
sometimes suggest simplifications: advice that is always heeded. He said there
were not many workers of non-English speaking background in the company. He said
there might be half a dozen, but they seem to be
able to read acceptably and it
was not considered a problem.
28. This case was argued immediately after the hearing in
Private Nursing Home
by the same counsel and, unsurprisingly, the same
submissions, slightly adjusted for the different industries of the employers,
put. Indeed, many of the legal arguments were made by reference to the
earlier hearing without explicit repetition. We will not repeat
our discussion
of them in detail, and merely refer to that decision, which, as we have said, is
also published today.
29. Mr Sargent, in particular, argued for full remission of levy in this
case. He said that claims in the past ten years had been
while the employer had paid some $370 000 in levies. The claims, he said,
had been well and truly paid for. If full
remission was not considered
appropriate, the previous 30% remission would not significantly impact on the
scheme, but would pay
for a couple of extra workers to be employed. He
emphasised that no “floodgates” argument could flow from such a
not too many employers fall into this category of good employers, he
said. He said there was no better example in the cleaning industry.
30. Ms Emmett acknowledged that this employer is a particularly good
employer. She went so far as to say it was probably in the best
employers, with very comprehensive occupational health and safety, regular
visits to worksites and good communication. But,
she said, there was no evidence
of anything in excess of legal obligations. She said the employer hadn’t
had too many workers
to rehabilitate, but does it well, but said that was also a
legal obligation.
31. She pointed out that the employer employs workers offsite. Safety
responsibilities were more difficult to gauge in such a situation.
The employer
may not itself reach a standard of excellence in protection of workers because
of its reliance on a third party (the
clients) to rectify problems. Whilst the
employer was very good, there was no evidence to show that it was “over
to the requisite extent.
32. In reply, Mr Sargent contended there was nothing in section 67 about
“over and above”. He also said that when the
SAWIC was set under
section 66(8), it was clear that this industry was at the upper end, but this
employer should be set aside from
that and could be seen to be remarkably under
the average.
Conclusions
33. Without ignoring Mr Sargent’s point, we find that Ms Emmett’s
final point weighs heavily in our consideration of this
matter. Few of the
workers spend much, if any, time at the applicant’s workplace at Athol
Park. Most of the external worksites
mentioned are Catholic schools, coming
under the aegis of the group of self-insurers under the Act headed by the
Catholic Church
Endowment Society. We do consider the applicant to be an
excellent employer, but the result does seem to rely, at least in part,
excellence of the large self-insured employer (previously termed exempt
employer) which, as emerged clearly from the tenor
of Mr Gibbie’s
evidence, the applicant considers itself fortunate to have as its major
34. Our difficulty is that it is not possible, on the evidence before us, to
discern how much of the applicant’s excellent claims
record should be
attributed to the applicant’s own efforts and how much to the efforts of
the clients on whose premises the
applicant’s workers actually do their
work — and, of course, the applicant’s creditable responsiveness to
the pressures
of those clients (primarily, as we understand it, the Catholic
Church). We accept that the applicant does take an active role in
visits and inspections, but the utility of those depends largely on the
responsiveness of the client to reports made by
the applicant or the
applicant’s workers — and clearly the client is responsive: as Mr
Gibbie said, “they’re
hot on it as well”.
35. We do not think it is quite correct to say that there is nothing in
section 67 requiring an employer to be “over and above”
its peers to
receive a remission. The words certainly do not appear in section 67, but we
think it follows from the nature and context
of the discretion. As we said in
Ahrens Group v. WorkCover
[2012] SAWLRP 5
, also published today,
at [40], the legal framework of the Act and the associated
Occupational
Health, Safety and Welfare Act 1986
are clearly intended to create norms of
employer behaviour. One such norm is that an employer pays the industry rate
fixed under
section 66(8).
, in providing for individual adjustments
by way of remissions and supplements, clearly contemplates rewards and sanctions
for employers
departing from the norm. Whether the phrase “over and
above” is an appropriate way of describing an employer departing
positively from the norm is a question of semantics. We think it can be a
convenient and useful phrase.
36. Further, we are not persuaded that it is helpful to argue that the
employer has “well and truly paid for” its past
claims. While that
may be literally correct, it is inherent in the nature of insurance schemes, or
schemes with insurance characteristics.
A lack of claims by one levy-payer may
be offset by claims by another levy-payer. Moreover, a lack of claims by a
levy-payer at one
point of time may be offset by claims by the same levy-payer
at a different point in time. Given that the applicant is a relatively
employer (23 full-time equivalents, 70 part-time casuals altogether) we are
reminded of the statistic quoted in
Johnson Steel Fabricators v.
[2010] SAWLRP 10
, at [30], where we were informed that Safe
Work Australia’s
Compendium of Workers’ Compensation Statistics
Australia 2007-08
(published January 2010, available online) indicated that
there were 13.5 serious claims
1 000 workers across Australia in 2007-08, which would indicate that it was
likely that a small employer would go some years
between serious claims in any
37. Clearly, under a mechanical and automatic system such as that prevailing
under the former bonus/penalty scheme, the employer’s
claims record was
such as to entitle it to significant remissions without further enquiry.
However, under a consciously exercised
discretion, such as that sought to be
invoked under
, an “actual
persuasion”
, taking into
account all the circumstances, must be felt by a decision-maker.
38. Unfortunately, we cannot say that we are persuaded in this case. We mean
no disrespect to Mr Gibbie in reaching this conclusion.
He is clearly a
conscientious employer dedicated to doing what he can to reduce injury risks and
we have no wish to say anything
to discourage him in that regard. However, he
has an almost entirely offsite workforce working in premises controlled by a
ally in a large and, as we understand it, well-regarded, self-insurer
and we simply are not in a position to find that the applicant’s
efforts are decisive in the excellent claims record generated and the evidence
as a whole is not such as to move us to exercise
our discretion under
of the Act.
39. Accordingly, we are constrained to dismiss the application for review and
confirm the reviewable decision herein.
Determination
40. Pursuant to the powers delegated to us under section 72 of the Act, we
confirm WorkCover’s reviewable decision of 4 June
Bob Donnelly
Emma Hosking
Deputy Member
Total number of claims for the
SAWIC divided by number of locations registered for the SAWIC for the
Total claims costs for
the SAWIC divided by number of locations registered for the SAWIC for the
Defined as those lodged
in the reference year and accepted for compensation by the date the data are
extracted and which involve
a death, a permanent incapacity, or a temporary
incapacity with an absence from work of one working week or more. (See
definitions,
p.89 of the
. The raw statistic is at p.vii
(Summary of findings).)
albeit in a somewhat different context, the oft-quoted words of Dixon J in
Briginshaw v. Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
“The truth is that, when the law requires the proof of any fact, the
tribunal must feel an
actual persuasion
of its occurrence or existence
before it can be found. It cannot be found as a result of a mere mechanical
comparison of probabilities
independently of any belief in its reality”
(emphasis added).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (167 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter