URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SARTTRP/2008/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:05:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Edwards v Francis [2008] SARTTRP 14 (9 December 2008)
Section 88 Retaliatory Action by Park Owner
Francis (RP08/0039)
Park owner gives 90 day notice of termination within a day or so of the
resident (who had been at park for 14 years) complaining to
Local Council that
owner pumps sewerage into creek.
Tribunal finds park owner served notice in retaliation. Tribunal refuse park
owner’s application for possession and reinstates
the agreement on
condition the owner may not serve a 90 day notice for 2 years without
authorisation from the Tribunal.
REASONS FOR ORDER OF THE TRIBUNAL MADE ON
Hearing 5 and 9 December 2008 at Adelaide
EDWARDS v FRANCIS
(RP08/0039)
This is the determination of an application lodged on 24 November 2008 by Ian
Edwards who is the owner of the Virginia Gardens Residential
Park. It seeks an
order for vacant possession of the site occupied by Russell Francis at the
Mr Ian Edwards and Mr Russell Francis appeared and gave sworn evidence on 5
December 2008. They again appeared and gave sworn evidence
on 9 December 2008
when I also heard sworn evidence from Mr Edwards’ son Mr Stephen
On the basis of the evidence, I find that on 14 March 1994 a periodic
residential park site agreement was entered into between the
then park owner of
the Virginia Gardens Residential Park and Mr Francis with respect to site 53 at
that Park. I am satisfied Mr
Francis paid a security bond of $48.00. His rent
is currently $82.00 per week.
I find that the agreement is subject to the
Residential Parks Act, 2007
(“the Act”).
Mr Francis told me that he has a caravan on site 53 together with a 30 x 12
feet carport two sheds each of 12 x 12 feet and a pergola
fixed between the two
sheds. He told me he lives alone.
Mr Edwards told me that on 21 August 2008 he personally handed a notice of
termination to Mr Francis. It gives 90 days notice pursuant
the Act that the agreement will come to an end on 22 November 2008. Mr Edwards
said that it is because Mr Francis has failed
to vacate that he now brings the
application for an order for possession. He told me he would like possession as
soon as possible
as he has other applicants for sites in the Park.
Mr Francis told me that Mr Edwards only chose to serve the notice of
termination upon him because two days prior to the notice being
issued, he had
notified the Playford City Council that Mr Edwards was pumping sewerage down the
creek adjacent to the Park. He said
that as a result of his notification Mr
Edwards now has to have a tanker come to the Park to pump out the sewerage.
of the Act provides:
88- Retaliatory action by park owner
(1) This section applies to
proceedings before the Tribunal--
(a) on an application by a park owner for an order for possession of
rented property or for both termination of a residential park
agreement and an
order for possession of the rented property; or
(b) on an application by a resident for relief under this section
following receipt of a notice of termination (whether or not
the residential
park agreement has terminated by force of the notice).
(2) If the Tribunal is satisfied that the park owner was wholly or partly
motivated to make the application or give the notice of
termination (as the case
may be) by action of the resident to complain to a government authority or
secure or enforce the resident’s
rights as a resident, the Tribunal may,
if the Tribunal considers it appropriate to do so in the circumstances of the
case, do either
or both of the following:
(a) refuse the park owner’s application;
(b) make an order reinstating the residential park agreement on such
conditions (if any) as the Tribunal considers appropriate.
(3) If the resident alleges retaliatory action on the part of the park owner
and the Tribunal is satisfied that the resident had,
within the preceding 6
months, taken action to complain to a government authority or secure or enforce
the resident’s rights
as a resident, the burden will lie on the park owner
to prove that the park owner was not wholly or party motivated to make the
application
or give the notice of termination (as the case may be) by the action
of the resident.
Mr Edwards told me that Environmental Health Officers of the City of Playford
did attend the Park. He said that he was on leave at
the time but was present
at the Park and spoke to the Officers. He told me on the first hearing that was
approximately 9 days prior
to the notice of termination being served. He said
that he thanked Mr Francis for bringing the problem to his attention. He said
that he purchased the Park two years ago and, until August 2008, had managers
managing the Park for him. He said that he moved to
the Park and was on six
weeks leave following that move when Mr Francis brought the problem to the
attention of the Council. He
thought he had finished his leave on Monday 1
September 2008. Mr Edwards said that he was grateful for the action Mr Francis
as there was clearly a problem as the septic system had not been pumped out
by the previous owners for some 15 years although he
had had it pumped out prior
to August 2008. Mr Edwards said that in fact it was storm water and not
sewerage which was being pumped
out onto a lawn. He said that as a result of
the inspectors visit he has been required to cease pumping the waste water onto
lawn and now has a tanker remove the effluent and has plans to upgrade the
pump shed. He said that the complaint made by Mr Francis
was not of any concern
to him as he had plans to upgrade the pump shed in any event. He said that he
saw it as part of the ongoing
maintenance and upgrading of the Park as a whole.
He referred me to various invoices for the work which he has done to the Park
since taking ownership. This has included expensive tree lopping, installation
of laundry equipment and an expensive alarm and traffic
barrier together with
other work. He said the service of the notice of termination upon Mr Francis
whilst he, Mr Edwards, was on
leave, had nothing to do with the complaint Mr
Francis made to the Council. Rather, Mr Edwards told me he was simply
his right as a park owner to have people of his choice rent sites.
He said that others have complained to him about various items
such as the
safety of trees at the Park and he has not served notices upon those persons.
He stressed that the complaint to the
Council had no bearing on his decision.
He told me that Mr Francis keeps his site to a reasonable standard and that he
has similar
sheds, carport and caravan to many others in the Park. He said that
Mr Francis has not caused any problems which have resulted in
police attendance
and nor has his rent been an issue.
I had the notices which were served on Mr Edwards provided to me by the City
of Playford prior to the second hearing day. There are
two such notices. One
is dated 20 August 2008 and the other 17 November 2008. Mr Edwards told me he
received the first by e-mail
and the second by post from the Council. The first
notice states that the Council officers visited the park on 18 August 2008.
Edwards doubted that was the correct date as he was sure there were some 9 days
between the visit and the issue of the notice
of termination upon Mr Francis.
The notice of 20 August 2008 requires that Mr Edwards immediately cease any
discharge entering the
storm water system and engage a licensed contract to
remove effluent from the waste control system. It also requires that in future
he upgrade or replace the current waste control system. The notice of 17
November 2008 requires that by 31 January 2009 he remove
the storm water
connection from the effluent pump shed and upgrade all the plumbing in the pump
shed. Further it requires that prior
to certain other work, approval be
obtained from Council.
I am satisfied that Mr Francis made a complaint to a “government
authority” within the meaning of
Section 88(2)
when he notified Playford
City of the discharge from the Park. As Mr Edwards has sought an order for
possession and the complaint
made Mr Francis was within the preceding six months
Section 88(3)
the burden lies on Mr Edwards to prove that he was not
“wholly or partly motivated” to serve the notice of termination
because of the action taken by Mr Francis.
The overwhelming evidence before the Tribunal is that Mr Edwards was
motivated by the complaint to the Playford Council in serving
the notice of
termination. I am satisfied the date of the first visit by Council officers
was 18 August 2008 and the first letter
was received by Mr Edwards on either 20
or 21 August 2008. The dates of the Council officers visit and the notice of
termination
dated 21 August 2008 are so close that it stretches the imagination
to suggest there is an explanation other than that Mr Edwards
issued the notice
in retaliation. Mr Francis has lived at the park undisturbed since 1994. Mr
Edwards has been the owner for two
years during which time he could, had he
wished, have served a 90 day notice upon Mr Francis. He has no complaint about
in which Mr Francis maintains site 53 nor about his rent record or
behaviour at the park. Despite this, Mr Edwards chose, during
his annual leave,
to serve a notice on Mr Francis three days after the visit from the
Environmental Health Officers and the day after
he received the letter dated 20
August 2008 by e-mail or the day it may have been received in the post. It
seems to me that at the
very least, Mr Edwards was partly motivated to serve the
notice of termination because of the complaint.
Section 88(2)(a)
, the Tribunal has power to refuse Mr Edwards’
application for possession and to reinstate the “residential park
on such conditions (if any) as the Tribunal considers
appropriate.”
I have no hesitation in refusing Mr Edwards application for possession of the
site. He was, I find, motivated to serve the notice
because Mr Francis
complaint to the Council. I shall also reinstate the residential park
agreement. The only other issue which
I need to consider is the conditions upon
which the agreement is reinstated. It seems to me, given that Mr Edwards’
to serve the notice in August that, six months after the initial
complaint to Playford City Council, he will serve another 90 day
notice upon Mr
Francis. This puts Mr Francis in a vulnerable position with no protection from
the retaliatory action which
was meant to prevent. Whilst Mr Edwards
should not be prevented forever from serving a 90 day notice, I am concerned
that Mr Francis
should be protected in some way from what I see will be the
inevitable service of a notice. After careful consideration, I shall
the agreement on condition that if Mr Edwards seeks to serve a 90 day notice
within the 2 year period from the date of
this order he may not do so without
first seeking leave of the Tribunal. The same provision shall apply to Mr
Edwards successors
in that period.
Section 88(2)
of the Act, I refuse the application lodged by Ian Edwards
seeking possession of site 53 of the Virginia Gardens Residential Park.
Section 88(2)(b)
I reinstate the residential park agreement on condition that
if the park owner Ian Edwards or his successors seek to serve a 90 day
termination upon Russell Francis within the period ending 9 December 2010 then
such notice may only be served with the
authorisation of the Tribunal.
Presiding Member
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (62.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter