URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SARTT/2013/35.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:04:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bogner & Hall v Auscare Retirement [2013] SARTT 35 (15 January 2014)
REASONS FOR DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL MADE ON 15
JANUARY 2014
DISMISSING AN APPLICATION BY THE APPLICANT THAT MR S
THOMAS, TRIBUNAL MEMBER, DISQUALIFY HIMSELF FROM FURTHER CONSIDERATION OF THE
In the matter of a dispute between Robert Bogner &
Eva Hall of the Vailima Gardens Retirement Village and the Administering
of the Village
Orders made on 15 January 2014 in Adelaide
BOGNER & HALL v AUSCARE RETIREMENT
(RV13/0035)
Interim order dealing with application by the
resident seeking for the Tribunal member to disqualify himself on the grounds
The Tribunal
member consented to the Administering Authority being represented by a
The Tribunal
member’s conduct of the conciliation conference demonstrated a bias
towards the Administering Authority;
The resident was
not permitted to raise other issues;
There was a
dispute between the 2 applicants.
The Tribunal member considered each ground and declined to
disqualify himself on the grounds of bias.
The following persons participated in this hearing:
The Administering Authority’s Agent: Ms Cathy Mayfield
Resident: Mr Robert Bogner
a directions hearing held on this matter on 15 January 2014 the remaining
Applicant Mr Bogner made an application that I disqualify
myself from further
hearing this matter. I refused the application and indicated I would publish
reasons for that decision. I now
publish those reasons.
and Procedural Background
substantive application in this matter was originally brought by two Applicants,
Mr Bogner and Ms Hall. At the first preliminary
hearing it was apparent that the
notice of the hearing had not come to the attention of anyone at the Respondent
administering authority
Auscare until very soon before the hearing. In fairness
to Auscare I adjourned the matter to enable this to be dealt with.
the preliminary rehearing was resumed Auscare was represented by a solicitor, Ms
Mayfield. As the matter involved a claim of
greater than $50,000 Auscare has
permission by virtue of the relevant legislation
to be so represented.
that hearing an issue arose as to whether the dispute resolution process
required by the relevant residence agreement had been
followed. I could not be
satisfied that it had.
appeared to me also that from the nature of the case there was a reasonable
possibility of the matters in dispute between the parties
being settled by
conciliation. Accordingly, rather than sending the parties away to engage in the
dispute resolution process privately,
I endeavoured to conciliate the
am authorised to undertake this process by paragraph 7 of Schedule 1 of the
Retirement Villages Act and section 34 (1) of the Residential
Tenancies act
under which this Tribunal is created.
conciliation proceeded on 5 December 2013. Each of the seven issues raised in
the application were addressed at that conciliation.
Prior to the conciliation I
invited the parties to provide to me and the respective other party copies of
the documents they wished
to rely upon. Both parties in response to that
invitation provided me with such documentation which was of great
assistance.
to the conciliation I addressed in general terms with the parties the
possibility that during the conciliation I may become
aware of facts or a
position of one or both of the parties which might disqualify me from proceeding
to hear the matter should the
conciliation be unsuccessful.
Accordingly,
at the conclusion of the conciliation (which was unsuccessful) I listed the
matter for a further preliminary hearing
and indicated that at that hearing I
would hear any application by either party for me to so disqualify myself.
the preliminary hearing on 15 January 2014 a letter from the second Applicant,
Ms Hall, was considered and which I treated as effectively
withdrawing Ms Hall
from the proceedings.
remaining Applicant, Mr Bogner, applied for me to disqualify myself from further
hearing the matter. The application was opposed
by Ms Mayfield for
Principles Concerning Disqualification
judicial officer or member of a Tribunal who conducts a “without
prejudice” conciliation of the matter runs the risk
of one of the
following occurring which would possibly be a reason for that officer to
disqualify him- or her-self from hearing the
substantive matter:
party makes a specific admission contrary to that party’s
party offers to compromise the matter, the fact of which offer may be taken by
the officer of the Tribunal as an implicit admission
contrary to that
party’s interest;
party offers to compromise the matter, and the officer of the Tribunal
subsequently deciding the matter is guided, whether consciously
or not, towards
making the decision by reference to the amount or other terms of that offer;
officer of the Tribunal expresses a view about the issues in dispute which would
or may create an apprehension that the officer
is biased in favour of one
party’s position over that of another;
is any sort of collusion (or an exchange which might be construed as collusion)
between the officer of the Tribunal and one
of the parties during a private
discussion.
also take this opportunity to note that the legislation creating the Tribunal
and conferring jurisdiction on it to deal with matters
arising under the
Retirement Villages Act specifically provides that a Tribunal member who
conducts a conciliation or mediation is
not thereby disqualified from proceeding
to hear the substantive
my view the existence of this provision means that any party seeking to have the
member of the Tribunal who conducts a conciliation
or mediation be disqualified
must satisfy a greater onus than would a litigant seeking a similar outcome from
a Judge or Magistrate
of a Court.
Mr Bogner’s
Submissions
I address the submissions made by Mr Bogner, I pause to note that Mr Bogner was
apparently surprised by my suggestion that
he needed to provide reasons for me
to disqualify myself. He said he understood that by the indication I referred to
at paragraph
] of these reasons, , I
would not require reasons but simply agree to disqualify myself should one or
both of the parties ask me to
disagree with that summation of what indication I made to the parties and refer
to the Directions I issued in writing immediately
following the conciliation
conference on 5 December 2013.
Bogner put forward the following reasons for me to disqualify myself from
proceeding to hear this matter:
the course of listing the matter for the conciliation conference, Mr Bogner and
Ms Hall raised quite a valid concern about the
role that Ms Mayfield, a legal
practitioner, was to play in the conciliation. He requested that Ms
Mayfield’s role at the conciliation
would be limited to that of an
adviser, rather than an advocate. Mr Bogner asserted that at the conciliation,
Ms Mayfield regularly
addressed me on the position of Auscare and, in Mr
Bogner’s view, took on the role of “advocate” rather than
as an advisor to Auscare.
the conciliation, I did at one stage elect to meet with each of the parties
privately. My private meeting with the Applicants
lasted for approximately 5
minutes. My private meeting with Mr Heron from Auscare and Ms Mayfield lasted
for approximately 20 to
25 minutes. Mr Bogner pointed to the disparity between
the time I spent with each of the parties (and in particular the fact that
spent a much longer time in private with Mr Heron and Ms Mayfield) as a reason
why I should disqualify myself.
Bogner also stated that there were wider issues addressed or raised by the
Applicants at the conciliation than were raised in the
formal application. I
will expand on what this means later in these reasons when I deal with this
point at paragraph [
was at one stage during the conciliation an open dispute between Mr Bogner and
Ms Hall where Ms Hall expressly disclaimed wishing
to bring or press certain of
the issues raised in the original application.
deal with each of these issues in turn:
I address the role of Ms Mayfield at the conciliation.
do not consider Ms Mayfield to have gone beyond the agreed limited role for her
of acting as an “adviser” and becoming
an “advocate”. Ms
Mayfield was there to represent the interests of Auscare and to advise me and
the Applicants, in respect
of each of the issues raised in the application, of
the position of Auscare and in particular whether Auscare would be prepared to
concede its opposition to those issues and on what terms.
Mayfield did not advocate a position at the conciliation. There was no need for
her to do so as she did not need to persuade me
to take any particular position.
Accordingly, I do not consider the first reason put forward as a good reason for
me to disqualify
myself from further hearing the matter.
turn to the second reason, namely the disparity in time spent in private with
each the parties.
mere fact alone of having spent more time with Auscare than the Applicants does
not mean that I should be disqualified. On the
contrary, the more time I spend
with one party over another in such a context creates more likelihood that that
party will disclose
something to me that means that that party’s case
might be prejudiced. Auscare did not ask me to disqualify myself on this
spending more time with one party may raise the concern in the other
party’s mind that there is an inappropriate
collusion taking place. Whilst
Mr Bogner will never know what was said between myself, Ms Mayfield and Mr
Heron, I can assure Mr
Bogner that no such collusion has taken place. During the
hearing of this application Mayfield joined me in confirming this.
respect of Mr Bogner’s third reason, this issue requires some expansion
and explanation to be understood.
nature of the relief sought in the substantive application relates to, in very
general terms, a requirement by the Applicant for
greater financial transparency
by Auscare, and for various consequential adjustments to the accounts maintained
by the Administering
Authority in respect of the relevant retirement
the conciliation the Applicants raised a number of broader issues than those
addressed in the substantive application, but which
were of a similar nature to
those already in the substantive application. In light of this, at the end of
the conciliation one of
my directions was that if the Applicants wished to amend
their substantive application, they should give notice of such amendment
Tribunal and Auscare before the hearing listed for 15 January 2014.
respect, I fail to see how the fact that broader issues were raised at the
conciliation could possibly create a reason for me
to disqualify myself.
final reason put forward by Mr Bogner related to the dispute which arose between
him and Ms Hall during the conciliation and was
observed by me. The nature of
the dispute was that Ms Hall expressly distanced herself from matters which were
being pursued by Mr
Bogner. At the time I reminded Ms Hall that she had in fact
signed the same application. The response as I recall was that she had
intended to adopt a number of the matters raised in the application which
apparently were solely the creation of Mr Bogner.
Bogner was concerned that my observation of this dispute within the
Applicants’ camp may prejudice me against the Applicants
in the full
hearing of this matter.
to the resumption of this matter on 15 January 2014, Ms Hall wrote to the
Tribunal effectively withdrawing as an Applicant.
Whether or not I had observed
the dispute between Mr Bogner and Ms Hall at the conciliation, I have in
subsequent open communication
with the Tribunal been informed of that dispute,
with the result that I have accepted that Ms Hall has withdrawn from
proceedings.
I merely received that letter from Ms Hall without having observed the dispute
between Ms Hall and Mr Bogner I would not by reason
of that be disqualified from
hearing this matter. No greater prejudice (if any exists at all) can exist
through my having observed
that dispute at the
conciliation.
was satisfied in my own mind following the conciliation that I had not observed,
heard or said anything that would require me to
disqualify myself. That said, it
was important to give the parties the opportunity to raise the issue should they
be concerned.
is nothing in Mr Bogner’s submissions that leads me to the view that I
ought to disqualify myself.
application is dismissed. I will proceed to hear the matter to its
conclusion.
Tribunal Member
Villages Act, Schedule 1, paragraph 6 (3)
Residential
Tenancies Act section 34 (4) and Retirement Villages Act, Schedule 1, paragraph
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.22 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter