URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCA/2025/115.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v WITT [2025] SASCA 115 (9 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Court of Appeal: Criminal)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
[2025] SASCA 115
Judgment of the Court of Appeal
(The Honourable President Livesey, the Honourable Justice Bleby
and the Honourable Justice David)
9 October 2025
CRIMINAL LAW - APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - APPEAL AGAINST SENTENCE - APPEALS BY
CRIMINAL LAW - APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - APPEAL AGAINST SENTENCE - GROUNDS
FOR INTERFERENCE - SENTENCE MANIFESTLY EXCESSIVE OR INADEQUATE
This is an application by the Director of Public Prosecutions, seeking
permission to appeal sentence.
On New Year’s Eve 2023, while affected by a range of illicit drugs, the
respondent engaged in serious offending involving driving
dangerously on busy
major arterial roads, courting the risk of catastrophic harm to numerous road
users. When confronted by police,
and later ambulance workers, the respondent
acted with violence and rage.
The appellant contended that the sentence imposed by the sentencing judge is
manifestly inadequate and that the sentencing judge erred
in fact by sentencing
the respondent for offending under
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) on the basis that he did not intend to punch a
sergeant of police to the head.
The sentencing judge imposed a sentence of imprisonment of two years, 11
months and 21 days, with a non-parole period of 18 months,
backdated to commence
on 12 April 2024. The non-parole period expires on 12 October 2025.
Held (the Court), granting permission to appeal, allowing the appeal, setting
aside the sentence and re-sentencing the respondent:
this Court is conscious that offenders ought not ordinarily be twice vexed, the
respondent has repeatedly been shown leniency
yet continued to engage in
drug-fuelled offending. In these circumstances, the protection of the safety of
the community and personal
and general deterrence are important sentencing
considerations. [63]
there is a specific factual error and some of the individual sentences appear to
be too low, it is the overall result which
is key. The final sentence is
manifestly inadequate, and by a significant margin. That is in part the product
of ordering an inappropriate
degree of concurrence. [64]
Court’s principled intervention is required in order to maintain
appropriate sentencing standards in circumstances where
the sentence imposed was
affected by factual error and so egregiously low that intervention is necessary
in order to maintain public
confidence in the administration of justice. [65]
respondent is re-sentenced to five years and 12 days’ imprisonment with a
non-parole period of three years, backdated to
12 April 2024.
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Law Consolidation (Assaults of Prescribed Emergency
Workers) Amendment Bill 2019
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
Motor Vehicles Act 1959
Road Traffic Act 1961
Sentencing Act 2017
, referred to.
Barry v Samuels
(1975) 10 SASR 376
Birch v Fitzgerald
11 SASR 114
Branscheid v The King
[2023] SASCA 103
Cruise v The
King; R v Cruise
[2025] SASCA 59
Dinsdale v The Queen
[2000] HCA 54
(2000) 202 CLR
Director of Public Prosecutions (Vic) v Arvanitidis
[2008] VSCA 189
(2008) 202 A
Edmonds (a pseudonym) v The Queen
[2022] SASCA 11
v The Queen
[1994] HCA 49
(1994) 181 CLR 295
Gaston v Police
[2004] SASC 222
Hili v The Queen
[2010] HCA 45
(2010) 242 CLR 520
House v The King
Miller v Huffa
(1980) 24 SASR 595
Attorney-General’s Application (No 2 of 2002) (NSW)
[2002] NSWCCA 515
(2002) 137 A Crim
R v Coleman
(1990) 19 NSWLR 467
R v Edigarov
[2001] NSWCCA 436
(2001) 125 A
(1994) 71 A Crim R 459
[2007] VSCA
R v McCormack
[1981] VicRp 11
[1981] VR 104
R v Henderson
(2023) 142 SASR
R v McNamara
[2009] SASC 227
(2009) 105 SASR 38
(1979) 23 SASR 98
[2003] QCA 175
[2004] 1 Qd R 63
[2003] SASC 375
(2003) 87 SASR 168
(1982) 30 SASR 212
[2022] SASCA 127
[1962] HCA 23
(1962) 107 CLR 381
R v Sadik & Anor
[2025] SASCA 46
(1981) 29 SASR 12
[2024] SASCA 81
(2013) 118 SASR 342
[2024] SASCA 111
(2022) 142 SASR 275
, considered.
[2025] SASCA 115
Court of Appeal – Criminal: Livesey P, Bleby and David JJA
Introduction
prosecution seeks permission to appeal against sentence on two grounds. The
first is that the sentence imposed by the sentencing
judge on 25 July 2025 is
manifestly inadequate.
second ground is that the sentencing judge erred in fact by sentencing the
respondent for offending under
Criminal Law Consolidation Act
) on the basis that he did not intend to punch a
sergeant of police to the head. The prosecution contends that this finding is
inconsistent
with the factual basis upon which the respondent’s guilty
plea was accepted. The prosecution requires leave to amend to press
broad terms, while affected by a range of illicit drugs, on New Year’s Eve
2023 the respondent engaged in serious offending
whilst driving dangerously on
busy major arterial roads, courting the risk of catastrophic harm to numerous
road users. When confronted
by police, and later ambulance workers, the
respondent acted with violence and rage.
respondent was sentenced to imprisonment for two years, 11 months and 21 days
and a non-parole period of 18 months was fixed.
The sentence was backdated to
commence on 12 April 2024. The respondent’s non-parole period expires at
the end of this week,
on 12 October 2025.
application for leave to amend should be granted. The prosecution’s
application for permission to appeal against sentence
should also be granted.
This Court’s intervention is required in order to maintain appropriate
sentencing standards in circumstances
where the sentence imposed was affected by
factual error and so low that intervention is necessary in order to maintain
public confidence
in the administration of justice.
appeal will be allowed and the respondent re-sentenced.
circumstances of the offending
Sunday, 31 December 2023, the respondent drove a silver Mazda along Henley Beach
Road with his domestic partner as passenger.
At around 11.05 pm, the
respondent’s Mazda was seen to be stopped in the middle of the
intersection of Henley Beach and Marion
Roads in Brooklyn Park. The Mazda was
blocking two lanes of traffic travelling east on Henley Beach Road during two
light cycles.
The respondent appeared to be asleep in the driver’s seat.
Pedestrians attempted to assist.
respondent awoke, screaming at those attempting to assist. The respondent
accelerated, almost colliding with another vehicle
travelling through the
intersection. He then travelled in an erratic and dangerous manner east along
Henley Beach Road for around
1.6 kilometres. The respondent was seen to swerve
between lanes at around 55 kph. As the respondent approached the intersection
with South Road, he hit the northern kerb on Henley Beach Road, narrowly missing
two people on a scooter, waiting at a red light.
This offending comprised the
count of driving in a reckless or dangerous manner.
around 11.10 pm, the respondent drove through a red light at the intersection of
Henley Beach and South Roads and was T-boned
by another vehicle travelling south
on South Road. This offending comprised the count of act likely to cause harm.
The driver of
the other vehicle and his wife had been to the “Big
Bash” cricket at the Adelaide Oval and the New Year’s Eve fireworks.
The driver’s wife suffered a rib fracture.
this collision, the respondent’s Mazda crashed into another vehicle. That
vehicle had been travelling west on Henley
Beach Road and was stopped at a red
this occurred, Sergeant Damien Elliott, on solo uniform traffic duties in a
Police Drug Driving truck, was exiting a service station
and observed the
collision. He immediately went to the scene of the collision. As he did so, he
called for police assistance and
an ambulance. He saw that the respondent had
got out of his Mazda and was walking south across the intersection. Sergeant
directed the respondent to return to his vehicle. Although he did so,
the respondent was seen to be punching the steering wheel,
kicking his legs and
yelling that he had done “nothing wrong”.
after, Constable Bailey arrived. Sergeant Elliott conducted alcohol and drug
testing. The alcohol test was negative. Whilst
the drug swipe was being
analysed, Sergeant Elliott told the respondent not to smoke a cigarette.
Sergeant Elliott saw the respondent
lean towards his partner, punch the console
of the vehicle several times and yell “fucking dog”. He then
directed the
respondent to get out of the Mazda. He grabbed the
respondent’s arm, attempting to pull him from the Mazda. The respondent
resisted. Constable Bailey assisted Sergeant Elliott to remove the respondent.
This comprised the count of failing to comply with
a direction to submit to test
or analysis.
the respondent was out of the Mazda, Sergeant Elliott was still holding the
respondent’s left arm. The respondent swung
his right arm with a closed
fist, punching Sergeant Elliott to the left side of his head. This conduct
comprised the count of recklessly
causing harm to a prescribed emergency worker.
This incident occurred at 11.19 pm and was captured on Constable Bailey’s
worn video camera. The Court has viewed the video footage.
Elliott immediately felt pain and dizziness. He pushed the respondent backwards
and they both fell to the ground. The
respondent was resisting and yelling.
Constable Bailey and two members of the public assisted Sergeant Elliott to
restrain the respondent.
Sergeant Elliott became lightheaded and collapsed. His shoulder caused him
great pain, and his breathing was erratic.
of the South Australian Ambulance Service arrived. They treated Sergeant
Elliott for around 10 minutes. This occurred on
the busy roadway for a number
of minutes before the road was closed. The ambulance officers later reported
that Sergeant Elliott
had an elevated heart rate, angina and injuries to his
head and shoulder.
this was occurring, the respondent continued to be aggressive. On the body worn
video of Constable Bailey, the respondent
can be heard to yell “you
fucking dog”, “fuck off dog”, “you fucking mutts”,
cocksuckers” at police and others. This went on for more
than 25 minutes. Ambulance officers sectioned and restrained the
respondent on
a stretcher. The respondent continued to threaten to “smash [the
officers] in the face” and said he wanted
a “one on one” with
the officers.
respondent was taken in an ambulance to the Royal Adelaide Hospital. A police
officer who accompanied him heard the respondent
saying “fuck
SAPOL”, as well as continued abuse, calling police and ambulance officers
“dogs” and “rats”.
Elliott was treated at the Royal Adelaide Hospital for a dislocated left
shoulder, bruising and grazes to his right knee,
bruising to his right thumb,
tenderness to the bone behind his left ear and a severe headache. Multiple pain
relief medication was
required to treat his pain. He was discharged after
Elliott experienced an ongoing headache for three days, had two weeks off work
and four to six weeks on light duties. He
required physiotherapy treatment. In
his victim impact statement, Sergeant Elliott said that he had never encountered
an offender
as violent and aggressive as the respondent in his 32 years of
police service.
blood sample of the respondent’s blood later revealed that he had consumed
methylamphetamine, amphetamine, gamma-hydroxybutyrate
(GHB), tramadol,
O-desmethyltramadol, aripiprazole and droperidol. For this consumption, the
respondent was charged with driving
under the influence as well as driving in a
reckless or dangerous manner.
was ascertained that the respondent had been unauthorised to drive, having been
disqualified for driving with methylamphetamine
in 2020. This conduct comprised
the count of driving a vehicle unauthorised.
addition to this offending, the respondent had engaged in a number of thefts.
Two were committed on 18 February 2023. One was
committed on 19 December
2023. That involved stealing grocery items from a service station and the
earlier two involved using a
stolen credit card to purchase grocery items.
The offences before the court
respondent was charged on four separate Informations in the Magistrates Court
and pleaded guilty to the following offences:
count of act likely to cause harm, contrary to
of the CLCA, for which
the maximum penalty was imprisonment for five years.
count of driving in a reckless or dangerous manner, contrary to
Road Traffic Act 1961
), for which the maximum
penalty was a fine of $5,000 or imprisonment for two years.
count of recklessly causing harm to a prescribed emergency worker, contrary to
s 20AA(2) of the CLCA, for which the maximum penalty
was imprisonment for
count of failing to comply with a direction for the purpose of submitting to a
test or analysis, contrary to
and (4) of the RTA, for which the
maximum penalty was a fine of $2,900.
count of driving under the influence, contrary to
of the RTA, for
which the maximum penalty was a fine of between $1,900 and $2,900.
count of driving a motor vehicle not authorised following a drug driving
disqualification, contrary to
Motor Vehicles Act 1959
(SA), for which the maximum penalty was a fine of $5,000 or imprisonment for one
counts of theft, contrary to
of the CLCA, for which the maximum penalty in
each case was imprisonment for 10 years.
circumstances of the offender
psychiatric report from Dr Craig Raeside dated 7 September 2020 and a
psychological report from Dr Jack White dated 9 September
2024 set out in detail
the history of the respondent’s mental illness, being a diagnosis of
schizophrenia complicated by drug
use and antisocial personality traits and a
childhood history of emotional abuse by the respondent’s father. The
had been sexually abused when aged 11 years.
addition, the respondent had an extensive criminal history including offending
involving violence and driving. The respondent
admitted that his past offending
was “drug-fuelled”.
The starting sentences and final sentence imposed by the
sentencing judge
the offence of recklessly causing harm to a prescribed worker, contrary to
s 20AA(2) of the CLCA, the respondent was sentenced
to imprisonment for one
year and six months, based on a starting sentence of two years. This sentence
was reduced by 25 per cent
for the respondent’s guilty plea.
the offence of act likely to cause harm, contrary to s 29(3) of the CLCA, the
respondent was sentenced to a term of imprisonment
for one year, one month and
15 days, based on a starting sentence of one year and six months. This too was
reduced by 25 per cent
for the respondent’s guilty plea.
the offence of driving in a reckless or dangerous manner, the respondent was
sentenced to imprisonment for four months and fifteen
days, after a 25 per cent
reduction was made from a starting sentence of six months. The sentencing judge
ordered that this sentence
be served concurrently with the sentence for the
offence of act likely to cause harm.
the driving unauthorised offending, the sentencing judge started with seven
days’ imprisonment which, after a reduction
of 30 per cent for the
respondent’s guilty plea, became a sentence of four days. This too was
ordered to be served concurrently
with the sentences for the offences of
recklessly causing harm to a prescribed worker, for the act likely to cause
harm, and for
driving in a reckless or dangerous manner.
the earlier theft offences, the sentencing judge started with three
months’ imprisonment and, after a reduction of 30 per
cent for the
respondent’s guilty plea, imposed a sentence of two months and three days.
Sentencing Act 2017
), the respondent was sentenced for the earlier two offences of theft
to a sentence of three months, reduced by 30 per cent for the
respondent’s
guilty pleas, to two months and three days’ imprisonment.
the offence of failing to comply with a direction to submit to a test or
analysis, a conviction was recorded and no further penalty
imposed. For the
driving under the influence offending, the respondent was fined $1,900.
respondent was disqualified from holding or obtaining a driver’s licence
for five years for the act likely to cause harm
offending, for one year for the
drive dangerously offending, for three years for the driving under the influence
offending and for
three years for the driving unauthorised offending. Partial
concurrence was ordered in respect of these disqualifications, resulting
total licence disqualification period of seven years.
sentencing judge was required to deal with an application for enforcement of a
partially suspended sentence bond. The respondent
had three months, one week
and four days left to serve on that bond. The suspended sentence was revoked,
and the time already spent
in custody was taken into account. Relying on
Sentencing Act
, the sentencing judge determined that the
respondent had served his suspended sentence.
The principles
relating to prosecution appeals
Director’s right of appeal first depends upon obtaining permission to
appeal pursuant to
s 157(1)(a)(iii)
Criminal Procedure Act
is not sufficient for the prosecution to demonstrate material error pursuant to
the principles described in
House v The
The prosecution must
demonstrate that the case is sufficiently “rare and exceptional” to
warrant a grant of permission
to appeal, and that the public interest in favour
of this Court’s intervention outweighs considerations of double
need to show more than error on a prosecution appeal is illustrated by the
circumstances of this case. Leaving aside the question
of manifest inadequacy,
the prosecution contended that the sentencing judge made an error of fact
insofar as she found that the respondent
“did not intentionally punch
Sergeant Elliott to the
Even if the
prosecution succeeded in showing that this factual finding was wrong, that would
not necessarily be a sufficient basis
for a conclusion that this was an
appropriate case in which to grant the prosecution permission to appeal against
sentence. It would
still be necessary to demonstrate that it was necessary for
this Court to intervene. It is not normally appropriate for the prosecution
expose a defendant to the risk of re-sentence after the defendant has already
been sentenced. A factual error of that kind is
one made within jurisdiction.
It is not the kind of error that demonstrates that the sentence was not
authorised at law and contrary
to Parliament’s
the question of manifest inadequacy, it has been emphasised on a number of
occasions that a sentence which is manifestly inadequate
may not necessarily
warrant granting the prosecution permission to appeal. A question of degree is
involved. The sentence must
be so low as to demonstrate that it risks
undermining public confidence in the administration of
determination of the application for permission to appeal against
is first appropriate to determine whether any error was made in connection with
the exercise of sentencing discretion. Logically,
it is appropriate to start
with what is said to be a specific, factual error before considering whether any
error may be inferred
associated with the contention of manifest inadequacy.
respondent was sentenced on the basis of a prosecution factual summary filed on
21 August 2024. In that summary, the prosecution
Once removed
from the vehicle, Sergeant Elliott, who had a hold of one of Mr Witt’s
arms, attempted to grab his other arm.
Mr Witt swung his free arm around and
with a closed fist, punched Sergeant Elliott to the left side of his head
causing him to feel
to this, the sentencing judge
Your offending
against Sergeant Elliott was also a serious example of the offence of recklessly
causing harm to a prescribed emergency
worker. Whilst your offending was
reckless, in the sense that you did not intentionally punch Sergeant Elliott to
the head, you
had swung your arm, having formed a close fist, in circumstances
where it was inevitable that you would connect with his upper body
offences concerning prescribed emergency workers of relevance to this case are
set out in ss 20AA(1) and (2) of the CLCA:
(1) A person who causes harm to a prescribed emergency worker acting in the
course of official duties, intending to cause harm, is
guilty of an offence.
Maximum penalty: Imprisonment for 15 years.
(2) A person who causes harm to a prescribed emergency worker acting in the
course of official duties, and is reckless in doing so,
is guilty of an
Maximum penalty: Imprisonment for 10 years.
of these offences require that the conduct by the defendant which caused the
harm be both conscious and
The difference between
s 20AA(1) and 20AA(2) of the CLCA is whether the defendant intended to cause
harm and did so, or was reckless
in doing so.
this case, the sentencing judge misunderstood either or both the factual summary
and the elements of the s 20AA(2) offence. On
the agreed factual basis, the
respondent’s punch to the head was deliberate, and it caused Sergeant
Elliott harm. However,
the respondent was to be sentenced on the basis he was
reckless as to whether harm would be caused by his punch. Insofar as the
sentencing judge found that the respondent did not intend to punch Sergeant
Elliott to the head, but was reckless, that finding was
internally inconsistent
suggesting conduct
less serious than the agreed factual basis for sentence.
that error is clearly material, as well as relevant to the question whether
permission should be granted, standing alone,
it would probably not warrant
granting permission to appeal against sentence.
next question concerns whether the sentence was manifestly inadequate. The
determination of that question requires that this
Court consider all of the
matters relevant to the exercise of discretion to impose sentence. That
requires that this Court consider
the maximum sentence prescribed by law, any
applicable sentencing standards, where the offending sits on the scale of
seriousness
for offending of its kind, together with the personal circumstances
of the offender.
with manifest excess, the question of manifest inadequacy represents a
conclusion which may be reached by the appeal court after
a consideration of all
relevant matters and without the identification of any specific
one has regard to the offences, the maximum penalties, the overall circumstances
of the respondent’s offending, and his
personal circumstances, the
sentence which was imposed by the sentencing judge appears to be far too low.
That impression is borne
out by a consideration of each individual sentence, and
the scope for ordering concurrency in connection with those sentences.
is appropriate to commence with the offence of recklessly causing harm to a
prescribed worker offending. Section 20AA of the
CLCA was enacted for the
purpose of “better protecting the State’s police, emergency services
workers, front-line medical
officers and other law enforcement officers from
Attorney-General explained during her second reading
government is sending a clear message to those who are disorderly, disrespectful
and violent toward our police, ambulance
workers, doctors, nurses, firefighters
and front‑line officers that this behaviour is unacceptable and should be
such in the criminal law.
[O]ur most vulnerable on-duty workers will have charges appropriately
sentenced, accounting for their role at work and role in protecting
are a number of authorities which emphasise that an important sentencing purpose
for this kind of offending is the general
deterrence of those who might
otherwise harm or assault prescribed emergency workers acting in the course of
their duties. The courts
have emphasised general deterrence as a means of
protecting prescribed emergency workers acting in the course of their
For example, in
Director of Public Prosecutions (Vic) v Arvanitidis
, Redlich JA
serious offence to assault police officers in the execution of their duty
ordinarily requiring a significant element of deterrence
in the sentences to be
The courage of police
officers in protecting lives and property is something upon which the community
depends. It is incumbent on
the Court to impose appropriate sentences to
demonstrate support for the authority of police officers who undertake a
and dangerous task in the execution of their duties in maintaining
law and order.
officers, and others performing such essential public duties, are to receive a
similar measure of support and protection.
Where the offender knows or ought to
have known that the victim was discharging a public duty of this sort, a more
severe sentence
will usually be imposed to deter such persons from violent
assaults on them when performing their
(Citations in original.)
the respondent’s offending represents a classical example of a case where
police ought be protected from violent,
drug-fuelled offending whilst acting in
the course of their duties, protecting the community from harm.
the sentencing judge rightly observed, this was a serious example of offending
under s 20AA(2) of the CLCA. The respondent’s
offending demonstrated a
clear disregard for police officers undertaking the essential role of protecting
members of the community.
The enraged ranting associated with the
respondent’s offending exemplified both his unacceptable attitude to
police and the
need for the sentencing court to take a firm approach.
the sentencing judge relied on the decision of the Court of Appeal in
v The King; R v Cruise
where the offender was sentenced to imprisonment for three years and three
months for offending under s 20AA(1), it is obviously
inappropriate in cases
such as these to attempt to draw direct comparisons where the circumstances are
so markedly different. Quite
apart from any other distinguishing feature, the
respondent’s offending came at the conclusion to aggressive and extreme
offending, creating the need for Sergeant Elliott to quickly intervene
and ensure that the respondent no longer posed a risk to other
road users on
major arterial roadways.
might be expected, the respondent gave appropriate emphasis to his history of
hardship, mental illness and drug addiction. Whilst
these were clearly relevant
considerations, they did not necessarily suggest scope for
The respondent had a
long-standing addiction to methylamphetamine and, most importantly, he had
previously driven whilst affected
by that drug. The respondent’s prior
offending tended to demonstrate that his drug intoxication was, in the
circumstances
of this case, an aggravating
Where there
is foresight as to the probability of consequences of the general type
constituted by the offending conduct, the offender’s
premeditation or
recklessness
may become an
aggravating feature of the offence. It is the degree of deliberation or
awareness that taking the drug will predispose
the offender to such conduct
which aggravates the offence.
(Citations in original.)
this Court has recently observed, police are all too often exposed to harm by
offenders affected by intoxication, personal dysfunction
all of these circumstances, the starting point of two years appears too low. It
failed to adequately vindicate Sergeant Elliott’s
role as a police officer
entitled to protection whilst acting in the course of his
circumstances of the respondent’s brazen and risk-laden driving have been
described. The respondent drove whilst under
the influence of a cocktail of
illicit drugs late on New Year’s Eve at a time when, as might be expected,
the two major arterial
roadways he used were very busy. The respondent appeared
to pass out in the middle of Henley Beach Road before erupting and driving
dangerously and erratically, running a red light at South Road and causing an
accident involving other vehicles. It is remarkable
that the consequences were
not much more serious. As this Court has
Offending of this kind is prevalent. Courts are obliged to fix sentences of
sufficient severity that they will deter others from
driving in a manner
dangerous to the public, especially when offenders are affected by drugs and
(Citation in original.)
was very serious offending by an offender who had previously engaged in similar
offending, though admittedly that previous offending
was not as serious.
the sentencing judge rightly described this offending as sitting at the upper
end of the spectrum of seriousness for offences
In those circumstances,
the starting points of 18 months for the act likely to cause harm, and six
months for the dangerous driving,
combined with the decision to make these
offences wholly concurrent, appears to have resulted in an inadequate sentence.
there was scope for significant concurrence given the course of the driving
offending, it was necessary to recognise the distinct
phases of the
respondent’s offending: dangerous driving culminating in an accident,
followed by violence directed at a police
officer. The theft offending was
obviously distinct. Whilst the question of manifest inadequacy must ultimately
be directed to
the final sentence, the combination of low sentences and the
decision to order concurrency across the driving offences was problematic.
those circumstances, it was not appropriate to order complete concurrence across
all of the driving offence sentences.
is appropriate to consider the circumstances of the respondent and the questions
of public policy raised by the application for
permission to appeal.
2020, the respondent had been sentenced to imprisonment on four occasions, two
of which were suspended and, in other instances,
partially suspended. Since
that time, the respondent repeatedly breached the conditions of bonds, including
by continuing to offend.
this Court is conscious that offenders ought not ordinarily be twice vexed, it
is relevant to observe that the respondent
has repeatedly been shown leniency
yet continued to engage in drug-fuelled offending. In these circumstances, the
protection of
the safety of the community and personal and general deterrence
are important sentencing considerations in this case.
there is a specific factual error, and the sentences mentioned appear to be too
low, it is the overall result which is key
here. The final sentence is
manifestly inadequate, and by a significant margin. That is in part the product
of ordering an inappropriate
degree of concurrence.
final sentence of less than three years, with a non-parole period of
18 months, is so egregiously low that this Court’s
intervention is necessary in order to maintain appropriate sentencing standards
and public confidence in the administration
of justice.
all of these circumstances, permission to appeal should be granted and the
prosecution appeal allowed.
Re-sentencing the respondent
is not necessary to repeat the circumstances of the offending and the
circumstances of the offender. Having regard to these and
the matters already
outlined, it is appropriate to commence with a sentence of three years for the
offending involving recklessly
causing harm to a prescribed emergency worker.
That must be reduced by 25 per cent for the respondent’s plea, resulting
a sentence of two years and three months.
the offending of act likely to cause harm, involving driving through a red light
and colliding with another vehicle at the intersection
of Henley Beach and South
Roads, the starting sentence should be two years and six months, reduced by 25
per cent for the respondent’s
guilty plea to 22 months.
the offending involving driving in a reckless or dangerous manner it is
appropriate to start with a sentence of imprisonment
of 8 months which, when
reduced by 25 per cent for the plea, becomes a sentence of 6 months’
imprisonment. For the driving
under the influence (which also reflects the
respondent’s decision to drive whilst intoxicated by illicit drugs), it is
appropriate
to impose a fine of $2,500.
the offending involving driving unauthorised, it is appropriate to commence with
a sentence of six months, reduced by 30 per
cent for the respondent’s
guilty plea, resulting in a sentence of four months and 6 days’
imprisonment.
the offending of failing to comply with a direction to submit to a test or
analysis, it is appropriate to record a conviction
and impose no further penalty
given the sentencing for the appellant’s related offending.
it would be appropriate to commence with the individual disqualification periods
outlined by the sentencing judge, the total
licence disqualification should be a
period of 10 years.
is appropriate to address the theft offending in the manner outlined by the
sentencing judge, resulting in a combined sentence
of four months and six days.
Similarly, it is appropriate to address the enforcement of the partially
suspended sentence in the
manner outlined by the sentencing judge.
the separate offences which have been identified appropriately reflect the
respondent’s separate incursions into criminality,
it is necessary to
stand back and have regard to the respondent’s criminal conduct as a
whole. It is necessary to consider
the extent to which each sentence
successively addresses the relevant purposes of
sentencing.
this way, it is appropriate to order partial concurrency in connection with the
driving offending, but not the violence or theft
offending, in order to arrive
at a sentence which is appropriately proportionate to the circumstances of the
offending and the offender.
sentences, penalties and disqualification to be imposed on re-sentence may be
tabulated as follows, commencing with the heaviest
Reduction for guilty plea
Re-sentence
Degree of Concurrence
Recklessly causing harm to a prescribed emergency worker (punching a police
officer to the head)
2 years, 3 months
2 years, 3 months
Act likely to cause harm (driving through a red light etc at the
intersection of Henley Beach and South Roads)
2 years, 6 months
4 years, 1 month
Driving in a reckless or dangerous manner
3 months, with act likely to cause harm
4 years, 4 months
Driving under the influence
Driving unauthorised
4 months and 6 days
2 months, with driving reckless or dangerous
4 years, 8 months and 6 days
Failing to comply with a direction to submit to a test or analysis
Record a conviction
No further penalty
Theft offending
4 months, 6 days
5 years, 12 days
Total licence disqualification
licence disqualification
5 years, 12 days
is appropriate to impose a head sentence of five years and 12 days, together
with a non-parole period of three years, backdated
to 12 April 2024. The
respondent will be disqualified from holding or obtaining a driver’s
licence for 10 years on his release.
to appeal should be granted and the appeal allowed. The sentence imposed in the
District Court should be set aside.
The respondent should be re‑sentenced
Report of Dr Jack White dated
9 September 2024, p 10.
House v The King
, 504-505 (Dixon, Evatt and McTiernan JJ).
R v Osenkowski
30 SASR 212
, 212-213 (King CJ);
Everett v The Queen
[1994] HCA 49
(1994) 181 CLR 295
299 (Brennan, Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ);
R v Henderson
, [33]-[46] (Livesey P and David JA);
[2024] SASCA 81
[30]-[31] (Livesey ACJ, Doyle and David JJA);
R v Sadik & Anor
[2025] SASCA 46
, [88]-[91] (Livesey P, S Doyle and David JJA).
Sentencing remarks, p 8.
, [71]-[82], [87] (Livesey P, S Doyle and David JJA);
Cruise v The
King; R v Cruise
[2025] SASCA 59
, [148] (Livesey P).
[2003] SASC 375
, [24] (Doyle CJ);
[2024] SASCA 81
, [30]-[31] (Livesey
ACJ, Doyle and David JJA);
R v Sadik & Anor
[2025] SASCA 46
[88]-[91] (Livesey P, S Doyle and David JJA).
Prosecution summary of
proposed factual basis for sentencing dated 21 August 2024, [14].
Sentencing remarks, p 8.
He Kaw The v The Queen
[1985] HCA 43
(1985) 157 CLR 523
, 569-570 (Brennan J): “In statutory offences, general
or basic intent is an intent to do an act of the character prescribed
statute creating the offence; special or specific intent is an intent to cause
the results to which the intent is expressed
to relate”.
The inconsistency arises in
the following passage: “your offending was reckless, in the sense that you
did not intentionally
punch Sergeant Elliott to the head, you had swung your
arm, having formed a closed fist, in circumstances where it was inevitable
you would connect”. To say that it was inevitable that there would be
with recklessness which
does not amount to intention.
, 99 (King CJ).
Dinsdale v The Queen
[2000] HCA 54
(2000) 202 CLR 321
, [6] (Gleeson CJ and Hayne J);
Hili v The Queen
[2010] HCA 45
242 CLR 520
, [59] (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ).
South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates, House of Assembly, 2 May 2019, 5649 (Vickie Chapman,
Deputy-Premier, Attorney-General).
South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates, House of Assembly, 2 May 2019, 5650-5651 (Vickie Chapman,
Deputy-Premier, Attorney-General),
regarding the
Criminal Law Consolidation
(Assaults of Prescribed Emergency Workers) Amendment Bill 2019
Barry v Samuels
(1975) 10 SASR 376
, 377-378 (Zelling J);
Miller v Huffa
(1980) 24 SASR
, 598 (Walters J);
R v McCormack
[1981] VicRp 11
[1981] VR 104
, 109 (Young CJ, Kaye
and McGarvie JJ);
Warrell v Kay
(1995) 83 A Crim R 493
, 497-498 (Owen J);
Gaston v Police
[2004] SASC 222
, [9]-[12] (Gray J);
R v McNamara
[2009] SASC 227
(2009) 105 SASR 38
, [7] (Gray J);
Cruise v The King; R v Cruise
, [142] (Kourakis CJ, with whom Livesey P and S Doyle JA agreed).
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Vic) v Arvanitidis
[2008] VSCA 189
(2008) 202 A Crim R 300
, [50] (Redlich JA).
See also [4] (Buchanan JA).
R v Edigarov
[2001] NSWCCA 436
125 A Crim R 551
(Wood CJ at CL);
(1995) 84 A Crim
R v Hamilton
66 A Crim R 575
Re Attorney-General’s Application (No 2 of 2002) (NSW)
[2002] NSWCCA 515
(2002) 137 A Crim R 196
(Spigelman CJ).
[2003] QCA 175
[2004] 1 Qd
(Williams JA), at [72]-[74] (Muir J). It has been suggested
that the decision in
R v Reynhoudt
[1962] HCA 23
(1962) 107 CLR 381
may be applicable.
See Colin Howard,
Australian Criminal Law
(1st ed, 1965) pp 109, 116.
Cruise v The King; R v
[2025] SASCA 59 (Kourakis
CJ, Livesey P and S Doyle JA).
, [121]-[127] (Livesey P and David JA) and the cases there cited.
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Vic) v Arvanitidis
[2008] VSCA 189
(2008) 202 A Crim R 300
, [43] (Redlich
[2007] VSCA
(Buchanan JA), and at [33] (Maxwell P);
R v Coleman
47 A Crim R 306
(1994) 71 A Crim R 459
(1981) 29 SASR 12
5 A Crim R 204
at 207 (Zelling J).
Cruise v The King; R v
[2025] SASCA 59
, [142] (Kourakis CJ, with whom Livesey P and
Doyle JA agreed).
Birch v Fitzgerald
(1975) 11 SASR 114
, 117 (Bray CJ).
Branscheid v The
[2023] SASCA 103
, [68] (Livesey P, David JA and Nicholson AJA).
R v Watkins
118 SASR 342
, [25] Stanley J (with whom Kourakis CJ and Vanstone J agreed).
Sentencing remarks, p
Edmonds (a pseudonym)
v The Queen
[2022] SASCA 11 (Livesey
P, S Doyle and David JJA) and
v The Queen
(2022) 142 SASR 275 (Kourakis
CJ, Livesey P and S Doyle JA).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (446 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter