URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAERDC/2025/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:57:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MOUNT BARKER DISTRICT COUNCIL v CAIN & ANOR [2025] SAERDC 9 (16 May 2025)
ENVIRONMENT, RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT COURT OF SOUTH
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
MOUNT BARKER DISTRICT COUNCIL v CAIN & ANOR
[2025] SAERDC 9
Reasons of Commissioner Dyer
16 May 2025
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING - PLANNING - DEVELOPMENT ASSESSMENT AND CONTROL -
NOTICES AND ORDERS - ENFORCEMENT
Civil enforcement proceedings under
Planning, Development and
Infrastructure Act 2016
- application by the District Council of Mount Barker
alleges the Respondents have undertaken building work in the form of
verandah/lean-to,
spa pool and transportable building, transportable building
has been used for habitation without a development approval - Interlocutory
Applications filed by Respondents for summary dismissal; structures not fixed to
the ground, no swimming pool, no unlawful development,
‘pleadings’ deficient, action vexatious - significant overlap
between Respondents’ Interlocutory
Applications and substantive
proceedings - Court’s and parties’ time best used by hearing
Interlocutory Applications
concurrent with the substantive proceedings -
Respondents self-represented, failed to attend hearing - steps taken to assist
any injustice by proceeding in absentia was self-induced.
Held – Enforcement proceedings upheld – Interlocutory
Applications dismissed – Act has been breached; unlawful development
occurred – Respondents responsible for breach - breach to be rectified
– unlawful development to be removed - orders
to be issued
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
Development and Infrastructure (General) Regulations 2017
Environment, Resources and Development Court Act 1993
and Design Code
, referred to.
McDougall v City of Playford
[2017] SASC 169
Jennings v Police
[2019] SASFC 93 ;
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner for
(1964) 112 CLR 125
[1964] HCA 69
Cutting v Bell
City of Onkaparinga v Moyse
[2024] SAERDC 8
Ford v City of
[2015] SAERDC 13
The Corporation of the City of Unley v Brown
[2022] SAERDC 9
City of Charles Sturt v Baker
[2022] SAERDC 8
Bishop & Bishop v District Council of Mallala
[1997] SAERDC 425
Sojenka v City of Port Adelaide Enfield
[2001] SAERDC 22
considered.
MOUNT BARKER DISTRICT COUNCIL v CAIN & ANOR
[2025] SAERDC 9
THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING JUDGMENT:
Introduction
on the sworn evidence of its staff, the District Council of Mount Barker (
) alleged Mr Gary Cain and Ms Michelle Cain have caused, suffered or
permitted unlawful development in the form of a transportable
verandah/lean-to, and spa pool on their land at 59 Watts Road, Brukunga (
). The Council also alleged the transportable building had
impermissibly been used for habitation.
Council applied to this Court pursuant to
Planning, Development
and Infrastructure Act
) for orders to require the
alleged breaches to be made good by removing the unlawful developments from the
Land and that the transportable
building and spa pool not be returned to the
Land without first obtaining the requisite approvals. The Council also sought
response, Mr Cain and Ms Cain firstly questioned the competency of the
proceedings, the standing of the Council and the Court’s
Subsequently, Ms
Cain asked this Court to summarily dismiss the Council’s
proceedings.
Her general assertion
was the respondents had not engaged in any unapproved development and thus has
not breached the Act. She
also asserted the Council had provided false or
misleading material to the Court and claimed the Cains should each be entitled
damages/compensation in the amount of
the matters raised in Ms Cain’s Interlocutory Application comprised the
Cains’ defence to the substantive matter the
application was listed to be
heard concurrently with the substantive
hearing commenced on 5 March 2025. At the commencement of the hearing neither
Mr Cain nor Ms Cain were in attendance. Mr Cain
arrived and attended following
the commencement formalities.
sought to provide assistance to Mr Cain as an unrepresented litigant without
losing the perception of the impartiality that underpins
the discharge of the
However, Mr Cain’s opposition to the Interlocutory Application not
being heard separately ahead of the substantive matter was
such that he did not
seek to participate in a constructive manner. After some 20 minutes, I
adjourned the proceedings for two weeks
to enable him to consider his
Cains continued to be dissatisfied that their application for summary dismissal
was not to be heard ahead of the substantive
matter. Prior to the resumption of
the hearing they lodged three further Interlocutory
Applications.
These variously
sought the summary dismissal of the Council’s proceedings, for the
application to be heard ahead of the substantive
matter, for the application to
be heard by a Judge of this Court, and for them to be permitted to attend by
telephone/AVL.
Court’s position remained
Cain’s sought for the proceedings to be stayed and lodged an appeal with
the Supreme Court (in due course that appeal was
not accepted for filing). The
Cains also advised this Court that pending the outcome of their appeal neither
would attend the resumed
proceedings.
Neither did
therefore heard this matter (in the absence of Ms Cain and partly in the absence
of Mr Cain). Mr and Ms Cain had plenty of opportunity
to attend these
proceedings and make their case. They elected not to
Any detriment that the
Cains may have suffered as a result of me hearing this matter in their absence
they have brought upon themselves.
the reasons that follow I find that Mr Cain and Ms Cain have caused, suffered or
permitted a breach of the Act. The Council
is entitled to orders and the
Interlocutory Applications are dismissed.
20 December 2019, a bushfire destroyed the dwelling on the Land leaving only a
23 March 2023, Mr and Ms Cain became the joint tenant owners of the
7 August 2023, an application was lodged for the construction of a new dwelling
the Primary dwelling
) on the Land (
27 September 2023, the Council observed a transportable building had been placed
on the Land. The Council’s records showed
no development approval had
been granted for the transportable
20 October 2023, a site inspection was conducted in the presence of the Cains.
The transportable dwelling was sited on concrete
blocks, was fitted with entry
stairs and air conditioning and had pot plants around its perimeter. It was
being used as a dwelling.
26 October 2023, the Council issued the Cains with an enforcement notice
pursuant to
section 213
of the Act (
required the Cains to refrain from living in the transportable building and for
it to be removed from the Land by 30
December 2023.
3 November 2023, the Cains wrote to the Chief Executive Officer of the Council
) questioning the Council’s authority under the
Constitution
. On 14 November 2023 the CEO denied the Cains’
allegations.
23 November 2023, the Cains emailed the CEO. They sought details of the
sections of the Act upon which the Council relied and
clarification as to how
structure on wheels breaches this Act.”
On 1 December
2023, Mr Houlihan referenced the sections of the Act and explained the meaning
of building work.
7 December 2023, Mr Houlihan emailed the Cains. He reaffirmed the Cains had the
option to lodge a development application to
seek retrospective approval for the
transportable building and its temporary use. The Cains responded on 8 December
2023. Amongst
other matters, they alleged they had been advised “
[they] could stay in [their] tiny home until [their] new home is built & a
clause will be placed on [their] approval to that
.” In reply,
Mr Houlihan rejected any claim that development approval was not required and
provided information regarding the
application
22 December 2023, the Council’s Executive General Manager reached out to
the Cains to offer her
assistance.
29 December 2023, the Cains emailed the CEO. They demanded the withdrawal of the
Notice and advised they may seek an order for
On 16 January 2024, Mr
Houlihan responded to advise the Cains that the Council had more enforcement
options available to it.
7 February 2024, the application DA 23021105 for the Primary dwelling was
granted approval.
That Primary
dwelling has now been
constructed.
23 February 2024, the Council issued the Cains with an expiation notice for
failure to remove the transportable building used
habitation.
1 March 2024, the Cains emailed the Council. They asserted there had been no
breach of the Act and stated they would not pay
9 July 2024 Council staff attended the Land to inspect the Primary dwelling.
They observed a verandah/lean-to had been attached
to the shed and a spa pool
(without safety fencing) had been erected underneath. A review of Council
records indicated no approvals
had been granted in respect of either the
verandah/lean-to or the spa
19 August 2024, the Council filed for permission pursuant to s 214 of the Act to
serve a summons on the Cains. On 5 September
2024 permission was granted by the
Senior Judge of this Court and on 16 September 2024 the summons was served.
18 October 2024 the Cains filed an “
interim Defence
questioned the jurisdiction of the Court and the standing of the Applicant and
sought to have the orders sought by the
21 October 2024
the compulsory
conference under
Environment Resources and Development Court
the ERDC Act
) commenced but the parties were unable to
achieve a settlement. The Commissioner closed the conference and set the matter
directions hearing before me on Tuesday, 19 November 2024. The Cains were
granted leave to appear by telephone.
19 November 2024, the Council, represented at the directions hearing by Mr
Miegel of Counsel, requested the matter be listed for
a one day hearing,
commencing with a view of the Land, prior to the end of
The Council submitted it,
nonetheless, remained open to continuing negotiations with the Cains.
Cains provided no details of their case and rejected any view of the Land being
undertaken. They sought a date for the hearing
beyond 26 January 2025 to
accommodate some planned travel.
Council, being of the view that the Cains should be in attendance, agreed to a
later timeframe for the
matter was set down to be heard on 21 February 2025. The Affidavit of Merits
was to be provided on or before 7 February 2025
and pending its contents the
matter was set down to commence with a view of the Land.
28 January 2025, Ms Cain emailed the Registrar seeking confirmation of the
hearing details.
29 January 2025, the Registrar
confirmed the hearing date. Mr Miegel also emailed the Cains to remind them to
submit an Affidavit of Merits. The Cains acknowledged
the confirmation of the
hearing date and the need to submit the Affidavit of Merits.
4 February 2025, Ms Cain submitted an urgent Interlocutory Application (
first Interlocutory
Application
Interlocutory Application sought for the proceedings to be summarily dismissed.
Supported by an Affidavit
deposed by Ms Cain, on behalf of both herself and Mr Cain, she asserted the
Council had breached Universal Civil Rules (
) 67.2 and 67.3, contended
the information provided by the Council was false or misleading and that they,
the Cains, had not breached
the Act. Further, she sought exemplary damages
pursuant to s214(6)(g) and/or compensation pursuant to s 214(16) in the amount
$97,500 payable to each of herself and Mr Cain.
Cain requested the Interlocutory Application be listed ahead of the 21 February
2025 hearing and for leave to be granted for them
to attend by telephone.
parties were advised by the Registrar that the Interlocutory Application was
listed for 21 February 2025.
13 February 2025, an email was sent from the Registrar advising the parties that
the Court had to vacate the hearing scheduled
for 21 February 2025. It was
relisted for 5 March 2025 commencing with a view of the Land.
4 March 2025 the Cains emailed the Registrar to request leave to attend the
Hearing by telephone. The Registrar responded by
email advising that the Court
required all parties to attend in person and that leave to attend by telephone
had not been granted.
It reconfirmed the Interlocutory Application and the
substantive matter would be heard together. The Court advised that the site
visit would be deferred.
Cains emailed the Registrar saying they were unable to attend in person due to
long standing arrangements for them “
not to be at Court – in
contended the first Interlocutory Application must be heard by a Judge pursuant
to s 214(8) of the Act.
Registrar emailed the Cains to advise the earlier advice stood.
Cains emailed the Registrar, primarily repeating their request to appear by
telephone. The Registrar reaffirmed that leave had
not been granted to appear
by telephone and confirmed the hearing details.
5 March 2025 at 10.04 am the hearing commenced. Mr Cain appeared in person,
however, Ms Cain did not appear.
10:26 am it was apparent Mr Cain was not intending to constructively
participate. Despite a request by the Council for the hearing
to continue, I
adjourned the matter to 20 March 2025 to enable Mr Cain and Ms Cain to consider
their position(s).
that day, the Cains emailed the Registrar requesting a copy of the audio
recording of the proceedings. The Registrar replied
advising a transcript of
the proceedings would be available for purchase. The Registrar also emailed the
Records of Outcome to Ms
Cain and advised her of the listing for 20 March 2025.
11 March 2025, Mr Cain emailed the Registry attaching an urgent Interlocutory
Application and Affidavit of Facts (
the second Interlocutory
Application
). Mr Cain filed the Affidavit of Facts on behalf of himself and
Interlocutory Application sought for the Court to outline its intended protocol
for dealing with the first Interlocutory
Application, for the Council’s
proceedings to be summarily dismissed, for the second Interlocutory Application
to be dealt
with ahead of the resuming hearing on 20 March 2025, and damages.
In his supporting Affidavit Mr Cain requested the matter be listed
directions hearing and a
along with leave to
attend via AVL.
12 March 2025, the Registrar emailed the Cains advising the matter was listed
for 20 March 2025, the request to attend by audio
link was denied and that in
person attendance or attendance in-person by their representative was
13 March 2025, the Respondents emailed the
to enquire when a
directions hearing in respect of the first and second Interlocutory Applications
would be held. It further sought
confirmation the Single Bench Hearing had been
stayed pending the determination of the first and second Interlocutory
Applications
and that the matter had been listed before a Judge of this
14 March 2025, the Registrar emailed to the Cains advising them that the Court
was in receipt of both the interlocutory applications
and that the nature of the
applications were such they were best dealt with concurrently with the
substantive matter and that a directions
hearing would be of no utility. It
confirmed the matters remained listed for argument on 20 March 2025 and that in
person attendance
in some form was required.
18 March 2025, the Cains emailed the Registrar attaching an Interlocutory
Application
from Mr Cain dated
18 March 2025, along with an Affidavit witnessed on 11 March
and an Affidavit of Ms Cain
also witnessed on 11 March 2025.
An Interlocutory Application dated 18 March 2025 was also filed by Ms
the third and fourth
Interlocutory Applications
). The third and fourth Interlocutory
Applications sought for Mr Cain and Ms Cain respectively to attend by telephone.
The Affidavits
in both cases cited the reason for the request to attend by
telephone as the drought in South Australia and its consequences for
property management.
19 March 2025, the Registrar confirmed the documents had been accepted for
filing, the hearing would resume on 20 March 2025 and
in person attendance in
some form was required.
20 March 2025 the Cains emailed the Registrar to advise that they had lodged an
appeal with the Supreme Court to stay these proceedings
and they would not be
attending the resuming proceedings in this Court.
Environment Resources and Development Court Act 1993
– The Environment Resources and Development Court
Division 2 - Jurisdiction of the Court
7—Jurisdiction
(1) Subject to this section, the Court will have the jurisdiction (including
the jurisdiction to try a charge of an offence) conferred
on it by or under this
or any other Act.
(1a)-(5) ....
—Exercise of jurisdiction
Division 1—Principles governing hearings
21—Principles governing hearings
(1) On the hearing of proceedings (other than criminal or contempt
proceedings) under any relevant Act (but subject to the provisions
of any such
(a) the procedure of the Court will, subject to this Act, be conducted with the
minimum of formality; and
(b) the Court is not bound by the rules of evidence and may inform itself as it
thinks fit; and
(c) the Court must act according to equity, good conscience and the substantial
merits of the case and without regard to legal technicalities
(2)-(5)....
Planning Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
– Preliminary
3- Interpretation
means a building or structure or a portion of a building or
structure (including any fixtures or fittings which are subject to the
provisions of the Building Code), whether temporary or permanent, moveable or
immovable, and includes a boat or pontoon permanently
moored or fixed to land,
or a caravan permanently fixed to land
building work
means work or activity in the nature of—
(a) the construction, demolition or removal of a building (including any
incidental excavation or filling of land); or
(b) any other prescribed work or activity,
but does not include any work or activity that is excluded by regulation from
the ambit of this definition;
means the Environment, Resources and Development Court;
development means
(a) a change in the use of land; or
(b) building work; or
(c) – (l) ....
(including development on or underwater) but does not include an act or
activity that is declared by or under the regulations not
to constitute
development for the purposes of this Act;
swimming pool
means an excavation or structure that is capable of
being filled with water and is used primarily for swimming, wading, paddling
the like and includes a bathing or wading pool or spa pool (but not a spa
to undertake development
means to commence or proceed with development
or to cause, suffer or permit development to be commenced or to proceed.
Part 7—Development assessment—general scheme
Division 1—Approval
101—Development must be approved under this Act
Subject to this Act, no development may be undertaken unless the development
is an approved development
Part 18—Enforcement
Division 1—Civil enforcement
214—Applications to Court
(1) Any person may apply to the Court for an order to remedy or restrain a
breach of this Act or the repealed Act (whether or not
any right of that person
has been or may be infringed by or as a consequence of that breach).
(4) An application may be made without notice to any person and, if the Court
is satisfied on the application that the respondent
has a case to answer, it may
grant permission to the applicant to serve a summons requiring the respondent to
appear before the Court
to show cause why an order should not be made under this
(5) An application under this section must, in the first instance, be
referred to a conference under
Environment, Resources and
Development Court Act 1993
(a) after hearing—
(i) the applicant and the respondent; and
(ii) any other person who has, in the opinion of the Court, a proper interest
in the subject-matter of the proceedings and desires
to be heard in the
proceedings,
the Court is satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the respondent
to the application has breached this Act or the repealed
(b) the respondent fails to appear in response to the summons or, having
appeared, does not avail himself or herself of an opportunity
to be heard,
the Court may, by order, exercise any of the following powers:
(c) require the respondent to refrain, either temporarily or permanently, from
the act, or course of action, that constitutes the
(d) require the respondent to make good the breach in a manner, and within a
period, specified by the Court, or to take such other
action as may appear
appropriate to the Court;
(e) cancel or vary any development authorisation;
(f) require the respondent to pay to any person who has suffered loss or damage
as a result of the breach, or incurred costs or
expenses as a result of the
breach, compensation for the loss or damage or an amount for or towards those
costs or expenses;
(g) if the Court considers it appropriate to do so, require the respondent to
pay an amount, determined by the Court, in the nature
of exemplary
(i) if the applicant is a council and the Crown has not become a party to the
proceedings—to the council;
(ii) in any other case—into the General Revenue of the State.
(7) In assessing damages under subsection (6)(g), the Court must have regard
(a) any detriment to the public interest resulting from the breach; and
(b) any financial or other benefit that the respondent sought to gain by
committing the breach; and (c) any other matter it considers
(8) The power conferred under subsection (6)(g) can only be exercised by a
Judge of the Court.
(9) A designated authority, and any person with a legal or equitable interest
in land to which an application under this section relates,
is entitled to
appear, before a final order is made, and be heard in proceedings based on the
application.
(10) If, on an application under this section or before the determination of
the proceedings commenced by the application, the Court
is satisfied that, in
order to preserve the rights or interests of parties to the proceedings or for
any other reason, it is desirable
to make an interim order under this section,
the Court may make such an order.
(11) An interim order—
(a) may be made on an application without notice to any person; and
(b) may be made whether or not the proceedings have been referred to a
conference under
subsection (5)
(c) will be made subject to such conditions as the Court thinks fit; and
(d) will not operate after the proceedings in which it is made are finally
determined.
(12) If the Court
makes an order under
subsection (6)(d)
the respondent fails to comply with the order within the period specified by the
Court, a designated authority may cause any
work contemplated by the order to be
carried out, and may recover the costs of that work, as a debt, from the
respondent.
(13) If an amount is recoverable from a person by a designated authority
subsection (12)
(a) the designated authority may, by notice in writing to the person, fix a
period, being not less than 28 days from the date of
the notice, within which
the amount must be paid by the person, and, if the amount is not paid by the
person within that period,
the person is liable to pay interest charged at the
prescribed rate per annum on the amount unpaid; and
(b) the amount together with any interest charged so payable is until paid a
charge in favour of the designated authority on any
land owned by the person.
(14) The Court may, if it thinks fit, adjourn proceedings under this section
in order to permit the respondent to make an application
for a development
authorisation that should have been but was not made, or to remedy any other
(15) The Court may order an applicant in proceedings under this
(a) to provide security for the payment of costs that may be awarded against the
applicant if the application is subsequently dismissed;
(b) to give an undertaking as to the payment of any amount that may be awarded
against the applicant under
subsection (16)
(16) If on an
application under this section the Court is satisfied—
(a) that the respondent has not breached this Act or the repealed Act; and
(b) that the respondent has suffered loss or damage as a result of the actions
of the applicant; and
(c) that in the circumstances it is appropriate to make an order under this
the Court may, on the application of the respondent (and in addition to any
order as to costs), require the applicant to pay to the
respondent an amount,
determined by the Court, to compensate the respondent for the loss or damage
which the respondent has suffered.
(17) The Court may, if it considers it appropriate to do so, either on its
own initiative or on the application of a party, vary or
revoke an order
previously made under this section.
(18) The Court may make such orders in relation to costs of proceedings under
this section as it thinks fit.
(19) Proceedings under this section may be commenced at any time within
3 years after the date of the alleged breach or, with the
authorisation of
the Attorney‑General, at any later time.
(20) An apparently genuine document purporting to be under the hand of the
Attorney‑General and to authorise the commencement
of proceedings under
this section will be accepted in any legal proceedings, in the absence of proof
to the contrary, as proof of
the authorisation.
Division 2—General offences and provisions relating to offences
Subdivision 1—General offences
215—General offences
(1) A person must not undertake development contrary to this Act.
Maximum penalty: $120 000.
Additional penalty. Default penalty: $500.
217—False or misleading information
A person must not, in furnishing information under this Act, make a statement
that is false or misleading in a material particular
(whether by reason of the
inclusion or omission of any particular).
Maximum penalty: $20 000.
Planning Development and Infrastructure (General) Regulations
– Preliminary
3G- Aboveground and inflatable pools
(1) Any work or activity involving the construction of an aboveground or
inflatable swimming pool which is capable of being filled
to a depth exceeding
300 mm is prescribed under paragraph (b) of the definition of building work in
section 3(1)
of the Act.
(2) (a) ....
(2)(b) subregulation (1) applies subject to any exclusions from the ambit of
the definition of development under Schedule 4 or 5.
(3) In this regulation— swimming pool includes—
(a) a paddling pool; and
(b) a spa pool (but not a spa bath)
Schedule 4—Exclusions from definition of
development—general
4—Sundry minor operations
(1) The construction or alteration of, or addition to, any of the following
(including any incidental excavation or filling), other
than in respect of a
local heritage place:
(a) an outbuilding (other than in a designated flood zone, subzone or overlay
or in any other zone, subzone or overlay identified
under the Planning and
Design Code for the purposes of this paragraph) in which human activity is
secondary, and which—
(i) is detached from and ancillary to another building which is erected on
the site, or for which consent has been granted by the
relevant authority, or
which is classified as accepted development or deemed-to-satisfy development;
(ii) has a total floor area not exceeding 15 m 2 ; and
(iii) has no roof span (being the horizontal distance between supporting
walls, posts or columns of the outbuilding) exceeding 3 m,
and no part of the
building being higher than 2.5 m above the natural surface of the ground; and
(iv) is not being constructed, added to or altered so that any portion of the
building is situated—
(A) in front of any part of the building line of the building to which it is
ancillary that faces the primary street; or
(B) within 900 mm of a boundary of the land with a secondary street (if the
land has boundaries on 2 or more roads); and (v) is not
within 6 m of the
intersection of 2 boundaries of the land where those boundaries both face a
road, other than where a 4 x 4 m corner
cut-off has already been provided (and
is to be preserved);
(c) a swimming pool or spa pool (other than in a designated flood zone, subzone
or overlay or in any other zone, subzone or overlay
identified under the
Planning and Design Code for the purposes of this paragraph) which is
constructed in association with a dwelling
and intended primarily for use by the
occupants of that dwelling, and which—
(i) does not have a depth exceeding 300 mm; or
(ii) in the case of an aboveground or inflatable swimming pool or spa pool,
does not incorporate a filtration system;
Planning and Design Code
Part 7 – Land Use definitions
matter essentially turns on the ability of the Council to bring this action,
whether there has been a breach of the Act and,
if there has been a breach,
whether Mr and/or Ms Cain are responsible.
a breach has been committed and Mr and Ms Cain are responsible by way of
causing, suffering or permitting
that breach then the Council should get its orders and the principle that costs
follow the event would apply. The claims contained
within the first
Interlocutory Application and second Interlocutory Application would fail.
however, there has been no breach, or Mr and/or Ms Cain are found not to have
caused, suffered or permitted any breach of the
Act, then, the Council would not
be entitled to its orders nor its costs and the Court would be in a position to
consider whether
there are any grounds for the Cains’ compensation claim
pursuant to s 214(16).
these reasons, and the fact the Cains’ submissions represented their
defence to the Council’s allegations, I determined
that I would hear the
first Interlocutory Application and the second Interlocutory Application
concurrently with the substantive
third and fourth Interlocutory Applications sought for the Cains to be granted
permission to attend by telephone to enable them
to remain on the Land to attend
to matters arising from the drought.
Court had granted permission for the Cains to attend the conference and the
directions hearing by telephone. However, given
the nature of the hearing, the
interests of the parties, and the efficiency of the Court, permission to attend
the hearing by telephone
had been repeatedly refused.
did not consider the contended reasons for the need for telephone attendance,
being the drought, to be a sufficient reason to obviate
the convention and
practice for the Cains to attend the hearing in person.
is roughly a 45 minute drive from Adelaide and the hearing required only a
portion of one day. Leaving the Land for this
amount of time would not have
been an unreasonable impost and the Cains would have had time to take care of
their stock around this
obligation.
I turn to the substantive issues, I will briefly address the Cains’ other
concerns regarding the jurisdiction of this
Court, the standing of the
applicant, the provision of false or misleading information, and the alleged
breaches of the UCR. I will
I understand the Cains’ arguments they question the jurisdiction of the
Court and assert because they had made a claim for
exemplary damages pursuant to
s 214(6)(g) of the Act that s 214(8) of the Act provides that the matter can
only be heard by a
Court’s jurisdiction is established by s (7)(1) of the
Environment,
Resources and Development Court Act
the ERDC Act
) and s (3) and
s 214(1) of the Act.
214(6)(g) and 214(8) of the Act enable a Judge of this Court to make an order
for the Respondent to pay an amount in the
nature of exemplary damages.
214 (6) If—
(a) after hearing—
the Court is satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the
respondent to the application has breached this Act or the repealed
(b) the respondent fails to appear in response to the summons or, having
appeared, does not avail himself or herself of an opportunity
to be heard,
the Court may, by order, exercise any of the following powers:
(g) if the Court considers it appropriate to do so, require the respondent
to pay an amount, determined by the Court, in the nature
of exemplary
214 (8) The power conferred under subsection (6)(g) can only be exercised
by a Judge of the Court.
Cains are the respondents in this matter. Section 214(6)(g) only applies to the
payment of exemplary damages by a respondent.
In this case, it is therefore
open only to the Council, as the applicant in this matter, to seek an order
pursuant to s214(6)(g).
It has not done so.
these reasons I was satisfied this Court has jurisdiction as comprised by a
Commissioner.
Standing of the applicant
I understand it, the Cains’ dispute the Council’s legal authority
Constitution
Commonwealth
and the basis upon
which Mr Miegel could represent the Council.
The legal authority of Councils in South Australia is settled by
McDougall v
City of Playford
Cain’s assertion that the Council must appear in its own right is a
misunderstanding of s 214(2) of the
214(2) is concerned with proceedings being brought in a representative capacity.
In this case the Council brought the proceedings
on its own behalf as the
designated authority. Mr Miegel simply appeared as the legal representative for
the Council.
False or misleading information
Cains alleged that the Council had breached s 217 of the
A person must not, in furnishing information under
this Act, make a statement that is false or misleading in a material particular
(whether by reason of the inclusion or omission of any
particular).”
Council initially provided sworn evidence in the form of an Affidavit from Mr
Houlihan and during the hearing both Mr Houlihan
and Mr De Tullio gave sworn
oral evidence.
is no reason to conclude that the materials and evidence provided by the Council
was anything but true and accurate. I accept
Cains argued that the Council had breached UCR rules 67.2 and 67.3.
principles governing hearings in the Environment, Resources and Development
) are established by ss 21(1)(a), (b) and (c) of the ERDC
Act. These principles establish that proceedings in this Court are intended
be conducted with the minimum of formality, it is not bound by the rules of
evidence and it may inform itself as it thinks fit.
This Court must also act
according to equity, good conscience and the substantial merits of the case and
without regard to legal
technicalities and
Rules that apply to the ERD Court are the
Universal Civil Rules 2020
amended by the
Universal Civil (No 13) Amending Rules
, Gazetted on 18
December 2024 and operative from 1 January
1.4 provides:
(1) Unless the Court otherwise orders—
(a) the Previous UCR apply to—
(i) a proceeding commenced; and
(ii) a step in a proceeding taken,
on or after the commencement date; and
(b) the Previous Rules continue to govern a step in a proceeding taken
before the commencement date.
South Australian Government Gazette of 18 December 2024 provides that the
previous rules for the ERD Court are the
Environment, Resources and
Development Court (Reinstated) Rules
Council’s application was filed on 19 August 2024, therefore the Previous
Rules are the applicable
Rules Part 1, 1.3.5 provides that “[i]f these rules are silent in relation
to a particular procedure or other matter,
unless the Court otherwise orders,
that matter is governed by the Uniform Civil Rules 2020.” In this
instance the ERDC Rules
Part 7, 7.1 specifically governs the Institution of
Applications in respect of Enforcement and Compliance Applications.
7.1.1 An enforcement application shall
be commenced by filing the following documents:
(a) an Originating Application in the prescribed form
seeking leave to serve a summons (and where the applicant requires leave to
bring the application, seeking leave to bring the application);
(b) a summons in the prescribed form in respect of which leave
(c) one or more supporting affidavits; and
7.1.3 Every Originating Application must:
(a) be in writing and give the full name of the applicant;
(b) identify the person or persons on whom it is sought to serve the summons;
(c) specify the address for service of the applicant.
7.1.4 Every accompanying affidavit must be in the prescribed form, and any
exhibits to the affidavit(s) must be in the prescribed
form and set out:
the facts and circumstances upon which the applicant relies
(b) the name (and, as far as is known, the address, email address and
telephone number) of any person who, in the opinion of the deponent,
or might reasonably be expected to have a legal or equitable interest in the
land the subject of the application.
7.1.5 .....
My emphasis
is now replicated as UCR Rule 364.1
rules 67.2 and 67.3 are therefore not applicable to this matter. Even if the
UCR were to be applied to this matter, the applicable
rule would be 364.1.
Notwithstanding
the above, the Cains’ submissions complain they were not clear about the
specifics of the case being put against
Council’s case was set out in exhibit A1 and Mr Miegel’s opening on
5 March 2025.
the Cains and the Council had been communicating over the alleged breaches for
an extended period of time. This included
the issue of the Notice that clearly
stipulated at recital D
“...the construction or the placement of a
building on land is development for which authorisation is required”,
as well as a number of lengthy emails (notably Mr Houlihan’s email of
1 December 2023), and a site meeting.
first Interlocutory Application and associated Affidavit further belie the
Cains’ assertion that they were unclear of the
case against them. Ms
Cain’s affidavit responded to the Council’s allegations. She
specifically contended that the
spa and the transportable building were not
affixed to the Land and therefore did not constitute development. She also
definitions for development and building work to contend neither she
nor Mr Cain had undertaken development and that the Act had
Cains had attended the conference. They also had the opportunity to attend the
hearing, where if they were unclear about the
Council’s case they had were
at liberty to cross examine the Council staff. Prior to the hearing being
adjourned to enable
Mr Cain and Ms Cain additional time to consider their
position the Council’s case was put in succinct terms. Furthermore,
during his brief appearance Mr Cain was advised a number of times that he would
have the opportunity to cross examine the Council’s
is nothing to lead me to conclude that the Council’s proceedings were
other than appropriate. I am satisfied that the
Council sufficiently complied
with the applicable rules. Had that not been the case I could have exercised
the Court’s power
to dispense with
compliance.
Substantive Case
Council alleged the following breaches of the Act:
The placement of
a transportable building on the Land without development approval.
The addition of
a verandah/lean-to to the shed on the Land, without development approval.
The placement of
a spa pool (under the verandah/lean-to) on the Land, without development
The unauthorised
use of the transportable building as a dwelling.
sought the following orders:
1. That the First and Second
Respondents be required to make good the breaches of the
Planning, Development,
and Infrastructure Act 2016
(PDI Act) within such period as the Court deems
appropriate by removing the transportable dwelling, lean-to and spa pool from 59
Watts Road, Brukunga (Land).
2. On and from a date the Court deems appropriate, the First and Second
Respondents be required to refrain from returning the transportable
dwelling or
spa pool to the Land without first obtaining development approval under the PDI
3. That the First and Second Respondents be required to pay the
Applicant’s costs of and incidental to these
proceedings.
allegation of the unlawful Land use was based on observations made by Council
staff during an inspection of the Land that led
them to form the view that the
transportable building was being used for
habitation.
This was reinforced
by the fact that aside from a caravan this was the only other habitable building
on the Land.
now the Primary dwelling has been constructed to the point of occupation, the
Council cannot be certain whether the transportable
is still used for
habitation.
Council submitted it did not matter whether the transportable building was used
for habitation or not because the transportable
building of itself was a breach
of the Act and once removed from the Land any opportunity for it to function as
a dwelling was removed.
Council suggested that the Cains be given a maximum period of two months within
which to remove the transportable building, verandah/lean-to
and spa pool from
considered the Cains’ interim defence, the first Interlocutory Application
and the second Interlocutory Application
and corresponding
and Mr Cain’s
submissions from the Bar table on 5 March 2025, I understand the Cains’
submissions to the substantive
matters to be:
the Council has
provided no material or sworn evidence to substantiate the alleged breaches and
it has not particularised how the
transportable building and the
verandah/lean-to breach the Act;
something placed
on the Land is not “
fixed to the land
” and is not
development;
there is no
swimming pool on the Land because a swimming pool must be dug into the ground; a
spa pool is not a swimming pool and does
not amount to building work;
neither of the
respondents have “
undertaken”, or “engaged in” or
participated in”
“development”
pursuant to s 215(1) of the Act
or any building works
pursuant to s
216(1) of the Act.
Has the Act been breached?
Are the transportable building, verandah/lean-to and spa pool on the
the Cains’ position that the Court not attend the Land for a view I
commenced the hearing in reliance upon the evidence
presented by the parties.
Council tendered two exhibits.
A1 comprised the sworn Affidavit of Mr Houlihan. This Affidavit variously
included Council records and photographs that
clearly evidenced the
transportable building and the verandah/lean-to on the
It also documented the
placement of the spa pool on the Land and the use of the transportable
second exhibit A2 was an aerial photograph taken from NearMap dated Friday 22
September 2023. This photograph clearly shows
the transportable building, the
verandah/lean-to and the spa pool on the Land.
Council further relied upon the sworn oral evidence of Mr De
an inspection on 9 July 2024, Mr De Tullio observed firsthand the transportable
building, the verandah/lean-to and the spa
pool located on the
Those structures are
evident in a photograph of the same
De Tulio attested to the transportable building remaining evident on the Land in
aerial photography dated 11 January 2025.
the Bar table, Mr Cain submitted there was no swimming pool on the Land,
however, neither Mr Cain nor Ms Cain provided any evidence
to suggest the
transportable building, the verandah/lean-to and the spa pool were not on the
Land. I will return to the definition
of swimming pool.
on the evidence provided by the Council I am satisfied on the balance of
probabilities that the transportable building, the
verandah/lean-to and the spa
pool are on the Land as alleged.
Do the transportable building,
verandah, and spa pool comprise development for which approval must be
101 of the Act requires all development to be approved under the Act.
Development includes “
building work
” which encompasses the
construction of a building,
prescribed work or activity
Planning, Development and Infrastructure (General) Regulations
Regulations
) provide at reg. 3G(1) “any work or activity involving the
construction of an aboveground or inflatable swimming pool which
is capable of
being filled to a depth exceeding 300mm is prescribed under paragraph (b) of the
definition of building work in
of the Act.”
None of the exclusions provided by
reg. 3G(2) apply.
provides that a swimming pool includes a spa
A spa bath is explicitly
excluded. The Council submitted the difference between a spa pool and a spa
bath is that a spa pool is
typically external to a building whereas a spa bath
is internal to a building. I accept this proposition as the common
understanding
only other exclusion would be that the spa pool does not comprise development
(sch. 4 cl. (4)(c)). However, to be excluded the
spa pool would need to be
constructed in association with a dwelling and intended primarily for the use of
the occupants of that
dwelling, be less than 300mm in depth or in the case of an
above ground spa pool not incorporate a filtration system.
was Mr De Tullio’s evidence that the spa pool on the Land was of a depth
greater than 300mm, and was of a size that would
require a filtration system.
He opined it was of a size that would need a safety fence. For these reasons it
was his opinion that
the spa pool did not meet the terms of the exemption.
am satisfied that the spa pool comprises development for the purposes of the Act
and requires a development approval.
the above reasons, the Cains’ assertion that there is no swimming pool on
the Land because a spa pool is not a swimming
pool and the spa pool does not
amount to building work and therefore does not require development approval does
not succeed.
Act defines construct, in relation to a building, to include to build, erect or
place a building on land,
further defines a building as “
a building or structure or a portion of
a building or structure (including any fixtures or fittings which are subject to
the provisions
of the Building Code), whether temporary or
moveable or immovable, and includes a boat or pontoon permanently moored or
fixed to land, or a caravan permanently fixed
De Tullio was familiar with the type of transportable building that is on the
Land, having seen plans for similar structures whilst
working for the City of
Onkaparinga. It was his opinion that the transportable building was the same
structure as that described
Moyse v City of Onkaparinga
De Tullio described the transportable building as comprising a “shipping
container” that is manufactured with a bathroom
at one end. The shipping
container becomes the central module of the transportable building and contains
extra panels, flooring,
windows and roofing together with kitchen fittings. It
is often fitted to a trailer to enable it to be manoeuvred. Once positioned
the site the sides are folded open and the extra panels, flooring, windows and
roof sheeting are assembled to provide for another
shipping container sized
module to either side. Each of these side modules is supported on blocks or
legs. Once on-site the whole
structure is braced and screwed together and the
kitchen is fitted and the wet areas are
this instance Mr De Tullio said, upon assembly the side modules of the
transportable building have been positioned on blocks and
the whole underside
enclosed. Stairs have been constructed to the front to provide access and an
air-conditioner has also been installed.
He said whilst it is not evident from
the photographs the transportable building would be plumbed to the Land.
De Tullio’s evidence was corroborated by Mr Houlihan’s
Council submitted the transportable building comprised building work because of
its permanence.
De Tullio said that disassembly would likely require assistance from trades
persons and estimated the process would take in the
order of one month.
Miegel pointed the Court to
Ford v City of Burnside
a decision on the
question of whether a structure comprises building work. In Ford, HH Costello J
it may be accepted, however, that the word
‘structure’ is not intended to catch all things erected on land
of permanence or
went on to say that whether something is a structure for the purposes of the
definition of building will be a matter
of fact and degree, and will turn on the
degree of permanence and whether it is in the nature of a
this case I am satisfied the transportable building has a level of physical
connection to the Land such that it is not able to
be easily nor quickly
dismantled and moved; it has a permanence. The enclosure of the underside would
need to be removed and the
plumbing and air-conditioning disconnected and
removed. The stairs would need to be dismantled; the windows and doors removed
the bracing removed to enable the side modules to be dismantled and the
concrete support blocks removed. Only then could the whole
structure be
returned to the shipping container state in which it could be transported.
Cains’ submission that the transportable building is not development
because it is not fixed to the Land fails.
the transportable building was not being primarily used for habitation, the
construction of the Primary dwelling on the
Land could now give rise to the
argument that the transportable building is an outbuilding. An outbuilding is a
building in which
human activity is
Schedule 4 cl. 4 of
the Regulations excludes an outbuilding from comprising development if the floor
area does not exceed 15m
, the roof span does not exceed 3m and the
height is no more than 2.5m above the natural surface of the
Houlihan measured the size of the transportable building to be
if the transportable building could be considered an outbuilding it would not be
exempt from the need for development approval
because of its size.
am therefore satisfied that the transportable building comprises building work
and is development for which approval is required
under the Act.
verandah/lean-to is a structure of some 40m
is attached to the side of the existing shed. It has a non-permeable roof. No
exemptions apply. It is a structure that comprises
building work and it
requires development approval.
find all of the structures on the Land comprise building work and require
development approval.
Has development approval been granted to
the transportable building, the verandah/lean-to and spa pool?
Act will be found to have been breached in the event that development has
occurred without the requisite approvals (s 101 of
Houlihan’s review of the Council’s records identified that the only
statutory approval for development of the Land
is DA 23021105; the approval for
the Primary dwelling.
no approvals have been sought nor obtained for the transportable building, the
verandah/lean-to nor the spa pool they are not
approved development on the Land
within the meaning of s 101 of the Act.
Unlawful use of the
transportable building for habitation
Council alleged that the transportable building had been used for the purposes
of habitation while the Primary dwelling was being
constructed. Now that the
Primary dwelling is habitable, the Council could not say whether the
transportable building was still
used for habitation. In any case, the Council
did not seek a specific remedy in regard to the use of the transportable
it is likely that the transportable building has been used for habitation, I am
not in a position to determine if habitation
is ongoing.
similar to the reasoning in Moyse I do not need to find on this
Whether there is
occupation of the transportable building is immaterial. The transportable
building comprises unlawful development
and its removal from the Land would
rectify any habitation that may be ongoing.
Responsibility for
the breach?
was the submission of the Council that Mr Cain and Ms Cain had breached section
215(1) of the Act, by undertaking development
without approval.
Act, s 3, defines the phrase undertake development as “to commence or
proceed with development or to cause, suffer or permit
development to be
commenced or to proceed.”
way of Affidavit Mr Cain and Ms Cain asserted that neither had breached the Act
because neither of them had “
undertaken”
“participated in”
any development pursuant
to s 215(1) of the Act or any building work pursuant to s 216(1) of the
Other than the assertion
they had not undertaken development, engaged in or participated in development,
which I took to mean they
were not responsible for causing the development, the
Cains provided no evidence to demonstrate that they have not at least permitted
or suffered the development on the Land pursuant to s 3 of the Act.
show that Mr Cain and Ms Cain have been the registered owners of the Land since
23 March 2023.
aerial photograph from 18 March
depicts the Land without
the transportable building, verandah/lean-to or spa pool. The aerial photograph
exhibit A2 shows the transportable
building, verandah/lean-to, and spa pool were
all evident on the Land on 22 September 2023. The unlawful development
therefore occurred
sometime between 5 days prior to the Cains becoming the
registered owners of the Land and some six months into their ownership.
Cain and Ms Cain have not disputed that they own and occupy the Land.
This is evidenced by the details on the Certificate of
combined with the fact
that the Council has been communicating with the Cains as the occupiers of the
site since at least 20 October
2023 and site inspections have been conducted
with the Cains present.
the balance of probabilities, it is unlikely that within the span of time that
the breaches occurred that they occurred within
the five days prior to the Cains
taking ownership of the Land. It is more likely that the breaches occurred
after the Cains took
possession. Even if I am wrong on that point and the
unlawful development did occur during the five days prior to their ownership,
the Cains have nonetheless permitted and suffered it to remain on the Land.
to s 215 (1) and s 3 of the Act, as both the owners and occupiers of the Land, I
am satisfied on the balance of probabilities
that Mr Cain and Ms Cain have
breached the Act by having caused, suffered or permitted unlawful development on
the Land in the form
of a transportable building, a verandah/lean-to and a spa
In time to bring action
214(19) provides that action pursuant to s 214 must be commenced any time within
three years after the date of the alleged
breach, or with the authorisation of
the Attorney-General at any later time.
the evidence the unlawful development occurred on the Land some time between 18
March 2023 and 22 September
Council’s application was filed on 19 August
am satisfied that the Council is in time to make this
application.
All relevant parties had an opportunity to be
214 of the Act provides the Court must hear the applicant and the respondent and
any other person who has, in the opinion
of the Court, a proper interest in the
subject-matter of the proceedings and who desires to be heard. Section 214(9)
further provides
a person with a legal or equitable interest
in land to which an application under this section relates, is entitled to
appear, before
a final order is made, and be heard in proceedings based on the
application
Council, attended every conference and hearing in respect of this matter.
Cains attended the conference and the directions hearing by telephone, and Mr
Cain attended a portion of the hearing.
the Council’s desire for the hearing to be held prior to Christmas 2024 it
was initially set for 21 February 2025 to
accommodate the Cains’ planned
Hearing was vacated and relisted for 5 March 2025. Mr Cain attended but Ms Cain
did not. As I said earlier it became apparent
shortly after the commencement of
the proceedings that Mr Cain did not intend to participate in a constructive
manner, or indeed
a manner helpful to his case. Accordingly, I adjourned the
matter to enable him and Ms Cain to consider their situation.
matter was set to resume on 20 March 2025.
the intervening period, Mr Cain and Ms Cain collectively resisted the hearing,
resisted attending in person, challenged the composition
of the Court to hear
the matter and ultimately, advised they would not attend the resumed hearing on
the basis that they had lodged
an appeal with the Supreme Court. Neither
attended on 20 March 2025.
enquiry of the Registrar I established the Cains had lodged appeal documents,
however, at that time those documents had not
been sealed, no fees had been paid
nor had the matter been brought to the attention of a Judicial Officer.
Ultimately the application
was not accepted for filing.
214(6)(b) of the Act provides that the Court may take specified actions in the
event a respondent fails to appear in response
to a summons, or having appeared,
does not avail himself or herself of the opportunity to be heard. This includes
the issue of orders
to restrain (temporarily or permanently) or rectify a breach
of the Act (ss 214(6)(b) and (c)).
the resumption of the hearing, the Council submitted the hearing should proceed
on the grounds that the appeal documentation had
not been filed and the Cains
had been well aware of the Council’s proceedings for some time but had
actively chosen not to
participate.
resumed and concluded the hearing in the absence of the Cains.
am satisfied the Cains were aware of the proceedings and consciously chose to
limit their participation. I concluded hearing the
matter in the absence of
Mr Cain and Ms Cain because I had no reason to believe that delaying the
proceedings would have afforded
any different result with respect to the
Cains’ attendance and participation. Any disbenefit that might have been
by the Cains by not attending the hearing was of their own making.
coming to my determination of the substantive matter, in so far as I was able to
decipher them, I have considered the submissions
of the Cains as included in
their interim Defence, the various Interlocutory Applications and Affidavits and
as raised by Mr Cain
on 5 March 2025.
other interested party(s) were identified, as per the Certificate of Title
am satisfied, therefore, that all parties have reasonably had the opportunity to
Summary Dismissal
Cains sought for this Court to summarily dismiss these proceedings.
I have said, I determined that it was in the interests of justice that I heard
the first and second Interlocutory Applications
concurrent with the substantive
matter. Having done so, for the reasons set out above, I have found on the
balance of probabilities
a breach of the Act has occurred and that breach can be
attributed to Mr Cain and Ms Cain as the owners and occupiers of the Land.
this basis the Cains’ application for summary dismissal fails.
for completeness, had I determined that I would hear the first and second
Interlocutory Applications prior to the substantive
matter, UCR rule
provides that the Court
may grant a judgment dismissing an action on, amongst others, the ground there
is no reasonable basis for
prosecuting the claim.
Miegel submitted that for the Cains’ application for summary dismissal to
be successful it would need to meet the tests
Cutting v Bell
[2020] SAERDC 26
, which HH Durrant J when applying the case
described as follows:
“....., I have considered that the bar which Mr Bell must
jump, is a high one. That is, the summons: must be, “so obviously
untenable that it cannot possibly succeed”; is “manifestly
groundless”; “must be so manifestly faulty that
it does not admit of
argument”; “disclose[s] a case which the Court is satisfied cannot
succeed”; must be such
that “under no possibility can there be a
good cause of action”; and, it must “be manifest that to
[it] “to stand would involve useless
this instance, s214(1) of the Act, required the Council to obtain the permission
of this Court for it to serve the summons on
the Cains. In support of its
application the Council furnished the Affidavit of Andrew Mark Houlihan dated 13
August 2024.
This Affidavit
provided evidence to support the Council’s allegations. The evidence
included dated photographs displaying
the alleged unlawful development on the
Land and proof of the Cains’ ownership of the Land. This Court was
satisfied prima
facie there was a case to answer and granted permission to
regard to the evidence contained within Mr Houlihan’s Affidavit I could
not conclude that the action is so obviously
untenable that it could not
succeed. Nor could I find it manifestly groundless; nor does it not admit of
argument; nor disclose
a case which the Court can be satisfied cannot succeed;
nor is there no possibility of a good cause of action; nor to allow it to
would involve useless expense.
this basis too, the claim for summary dismissal fails.
Respondents have breached the Act by causing, suffering or permitting the
transportable building, the verandah/lean-to and spa
pool to be upon the Land
without development approval. It is in the public interest that there be
orderly and proper development
and that the requisite approvals be sought and
obtained before development is undertaken.
Court has the power to exercise a discretion with respect to costs, pursuant to
s 214(18) of the PDI Act. Costs are typically
awarded in favour of the
successful party; the ‘costs follow the event’
Miegel submitted that in this instance the Council had not pursued the matter
unnecessarily. The Council had tried to work with
the Cains to achieve a
resolution, and was prepared to continue to do so even after seeking for the
matter to be listed for hearing.
Council afforded the Cains opportunities to make good the breaches. The Cains
have not done so.
proceedings were considered necessary to achieve redress and rectify the breach
through the removal of the unlawful development
from the Land. The costs were a
necessary consequence of the Council’s need to pursue these proceedings.
determining the matter of costs, I will afford the Cains one final opportunity
to make written submission in relation to what
orders, if any, should be made in
relation to costs.
the matters before this court, I find the Council’s case has been
has been unlawful development on the Land in the form of a transportable
building, a verandah/lean-to and a spa pool.
transportable building, the verandah/lean-to and the spa pool require
development approval and in contravention of s 101 of the
Act, no approval has
been sought nor granted with respect to these structures.
Cain, the First Respondent, as an owner and occupier of the Land has caused,
suffered or permitted the unlawful development to
Cain, the Second Respondent, as an owner and occupier of the Land has caused,
suffered or permitted the unlawful development to
Council is in time to take action in respect of this breach of s 101 of the
interested parties were notified of and provided with the opportunity to be
heard by the court, had they so chosen.
first Interlocutory Application should be dismissed.
second Interlocutory Application should be dismissed.
third Interlocutory Application should be dismissed.
fourth Interlocutory Application should be
will be Orders in the following terms:
first Interlocutory Application FDN 16 is dismissed.
second Interlocutory Application FDN 21 is dismissed.
third Interlocutory Application FDN 23 is dismissed.
fourth Interlocutory Application FDN 25 is dismissed
30 May 2025 Mr Cain and Ms Cain must file and serve a written response to the
Council’s submission that two months is a reasonable
timeframe for the
transportable building, the verandah/lean-to and the spa pool to be removed from
30 May 2025 Mr Cain and Ms Cain must file and serve a written submission on the
question of the Council receiving its costs.
Friday 13 June 2025 the Council shall file and serve its response to the
Cains’ submissions.
the receipt of the above submissions required by Orders 6 and 7, or the
expiration of the relevant dates, the Court will
issue final orders in respect
(a) The requirement to remove the transportable building, the verandah/lean-to
and the spa pool from the Land within a specified
time frame.
(b) Thereafter, to not reinstate the transportable building, the
verandah/lean-to or the spa pool without first obtaining development
FDN 15 (The Interlocutory
Application that was lodged by Ms Cain and thereafter referenced the
respondents) and FDN16 the Affidavit
that was deposed by “
respondent for both respondents
The claim was for exemplary
damages pursuant to
Planning Development and Infrastructure
(SA) and compensation pursuant to
s214(16)(c)
Development and Infrastructure Act
FDN 15 and FDN 16.
Australian Experience with
self-represented litigants, 920030 The Australian Law Journal [820]-[826].
By way of example see
Tp2.1-21, Tp3.33-34, Tp6.11-16, Tp7.11-38, Tp8.1-15, Tp10.14-27, Tp11.14-16,
Tp12.5-21, Tp13.19-24 and 31-38,
Tp.13.3-4, Tp13.31-38.
FDN 20, FDN 23 and FDN 24.
See email correspondence from
14 March 2025 and 19 March 2025.
Environment, Resources and
Development Court advised by an email from the Cains sent at 9:45am on 20 March
2025. On 2 April 2025
the ERD Court was notified by the Higher Courts Deputy
Registrar that upon referral the appeal (CIV-25-003253) was not accepted for
filing and the appeal file had been closed.
Tp7.37-38, Tp12.3-4 and
24-27, see also email of 20 March 2025.
Exhibit A1 (Affidavit of Mr
Andrew Mark Houlihan dated 13 August 2024) at [10] and AMH-1 and AMH-2.
Exhibit A1 at [11.1].
Exhibit A1 at [11].
Exhibit A1 at [16].
Exhibit A1 at [17].
Exhibit A1 at [18] and [19]
and AMH-9, and AMH-10.
Exhibit A1 at [20], and
AMH-11. Mr Houlihan is the Assessment Manager pursuant to
of the Act and
Team Leader Planning.
Exhibit A1 at [21] and
Exhibit A1 at [22].
Exhibit A1 at [22] and
AMH-13. The schedule of fees set the costs in the amount of $97,500 for each
respondent payable only in gold.
Exhibit A1 at [22] and
Exhibit A1 [11.1].
Tp25.34-36 and
Tp35.21-30.
Exhibit A1 at [23].
Exhibit A1 at [24].
Exhibit A1 at [25]-[26] and
Tp4.9-18 and Tp4.23-33.
The conference was listed
for 21 October 2024 pursuant to
Environment, Resources and Development
The Respondents appeared by
Transcript from Directions
Hearing of 19 November 2024 Tp2.23-38 and Tp3.1-18.
Transcript from Directions
Hearing of 19 November 2024 Tp3.37-38 and Tp4.1-9 and Tp5.16-17.
Transcript from Directions
Hearing of 19 November 2024 Tp4.20-21.
Once the matter commenced
in the Court all of the email correspondence referred to was cc’d to all
parties. For clarity of
the chronology the emails are referred to by sender and
primary recipient.
per Registrar Environment
Resources and Development Court.
See email from Mr and Ms
Cain to the Environment Resources and Development Court Registry dated Tuesday 4
March 2025 (3:48pm).
The Cains were
[incorrectly] citing s214(6)(g) in relation to each of their claims for $97,500
exemplary damages and s214(8) provides
that section can only be heard by a
FDN 20 and FDN 21.
Pursuant to
Environment Resources and Development Court Act
FDN 20 and FDN 21were
reattached to this email.
FDN 22 and FDN 24 are in
the same terms.
FDN 25, FDN 25 is in the
same terms as FDN 23.
Development and Infrastructure Act
FDN 16 at [3] and FDN 15 at
[15]. The Cains are seemingly seeking damages pursuant to
s214(6)(g).
in FDN 15 at [15] they reference
, however I have concluded this must
be intended to read
s 214(6)(g)
because that is the reference in FDN 16 at [3]
and there is no
s 215(6)(g)
in the Act and the gist of the balance of the
paragraph is consistent with the power conferred by
s 214(6)(g).
insistence that the matter be heard by a judge pursuant to
consistent with the reference intended being
s 214(6)(g)
, FDN 16 at [5] The
Cains are also seeking to claim similarly pursuant to
and Tp7.25.
Planning Development and Infrastructure Act
defines the Court to be
the Environment, Resources and Development Court.
Exhibit A1 at AMH-9.
Tp2.22 and 25-27.
McDougall v City of
[2017] SASC 169
FDN 16 at [1].
Environment, Resources
and Development Court Act
These commenced on 1
January 2025. All of the Cains’ Interlocutory Applications were lodged
after this date.
At the date that the
Council’s application was filed the applicable rules were the
Environment Resources and Development Court Rules Amendment No. 2.
2020). These rules were operative until 26 August 2024 when a version of the
UCR amended by the
Universal Civil (No 11) Amending Rules
operative. This version of the UCR was revoked by a notice published in the
South Australian Government Gazette of 20 September
2024. This required the
Environment Resources and Development Court Rules to be reinstated. This was
done by simultaneous notice
in the Gazette of 20 September 2024 that enacted the
Environment Resources and Development Court (Reinstated) Rules
all material respects the
Environment Resources and Development Court
(Reinstated) Rules
2024 replicated the earlier
Environment Resources and
Development Court Rules Amendment No. 2 (2020)
FDN 15 and 16.
Tp7.15-16, Tp8.10,
Tp11.14-15 and Tp12.1-2
ERDC Part 4 (4.1 and
4.2(a)) and UCR rule 12.1 and 12.2(a).
Exhibit A1 at AMH-7.
Mr De Tullio and Mr Meigel
said aerial photography dated 11 January 2025 and 3 February 2025 evidenced the
transportable building
remained on the land Tp35.33 and Tp51.24-33.
A certificate of occupancy
for the Primary dwelling was signed on 5 December 2024 Tp35.25-27.
FDNs 12, 16, 21, 15 and
Exhibit A1 pp AMH-5, AMH-7
and AMH-16 p 123.
Mr De Tullio is the Team
Leader of Building at the District Council of Mt Barker. He has held this
position for 14-15 months. Tp29.6-14.
Although he couldn’t
specifically remember the date, I am satisfied based on the copy of the
Record of site inspection/photos/conversations
” at AMH-16
page 123 of Exhibit A1 that this inspection occurred on 9 July 2024.
Exhibit A1 AMH-16 p123.
Mr De Tullio and Mr Meigel
said aerial photography dated 11 January 2025 and 3 February 2025 evidenced the
transportable building
remained on the land Tp35.33 and Tp51.24-33.
Planning Development and
Infrastructure Act
Planning Development and
Infrastructure Regulations Regulation 3G (1).
Planning Development and
Infrastructure Regulations Regulation 3G (3).
FDN 15 Affidavit of Ms Cain
– second respondent for both respondents dated 03 February 2025 at
Planning Development and
Infrastructure Act
City of Onkaparinga
[2024] SAERDC 8
Tp.36.13-20.
Tp37.27-38 and
Exhibit A1 AMH-16 p123, and
Tp24.33-35.
Ford v City of
[2015] SAERDC 13.
[2015] SAERDC 13
[2015] SAERDC 13
Outbuilding is defined in
Section 7 of the Planning and Design Code to mean “
a non-habitable
detached building on the same site as a main building which is
ancillary and subordinate to the main building and
has a use and function which
relates to the main building, but does not include a private bushfire
Sch. 4 cl. 4(1)(a).
Mr Houlihan measured the
building from an aerial photograph as being 6m by 6m for a total
Exhibit A1 at [11].
[2024] SAERDC 8
FDN 15 at [10].
Exhibit A1 at AMH-5 at
Exhibit A1 at Exhibit AMH-1
Exhibit A1 at AMH-5 p18 and
Exhibit A2.
The ERDC Rules are silent
on the question of summary dismissal.
Jennings v Police
[2019] SASFC 93 and
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner for
(1964) 112 CLR 125
[1964] HCA 69.
Cutting v Bell
[2020] SAERDC 26
Now Exhibit A1.
The Corporation of
the City of Unley v Brown
[2022] SAERDC 9
City of Charles Sturt v
[2022] SAERDC 8
Bishop & Bishop v District Council of
[1997] SAERDC 425
Sojenka v City of Port Adelaide
[2001] SAERDC 22.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.6 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter