URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWLRP/2010/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
B&C Security Logistics v WorkCover [2010] SAWLRP 4 (18 May 2010)
[2010] SAWLRP 4
WORKCOVER LEVY REVIEW PANEL
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
B. & C. SECURITY
LOGISTICS PTY LTD
(Employer No. E19339304 -- File Reference 2010-0004244)
TWIN BRIDGE SECURITY LOGISTICS PTY LTD
(Employer No. E22966909
-- File Reference 2010-0004245)
NORTHERN ALARMS SECURITY LOGISTICS
(Employer No. E233318408 -- File Reference 2010-0004246)
(Applicants)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION
OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
Member P.G. Eblen
Member L.R.
Member T.M. Minett
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED 18 MAY
Application for review -- impact on employer’s claims history of
claim of particular worker -- claims history taken into account
in calculating
levy -- worker a security guard assaulted in the course of his employment --
alleged assailant charged and committed
for trial in criminal courts but trial
not proceeded with -- Director of Public Prosecutions not considering there was
a reasonable
prospect of conviction -- WorkCover abandoning recovery action --
whether recovery action should have been pursued -- prospects of
costs -- likelihood of alleged assailant being able to satisfy judgment should
judgment have been given against him --
sections 54
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Appearances:
No appearance for the applicant employers.
Ms J. Gillespie
of counsel, with Mr S. Makai, for the respondent WorkCover.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
applicants lodged an application on 12 October 2009, seeking a review pursuant
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
") of a levy assessment made by the WorkCover Corporation of South
Australia ("WorkCover"). The assessment was partly based on the
recorded claims history, which is subject to
, at the relevant time,
provided as follows:
Review of levy, penalty interest or fine
(1) Where an employer considers that a decision of the
Corporation as to--
the fixing or assessment of a levy;
the imposition of penalty interest or a fine;
the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead
to the imposition of a supplementary levy,
is unreasonable, the Board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a levy,
penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined
by the Board, by the Board itself, or by a committee or
person to whom the Board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the Board has an
absolute discretion as to whether
it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the Board may--
alter a levy or an assessment;
quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
quash or vary a condition imposed by the Corporation. ...
This Panel is the Board’s delegate
section 72:
WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002
amended (see
South Australian Government Gazette
, 29 October 2009,
, under which
the dispute has arisen, at the relevant time provided (so far as is
Adjustment of levy in relation to individual
(1) The Corporation may, in relation to a particular employer,
having regard to all or any of the following matters--
the adequacy or inadequacy of measures taken by the employer to
reduce the incidence of work related traumas;
the incidence or costs of claims in respect of compensable
disabilities suffered by the employer’s workers (disregarding claims
class excluded from the ambit of this paragraph by regulation);
the rehabilitation facilities or services for disabled workers
provided by the employer, or the absence or inadequacy of such facilities
services provided by the employer;
the employer’s practices as to the retention, employment or
re-employment of disabled workers (and in particular, any failure
employer’s part to provide, in accordance with this
, employment to a
worker who has suffered a compensable disability in the employer’s
employment);
such other matters (whether similar or dissimilar to those
referred to above) as the Corporation considers relevant,
grant to the
employer a remission of the levy that would be otherwise payable or impose on
the employer a supplementary levy (as the
case may require). ...
It is under paragraph
subsection (1) that an employer’s claims history may be taken into account
in assessing the employer’s levy, by the
granting of a remission or the
imposition of a supplement in accordance with the cost of claims. The
application for review referred
to the claims of two workers.
The most common reason for the exclusion of
a claim from calculations is that it is a secondary or unrepresentative
disability (to
which the words in parentheses in
section 67(1)
As a result of the conciliation process provided under the
WorkCover Levy
Review Determination 2002
, one of the contentious claims was agreed to be a
secondary disability.
The parties could not
agree on the treatment of the second worker’s claim. The question of
whether it should be included in
the employers’ claims history therefore
falls for our decision.
The hearing
unfortunately had to be conducted without the participation of the employers.
The managing director of all three companies,
Mr L.H. Bais, was present at the
directions hearing at which the hearing date was agreed, with input from him.
However, when the
hearing was called on at the appointed time (actually, after
waiting ten minutes in case Mr Bais was running late), there was no
by Mr Bais or anyone else on the employers’
The worker’s claim
The worker was a 36 year old security
guard working for the employer in crowd control. He had been employed for about
a month when
he was injured in the course of his employment in an alleged
assault by a patron at a country hotel in the early hours of 23 December
The worker’s initial claim, dated 2 January 2007 (book of documents, p.5),
related to physical injuries to the face and
upper body. A subsequent claim,
dated 17 July 2008 (p.6), related to a post traumatic stress disorder that arose
subsequently out
of the incident and its
His alleged assailant was
charged by the police with an aggravated offence of causing serious harm to
another person.
The claim was not disputed,
and indeed Mr Bais’s comments on the employer report form were most
supportive. The claim was duly
accepted and compensation payments to the worker
The recovery action
The claims agent sought and obtained
information from the South Australia Police about the alleged assailant (p.8)
and on 22 May 2007
wrote to him, notifying him of its intent to recover from him
compensation paid and payable to the worker (p.14). This was pursuant
, under which WorkCover may make recovery from a third party
wrongdoer of compensation it has paid, or which it may pay in the future.
information available, this was an appropriate thing to
The significance for an
employer’s levy adjustment under
section 67(1)
of a recovery
action is that, when recovery is made successfully, claims costs are reduced,
perhaps to zero.
Conversely, a recovery
action by WorkCover against an alleged third party wrongdoer can involve
significant legal costs, which, if
unsuccessful, will only add unproductively to
the claims costs on which the employer’s section 67 adjustment is
calculated.
Recovery actions under
are not, therefore, to be
undertaken lightly.
On 7 June 2007, the
claims agent received a phone call from the alleged assailant’s solicitor,
denying all liability on his
behalf (p.15A). This denial was confirmed by a
letter of the same date (p.16), which also indicated that the alleged assailant
the charges laid by the police and intended strenuously to defend them.
The matter was at the committal stage in the magistrates’
solicitor also indicated that when the criminal process was complete, he would
It appears that the alleged
assailant was indeed committed for trial in the District Court, because the
District Court’s Certificate
of Record shows that in due course he was
arraigned on 29 October 2007 (p.24). Following the pre-trial processes of the
trial date was set, but shortly before that date, the matter was called
on at the request of the Director of Public Prosecutions
was entered. This, broadly, is a procedure whereby a prosecutor
indicates to a court an unwillingness to proceed. It may follow an
persuasion on the part of the prosecutor that an accused is not guilty, or it
may indicate doubts on the part of the prosecutor
as to whether there is a
reasonable prospect of securing a conviction, or it may be entered for many
other reasons, including the
death of the accused. Where it occurs before trial,
as in this case, it does not preclude the laying of a further indictment if (for
example) the evidentiary situation changes, but clearly the accused in such a
case is entitled to be presumed innocent, not having
The Certificate of Record was
supplied to the claims agent by the alleged assailant’s solicitor, under
cover of his letter of
20 November 2008 (p.22). In this correspondence, the
solicitor indicated that:
"I can advise that I was involved in
negotiations and that the Director of Public Prosecutions withdrew the matter
before it was going
to trial because they were not confident that the
Prosecution would be successful. Among the matters discussed was the action of
[the worker] in acting unlawfully in that he prevented our client from leaving
the hotel and it was the defence case that our client
was assaulted by [the
worker]. These were matters that were to be put to trial but in any event the
trial did not eventuate as the
attached Certificate of Record indicates the
Prosecution withdrew all charges against our client ..."
The solicitor did not use the expression
"self-defence" in his correspondence, but it seemed to be common ground between
and Mr Bais at the directions hearing that this is what it amounted
to, albeit Mr Bais hotly disputed that the worker had in any
way provoked the
By letter dated 28 November 2008
(p.26), the claims agent replied to the alleged assailant’s solicitor
confirming that the recovery
would not be further
Consideration
We proceed on the basis that the
employers, through Mr Bais in the application for review and at the directions
hearing he attended,
contend that the supplementary levy that has been imposed
is unreasonable (in terms of
section 72).
be by reason of WorkCover’s failure to make recovery from the alleged
assailant, because the fact of the worker’s
injury and the correctness of
its acceptance as a compensable claim are not
We turn to consider the
reasonableness, or otherwise, of WorkCover’s and the claims agent’s
actions in relation to the
At the hearing before us, Ms
Gillespie, we think correctly, submitted that three main issues arose in the
circumstances of this matter:
likely is it that the recovery action will be
successful?
What are the likely costs
of pursuing the recovery action?
decision is made in favour of WorkCover, how likely is it that WorkCover will
actually receive payment of any damages
We consider these issues in
How likely is it that the recovery action would be
successful?
There can be no doubt that such a
recovery action would be highly likely to succeed if it followed the conviction
of the alleged assailant.
Conversely, success in a recovery action would be far
less likely if the alleged assailant were acquitted -- although success would
still be theoretically possible given that an acquittal would mean merely that a
jury had not been satisfied of guilt
beyond reasonable doubt
, whereas a
civil court could still be satisfied on the lesser civil standard of proof
the balance of probabilities
present case, the alleged assailant has been neither convicted nor acquitted of
the charges laid against him. There has simply
been a decision of the Director
of Public Prosecutions not to proceed, apparently on the basis that the
prosecutor was not convinced
there was a reasonable prospect of establishing
guilt before a District Court jury or perhaps, more strongly, that the
convinced that there was
reasonable prospect of
so establishing guilt. We do not know
Mr Bais, at the directions hearing,
indicated he could obtain and tender security film showing clearly that the
alleged assailant
had engaged in an unprovoked attack on the worker and that
there was no element of self-defence. If that was true, he may have been
way to establishing that WorkCover was unreasonable in not pursuing a recovery
action. However, he has not done so. In any
event, we cannot believe that any
such footage (presumably taken from closed-circuit security cameras installed by
the hotel, the
employers’ client) would not have been available to the
police and the Director of Public Prosecutions and, on the assumption
prosecutor would have examined it, we can only conclude that the footage cannot
have been as unambiguous as Mr Bais
In particular, if the defence in
a recovery action was an alleged unlawful detention of the alleged assailant by
the worker, it is
hard to see that security footage could be conclusive on that
issue. However, this is all speculative: Mr Bais did not fulfil his
produce the footage.
The material before us
does not support a view that a recovery action, in the absence of a finding of
guilt in the criminal courts,
would necessarily be successful. On the contrary,
it seems to us that the obstacles would be formidable and the chances of success
would depend on the quality of the respective witnesses, in particular, but not
limited to, the worker and the alleged assailant.
The interpretation of security
footage would also be involved. We have no basis on which to make such an
assessment, but we think
confidence as to a successful outcome would be highly
speculative at best.
circumstances, it would be sensible to look carefully at the likely costs of a
proposed recovery action before deciding to
likely costs of pursuing a recovery action
In circumstances where no criminal trial
has taken place, it could be anticipated that the costs of pursuing a recovery
action would
be high. All of the witnesses who might have been expected to give
evidence in the criminal trial would need to be called to give
evidence in the
trial of the recovery action. This could mean a trial occupying several
On the other hand, Ms Gillespie
thought that the preparation work already done by the Director of Public
Prosecutions in anticipation
of the aborted criminal trial might be able to be
borrowed and used in a recovery action, although we do not think that the ready
availability to WorkCover of all of the police material should necessarily be
simply assumed. If Ms Gillespie is correct, however,
this could be expected to
ameliorate WorkCover’s costs
However, if a recovery action
were launched and did not succeed, WorkCover would face not merely the
expenditure of its own costs,
but a probable order to pay the costs of the
alleged assailant as well. All of these expenses could legitimately be counted
of the costs of the worker’s compensation claim, as we understand
Ms Gillespie estimated
WorkCover’s likely costs of pursuing the matter at $25-30,000, and if it
were unsuccessful, at $60,000.
While it is true that success would probably mean
the making of an order for costs against the alleged assailant, the value of
an order would depend upon the alleged assailant’s ability to meet
any adverse order made against him, be it for damages or
The likelihood of actually receiving any proceeds
from a successful recovery action
In many cases where recovery actions are
taken under
, the alleged third party wrongdoer is
indemnified by an insurance company, for example, where the use of a motor
vehicle is involved.
In an assault case, this is usually not so. If WorkCover
obtains judgment against a third party wrongdoer in such a case and the
party wrongdoer does not have the financial resources to meet the judgment, all
WorkCover will have achieved is a Pyrrhic
Mr Bais himself stated at the
directions hearing he attended that he anticipated that if the alleged assailant
in this case was faced
with a judgment against him, he would go bankrupt. He
also said he believed there were assets the alleged assailant could call upon,
but they were not in his own name. The basis on which Mr Bais made those
statements was not specified. They are not matters in respect
of which WorkCover
has any effective remedy. Significant legal costs would have been incurred for
no worthwhile purpose.
Ms Gillespie said
that WorkCover was not in a position to obtain evidence to assist in determining
whether wrongdoers have the means
to pay an award of damages (and costs) made
against them. In the present case, WorkCover had no specific evidence in
relation to
the alleged assailant’s financial status. All that was known
is that he is a 29 year old male who is living at Victor Harbor
and is employed
as an amusement games operator. Mr Bais’s assertions at the directions
hearing were unsupported by any evidence
of which we are aware, but in any case,
supported the view that any judgment obtained was unlikely to be
In these circumstances,
WorkCover’s decision not to incur the further expense of a property search
can probably be justified,
although we observe that the expense of a property
Conclusions
In our respectful opinion, all the
material before us points one way. WorkCover has given careful consideration to
the question of
pursuing a recovery action against the alleged assailant in
respect of the injuries he undoubtedly caused to the worker. The alleged
assailant’s legal representatives have indicated that any action would be
defended, and the defences would presumably be the
same as those maintained in
relation to the criminal proceedings (self-defence and unlawful detention). The
strength of the defences
is difficult for us to evaluate, but it cannot be
ignored that the Director of Public Prosecutions gave careful consideration to
the same matters and concluded, so far as we can tell, at the very least that
there was no reasonable prospect of securing a conviction
in the criminal court.
We do not conclude that a recovery action would have been hopeless, but we
cannot conclude that the prospects
of success would have been
We are also cognisant that a
significant amount of money would have been involved in pursuing a recovery
action that was far from
assured of success, and on the available information,
there is a very real doubt, even if the recovery action had been successful,
whether judgment could have been enforced against the alleged
The claims costs of which the
applicant employers complain most likely would only have been substantially
increased by a futile chase
through the
In the circumstances as far as we
can know them, we consider WorkCover was not only reasonable, but wise, not to
pursue the proposed
recovery action in this
It follows that there is no basis
on which we can reduce the claims costs taken into account in the calculation of
the employers’
application for review must therefore fail and be
After the above had been drafted, but
before it was published, the registry received a phone call from Mr Bais
enquiring about the
hearing he had missed. As we understand the message that was
taken, Mr Bais lost a box of papers while moving, apparently including
papers relating to this matter and his note of the hearing date, and he asked to
attend another hearing. We record that we have
given careful consideration to
the request, and we are unanimously of the opinion that procedural fairness in
these circumstances
does not call for us to re-convene the hearing to hear the
matter further, and we consider this does not in any way alter our conclusions
Determination
For the reasons we have outlined, we
confirm WorkCover’s decisions in this
Trudy Minett
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (170 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter