URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASC/2025/173.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:05:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CLONE PTY LTD v PLAYERS PTY LTD (No 15) [2025] SASC 173 (16 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
CLONE PTY LTD v PLAYERS PTY LTD (No 15)
[2025] SASC 173
Reasons for the Orders of the
Honourable Auxiliary Associate Justice Norman
16 October 2025
PROCEDURE- CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS- COSTS- REVIEW
OF ORDER ON TAXATION
Application for review of orders awarding interest on the applicants’
costs - consideration as to the principles relating to
a review of a taxation of
costs - rulings on review.
Supreme Court Rules 1987
(SA) [ceased] r 101.21(2);
Supreme Court
Civil Rules 2006
(SA) [ceased] rr 187, 271(6), 276, 278, 279;
Civil Rules 2020
(SA) rr 13.2, 195.8, 195.9, 195.10, 195.12, referred
Catto & Ors v Hampton Australia Ltd (In Liq) & Ors
[2008] SASC
Clone Pty Ltd v Players Pty Ltd (No 13)
[2025] SASC 49
Ltd v Players Pty Ltd (No 14)
[2025] SASC 109
Orio Holdings Pty Ltd
& Anor v Costi & Co
[2008] SASC 218
Osborne v Kelly
[1999] SASC 486
75 SASR 392
, discussed.
Australian Coal and Shale Employees’ Federations and Another v The
Commonwealth and Others
[1953] HCA 25
(1953) 94 CLR 621
Baronglow Pty Ltd v Willing
and Thomas (Intervenor) DC (SA)
Action No 107 of 1995, reasons published 2
October 2008 (unreported);
Bennett v Seaman
(1993) 117 ACTR 1;
v Westpac Financial Services Ltd
[2003] FCA 817
Collins v Djunaedi
[2023] SASCA 97
Dalgety Aust Operations Ltd v F F Seeley Nominees Pty Ltd
(1988) 49 SASR 75
Eaves v Eaves and Powell
[1956] P 154
Hall v City of Burnside
[2023] SASC 173
House v The King
In the Estate of Ogilvie
[1910] UKLawRpPro 14
(1910) P 243
Joseph Lahoud &
Anor v Victor Lahoud & Ors
[2006] NSWSC 126
Keogh v Keogh
[1905] ArgusLawRpCN 47
11 ALR (CN) 38
Kuek v Devflan Pty Ltd and Anor
[2009] VSC 91
Devflan Pty Ltd & Anor
[2011] VSCA 25
Kuek v Devflan Pty Ltd and
[2012] VSC 327
Law Society of South Australia v Jordan
198 LSJS 434
Leda v Weerden (No 3)
[2006] NSWSC 220
Laurence Tai Pty
Ltd v Eric & Ors v Knox and Hargraves DC (SA)
Action 614 of 1993,
reasons published 19 January 2000 (unreported);
Malaugh Holdings (No 2) Pty
Ltd v Seal & Others Anor DC (SA)
Actions 1453 of 2002 and1388 of 2003,
reasons published 19 August 2009 (unreported);
Ocean Marine-Tech Pty ltd
& Ors v BMW Australia Ltd DC (SA)
Action 4017 of 1991, reasons published
14 March 2001 (unreported);
Re Gibson’s Settlement Trusts, Mellors v
[1981] 1 All ER 233
Re Melbourne Parking Station Ltd
[1928] ArgusLawRp 100
Schweppes’ Ltd v Archer
[1934] NSWStRp 17
(1934) 51 WN (NSW) 71
Slingsby v Attorney General
(1918) P 236
Spencer v GMG Legal Services
[2013] SASC 19
Swan v Bank of New Zealand
[1890] SALawRp 3
(1890) 24 SALR 20
Clark, Tait & Co v Commissioner of Taxation (Cth)
[1931] HCA 26
(1931) 47 CLR 142
Titan v Babic
[1995] FCA 813
Western Australian Bank v Royal
Insurance Co
[1908] HCA 71
(1908) 7 CLR 385
, considered.
CLONE PTY LTD v PLAYERS PTY LTD (No 15)
Civil: Application
Auxiliary Associate Justice Norman
Introduction
is an application of the seventh, eighth and tenth respondents (Players) for a
review of an order made on 7 July 2025 following
the taxation of the costs of
the applicant (Clone). Clone was awarded its costs of the trial by
Vanstone J in these proceedings
against Players, a determination that was
confirmed by the ultimate decision of the High Court.
taxation itself has concluded, and the only remaining issues are Clone’s
claim for interest on its costs, and the costs
of the taxation itself. By
agreement the interest issue is being determined first.
a dispute arose as to the mechanism for the determination of the interest issue,
by reason of the Court having been informed
that following the service of
Clone’s claim for costs, Players had served three offers for those costs
including interest thereon.
Players had sought a two-stage process wherein a
determination should first be made as to the point in time when Clone’s
entitlement
to interest commenced to run (stage one), and secondly, after that
determination, and based on the Court’s ruling, calculations
could be made
as to Clone’s actual interest on its costs entitlements, relying on the
amounts allowed for the three individual
costs components being,
solicitors’ fees, counsel fees and disbursements up to and including the
date of the offers (stage
Clone Pty Ltd v Players Pty Ltd
dated 11 April
2025 (Reasons No 13) the Court ordered that the award and assessment of interest
was to be undertaken in two separate
on the first of those hearings was heard and in
Clone Pty Ltd v Players Pty
Ltd (No 14)
7 July 2025 (Reasons No 14) orders were made in relation to stage one,
awarding Clone interest on its costs. Although neither
party had made
submissions on the issue, the Court determined that adopting a lump sum approach
was appropriate and accordingly assessed
interest in a lump sum of $125,000.
is that order which Players now seeks to review. They did so by way of a letter
to the Court dated 18 July 2025, to which Clone
responded with submissions
dated 18 August 2025, with responding submissions filed by Players on
19 August 2025. Oral submissions
were presented at a hearing on
19 August 2025 when Mr B Roberts KC of counsel appeared for
Clone, and Mr R Whitington KC of counsel
appeared for Players. I
reserved my decision.
The review process
lodged its long form claim for costs on 11 March 2008, and as this was a
“step in the proceedings”, the applicable
rules governing this
taxation of costs are the
Supreme Court Civil Rules 2006
2006 Rules” or “Rule”).
276 provides that if costs are taxed by a Master (which is occurring here), the
Master will, in the first instance, make a provisional
order for the payment of
costs or any other amount found to be payable on the adjudication. This is
defined as a provisional costs
278 provides that a party who is dissatisfied with a provisional costs order
may, within 14 days after the date of the order,
apply for a review of the order
by a Master. An application for review must specify, in detail, the
applicant’s objection
to the decisions made on the adjudication. If the
provisional order was made by a Master, the review will, as a general rule, be
in the nature of a reconsideration by the Master who made the order. It is not
disputed that as an Auxiliary Associate Justice of
the Court, I am, or ought
properly to be considered, to be a Master for th
purposes of the 2006
Players’ submissions on
their application for a review
their submission by way of a letter dated 18 July 2025, Players wrote that
they did not challenge the decision to award Clone
interest on its costs from
the relevant dates of payments made by it, as had been sought by it at the
hearing, those dates being
reflected in Schedule 1 to Clone’s written
submissions filed 2 May 2025 (“Schedule 1”). Secondly, they
challenge the reliance upon the Schedule 1 interest calculations as
accurately reflecting the relevant dates of payments made by
Clone to its
solicitors, nor the interest calculations based
. Thirdly, they did not challenge the
findings that it would be appropriate to fix an interest cutoff date which was
found to be a
period of two months after the date of Players’ offers of 20
February 2008, being an effective interest cutoff date of 20 April
essential basis for Players’ request for review is as follows:
if one applies
that “interest cutoff date” of 20 April 2008; and
arithmetically calculates an additional two months’ worth of interest
based on the second table in Clone’s Schedule
1 from 20 February
2008 to the “interest cutoff date” of 20 April 2008 one can
precisely calculate that additional amount
of interest; and
that calculation
results in an interest amount of approximately $11,000 less than the $125,000
lump sum interest amount the subject
of the 7 July order, Reasons No 14;
put another way,
if one calculated an additional two months of interest (from 20 February
2008 to 20 April 2008) using Clone’s
figures in Schedule 1, and
adding that additional two months’ worth of interest to the $106,276.32
figure in Schedule 1, one
would arrive at a total interest amount of
$113,830.32, which is approximately $11,000 less than the $125,000 lump sum
interest award.
contention is that this reduced interest figure of $113,830.32 is the precise
and actual amount of interest which
should be awarded to Clone based upon a
calculation reflecting my reasoning (first ground of review).
second basis to review (namely, an “objection” to the 7 July
2025 order) is that Players says that this revised / specific
calculation should be performed in respect of each of
the three individual costs components set out in
Clone’s Schedule 1, being solicitors’ fees, counsel fees, and
disbursements,
rather than by fixing a single lump sum interest amount as per
the 7 July 2025 order (second ground of review).
have performed this revised / specific interest calculation applying my
reasoning in respect of each of those three individual
costs components in
Schedule 1 with a table showing what Players contend should be the correct
arithmetical result, as follows:
had proceeded on the basis that the appropriate course in terms of a rule 278
review was for a hearing convened by the Court
where both parties could make
oral submissions. They requested that a hearing be fixed, and this took place
on 19 August 2025.
Clone’s submissions in
Clone’s response dated 18 August 2025 it noted that a lump sum amount
of $125,000 had been fixed in stage one to be utilised
in considering the filed
costs offers made by Players on 20 February 2008. It submitted that the Court
had already been more than
accommodating in splitting the hearing, and noted
that no authority had been cited by Players mandating any particular approach
the issues now sought to be raised. Accordingly, it could not be
said that there was a relevant error, and to the contrary it was
established that the Court had a broad discretion and could approach the
determination of interest with a broad axe. The attempt
by Players to further
constrain that approach should be rejected.
review application only sought to challenge two discrete aspects of the
7 July 2025 orders, the first being whether an arithmetical
error had been
made in fixing the lump sum interest award, and secondly whether there should
have been three distinct determinations,
referable to the three individual costs
components, namely, solicitors’ fees, counsel fees, and disbursements
rather, than
the single lump sum actually fixed.
their submissions at paragraphs 6 to 13, Clone referred to principles and
caselaw. It submitted that:
a review was a
rehearing and not a hearing de novo: referring to Orio Holdings Pty Ltd &
Anor v Costi & Co (“Orio Holdings
on review, there
should be no interference with findings made unless it could be shown that the
adjudicating Master had made a gross
mistake, or had acted on an incorrect
principle, referring to
Swan v Bank of New
Australian Coal and
Shale Employees’ Federation and Another v The Commonwealth and
Re Melbourne Parking
Station Ltd
Dalgety Aust
Operations Ltd v F F Seeley Nominees Pty Ltd (No
Western Australian Bank
v Royal Insurance Co
Clark, Tait & Co v Commissioner of Taxation
as had been
confirmed in
Kuek v Devflan Pty Ltd and
, the appellate
principles are to be applied equally to a review under rule 276;
the overriding
principle had been endorsed by the High Court in Australian Coal and Shale
Employees’ Federation and Another
v The Commonwealth and
citing with approval
Jordan CJ in Schweppes’ Ltd v
the decision of
a Master is not absolutely final, even on a decision on quantum:
Attorney General
In the Estate of Ogilvie
the Court should
also have regard to the principles set out in
House v The
will refer to some of these authorities later in these reasons.
the first ground of review, Clone contended that Players, in seeking to impose a
rigid “cutoff date” at which
the interest calculation ceased, had
mischaracterised the purpose and intention of the 7 July 2025 orders, and
further, there was
no principle involved which compelled the exercise of the
discretion in that manner. In consequence there was no error alleged such
invoke the power to set aside the 7 July 2025 orders on review. It noted
that the discussion of interest cutoff dates had
occurred in the context of
competing “end points”. Clone had advocated for a date of
30 November 2008, or alternatively
an earlier date of
20 February 2008, and in deciding which of these two was preferred,
the Court had adopted a middle ground, so
as to provide an allowance in favour
of Clone’s primary position for considering the two offers. The two
months to do so was
an indicative date, rather than one adopted for the purpose
of sustaining a rigid mathematical calculation. In any event, it submitted,
purpose of the 7 July 2025 orders was to fix an amount of interest which
could then be notionally subtracted from Players’
costs offers, seemingly
to aid those parties in foreshadowed contentions as to whether those offers had
been bettered. How this
might be undertaken by Players remained uncertain, but
the parties necessarily had the benefit of the 7 July 2025 orders to aid them
this regard.
submitted that a $125,000 lump sum award of interest to a point in time relevant
to the assessment of the costs offers had
been manifestly open in the exercise
of the Court’s wide discretion, and to aggregate that interest amount with
the costs actually
awarded, enabled the comparison exercise between the interest
inclusive amount awarded, and the interest-inclusive filed offers.
not these offers had been bettered was now known to the parties. This was the
sum total of what was required of stage
Clone submitted, there could be no suggestion that the use of such a broad axe
to calculate interest in a fashion that
would enable the assessment of the costs
offer would constrain the Court in the exercise of its discretion concerning the
of the interest award. A lump sum award of interest in respect of the
remainder of the period of more than 20 years over which Clone
had been kept out
of its money, remained within a broad discretion which was yet to be exercised,
and mathematical precision was
never required for a lump sum interest assessment
– much less where this was merely a very small subset of the period over
which the discretion was to be exercised.
submitted that to date the Court had fixed an amount for interest for a limited
purpose, namely, to allow for Players to make
the submission that they chose as
to the significance of the filed offers. The Court had not yet fixed an amount
from which further
interest was to follow in the strict
sense. This final interest entitlement would be
considered holistically and not on an inflexible mathematical basis from a date
2008. This was plainly apparent from paragraph [192] of Reasons No 14. In
those reasons I had observed that the task of resolving
all the considerations
mathematically would, as Doyle CJ observed in
constitute a rather
crude device, and it was undesirable that the question of interest should give
rise to lengthy argument about
the selection of an appropriate date. Clone
submitted that to rigidly select and perform calculations to an arbitrary date,
was now seeking, was incorrect both in principle and inconsistent
with the way in which the Court determined to exercise its discretion,
to fix a lump sum amount for interest in a holistic manner having regard to an
array of various and competing factors.
Clone referred to paragraphs [194] to
[205] of Reasons No 14.
argued that in determining this aspect of interest on costs the Court had
determined that a lump sum process should be utilised,
relying on the Full Court
found that adjusting the date from which interest ran could be arbitrary and
contentious, and that the power to award a
lump sum enabled flexibility into a
process which would avoid artificial arguments over choices of dates. This was
precisely what
had occurred. Accordingly, there was no reasonable basis to
interfere with the decision made.
relation to the second ground of review relied upon by Players in its
application to review, Clone’s submission was that
this ground involved a
pure exercise of discretion and that Players had not identified or articulated
any form of error – let
alone a gross mistake – nor any basis to
suggest that the discretion had miscarried. In fact, it argued, what was now
advanced would lead to error. It submitted that the interest cost was
calculated through the means stated in
Joseph Lahoud & Anor v Victor
Leda v Weerden (No 3)
Gzell J had also applied the calculation reasoning of
single number to ascertain the total amount of costs and disbursements in
assessing interest. Clone submitted that the
analysis contended for by Players
would unduly distort the lump sum interest amount fixed by the Court and that
their approach would
distort the conventional application of principle in a
fashion designed to assist them to artificially enhance reliance upon the
offers, which should not be countenanced.
conclusion, Clone emphasised that Players’ submissions concerning the
alleged arithmetical issue did not disclose any error
in the exercise of the
Court’s discretion, and that the date had been fixed in a manner
the Court had deemed appropriate in its decision to
adopt the lump sum method. It noted that the Court had considered a range of
factors in fixing the lump sum amount, not only the issue of an interest
“cutoff date”. Further, it submitted that the
consistently recognised the merits of the lump sum approach in assessing
interest on costs, and that such a preference
should be maintained as it
provided consistency and efficiency, avoided unnecessary fragmentation of
interest on costs awards, and
prevented reliance on “crude” and
superficial arithmetical arguments as to a party’s entitlement to interest
its costs. Clone submitted that such an approach was more justified in the
circumstances of the complex and lengthy history of this
case. It submitted
that a review was only available where an error of principle or clear
miscalculation or other material error
had been shown, and that no proper reason
for review had been advanced by Players. Further, it submitted that the review
application
did not identify any error committed by the Court in fixing a global
lump sum figure.
was contended that in these circumstances, little weight should be given to
Players’ submission that the Court’s determination
in this respect
provided an additional basis to review. Clone submitted that the Court should
decline to interfere with its earlier
orders of the lump sum interest award as
set out in Reasons No 14.
sought an order for the costs of the review against Players.
Players’ responding submissions
responding submissions were filed on 19 August
. In relation to the first ground of review
they submitted that Clone’s submissions had “missed the
maintained that the complaint was not with the exercise of the
discretion, or of the identification of the discretionary considerations.
the additional period of two months within which to consider the offer might
have been a determination arrived at in the exercise
of the discretion as to an
award of interest, there was no complaint with that decision or determination.
However, they emphasised,
once such a determination had been made, they took
objection to the consequence which followed, namely, the application of the
and defined period to Clone’s calculation of interest based on
the principal amount set out in its Schedule 1. Players contended
there might be a further calculation of interest once the Court had had the
opportunity to assess the anterior calculation
against the offers made in
February 2008, this was an entirely different and separate question from the
calculation of the quantum
of interest appropriate to be incorporated in such
offers. They submitted that the date was not arbitrary as Clone had contended,
rather it was a date chosen by the Court in an appropriate (unchallenged)
exercise of its discretion to fix an appropriate date to
allow Clone, in respect
of the time necessary, to consider offers. Further, there was no challenge to
the Court adopting a lump
sum approach, nor to the factors relied upon by it in
exercising that approach. Rather, the review expressly relied on the
reliance in Reasons No 14 on Clone’s calculations. To make
it clear, by reference to paragraphs [191] and [197] of those reasons,
Players’ scenario C did not challenge Clone’s Schedule 1,
rather it had made a calculation simply to demonstrate that
necessarily (as the
Court had found) Clone’s calculations in Schedule 1 had meant that not
all of the costs relied upon for
the purpose of interest could have been
incurred prior to the date of the costs order of 18 August 2005. This had
no bearing upon
the Court’s analysis at paragraphs [195] to [203], and the
impact of the Court’s acceptance of Schedule 1 in an interest
calculation.
relation to the second ground of review, Players submitted that again,
Clone’s submissions suffered from the same misconception
as to the nature
of the review process.
In any event, the second
ground of review simply built upon the findings in the reasons which proceeded
from the basis of three individual
costs components. Not only was there
nothing inconsistent with the authorities relied on by Clone in invoking that
approach, but
that approach was the very premise of the Court’s decision
in it Reasons No 13 at paragraph [3]. Players contended that there
basis in law, principle or the rules dealing with awards of interest on costs to
contest the second ground of review. It
was notable that the Court had
explained its adoption of the two stage process in its Reasons No 13 at
paragraph [63] on the basis
that once it had made its determination on the
issues as to how much interest was allowable up to the date of the offers,
by any knowledge of what had been offered, then it could proceed
following the disclosure of the offers and their effect to a consideration
determination as to whether Players had relevantly beaten any of their offers,
or not, as the case might be, and the consequences
of this. This, they
submitted, had come to be reflected in the orders in Reasons No 13 at paragraph
[67] order 1(b). Players submitted
that there is no basis to either reject or
dismiss either ground of review sought, and both were consistent with the
reasons of the
Court and the terms of the relevant rules.
submissions of the parties
Players’ oral submissions
his submissions Mr Whitington referred to Reasons No 13 wherein bifurcation
of the interest argument was ordered having regard
to the existence of the three
offers and their separate relevance.
relation to the first ground of review, he referred to the question of the
determination of the relevant interest calculus, namely,
the integers.
Reasons No 14, which had determined that interest was to be allowed for the
period between the date of Vanstone J’s costs
order and the Players’
offer of 20 February 2008, it was ultimately decided that Clone be allowed a
reasonable time between
20 February 2008 (being the date of the costs offers, at
the earliest) and 30 November 2008 (being the date of their lapsing pursuant
the rules, at the latest) to consider and respond to the costs offers. That
finding, at paragraph [200] of Reasons No 14, was
that a period of two months
would be reasonable, thereby extending the date to 20 April 2008 for Clone to
respond to that offer.
further integer in the interest calculation comprised those amounts determined
on taxation as set out in Clone’s Schedule
1, appearing at
paragraph [29] in Reasons No 14. Schedule 1 comprised two tables, one
setting out calculations made to 30 November
2008, and the other to 20 February
2008. Each table contained a middle column identifying the principal amounts,
with the right-hand
column reflecting the corresponding interest calculations.
Mr Whitington contended that the Court had relied on Clone’s
calculations
in paragraph [203] of Reasons No 14, being Schedule 1.
starting point was an assumed date of payment on the date of the costs order
being 18 August 2005. Mr Whitington reminded the
Court, however, that
Players had produced a scenario C (which was referred to in several places in
Reasons No 14). This showed that
using Clone’s calculations of
interest, based upon its asserted actual incurral of expenditure, some part of
that expenditure
must have occurred after 18 August 2005. For present
purposes, Players accepted Clone’s Schedule 1 calculations and did not
seek to challenge these. Further, the interest calculations for the purpose of
Schedule 1 set out in paragraph [29] of Reasons No
Clone’s calculations, and these were not disputed or sought by Clone to be
Whitington then addressed the Court’s powers on review. The effect of the
relevant 2006 Rules was that they necessarily
implied that a provisional costs
order was provisional or interim only, and not final. Further, a
reconsideration was not the same
as an appeal. A provisional costs order was
not one able to be entered up. An order would be made but for a review
application,
but if the review application was not made, then there could be no
further review by a higher judicial officer – although there
right of appeal. It was for this reason that Players was seeking a review at
this stage. Clone’s submission that
a review had to meet a test of error,
as on an appeal, was disputed. The caselaw indicated that a review process was
not equivalent
to an appeal, or a second appeal. The cases cited by Clone all
relied either on an appeal procedure or a second review procedure,
and none of
them touched on a stage one review process of the kind now being dealt
ultimate test for the Court was that set out in rule 278(3) which referred to
the term “reconsideration”. The process
was not, it was emphasised,
equivalent to an appeal. Instead, it was a request to the Court to review what
had been done in the light
of an arithmetical calculation as had been undertaken
by Players in their application.
the second ground of review, Mr Whitington referred to paragraphs [197], and
following, of Reasons No 14. Noting that
the Court had accepted Clone’s
submission that interest could be backdated to the dates when payments were
made, he said the
Court had also addressed a second factor, namely, relating to
offers and their acceptance (which was also not disputed), and a third
which Players also accepted, that any delays by Clone in the taxation process
would not be held against it. Likewise,
Players accepted the finding of a
fourth factor, namely that costs offers were relevant to an award of interest on
costs incurred.
The fifth factor, referred to in paragraph [203] of Reasons No
14, was the starting point. The Court had observed that there had
suggestion by Players in their scenario C that the Court might look to some
other and later starting point than 18 August
2005. However, Players
were content to accept Clone’s starting point in its Schedule 1
calculations as being on 18 August
2005 even if this was to its
disadvantage.
short point, Mr Whitington submitted, was that if any slippage were to be built
in, this should be in favour of a reduction of
the claimed calculations, but
Players did not urge a finding of any slippage and accepted Clone’s
starting point.
he submitted, applying these integers into the calculation of interest, this
allowed a simple calculation on Clone’s
Schedule 1 figures by adding two
months interest from 20 February to 20 April (referred to in paragraph [29] of
Reasons No 14), wherein
Clone itself had calculated interest of $106,276.32 to
20 February 2008, and interest to 30 November 2008 of $142,000.01.
Players was seeking, as was demonstrated by its letter pursuing a review, was to
simply take the difference in interest between
these two figures, and these two
dates, to calculate the number of days in between, and to divide up the
differential interest per
day, as had appeared on page 4 of Players’
letter. The result was an additional 60 days of extra interest up and
April 2008 amounting to $7,554. There was a slight quirk in that
calculation, favourable to Clone, in that a better daily rate of
interest had
been taken. In Clone’s table, from 1 October 2008 interest had increased
from 6.5 per cent to 10 per cent. Players’
calculation, which was
only for the early part of that period up to 20 April 2008, was for a
period at which the rate of 6.5 per
cent prevailed, but nevertheless it
calculated a daily rate spread over the whole period. That daily rate was in
effect a weighted
daily interest amount, which favoured Clone by factoring in 60
or 61 days at the end of the period of 10 per cent, but this did not
Players. If one added $7,554 to Clone’s figure appearing in paragraph
[29] of Reasons No 14 being $106,276.32, a total
of $113,830.32 would be arrived
at, in contrast to the lump sum figure awarded in Reasons No 14 of
Players was suggesting to the Court for review was that taking an arithmetical
approach based on Clone’s figures, and
the Court’s findings
concerning the appropriate figure and end date, was a preferable approach to a
rounder lump sum figure.
This was not intended to be a criticism of the Court
for not engaging in the discrete daily calculation exercise, however once that
calculation was undertaken, the ultimate figure would be a little over $11,000
lower. While proceeding to move to offers where it
might turn out that precise
figures mattered, this was important.
Clone’s oral
submissions
Roberts submitted that the present debate arose from the unusual circumstances
of the bifurcation of the interest assessment process,
which had become
necessary due to Players’ approach to the treatment of their offers.
While it was now said that the costs
order was provisional only, it was not
entirely evident from Reasons No 13 that the Court was determining a sum
that would be capable
of perfection by a way of an order under rule
it were the case that Players were proceeding on the basis that it was a
provisional costs order capable of being perfected either
as is, or in
consequence of any variation to that order that the Court might make, the matter
could proceed accordingly.
Roberts referred to
Catto & Ors v Hampton
Australia Ltd (In Liq) & Ors (“Catto v
which dealt
with a rule 278 review. The Full Court had observed there that as the matter
related to a question of principle; it
would have been better dealt with by way
of an appeal rather than a review. What had occurred was that a Master had
determined a
question of principle based on some exampled cases, but had
deferred from either determining a review from himself, or proceeding
single judge review, and had instead referred the matter directly to the Full
Court, without a request from the parties. The
Full Court was critical of this
approach. In its reasons at paragraph [27], it had discussed the differing
functions of a review
and an appeal. It had held in that paragraph that
rule 278 was inappropriate as a means of review of the issues in dispute
the parties, and that the review process was best adapted to a review of
decisions concerning the actual quantification of claimed
costs, and to the
correction of mistakes, errors or oversights which had occurred in the detailed
adjudication process. This explained
why the rule contemplated, rather
unusually, a first stage review by the original decision-maker. The process was
not well adapted
to the review of decisions on issues of principle decided under
rule 271(6).
explained why rule 278 contemplated a two-stage review exercise. A
review was not, in his submission, simply a basis
for returning to the relevant adjudicating officer seeking in effect another
on the taxation, and there were many reasons why the Court should not
construe a review exercise as simply being a “second
Players’ first ground of review did not identify any relevant error in the
exercise of the discretion, rather
it simply advanced fresh submissions that
they might have advanced the first time around. Such a process would be outside
ambit of the review exercise as described in
Catto v Hampton
even if the Court acceded to the submission that there was a second stage of
The Schedule C issue, addressing the date of payment compared with the date of
order and the notion that there was slippage, could
be answered by referring to
the affidavit of Clone’s solicitor, Mr Hamilton, FDN 346, which
established that in relation to
solicitors’ fees, although there had been
substantial fees incurred and paid after the date of the costs order, these were
nevertheless trial costs. This was evident from the bills rendered report
annexed to his affidavit. Accordingly, when the illustrative
exercise of
identification of the judgment sum as being a relevant measure for payments was
identified, it did have the effect that
it was lower (but only marginally lower)
than by using the actual dates of payments. This was because those dates were
August 2005 date. However, in relation to solicitors' fees, also
after August 2005, in consequence when there was the application
of a single
date, it was something of a midpoint relevantly, and this was why there was no
slippage or error as has been described
by Players.
any event, this was not a matter arising on review.
Roberts identified the way the Court’s discretion had been exercised in
fixing a lump sum as set out in its Reasons No 14.
The Court had observed at
paragraphs [109] and [110] that there was a broad discretion to be exercised; at
paragraph [130] it had
noted both the undesirability of lengthy argument, and
the recognition that the process was something of a crude device, and at
[174] to [175] it had observed that offers under the rules
contemplated a flexible period within which they might be assessed. Applying
these principles at paragraphs [190] to [192] and [195], the Court had indicated
that a lump sum assessment would be adopted to avoid
lengthy argument about the
selection of dates. At paragraphs [199] to [200], which involved the fixing of
a date up until which
the relevant assessment was to be calculated, it had
rejected Clone’s proposition that it was appropriate to calculate up to
two days before the hearing. It had also rejected the proposition from Players
that Clone would be denied a reasonable time within
which to consider the offer.
Accordingly, it had proceeded on the basis that it would be somewhere between 20
February 2008 and 30
November 2008 that the reasonableness of the offer, where
interest was effectively continuing to run in the meantime, would be
had fastened upon the reference to two months as being a reasonable period.
However, it was evident from the Court’s
approach at paragraphs at [199]
to [200] and [205] that it was considering a point between February and
November, rejecting each
of the parties’ submissions, and coming up with a
date somewhere in the middle, which was part of its broad discretion, well
to it, and which should not now sound in the style of interest calculation set
out by Players at paragraph 9.4 and 9.5 of their
review application.
an exercise would apply a mathematical result to what the Court had expressly
said was not to be the approach. Instead, it
should use a broad axe to adopt a
lump sum to avoid the very style of arguments presently advanced by Players. It
was not relevant
to contend before the Court now that there should be a precise
arithmetic approach to the end date, when the Court had already proceeded
otherwise with the exercise of its discretion.
relation to Players’ second ground of review, Mr Roberts submitted, they
had not advanced precise submissions as to allocations
being made between the
three individual costs components of solicitors’ fees, counsel fees, and
disbursements, so the Court
should not now make these awards pre-dating the
adjudication certificate and then going back and undertaking a fresh
calculation.
In Clone’s submission, this was not within the ambit of error
or oversight. Rather Players was simply having another go at
the matters, which
should be deterred rather than encouraged.
Clone’s submission, what was contemplated in the Reasons No 13 was that a
single calculation was to be made based upon each
of the three individual costs
components, namely, solicitors’ fees, counsel fees, and disbursements. It
was not contemplated
that the Court was to be required to go through an
independent mathematical exercise of fixing precise numbers to each of these
components. The endeavours of Players to deconstruct the lump sum order
was inimical to the process of a lump sum exercise.
there was something of an approbation and reprobation by Players on the notion
of the offers being confidential. Players
had contended that nothing could be
said about them because rule 187 contemplated that they be contained in a sealed
envelope and
not opened, yet they were now saying effectively that there were
three individual costs components, so they needed to be broken down.
should be no warrant for now allowing Players the broad exercise of coming back
and requiring this to be done again. Players
could make whatever submissions
they wished of their own arithmetic calculations by breaking down matters for
the purpose of addressing
submissions as to the significance of offers, but this
was a different thing from now requiring the exercise of Court in entering
fresh provisional costs order that might restart the whole exercise of review.
Players’ oral submission in reply
Whitington referred to the observations of White J at paragraph [27] of
Catto v Hampton
saying that this was an illustration or exemplification of a Court’s
function in the review process. By no means an exhaustive
definition, it did not
preclude the Court from taking the steps that Players now urged it to do. An
adjudication of costs could
include an adjudication of interest, and this was
precisely what the Court had done here, even though it had only reached a
point. It might be the only adjudication of interest, or there might be
more to come, but the point was that it was an adjudication
of interest on
costs, and if Players did not exercise their review rights at this stage they
would be shut out. The broad discretion
referred to at paragraphs [109] to
[110] in Reasons No 14 was beside the point. Players did not challenge that the
Court had a broad
discretion, and they agreed that it had identified factors
relevant to that discretion quite correctly.
point, however, of the present debate was that once the exercise moved past the
identification of the broad discretion, of the
factors or integers relevant to
that exercise, and then went to the stage of the actual exercise, the Court was
now approaching the
application of the discretion as opposed to its
identification. The review the subject of the present application was based
an acceptance of that discretion, however involving a challenge to the
application of the findings the Court had made, as opposed
to the discretionary
relation to the second ground of review, Mr Whitington submitted that if the
reconsideration was deferred then Players would be
shut out, with no right of a
second review or an appeal, in relation to this particular award of interest or
a component of an award
of interest. Noting that Clone had submitted that it
was wrong to suggest that Reasons No 13 ordained or even contemplated three
calculations, Mr Whitington contended that this was not so at all - the very
premise for the bifurcation of the interest argument
was that there were offers,
and as had been noted there were three individual costs components. Against
this, Clone had submitted
that Players were approbating and reprobating, but Mr
Whitington maintained there was no inconsistency in what Players was doing.
Players were not seeking to rely on the fact of offers and then saying that the
offers were confidential - this point was at the
heart of Reasons No 13, which
was the Court’s acceptance for the proposition that the offers should not
be disclosed until
after the issue of assessing interest had been completed.
Accordingly, there was nothing inconsistent with the approach, and indeed
appeared from that decision, relying on the proposition that there had been
offers, that three of them were discretely applicable
to three individual costs
components, and that for the time being the terms of those offers must remain
confidential. Accordingly,
there was nothing in Clone’s point about
approbation and reprobation.
summary, Players’ submission was that the effect of the 2006 Rules was
that they necessarily implied that a provisional
costs order was provisional or
interim only, and not final. Further, a reconsideration was not the same as an
appeal - a provisional
costs order was not one able to be entered up. The
ultimate test for the Court was that set out in rule 278(3) which referred to
the term “reconsideration”. The process was not, as had been
emphasised, equivalent to an appeal. In this instance,
the review was a request
by Players to the Court to reconsider what has been done in the light of the
arithmetical calculation set
out in its submissions.
as to the review process
276 provides that if costs are adjudicated by a Master, then the Master will in
the first instance make a provisional order
for the payment of costs or any
other amount found to be payable on the adjudication, which is defined as a
provisional costs order.
has been agreed that for the purposes of the 2006 Rules I am to be treated as a
order made by the Court on 7 July 2025, which is the subject of the
application to review, awarded to Clone the sum of $125,000
on account of
278 provides that a party who is dissatisfied with a provisional costs order may
apply for a review of that order by a Master,
which generally should be in the
nature of a reconsideration by the Master who made the order in the first
278(2) provides that the application for review must specify in detail the
applicant’s objection to the decisions made
on the adjudication. This has
been done by Players way of a letter to the Court seeking the review.
278(4) provides for the Court’s powers on review, which include confirming
the provisional costs order and ordering that
it be entered in the Court’s
record as a judgment of the Court, or alternatively varying the provisional
costs order as may
be appropriate in the circumstances and ordering that it be
entered in the Court’s record as a judgment of the Court. The wording
rule 278 suggests that it applies to general as well as special objections to
items - it refers to “the applicant’s
objections to the decisions
made on the adjudication”.
278 contemplates that a judge will conduct a review only after the provisional
costs order has been entered in the court’s
record as a judgment of the
review process was considered by the Full Court (White J, with whom Vanstone and
Anderson JJ agreed) in
In paragraph [21],
White J wrote that it was doubtful that a dispensation of a review by a
Master in the process could be made.
That was because completion of the first
stage review was a necessary step before a dissatisfied party could apply for a
by a judge. Put slightly differently, what the 2006 rules contemplated
was a single judge reviewing the order or decision
made on review
Master. If that review was dispensed with, then there was no order or decision
which may be reviewed by a judge. At paragraph
[27], White J wrote that the
review process was best adapted to a review of decisions concerning the actual
quantification of claimed
costs. It was adapted to the correction of mistakes,
errors or oversights which had occurred in the detailed adjudication process.
during a taxation it is often not the practice of the taxing
to give reasons, on a
review reasons should be given by the taxing officer on all of the grounds of
objection, as there is an appeal
from a judgment or order on the taxation:
Eaves v Eaves and Powell
Re Gibson’s Settlement Trusts,
review process has been continued under the
Uniform Civil Rules
(“UCR”), with some modifications. UCR 195.12 provides that if the
taxing officer makes a provisional order under
UCR 195.10(1), the claimant or
liable party may within 14 days after the date of the order request a review of
the provisional order
by filing and serving an application to the Registrar in
accordance with UCR 13.2(5). If neither party requests a review within
after the date of the order, it becomes a non-provisional order as if it had
been made under UCR 195.10(2). If either party
requests a review within 14 days
after the date of the order, the Registrar will convene a hearing and give
notice of the hearing
to the parties in the prescribed form, and the hearing
will be conducted, if the order was made by a taxing officer other than a
Registrar or Judicial Registrar, (generally) , by the same taxing officer who
made the order. A taxing officer conducting a review
under this rule will
reconsider the provisional order the subject of the review and may exercise any
of the powers identified in
UCR 195.8 and proceed in any manner identified in
UCR 195.9. A taxing officer conducting a review under the rule may confirm or
vary the provisional order, which (as varied, when applicable) then becomes a
non-provisional order as if it had been made under
UCR 195.10(2).
was considered and followed in the context of UCR 195.12
Hall v City of
where Judge Dart at
[18]– [23] observed that a review was an unusual process which could also
lead to a reconsideration of
an issue. The process was long standing. However,
where there were competing contentions of substance put forward by the parties,
the court would usually prefer one to the other. In that situation an appeal
worked better. There was a right of appeal, and in
light of the Court of Appeal
decision in
it was likely that
leave to appeal would be required. Upon considering the review in
City of Burnside
, Judge Dart held at [31] – [43] that the applicants
had not satisfied the Court that it was appropriate to change the outcome
lump sum assessment he had undertaken, and refused the application for a
this does not appear in the 2006 Rules, the court may adopt the practice that
when an application is made to review an adjudication,
the Master may receive
further evidence, state reasons, and allow costs of the objection on order to
properly undertake the review.
a review the Master has power to change any rulings made during the adjudication
as is seen fit until there is a final ruling
on the objections:
Spencer v GMG Legal Services Pty
(as he then was) referring at [8] to the requirement for an application for a
review of the order by a Master, found that
it was only thereafter that the
further right of review by a judge was satisfied.
submit that if they are not to now seek a review of the order I made in
paragraph 208 on 7 July 2025, they will be shut out
from seeking a further
review by a judge. This would appear to be the case, and was the reason for the
present hearing being fixed.
review by a judge of a Master’s order on a taxation is in the nature of a
rehearing on the papers and not a hearing
Orio Holdings v
Vanstone J at
[7], referring to Doyle CJ in
Law Society of South Australia v
in relation to
the forerunner of rule 278, being rule 101.21(2)
Supreme Court Rules 1987
noting that the approach taken in
corresponded to the position
under the Federal Court and High Court Rules:
Cachia v Westpac Financial
Services Ltd
Coal and Shale Employees’ Federation v
Commonwealth
has submitted that on a review by a Master there should be no interference with
findings made unless it was shown that the
adjudicating Master has made a gross
mistake, referring to
Swan v Bank of New
Australian Coal
and Shale Employees’ Federation v
Commonwealth
Kuek v Devflan Pty Ltd
[2009] VSC 91
, overturned on
[2011] VSCA 25
but on other grounds);
Re Melbourne Parking
Station Ltd
Australian Operations Ltd v F F Seeley Nominees Pty Ltd (No
it appears on a reading of the above cases that these were authorities relating
to an appeal procedure or a second review
procedure treated as analogous to an
appeal procedure, and they did not concern a stage one reconsideration procedure
of the kind
dealt with here.
first instance review by a Master does not require an applicant to establish a
gross mistake, rather a mere factual, legal or discretionary
sufficient. The bar is accordingly lower than that required for a second stage
review or an appeal.
is important to note that while an appeal is said to be a rehearing (see rule
286) a review of a provisional costs order under
rule 278 (applicable here) is
not treated as an appellate proceeding and the rule expressly provides that the
review is to be a
reconsideration
(emphasis added) by the Master who made
a reading of the well-known passage of Kitto J from
Australian Coal and
Shale Employees’ Federation v
Commonwealth
from the dictum of Jordan CJ in
Schweppes’ Ltd v
establishes
that among other things, it is necessary to distinguish between a mere question
of quantum (which can be corrected if
the taxing officer has clearly made a
mistake), and issues of principle and other issues going to a proper exercise of
the discretion.
has submitted that a
House v The
error must be
demonstrated. However, as noted above, what is relevant here are the terms of
rule 278(3) providing that the review
is “in the nature of a
reconsideration”. Accordingly, concepts of “interference” and
the need for a “gross
mistake’ are not relevant to the application
of those principles.
Principles relating to interest on
Reasons No 14 at paragraphs [97] to [137] and [138] to [151], I discussed in
detail the principles relating to awards of interest
on costs and the relevant
considerations. Without going into that degree of detail again here, I had
regard to the observations made
concerning the broad
discretion of the Court in awarding interest on costs, and particularly the
utility of assessing interest as
a lump sum. I refer to paragraph [130] of my
reasons, referring to
where the learned
Chief Justice observed that adjusting the date from which interest was to run
would, in many circumstances, be
a rather crude device and that it was
undesirable that the question of interest should give rise to a lengthy argument
selection of a date which would fairly compensate a plaintiff and an
award of a lump sum would inject some flexibility into the process
which would
avoid artificial arguments over the choice of a date.
observations were made in
. Campbell J at
[85] adopted a pragmatic approach to the calculation of interest as
In all the circumstances, the appropriate way of
calculating interest on costs is to ascertain the total of the amounts which the
plaintiffs have paid and are liable to pay for costs and disbursements,
ascertain the total amount of costs and disbursements allowed
on assessment,
calculate the percentage which the total amount allowed on assessment bears to
the total costs and disbursements which
the plaintiffs have paid or are liable
to pay, and allow the plaintiffs interest on that percentage of each payment
which they have
made from time to time on account of costs and
disbursements.
approach was adopted and followed by Gzell J in
Leda v Weerden
carries the authority of the Full Court in
also examined legislation, rules and caselaw, and the principles relating to the
assessment of interest on costs. These cases included
the decision at first
instance in
Malaugh Holdings (No 2) Pty Ltd v Seal & Anor
where I referred to earlier
decisions awarding interest on costs based on the dates of payments by the
claiming party, including
my decisions in
Laurence Tai Pty Ltd v Eric &
Ors v Knox and Hargraves
Ocean Marine-Tech Pty
Ltd & Ors v BMW Australia Ltd
Baronglow Pty Ltd
v Willing and Thomas (Intervenor)
In those cases, factors
considered effecting the award of interest on costs included the extent of the
costs claim, payments made
by the claiming party to its solicitors on account of
costs and the dates thereof, whether or not there had been delays in the
of adjudication of costs, any unreasonable approaches to the
adjudication of costs, the presence or absence of offers as to costs,
issue of whether there had been considerable reductions from the amounts claimed
for costs. Rounded lump sum interest amounts
were awarded in at least two of
these cases.
Reasons No 14, the subject of the present review, at paragraphs [87] to [151]
and further at [152] to [207], I took into account
five factors in fixing a
global sum, the first being that it would be appropriate that Clone be awarded
interest on its costs to
be backdated to the times when it paid monies on
account for solicitors’ fees, counsel fees and disbursements; the second
a fixing of a date until which interest was to be calculated; the third
being whether the conduct of Clone in and about its delay
in the submission of
its costs claim to Players should result in a diminution of its interest
entitlement; the fourth being the relevance
of costs offers, and the importance
of allowing paying parties the opportunity to exercise their rights under the
rules to make costs
offers after being properly informed as to the costs claim
and its quantification, and the fifth (being a supplement to the first)
dates upon which the paying party actually made payments to its solicitors.
difficulties and intricacies of attempting to reconcile these considerations,
even if some were capable of mathematical calculation
(the others not) was such
that in accordance the observations of the Full Court with
, I fixed a global lump
Consideration
First Ground of Review
do not complain as to the exercise of the Court’s discretion or to the
identification of the discretionary considerations,
nor as to the allowance in
Reasons No 14 of an additional period of two months within which for Clone to
consider the offers made
by Players. Further, there is no challenge to the
Court adopting a lump sum approach, nor to the factors relied upon by it in
that approach.
the essence of Players’ complaint is in the consequence which follows,
namely, the application of a determined and
defined period to Clone’s
calculation of interest based on the principal amount set out in its Schedule 1.
The Court in Reasons
No 14 decided that Clone be allowed a reasonable time
to consider and respond to any offer between 20 February 2008 and
30 November
2008, its finding being that two months would be a
reasonable time, which took the date to 20 April 2008 for Clone to respond to
that offer. Schedule 1 comprised two tables, one setting out calculations made
to 30 November 2008, and the other to 20 February
2008. Each table contained a
middle column identifying the principal amounts, with the right-hand column
reflecting the corresponding
interest calculations. The starting point was an
assumed date of payment on the date of the costs order being 18 August
2005. However,
Players’ scenario C showed that using Clone’s
calculations of interest, based upon its asserted actual incurral of
expenditure,
some part of that expenditure must have occurred after
18 August 2005. They contend that if one calculates an additional two
of interest (from 20 February 2008 to 20 April 2008) using
Clone’s figures in Schedule 1, and add that additional two
worth of interest to the $106,276.32 figure in Schedule 1, one
will arrive at a total interest amount of $113,830.32, which is approximately
$11,000 less than the $125,000 lump sum interest awarded. This reduced interest
figure of $113,830.32 is accordingly the precise
and actual amount of interest
which should be awarded to Clone based upon a calculation reflecting the
reasoning, in lieu of the
$125,000 awarded.
in response Clone contends that Players in seeking to impose a rigid
“cutoff date” at which the interest calculation
ceased, have
mischaracterised the purpose and intention of the 7 July 2025 orders, and
further, it says that there was no principle
involved which compelled the
exercise of the discretion in that manner. Accordingly, no error had been
alleged such as to invoke
the power to set aside the 7 July 2025 orders on
note that the discussion of interest cutoff dates had occurred in the context of
competing “end points.” Clone advocated
for a date of
30 November 2008, or alternatively an earlier date of 20 February 2008. In
deciding which of these two was to be preferred,
I adopted a middle ground,
providing to Clone an allowance in favour of its primary position for
considering the offers. The intention
of a two-month period was an indicative
date, rather than one adopted for the purpose of sustaining a rigid mathematical
calculation.
formed the view, which I retain for the purposes of this review, that the final
interest entitlement should be considered holistically.
I refer to paragraph
[192] of Reasons No 14, where I observed that the task of resolving all the
considerations mathematically would,
as Doyle CJ observed in
constitute a
rather crude device, and that it was undesirable that the question of interest
should give rise to lengthy argument about
the selection of an appropriate date.
To select and perform calculations to an arbitrary date, as Players seek on the
review, would
be inconsistent with the manner in which the Court previously
exercised its discretion, namely in fixing a lump sum amount for
having regard to an array of various and competing factors, such as the conduct
of Clone in and about its delay in the submission
of its costs claim to Players,
the relevance of costs offers, and the importance of allowing paying parties the
opportunity to exercise
their rights under the rules to make costs offers after
being properly informed as to the costs claim and its quantification, which
would be impossible to assess with any mathematical precision.
the Full Court emphasised in Osmond v
, and as was observed in both
and Leda v Weerden (No
, the power to award a lump sum enables
flexibility into a process and avoids complex arguments over dates and events,
unnecessary
fragmentation of interest on costs awards, and crude and superficial
arithmetical arguments as to a party’s entitlement to
interest on its
further reason advanced by Clone not to depart from a lump sum assessment of
Clone’s interest entitlement was by having reference
to the affidavit of
its solicitor, Mr Hamilton, FDN 346. This testified that although
substantial fees had been paid after the date
of the costs order, these were
nevertheless trial costs. This was evident from the bills rendered report
annexed to his affidavit.
In relation to solicitors' fees after August 2005,
the application of a single date was something of a midpoint, and this was why
Clone contended that there was no slippage or error as had been described by
Court expressly used a broad axe to adopt a lump sum in order to avoid the style
of arguments now advanced by Players. To repeat
the observations in
, adjusting a date from which interest is to run will in many
circumstances be a rather crude device and it was undesirable that the
of interest should give rise to a lengthy argument about the selection of a date
which would fairly compensate a costs
recipient when an award of a lump sum
would inject some flexibility into the process which would avoid artificial
arguments over
the choice of a date.
accordingly decline on Players’ first ground of review to amend the global
figure fixed for interest on Clone’s costs,
although this will be subject
to the issues raised in the second ground of review.
Ground of Review
ground seeks that in lieu of fixing a single lump sum interest award as made in
the 7 July 2025 orders, the Court should instead
assess individual interest
amounts to reflect the three offers made by Players, namely for
solicitors’ fees, counsel fees,
and disbursements.
submitted that it was notable that the Court explained its adoption of the two
stage process in its Reasons No 13 at paragraph
[63] on the basis that once
it had made its determination on the issues as to how much interest was
allowable up to the date of
the offers, unfettered by any knowledge of what had
been offered, then it could proceed following the disclosure of the offers and
their effect to a consideration or determination as to whether Players had
relevantly beaten any of their offers, or not, as the
case might be, and the
consequences of this. This had come to be reflected in the orders in Reasons No
13 at paragraph [67] order
any event, Players said, the second ground of review simply built upon the
findings in the reasons which proceeded from the basis
of three individual costs
components. Not only was there nothing inconsistent with the authorities relied
on by Clone in invoking
that approach, but that approach was the very premise of
the Court’s decision in its Reasons No 13 at paragraph [3]. Players
contended that there was no basis in law, principle or the rules dealing with
awards of interest on costs to contest the second ground
Ground was also opposed by Clone, which contended that a fresh calculation was
inappropriate and that it did not come within
the ambit of error or oversight.
Rather, it argued, Players was simply having another attempt at the matter. What
had occurred was
that a single calculation was made based upon the collective of
each of solicitors’ fees, counsel fees, and disbursements,
and it was not
contemplated that the Court was required to go through an independent
mathematical exercise of fixing precise numbers
to each of these three
components. Clone submitted that Players were approbating and reprobating, but
Players responded there was
no inconsistency in what they were doing. They were
not seeking to rely on the fact of offers and then saying that the offers were
confidential - this point was at the heart of Reasons No 13, which was the
Court’s acceptance for the proposition that the
offers should not be
disclosed until after the issue of assessing costs had been completed.
Accordingly, there was nothing inconsistent
with the approach, and indeed this
appeared from that decision, relying on the proposition that there were offers
and that three
of them were discretely applicable to three individual costs
components, and relying on the proposition that for the time being the
those offers must remain confidential. Accordingly, there was nothing in
Clone’s point about approbation and reprobation.
my view there is merit in this ground of review. Order 1(a) made in Reasons No
13 provided that the award and assessment of
interest on Clone’s costs
was to be undertaken in two separate hearings, the first being a determination
as to the point in
time when Clone’s entitlement to interest was to run
and after that determination, and based on the Court’s answer, a
calculation made as to Clone’s actual interest on its costs entitlement
calculated on the amounts allowed for solicitor’s fees, counsel fees
and disbursements
, up to and including the date of Players’ offers
dated 20 February 2008 (emphasis added).
very premise for the bifurcation of the interest argument was that there were
three offers, relating to solicitors’ fees,
counsel fees, and
disbursements, which ultimately needed to be considered.
submissions dated 2 May 2025 supporting its application for interest (appearing
in Reasons No 14), Schedule 1, included
tables setting out interest
alternatively claimed to 30 November 2008, and to 20 February 2008,
and in these calculations separate
amounts were assigned to solicitor’s
fees, counsel fees, and disbursements (then totals for these collectively).
in Players’ interest calculations tabled by their Counsel
Mr Whitington at the hearing on 23 May 2025, each of scenarios
separated out the individual components for solicitors’ fees, counsel
fees, and disbursements.
Reasons No 13 published on 11 April 2025, when a bifurcated hearing on interest
was ordered, reference was made in paragraph [3]
to the service by Players of
three offers for costs, including interest, with interest to be calculated based
on the amounts allowed
for solicitors’ fees, counsel fees, and
disbursements, up to the date of the offers.
paragraph [63] of those reasons, it was observed that once the Court had made a
determination of the issues as to how much interest
was allowable, then the
second phase of the two stage submissions could be ventilated, considering
whether Players had beaten any
of their offers, or not, as the case may be.
There followed at the foot of these reasons the orders summarised above.
Reasons No 14, the subject of the present review, stage one of the bifurcated
hearing was finalised, but instead of separating
the global lump sum award into
the three separate components contemplated when the process was fixed, they were
fixed in the single
sum of $125,000.
the consideration of Player’s three offers of costs and interest will
necessarily involve having to include interest in
each component, in order to
enable a comparison of each offer and whether it was “beaten” or
not, it will be necessary
that in each case the interest component will need to
be crystalised at this stage. Accordingly, it is appropriate to reconsider
orders made in Reasons No 14, and to vary them in the manner now sought by
Players, namely to separate the total interest award
into three individual costs
components for solicitors’ fees, counsel fees, and disbursements.
consequence, there must be a decision as to the form in which the order should
be amended on the review.
my view, this can be undertaken quite simply. The confirmed sum of $125,000 to
be awarded for interest should be apportioned to
each of the three components of
Clone’s awarded costs in the same proportions as they bear to each other.
The amounts awarded
for solicitors’ fees, counsel fees and disbursements
have now been determined on the taxation. Solicitors’ fees have
at $207,826.77, counsel fees at $324,166.53, and disbursements at $98,431.81,
totalling $630,424.81. A global figure of
$125,000 for interest has been
assessed. This should now be reflected not as a global sum, but instead
subdivided in three separate
orders, one for each of the components. The totals
for each of the three orders can be calculated by identifying the percentage
the interest allowance, namely $125,000, to the total costs awarded to Clone
namely $630,424.81 and applying this ratio to each
of the three components of
the latter, the solicitors’ fees, counsel fees, and disbursements, so that
each of these three components
contains both costs and interest allowances.
will enable the Court to decide whether, or not, Players’ offers have
“beaten” the amounts ultimately allowed
will accordingly direct the parties to confer to endeavour to agree the correct
figures for each component in accordance with the
above analysis, and fix a
further hearing date to either give directions or alternatively then hear
submissions relating to the stage
two process. I will also hear from the parties
in relation to the costs of the review.
the first ground of review sought by Players, the Court declines to increase the
total interest awarded in its orders contained
in Reasons No 14.
Court upholds the second ground of review and in lieu of a total award of
$125,000 for interest it is instead ordered that a revised
/specific interest
calculation be performed in respect of each of the three individual costs
components set out in Clone’s
Schedule 1 being solicitors’ fees,
counsel fees and disbursements.
calculations are to be made by identifying a percentage of the interest
allowance namely $125,000 to the total costs awarded
to Clone namely
$630,424.81, and then applying this to each of the three components being
solicitors’ fees, counsel fees, and
disbursements.
parties are directed to confer in an endeavour to agree the correct figures for
each component. If they cannot agree, the Court
will determine the amounts
following the receipt of submissions.
orders will then be made on this issue reflecting the appropriate amounts to be
awarded, and these orders will become non provisional
and constitute a judgment
of the Court.
further hearing date is to be fixed for either directions and orders, or to hear
submissions relating to the stage two process,
and as to the costs of the
parties are to contact Chambers to arrange a mutually convenient date for that
[2025] SASC 49.
[2025] SASC 109.
[2008] SASC 218
[1890] SALawRp 3
(1890) 24 SALR 20.
[1953] HCA 25
(1953) 94 CLR 621
[1928] ArgusLawRp 100
[1929] VLR 5
(1929) 34 ALR
(1988) 49 SASR 75.
[1908] HCA 71
(1908) 7 CLR 385
[1931] HCA 26
(1931) 47 CLR 142
(1993) 117 ACTR 1.
[2012] VSC 327
[1953] HCA 25
(1953) 94 CLR 621.
[1934] NSWStRp 17
(1934) 34 SR (NSW) 178
(1934) 51 WN (NSW) 71.
(1918) P 236
[1910] UKLawRpPro 14
(1910) P 243
(1936) 55 CLR 499.
[1999] SASC 486
(1999) 75 SASR 392.
[1999] SASC 486
(1999) 75 SASR 392.
[2006] NSWSC 126.
[2006] NSWSC 220.
[2008] SASC 231.
Catto & Ors v
Hampton Australia Ltd (In Liq) & Ors
[2008] SASC 231
[2008] SASC 231.
For the purposes of this
judgment, “Taxing Officer” is to be understood as referring to a
[1956] P 154.
[1981] 1 All ER 233
[1995] FCA 813.
[2023] SASC 173.
[2023] SASCA 97.
[1905] ArgusLawRpCN 47
(1905) 26 ALT 202
11 ALR (CN) 38.
[2013] SASC 19.
[2008] SASC 218.
(1998) 198 LSJS 434.
[2003] FCA 817.
[1953] HCA 25
(1953) 94 CLR 621.
[1890] SALawRp 3
[1890] 24 SALR 20.
[1953] HCA 25
(1953) 94 CLR 621
[1928] ArgusLawRp 100
[1929] VLR 5
(1929) 34 ALR
(1988) 49 SASR 75.
[1953] HCA 25
(1953) 94 CLR 621
[1934] NSWStRp 17
(1934) 34 SR (NSW) 178
(1934) 51 WN (NSW) 71.
(1936) 55 CLR 499.
[1999] SASC 486
(1999) 75 SASR 392.
[1999] SASC 486
(1999) 75 SASR 392
(2006) NSWSC 126.
[2006] NSWSC 220
[1999] SASC 486
(1999) 75 SASR 392.
Actions 1453 of 2002
and1388 of 2003, reasons published 19 August 2009 (unreported).
Action 614 of 1993, reasons
published 19 January 2000 (unreported).
Action 4017 of 1991,
reasons published 14 March 2001 (unreported).
Action No 107 of 1995,
reasons published 2 October 2008 (unreported).
[1999] SASC 486
(1999) 75 SASR 392.
[1999] SASC 486
(1999) 75 SASR 392.
[1999] SASC 486
(1999) 75 SASR 392.
[2006] NSWSC 126.
[2006] NSWSC 220.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.08 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter