URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCFC/2024/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:07:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
LEGAL PROFESSION CONDUCT COMMISSIONER v RADIN [2024] SASCFC 1 (25 March 2024)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Full Court)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
LEGAL PROFESSION CONDUCT COMMISSIONER v RADIN
[2024] SASCFC 1
Judgment of The Full Court
(The Honourable President Livesey, the Honourable Justice Bleby
and the Honourable Justice S David)
25 March 2024
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES - LAWYERS - COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE -
PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT AND UNSATISFACTORY PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT
In January 2023 the Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal found the
respondent practitioner guilty of 11 counts of professional
misconduct (or
unprofessional conduct where the conduct occurred before 1 July 2014) in
circumstances where the practitioner was,
at various times, operating under
financial pressure.
In July 2023 the Tribunal found that the powers available to it pursuant to
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
(SA) did not provide appropriate or
adequate penalties and, pursuant to that Act, recommended that disciplinary
proceedings be commenced
in the Supreme Court.
The practitioner’s misconduct concerned three separate actions. The
first concerned the practitioner’s failure to pay
the invoices of six
barristers during 2016 and 2017. In the case of three barristers the
practitioner misappropriated trust monies
which were intended to meet their
The second action concerned the practitioner’s conduct in 2011
concerning the trust monies of a client who had instructed the
practitioner’s business partner at a time when they practised together,
and false and misleading statements made to the Law
Society about whether monies
had been repaid into trust. The third action concerned the practitioner’s
failure to meet his
taxation and superannuation obligations for a period ending
in 2017, together with a false statement he made about those liabilities
Law Society.
HELD (the Court) striking the practitioner’s name from the roll of
practitioners:
the misconduct is viewed as a whole, it represents such a serious departure from
the standards reasonably to be expected from
members of the legal profession
over such a long period that the Court cannot be confident that the practitioner
can ever fulfil
the essential obligations associated with legal practice.
is necessary to protect the public from legal practitioners who lack personal
integrity and who are indifferent to rudimentary
professional standards.
practitioners must adhere to the high standards expected of them notwithstanding
their own difficulties. A practitioner’s
adherence to the requirements of
ethical conduct cannot be made to depend upon whether the practitioner is
personally in financial
difficulty or under other kinds of personal stress.
A New Tax System (Pay As You Go) Act 1999
Tax System (Goods and Services Tax Transition) Act 1999
Inheritance (Family Provision) Act 1972
Legal Practitioners Act
Superannuation Guarantee (Administration)
Taxation Administration Act 1953
(Cth), referred
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
(1938) 60 CLR 338;
Carver v NSW Legal
Profession Disciplinary Tribunal
(1991) 7 LPDR 8;
Council of the Law
Society of New South Wales v Jafari
[2020] NSWCA 53
Council of the Law
Society New South Wales v Rogers
[2021] NSWCATOD 124
Council of the Law
Society of New South Wales v Wilson
[2015] NSWCATOD 83
Council of the
Law Society of New South Wales v Xenos
[2012] NSWADT 283
[2020] SASC 28
Kennedy v Broun
[1863] EngR 136
(1863) 13 CBNS 677
[1863] EngR 136
Law Society of New South Wales v Davidson
[2007] NSWADT 264
Society of New South Wales v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
Law Society of
New South Wales v Graham
[2007] NSWADT 67
Law Society New South Wales v
[2010] NSWADT 171
Law Society of New South Wales v McCarthy
[2002] NSWADT 58
Law Society of New South Wales v McCarthy
[2003] NSWADT
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v Kerin
[2006] SASC 393
Profession Conduct Commissioner v Kaminski
[2021] SASCFC 39
Profession Conduct Commissioner v Kassapis
[2015] SASCFC 37
Profession Conduct Commissioner v Moore
[2022] SASCFC 2
Practitioners Conduct Board v Clisby
[2012] SASCFC 43
Practitioners Conduct Board v Trueman
[2003] SASC 58
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Wharff
[2012] SASCFC 116
Law Society of South Australia
[1999] SASC 83
Mostyn v Mostyn
[1870] UKLawRpCh 40
(1870) 5 Ch App 457
Legal Practitioners Act
[1974] 1 NSWLR 19
Re Sharp; Ex Parte
[1998] FCA 6
(1998) 80 FCR 536
Re Robb & Anor
(1996) 134 FLR 294
Rhodes v Fielder, Jones and Harrison
[1919] All ER 846
Swinfin v Lord
[1860] EngR 838
(1860) 5 H&N 890
157 ER 1436
Thornhill v Evans
[1742] EngR 75
; (1742) 2 Atk 332;
Victorian Legal Services Commissioner v
[2021] VCAT 1246
, considered.
LEGAL PROFESSION CONDUCT COMMISSIONER v
[2024] SASCFC 1
Full Court - Civil: Livesey P, Bleby and David JJA
Introduction
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner (the
Commissioner
) seeks orders
name of the respondent, Mr Atanas Michael Radin (the
practitioner)
struck off the roll of legal practitioners; and
practitioner pay the Commissioner’s costs.
Commissioner’s application is made pursuant to various provisions of the
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
(SA) (as amended) (the
inherent jurisdiction of this
5 January 2023, the Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal
) found the practitioner guilty of 11 counts of
unprofessional conduct (conduct before
1 July 2014) and professional misconduct (conduct after 1 July 2014).
In circumstances where
the practitioner was, at various times, operating under
financial pressure of varying degrees, the Tribunal
findings of the Tribunal, considered overall with respect to all Actions,
chronicle a pattern of behaviours by the practitioner
over a significant period
of time where he has fallen well short of the standard expected of legal
practitioners. The practitioner’s
conduct constituted a substantial and
consistent failure to reach or maintain a reasonable standard of competency and
The pattern of behaviours included making false representations, misleading
clients and the Law Society, certifying a false document,
not maintaining
accurate Trust Account Records, failing to pay counsel fees and failing to pay
taxes and the superannuation entitlements
of his staff.
Tribunal found that the powers available to it pursuant to s 82(6) of the
Act did not provide appropriate or adequate penalties
and, pursuant to
s 82(6)(a)(v) of the Act, recommended that disciplinary proceedings be
commenced in the Supreme Court.
the question of costs of the hearing before the Tribunal, the Tribunal
ultimately determined to make a lump sum order in the amount
of $48,000 pursuant
to s 85(1) of the Act.
Commissioner has invited this Court to adopt and act on the findings of the
Tribunal without further enquiry pursuant to s 89(5)
of the Act. We are
satisfied that course is appropriate. Those findings are set out in the reasons
for decision of the Tribunal delivered
on 5 January 2023, as well as in the
reasons for determination on penalty and costs delivered on
18 July 2023.
Acknowledging
that the practitioner does not presently hold a practising certificate, the
Commissioner maintains that this Court
should find that he is not a fit and
proper person to practice the profession of the law.
the hearing on 21 March 2024, the Court ordered that the practitioner’s
name should be struck from the roll of practitioners
and that he must pay costs.
These are the reasons for the making of those orders.
practitioner’s background
practitioner was admitted to practice in South Australia on 20 December 1982. In
1989 he was appointed an Executive Senior Member
of the Immigration Review
Tribunal through which he held primary responsibility for the South Australian
and Northern Territory
The practitioner
held this position until 1999.
practitioner subsequently commenced employment as a consultant in the legal
practice Steven M Clark Pty Ltd.
2002, the practitioner was offered and accepted equity in the practice, and it
was known as Clark Radin Lawyers until its dissolution
this period the practitioner engaged in “essentially full-time tribunal
On 14 June 2011, the
practitioner and Mr Clark dissolved their practice and established two new
The practitioner became
the director and sole principal of Radin Legal until 19 September 2017, when the
practice companies were
wound up by order of the Federal
findings made by the Tribunal
findings made by the Tribunal were made in actions numbered 5 of 2020, 6 of 2020
and 2 of 2021.
Action No. 5 of 2020
first action concerned the practitioner’s failure to pay the invoices of
six barristers during 2016 and 2017. Almost all
of the relevant facts were
admitted by the practitioner. One of the counts was found not
the period 2016 to 2017, the practitioner was the sole director and principal of
Radin Legal Pty Ltd trading as “Radin
Legal” from offices in Gawler.
The practitioner’s practice involved briefing counsel from time to time to
represent clients
in various litigated disputes.
first count concerned the practitioner’s failure to pay the counsel fees
of Ms Bergin in the sum of $2,112 including GST
for representing a client
on an application for a freezing order. The practitioner briefed Ms Bergin on
8 August 2017 and, on the
same day, she sent a costs agreement. The
relevant paragraphs in that agreement stated:
I confirm that you as
solicitor have engaged me as a barrister only to act for you in this matter in
which you act for [the client].
I confirm that you are retaining me in your own right only and not as agent
for the lay client.
Subject to any other agreement, my fees are payable 14 days after the issue
of an invoice.
the time of this retainer, the practitioner told Ms Bergin that the property the
subject of the application for a freezing order
would be sold and her fees would
be paid from the proceeds of sale.
Bergin issued invoices following the hearing before Judge Dart in the Supreme
Court on 9 August 2017 and the settlement of the
substantive litigation between
parties on 4 September 2017. The settlement of the property occurred on
15 September 2017.
Separately,
the practitioner advised his client that he would charge her a maximum of
$12,500 from which he would “take care
of” Ms Bergin’s fees.
With the client’s written authority, the sum of $12,500 was paid into the
practitioner’s
office account.
of that sum was appropriated by the practitioner for his own fees.
Ms Bergin has never received any payment and her fees remain
outstanding.
Tribunal rejected the practitioner’s explanations for his failure to pay
Ms Bergin. These comprised a combination of an
asserted misunderstanding
that the client would pay Ms Bergin and that, but for his firm being placed
into external administration,
he may have paid Ms Bergin within a reasonable
Tribunal found that the practitioner was well aware of his firm’s
financial difficulties during September 2017 and was
attempting to “juggle
funds so to keep the firm afloat”. The practitioner was, in those
circumstances, prepared to use
the settlement monies to pay his own accounts and
prefer his own interests over those of
2 concerned the failure to pay Mr Matthew Murphy the sum of $14,520 after the
practitioner retained him to represent a client
developer in connection with a
three‑day hearing before the Environment, Resources and Development Court.
Mr Murphy’s
written retainer dated 13 April 2016 sent to the practitioner
included the following terms:
Your Firm is responsible for the
payment of my fees, disbursements and GST.
You acknowledge that failure to pay my fees, in the absence of a genuine
dispute, is unethical.
In the event of a dispute as to my fees you will provide to me written
particulars of the grounds on which you dispute my fees within
14 days of the
date of the invoice.
Murphy’s retainer stipulated that payment was to be made regardless of the
outcome of the case and, should payment not be
made within 60 days, he was at
liberty to recover fees from the practitioner’s firm “as a debt due
under this agreement.”
a request made by the practitioner’s firm on 16 December 2016, Mr Murphy
estimated his fees at $14,520. The practitioner
warned Mr Murphy not to start
trial preparation until money was received into trust from the client to cover
his fees. The practitioner
asked his client to meet outstanding accounts and to
put $10,000 into trust on account of Mr Murphy’s fees so as to secure
booking for the trial commencing in March 2017. Why the practitioner did not
request that the amount to be paid into trust match
counsel’s estimate of
$14,520 does not appear to be explained.
February 2017, the practitioner’s trust account records disclosed a
deposit by the client of $10,000. Soon after that, Mr
Murphy was advised that
the client had paid $10,000 into trust and he could commence preparation for
trial. That work commenced and
included a meeting with the client on the
development site at Wallaroo. Following the trial, Mr Murphy issued an account
for $14,520
which he reduced so as to ensure that it remained within his
practitioner appropriated all of the sum of $10,000 and did not ever make
payment of any amount owing to Mr Murphy.
May 2017, Mr Murphy was advised by a solicitor in the practitioner’s firm
that there was a dispute about the practitioner’s
bill, including Mr
Murphy’s bill. If there had been a dispute relating to his account, Mr
Murphy was never told the particulars
of that dispute, contrary to the terms of
his retainer.
client asserted “strongly” that the sum of $10,000 paid into trust
was on account of the fees of counsel and there
was never any dispute about
counsel’s fees. The client was “shocked” to receive another
request for payment of
Mr Murphy’s fees. The client later complained
to the Commissioner that the practitioner had been overcharging and had misused
the funds deposited specifically for counsel.
Tribunal found that there was never any genuine dispute about counsel’s
There was only ever a
dispute about the practitioner’s fees and this “should not have
impacted upon counsel”.
Tribunal rejected the practitioner’s explanations for what it described as
a “blatant misappropriation of trust
In particular, the
Tribunal found that the practitioner’s evidence was self-serving and
represented “an attempt to excuse
the inexcusable, namely preferring his
own interests to those of Mr Murphy and in doing so misappropriating trust
3 concerns the practitioner’s failure to pay the fees of
Mr Paul Bullock in the amounts of $11,687.50 on 15 September
and $545.60 on 13 October 2017.
practitioner retained Mr Bullock to represent a client in the defence of a claim
made under the
Inheritance (Family Provision) Act
(SA) on the
basis that fees would be paid out of estate funds which were expected to be paid
into the practitioner’s trust
account. Following a long mediation, a
settlement was reached and, pursuant to the settlement, sums exceeding $200,000
into the practitioner’s trust account between December 2016 and
January 2017.
December 2016, the practitioner took $45,000 from the monies in trust for his
own fees. It transpired that the practitioner paid
the balance of the amounts
held in trust to his client to assist her to purchase a house. At no stage did
he make any payment to
Mr Bullock.
Unexpectedly,
an issue concerning estate tax liability arose for which further advice was
given by Mr Bullock and an invoice was
rendered for that advice on 13
October 2017.
the advice was given, the practitioner’s practice company, Radin Legal Pty
Ltd, and service trust company, Radtra Pty
Ltd, were both ordered to be wound up
by the Federal Court on 19 September 2017.
Bullock later made a claim on the fidelity fund for which he accepted a payment
of $11,121 exclusive of GST on account of the
practitioner’s fiduciary or
professional default in failing to make payment of counsel fees.
Tribunal found that there was never any express instruction from the client to
refuse to pay Mr Bullock and, even if that had
occurred, it remained the
practitioner’s professional obligation to ensure payment of Mr
Bullock’s fees, if necessary,
from his own funds including from the sum of
$45,000 which had been transferred to the firm’s office account.
Tribunal found that the practitioner ultimately preferred his own interests to
those of Mr Bullock, as had been the case with
Mr Murphy and Ms
5 concerned the admitted failure by the practitioner to pay the counsel fees of
Ms Di Girolamo in the sum of $880 incurred
in connection with a
dispute between the practitioner’s company, Radtra Pty Ltd, and the
Australian Taxation Office.
6 concerned the failure to pay the counsel fees of Mr Chad Jacobi incurred in
connection with the defence of a claim brought
against the practitioner
personally by a consultant solicitor for the practitioner’s failure to pay
consulting fees. Mr Jacobi
rendered an account in the sum of $6,666 on 7 August
2016. In this case, however, the practitioner made a part payment of $3,000
the failure to pay the balance he attributed to his financial difficulties.
The failure to pay counsel fees
Historically,
the fees of counsel could not be made the subject of a legal debt and could not
be recovered in a court. They were
. That is, barristers
were paid because the instructing solicitor was personally “liable”
as a matter of honour and
The earliest case on
this approach may be
Thornhill v
where the Court
Can it be thought that this court will suffer a gentleman of
the bar to maintain an action for fees, which is
quiddam honorarium
if he happens to be a mortgagee, to insist upon more than the legal interest,
under pretence of gratuity or fees for business
formerly done in the way of a
Swinfin v Lord Chelmsford
, Pollock CB
emphasised that the relationship between barrister and client was not
contractual in
of opinion that an advocate at the English Bar, accepting a brief in the usual
way, undertakes a duty, but does not enter
into any contract or promise,
express, or implied. Cases may, indeed, occur, where, on an express promise (if
he made one), he would
be liable in assumpsit; but we think a barrister is to be
considered, not as making a contract with his client, but as taking upon
an office or duty, in the proper discharge of which not merely the client but
the Court in which the duty is to be performed,
and the public at large, have an
Kennedy v Broun
We consider
that a promise by a client to pay money to a counsel for his advocacy, whether
made before, or during, or after the litigation,
has no binding effect; and,
furthermore, that the relation of counsel and client renders the parties
mutually incapable of making
any contract of hiring and service concerning
advocacy in litigation.
arrangements extended to all work done by a barrister in the capacity of a
Barristers were paid
because the instructing solicitor was personally liable, whether or not the
barrister’s fee was received
the law relating to the solicitor’s obligation to meet the fees of counsel
developed at a time when there was no enforceable
contract between solicitors or
clients and counsel and, in consequence, payment was enforced as a matter of
honour, the ethical obligation
in solicitors has not altered even though counsel
may now sue an instructor for breach of the retainer.
South Australia, the Act has been amended to make it clear that the obligation
to meet counsel fees can now be enforced as a
Schedule 3 to the Act,
which operates by virtue of s 41 of the Act, came into effect on 1 July 2014.
Clause 21 of Part 4 of Schedule 3 provides that
legal costs, including barrister’s fees, are recoverable as a debt from a
practice” pursuant to a costs agreement made with a barrister
in the particular circumstances and manner
breach of the obligation in a solicitor to pay counsel has long been regarded as
comprising what is now described as professional
misconduct.
As Vice President
Judge Hampel explained in
Victorian Legal Services Commissioner
are entitled to expect, when retained by a solicitor, that they can trust they
will be paid for the services they are retained
to provide, and paid in
accordance with the terms of the retainer, not at the whim of the solicitor.
They should be able to trust
that a solicitor will use the moneys received from
the client for their fees to pay them, not to pay other expenses, for their own
failure by a solicitor to pay counsel in full and on time in accordance with a
retainer agreed between the solicitor and counsel,
absent a genuine dispute or a
negotiated payment plan, represents professional misconduct under s 69 of
the Act. In particular, and
as has been said many times, any failure by a
solicitor to pay counsel merely because the client has not paid the solicitor
to professional misconduct. It has also consistently been held that a
solicitor commits professional misconduct by paying his or
her own fees in lieu
of counsel’s fees.
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v Wharff
, the Full Court struck off a
, for failing to pay a barrister’s fees. The
Court said:
solicitor who engages a barrister or solicitor agent undertakes a personal
liability, either in honour or in contract as the case
may be, to pay the
barrister’s or agent’s fees, unless otherwise
Where a legal
practitioner undertakes such a personal liability, it is unethical to ignore his
or her obligation, and hence a wilful
or persistent refusal or failure to pay
fees can amount to unprofessional
failure to pay counsel when a client has provided funds for that explicit
purpose is particularly egregious. In
Re Robb & Anor
, the Full Court
of the Supreme Court of the Australian Capital Territory
The point is
that the delay in paying counsel to be attributed to the solicitors in the
present case stems from their assumption that
moneys in their office account,
received on trust for the client and transferred to the office account for the
very purpose of paying
counsel, were not affected by their fiduciary duties to
the client and were their moneys to pay counsel fees when they chose and
any delay was simply a matter between counsel and themselves.
The assumption was totally unjustified. On the contrary, every day of delay
in paying counsel from the time of transferring the moneys
from the trust
account to the office account, was a day in which the solicitors were in breach
of their fiduciary duty to the client.
proper conclusion where a client has provided funds on account of
counsel’s retainer, and the solicitor has paid those
funds into the firm
account or to others and not counsel, is that the solicitor has misappropriated
trust funds. Misconduct of that
kind represents a very serious failure to
adhere to the high standards expected of legal practitioners.
it may be accepted that a solicitor’s straitened financial circumstances
may explain a failure to pay counsel, it does
not excuse the professional
misconduct though it may be relevant to the appropriate disciplinary sanction.
The same may be said of
a solicitor’s delayed payment or part payment
after the fees of counsel have fallen due, absent a genuine dispute or a
payment plan.
this case, the misconduct of the practitioner in connection with the retainers
with Ms Bergin, Mr Murphy and Mr Bullock is particularly
egregious. The
misappropriation of trust funds which were agreed to be the source for the
payment of counsel is inexcusable. Whilst,
standing alone, the
practitioner’s conduct concerning Ms Di Girolamo and Mr Jacobi might
be regarded as less serious, these
failings were not isolated. Far from
explaining his financial circumstances with candour to counsel in connection
with these last
two matters, the practitioner appears to have cynically
exploited the willingness of counsel to assist him with his own difficulties.
it is when a legal practitioner is experiencing personal difficulties, including
financial difficulties, that the need to
adhere to the high ethical standards
expected of professional lawyers becomes particularly acute.
the practitioner’s conduct occurred some years ago, there is no evidence
before this Court to suggest that there has
been any attempt to make reparation
or to otherwise explain his misconduct in a satisfactory manner.
in all, taken as a whole, the practitioner’s conduct demonstrates a
fundamental inability to adhere to the high standards
expected of legal
practitioners when dealing with counsel and when entrusted with client funds.
Though, in a sense, the sums involved
are not particularly large, that naturally
cuts both ways. This course of conduct, of itself, suggests that it would be
appropriate
to proceed to strike-off.
Action No. 6 of
action concerns the practitioner’s conduct concerning the affairs of a
client who had instructed Mr Steven Clarke at a
time where he and the
practitioner practised together through an incorporated legal practice called
Juris Prudence II Pty Ltd, which
operated the Clark Radin Lawyers Trust
The client had
instructed Mr Clarke concerning a claim for damages for personal injury
sustained in a motor accident as well as in
connection with a dispute over a
deceased estate.
Clark settled the motor accident claim in early 2011 for $48,000 inclusive
of interest, costs and disbursements. A little later
in 2011, Mr Clark
settled the estate matter. The proceeds of settlement for the motor accident
claim were received on 24 March 2011.
Those proceeds were banked into
trust and immediately credited to the firm’s ledger concerning the motor
accident matter. The
following day Mr Clark appropriated the sum of
$18,465.06 on account of his costs for the motor accident claim. A few days
that, Mr Clark appropriated the further sum of $25,000 for costs incurred
in connection with the estate matter, paying them from
trust into the
firm’s account without the explicit authority of the client to do so.
client made a complaint to the Law Society. After an inspection of the
firm’s trust account, on 8 August 2011 the Law Society
directed Mr Clark
and the practitioner to restore the $25,000 taken from trust and allocate it to
the client’s motor accident
trust ledger. The Law Society specified that
this should be done by 19 August 2011, at the latest. Despite these
directions, Mr Clark
and the practitioner did not repay any money until
31 August 2011 and, even then, only an amount of $18,488 was repaid.
are three counts. The first count concerns a letter dated 18 August 2011
signed and sent by the practitioner to the Professional
Standards section of the
Law Society which was false and misleading as to whether repayment had been
made. As for count 2, it was
essentially alleged that this conduct was
misleading rather than false and misleading. The findings made about these
matters were
to the following effect.
after the client complained to the Law Society, Clark Radin Lawyers ceased
operations on 10 June 2011. Mr Clark and the practitioner
opened separate
practices from the same offices trading as “Clark Lawyers” and
“Radin Legal”, respectively.
inspection of Clark Radin Lawyers’ trust account records was conducted by
Law Society staff on 7 and 28 July 2011. During
that month, Mr Clark instructed
the practitioner to represent him when dealing with the client and the
Law Society on these issues.
The practitioner agreed to do so.
8 August 2011, the Director of Professional Standards at the Law Society
wrote to Mr Clark and the practitioner directing that
the sum of $25,000 be
reinstated to the client’s motor accident trust account ledger “as a
matter of urgency and in any
event by 19 August 2011 at the latest”. It
was in response to this letter that the practitioner wrote to the Director,
the letter on his own account as well as on behalf of Mr Clark.
Relevantly, the letter included the following:
We attach herewith
documentary evidence of a reinstatement made into the MVA account of [the
client] as required by you ... we regret
to advise that an amount of only
$23,315.14 has been reinstated to date.
“documentary evidence” referred to in the practitioner’s
letter comprised a photocopy of the trust account
ledger to which had been added
handwriting as follows:
Credit Balance
19/8/2011 Reinstatement of Trust Funds from [the practitioner and Mr Clark]
as per Law Society letter dated 8/8/2011
this entry appeared the sum of $23,315.14 together with another entry suggesting
that $20,000 had been repaid.
bank statements of the Clark Radin Trust Account disclosed that no funds had
been transferred by 18 August 2011.
no stage did the practitioner ever correct the false statement conveyed by his
letter dated 18 August 2011.
for count 3, soon after the letter dated 18 August 2011, a Trust Account
Regulatory Officer from the Law Society spoke with the
practitioner on 29 August
2011. In the course of that conversation the practitioner misled the trust
account officer by making a
false statement.
mentioned, the trust account ledger suggested that a sum of $20,000 had already
been returned. This entry was the subject of enquiry.
The trust account officer
rang the practitioner on the morning of 29 August 2011. The
practitioner returned the call late that day.
The officer discussed the urgent
need to reinstate the monies owing to the client’s trust account ledger.
She asked the practitioner
whether he had deposited funds or whether the deposit
disclosed in the letter dated 18 August 2011 was merely a credit entry.
practitioner told the trust account officer that he had written to the client on
18 August 2011 to advise of the direction from
the Law Society when, in
fact, the letter told the client that a sum of $23,315.14 had been reinstated to
the trust account and was
“now payable ... within 5 working days”.
practitioner told the officer that the funds had actually been repaid. The
officer’s contemporaneous note of the conversation
was to the following
I asked whether the $20,000 had been actually deposited
into trust account, not just credited to [the client’s] ledger account,
and I asked him to provide me with a copy of the bank statement confirming the
same. He confirmed that the funds had been deposited
into the trust account
statement was false.
Tribunal observed that the practitioner had never made any written response to
these allegations. Nonetheless, during the hearing
he agreed with what was
alleged but maintained that it was the responsibility of Mr Clark to
address the client’s trust monies.
The practitioner told the Tribunal that
he was not suggesting that Mr Clark had done anything wrong because advice
had been received
permitting trust transfers to be made without a specific
authority. A general form of authority was sufficient.
addition, the practitioner gave evidence by which he attempted to explain why
only $18,488 had been reinstated to the client’s
trust account for
the estate matter by 1 September 2011. He referred to difficulties with the
National Australia Bank which was exerting
pressure because of the poor
financial performance of the practice. The practitioner also referred to the
Accounts Manager leaving
and his best friend and financial adviser coming in to
assist as the new Accounts Manager. Before the death of his best friend and
financial adviser, the practitioner said that the new Accounts Manager made a
number of mistakes including mismanaging the process
of reimbursement.
this evidence, under questioning from the Tribunal, the practitioner conceded
that there was never the money available for
the new Accounts Manager to satisfy
any instruction he may have given to transfer $25,000. The Tribunal regarded the
practitioner’s
evidence as revealing a lack of insight into his conduct
and an incapacity to acknowledge responsibility for his own actions.
Tribunal recorded that the practitioner’s evidence then changed. The
practitioner suggested that the new Accounts Manager
had failed to communicate
that there were insufficient funds to permit a transfer of $25,000. Nonetheless,
here again the practitioner
conceded that it was his obligation to check whether
monies were available before any transfer was made. As the Tribunal
the practitioner made
the reluctant concession that the failure was his because he did not check what
was happening to see that the
direction of the Law Society had been complied
with. He accepted that his assertions to the Law Society and to the client were
misleading and untrue” but that there was “no
deliberateness nor ill
far as the discussion with the trust account officer was concerned, again the
practitioner conceded that he had misled but that
this was not deliberate. The
Tribunal found that the “inescapable conclusion” was that the
practitioner spoke without
checking and in “complete disregard” for
the veracity of what he was
Tribunal was satisfied that the practitioner knew that no money had been
reinstated by the time he wrote the letter to the Law
18 August 2011. It regarded it as “particularly
concerning” that the practitioner attempted to distance himself
transaction by ascribing responsibility to his co-director, Mr Clark, as
well as to the new Accounts Manager, now
The Tribunal made
these findings on the balance of probabilities bearing in mind the seriousness
of the allegations made.
Notwithstanding
its finding that the practitioner knew that money had not been reinstated, the
Tribunal appears to have ultimately
accepted that the practitioner was
“recklessly
Tribunal found, nonetheless amounted to “wilful
misconduct”.
Tribunal found that as a principal and director of a small incorporated legal
practice, on notice that there may be a problem
with the trust account, the
practitioner had a duty to actively examine the account and supervise the
conduct of his fellow principal
and new Accounts Manager. The Tribunal concluded
that the practitioner’s conduct in connection with the letter dated
2011 amounted to unprofessional conduct because it involved
a substantial failure to meet the standard of conduct observed by competent
legal practitioners of good
for the conversation with the Law Society’s trust account officer, the
Tribunal likewise concluded that his misleading conduct
amounted to
unprofessional conduct, compounded by the earlier conduct in sending the
correspondence a few days before.
may be obvious, these findings were expressed in terms which were consistent
with the form of the Act at the time of the conduct.
No. 2 of 2021
action concerned the practitioner’s failure to meet his taxation and
superannuation obligations.
part of the case concerned the practitioner’s practice on his own account
as the sole director and principal of Radin
Legal Pty Ltd (
Radin Legal
from offices in Gawler. There the practitioner employed solicitors and
administrative staff. The solicitors were employed by Radin
Legal Pty Ltd,
whereas the administrative staff were employed by Radtra Pty Ltd, the trustee of
a service trust engaged pursuant
to a service agreement between Radin Legal Pty
Ltd and Radtra Pty Ltd dated 1 July 2011.
the practitioner’s wife was the sole director of Radtra Pty Ltd, the
practitioner, as shadow director, operated that
earlier mentioned, these practice companies were placed in liquidation by order
of the Federal Court on 19 September 2017, whereupon
Mr Tim Mableson and Mr
Martin Lewis, formerly of Ferrier Hodgson but later of KPMG, were appointed
joint liquidators.
1 concerns the practitioner’s failure to fulfil his financial and
professional obligations by failing to ensure that
both companies paid the
amounts required under the
Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act
in respect of its employees in the order of $50,000.
Australian Taxation Office filed a proof of debt
the liquidation of Radin Legal Pty Ltd for $16,743.01 concerning its employees
for unpaid Superannuation Guarantee Charge.
Australian Taxation Office filed a proof of debt in the liquidation of Radtra
Pty Ltd for $33,027.83 concerning its employees
for unpaid Superannuation
Guarantee Charge.
2 concerns the practitioner’s failure to fulfil his financial and
professional obligations to ensure that both companies
paid the amounts required
in respect of Pay-As-You-Go (
) taxation as well as Goods and Service
) from time to time in the order of $325,000. These obligations
arose under the
Taxation Administration Act 1953
(Cth), as amended by
A New Tax System (Pay As You Go) Act 1999
(Cth), and the
System (Goods and Services Tax Imposition - General) Act 1999
Australian Taxation Office filed a proof of debt in the liquidation of Radin
Legal Pty Ltd for outstanding PAYG and GST taxes
totalling $142,211.04.
far as Radtra Pty Ltd was concerned, the Australian Taxation Office filed a
proof of debt for outstanding PAYG and GST taxes totalling
$185,147.20.
3 concerns the submission by the practitioner to the Law Society of a statement
pursuant to Reg 48 of the
Legal Practitioners Regulations 2014
September 2016. The Tribunal found that the practitioner knowingly included
information that was false and misleading in
a material particular, contrary to
statement concerned the receipt or holding of trust money for the period 1 July
2015 to 30 June 2016. The statement which was
submitted concerned Radin Legal
Pty Ltd. The statement was signed as “complete and correct”.
relevant information was contained in Part B at
of the form,
“Assessing Risks to the Law Practice”, which included nine
questions. Question four asked:
Are taxes and superannuation up to
date? (if not provided details including amount(s) owing, relative periods due
and any payment
arrangement(s))
to this question appeared two boxes marked “Yes” and
“No”. The box marked “Yes” had
inserted in it. After this question and answer appeared the
Name of certifying principal: Atanas Michael Radin
I certify that to the best of my knowledge and belief:
(a) the details provided in Part B of the Statement are complete and
Signed: [Practitioner’s signature]
evidence before the Tribunal demonstrated that, prior to completing this
statement, the accounts administrator employed by the
practitioner sent an email
on Monday, 26 September 2016 with the subject heading “Trust Audit
Report”. In that email,
the accounts administrator
Please provide your response to the following questions TODAY
so I can finalise the report tomorrow when I am in.
“4. Are taxes and superannuation up to date?”
They have requested details – MICHAEL, DO YOU WANT ME TO PROVIDE
DETAILS (ie [taxation] $123,216.99 & [superannuation] $11,898.82)
TICK “YES”?
response to this email, the practitioner circled “Yes” with a red
pen on a hard copy of the email. After writing several
other comments onto the
email, the email was handed back to the Accounts Administrator.
his evidence the practitioner did not deny any of the underlying facts relevant
to these three counts. In relation to the first
two counts, the practitioner
conceded the existence of significant financial difficulties and cashflow
problems over a substantial
period. This was described as a “persistently
stressed financial
situation”.
practitioner also conceded that “primacy” was given to the payment
of staff wages and important operational expenses
rather than taxation
obligations.
A number of payment
arrangements had been entered into with the Australian Taxation Office. The
practitioner maintained that the
Australian Taxation Office had been
“extremely accommodating” over a number of years until
The practitioner took the
position that the existence of payment arrangements meant that he in some way
had not committed the conduct
the subject of these counts.
Considerable
attention before the Tribunal was devoted to the practitioner’s disclosure
to staff of the financial difficulties
encountered by the practice. This
included evidence from a solicitor who had been led to understand that there
would be delays in
making the requisite payments, including payments in respect
of superannuation.
Nonetheless,
the Tribunal found that the first two counts were proved given the
practitioner’s severe financial and cashflow
difficulties. The
practitioner had given priority to meeting certain creditors so as to keep the
practice afloat, and to provide
an opportunity to trade out of those
difficulties, which nonetheless amounted to professional
misconduct.
The Tribunal found
that the practitioner’s failings and guilt were “complete”
regardless of the accommodating attitude
of the Australian Taxation Office for a
Tribunal acknowledged that, in some instances, what might otherwise be
professional misconduct may be ameliorated where a practitioner
has sought the
agreement of staff to trade out of financial difficulties, particularly where
the practitioner offers and staff accept
the practitioner’s personal
guarantee regarding eventual
The Tribunal was
prepared to find that the practitioner’s conduct went some way towards
informing staff about the non-payment
of their superannuation entitlements
The evidence
does not, however, go so far as to allow the Tribunal to conclude that either
[the employee] in particular or the staff
in general knew with any significant
degree of specificity the full extent of the practice’s financial
difficulties or the
number and amount of superannuation payments not made.
Indeed, accepting [the employee’s] evidence, he discovered the true
accurate state of his entitlements position only a few months before his
testimony to the Tribunal ... There is no evidence before
the Tribunal that the
practitioner regularly advised the employees that a given superannuation
payment, of given amount, would not
be paid as due. Nor was there suggestion
that the Practitioner promised staff he would meet any outstanding entitlements
personally.
Tribunal found that the practitioner’s disclosure was insufficient to
ameliorate his misconduct.
whilst some disclosure was made concerning superannuation (count 1) that had no
bearing on the practitioner’s persistent
failure to meet PAYG and GST
obligations (count 2). The Tribunal found, therefore, that the practitioner had
engaged in professional
misconduct in respect of both counts because his failure
to meet these liabilities over an extended period involved a substantial
consistent failure to maintain reasonable standards of competence and diligence.
far as count 3 was concerned, in the course of his evidence the practitioner
conceded that his answer was not correct and, under
cross-examination, he
admitted that the correct answer should have been “No”. The
practitioner, however, relied upon
the existence of payment arrangements with
the Australian Taxation Office, with which he expected to comply.
the practitioner asserted that there was no “wilful deliberateness”
in connection with his conduct, the Tribunal
found that the practitioner’s
statement was false.
having regard to the requirement to specify whether any arrangements had been
entered into and the practitioner’s failure
to truthfully answer that part
of the question as well, the practitioner’s conduct was regarded as a
serious departure from
his professional and statutory
obligations:
Accordingly,
the practitioner’s conduct as considered above manifests a serious
departure from his professional and statutory
obligations such that the
practitioner should be considered to be not a fit and proper person to practise
the profession of the law.
As such, the Practitioner’s conduct
constitutes professional misconduct.
mentioned, the Tribunal reconvened to hear submissions on penalty and later
delivered reasons regarding penalty and
So far as costs were
concerned, the Tribunal relied, amongst others, on
when awarding
a lump sum to the Commissioner.
Principles relating to disciplinary action
relevant principles are not in doubt. Disciplinary powers are exercised by this
Court so as to protect the public rather than
practitioner.
The protection of
the public includes deterring other practitioners from engaging in similar
misconduct.
By deterring
misconduct, the Court maintains professional standards as well as public
confidence in the legal
profession.
is necessary to protect the public from legal practitioners who lack personal
integrity and who are indifferent to rudimentary
professional
It follows that
because the Court is acting in the public interest and not with a view to
punishment, the personal circumstances
of and any extenuating circumstances
relating to a practitioner are of less importance than if punishment was the
only objective.
ultimate question is whether the practitioner is fit to remain a member of the
legal profession.
explained earlier, whilst the practitioner’s straitened financial
circumstances may, to an extent, explain aspects of his
unprofessional conduct
or professional misconduct, they do not excuse it. Indeed, the
practitioner’s failure to ensure the
payment of counsel at a time when
funds were received into trust from which counsel were to be paid is
particularly egregious. The
Tribunal was amply justified in concluding that the
practitioner deliberately preferred his own interests to those of counsel when
misappropriating trust funds.
same may be said about the practitioner’s failure to act with transparency
and candour in respect of the reimbursement
of the motor accident claim trust
account monies. There is simply with no good excuse for the practitioner’s
misconduct, especially
when misleading the trust account officer.
the practitioner’s failure to meet his taxation obligations over an
extended period likewise represents a stark failure
to adhere to professional
and regulatory obligations. In that connection the completion of a false
statement concerning his taxation
and superannuation liabilities demonstrates a
serious instance of the practitioner’s inability to comply with important
serious professional
obligations.
The determination of the application
is necessary for this Court to reflect on whether the practitioner is presently
a fit and proper person notwithstanding that he
no longer holds a practising
certificate and, it would appear, has not practised for some time.
Court’s consideration must be made against the recognition that, for so
long as his name remains on the roll, the practitioner
is effectively being held
out as fit to practise the profession of the
is revealing that the practitioner has made little or no attempt before this
Court to explain his conduct. The practitioner failed
on two occasions to comply
with directions given by the Court. On 3 November 2023 Bleby JA made orders that
were not complied with
by the practitioner. On 4 March 2024 the practitioner was
given an adjournment because he said that he had been overwhelmed by the
of his step-son and his wife’s serious illness. He was required to file
his outline by 18 March 2024. The practitioner
was given liberty to apply if he
wished to adduce medical evidence in support of any further adjournment.
outline was received. No application for a further adjournment was made and no
medical evidence was adduced. The practitioner
has provided no explanation for
his failure to comply with orders of this Court, nor for his failure to appear.
Court can have no confidence that the practitioner understands the full import
of his transgressions. Indeed, no attempt has
been made to go behind his earlier
evidence by which, in significant respects, the practitioner attempted to shift
the blame for
his misconduct onto others.
must be remembered that the Tribunal’s findings were made about conduct
which had been engaged in by the practitioner between
2011 and 2017 after many
years in practice. The practitioner was neither inexperienced nor new to the
legal profession at the time
of his misconduct.
these transgressions occurred during a time of very difficult financial
circumstances might explain but does not excuse serious
professional misconduct.
It is necessary for legal practitioners to adhere to the high standards expected
of them notwithstanding
difficulties.
Whether a legal
practitioner manages trust account monies appropriately does not depend on
whether the practitioner is experiencing
personal or financial stress. A
practitioner’s adherence to the requirements of ethical conduct cannot be
made to depend upon
whether the practitioner is personally in financial
difficulty or under other kinds of personal stress.
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v Moore
, this Court considered the
“serious and significant mental and physical health issues” of the
practitioner, noting that
Whilst these
provided some explanation for the practitioner’s misconduct, they did not
ameliorate the seriousness of the practitioner’s
failure to discharge his
duties as a legal practitioner.
that case, the Tribunal had the benefit of medical evidence substantiating the
practitioner’s mental and physical
conditions.
The practitioner has
provided almost no medical evidence regarding his own mental and physical
conditions.
the practitioner’s misconduct is viewed as a whole, it represents such a
serious departure from the standards reasonably
to be expected from members of
the legal profession over such a long period that the Court cannot be confident
that the practitioner
can ever fulfil the essential obligations associated with
legal practice.
regard to the whole of the circumstances before this Court, it is clear that no
order short of striking-off is appropriate.
these reasons, the Court made an order made striking the practitioner’s
name from the roll. The practitioner was also ordered
Commissioner’s
As for the Act,
ss 89(1), 89(2) and 88A(2).
Legal Practitioners Act
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Prof G
Davis and M Pyke KC, 18 July 2023), page 5.
The proceedings commenced on
22 September 2021 before Ms Anne Pike QC, Ms Kay Clarke SC and Professor G
Davis. The matter concluded
on 5 November 2021. The reasons for decision of
the Tribunal were, however, only signed by Ms Pike and Professor Davis. Ms
did not sign the reasons on penalty either.
Transcript of Proceedings,
Atanis Michael Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal,
Pyke QC, K Clark SC, Prof G Davis, 22 September 2021) 66.32-38
Transcript of Proceedings,
Atanis Michael Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal,
Pyke QC, K Clark SC, Prof G Davis, 22 September 2021) 66.35-36
Transcript of Proceedings,
Atanis Michael Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal,
Pyke QC, K Clark SC, Prof G Davis, 22 September 2021) 66.27-29
Transcript of Proceedings,
Atanis Michael Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal,
Pyke QC, K Clark SC, Prof G Davis, 22 September 2021) 66.21-24, 68.3-5, 74.33-35
Transcript of Proceedings,
Atanis Michael Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal,
Pyke QC, K Clark SC, Prof G Davis, 22 September 2021) 66.31-32
Transcript of Proceedings,
Atanis Michael Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal,
Pyke QC, K Clark SC, Prof G Davis, 22 September 2021) 75.1-8
Transcript of Proceedings,
Atanis Michael Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal,
Pyke QC, K Clark SC, Prof G Davis, 22 September 2021) 94.22-28, 96.1-3
Concerning the fees of Mr
Edward Stratton-Smith in an invoice dated 31 October 2016 in the sum of
$3,712.50 in circumstances where,
in the absence of evidence from the barrister,
the Tribunal was uncertain if and when counsel ever expected to be paid for
representing
the practitioner before the Tribunal during the latter part of
Legal Practitioners
(SA) v Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Prof G
Davis and M Pyke KC, 5 January 2023), [10]-[14].
Legal Practitioners
(SA) v Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Prof G
Davis and M Pyke KC, 5 January 2023), [22].
Legal Practitioners
(SA) v Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Prof G
Davis and M Pyke KC, 5 January 2023), [23].
Legal Practitioners
(SA) v Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Prof G
Davis and M Pyke KC, 5 January 2023), [21].
Legal Practitioners
(SA) v Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Prof G
Davis and M Pyke KC, 5 January 2023), [24].
Legal Practitioners
(SA) v Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Prof G
Davis and M Pyke KC, 5 January 2023), [35].
Halsbury’s Laws of
, Fifth Edition, 2020, Vol. 66 Legal Professionals, p 289, [877].
The relevant authorities are helpfully reviewed by Lockhart J in
Re Sharp; Ex
Parte Donnelly
[1998] FCA 6
(1998) 80 FCR 536.
Brereton J also reviewed them in
Keesing v Adams
[2010] NSWSC 336
, [14]-[17].
Thornhill v Evans
[1742] EngR 75
; (1742) 2 Atk 332;
Swinfin v Lord
[1860] EngR 838
(1860) 5 H&N 890
157 ER 1436
, 1448 (Pollock CB).
Kennedy v Broun
[1863] EngR 136
(1863) 13 CBNS 677
[1863] EngR 136
, 287 (Erle CJ).
Mostyn v Mostyn
[1870] UKLawRpCh 40
(1870) 5 Ch App 457.
Halsbury’s Laws of
, Fifth Edition, 2020, Vol. 66 Legal Professionals, p 289, [877].
Practitioner’s Act
(SA), Schedule 3 – Costs
disclosure and adjudication,
, sub‑cls 24(1)(c) (and following)
and 29(6). Clause 1 defines a barrister as a legal practitioner who practises
the profession
of the law solely as a barrister. See also
Victorian Legal
Services Commissioner
[2021] VCAT 1246
, [45] (Vice President
Judge Hampel).
Clause 24 of Schedule 3 to
the Act stipulates that a costs agreement may be made between,
, a “law practice and another law practice that retained that law
practice on behalf of a client”. That includes a costs
agreement between a
barrister and a law firm.
Rhodes v Fielder, Jones
and Harrison
[1919] All ER 846
Carver v NSW Legal Profession
Disciplinary Tribunal
(1991) 7 LPDR 8, 12;
(1996) 134 FLR 294
Victorian Legal Services
Commissioner
[2021] VCAT 1246
Council of the Law
Society of New South Wales v Xenos
[2012] NSWADT 283
Law Society of New
South Wales v Davidson
[2007] NSWADT 264
Law Society of New South
Wales v McCarthy
[2003] NSWADT 198.
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Wharff
[2012] SASCFC 116
, [18]. See also
Practitioners Conduct Board v Trueman
(2003) 225 LSJS 503
[2003] SASC
Rhodes v Fielder, Jones
and Harrison
[1919] All ER 846
, 847 (Lush J, with whom Sanke J agreed);
(1996) 134 FLR 294
, 310 (Myles CJ, Gallop
and Higgins JJ).
Rhodes v Fielder, Jones
and Harrisons
[1919] All ER 846
, 847 (Lush J, with whom Sanke J agreed);
Law Society of New South Wales v McCarthy
[2002] NSWADT 58
, [46] (Malloy,
Robinson QC and Kirk);
Law Society of New South Wales v Graham
, [29] (Karpin ADCJ, Pheils and Fitzgerald).
Re Robb & Anor
(1996) 134 FLR 294
, 310 (Miles CJ, Gallop and Higgins JJ).
The Commissioner obtained
an extension of time in order to pursue this action.
Legal Practitioners
(SA) v Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Prof G
Davis and M Pyke KC, 5 January 2023), [83].
Legal Practitioners
(SA) v Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Prof G
Davis and M Pyke KC, 5 January 2023), [83].
Legal Practitioners
(SA) v Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Prof G
Davis and M Pyke KC, 5 January 2023), [87].
Legal Practitioners
(SA) v Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Prof G
Davis and M Pyke KC, 5 January 2023), [90].
Briginshaw v
(1938) 60 CLR 338.
Legal Practitioners
(SA) v Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Prof G
Davis and M Pyke KC, 5 January 2023), [95].
The Tribunal relied on
Re Mayes and
Legal Practitioners Act
[1974] 1 NSWLR 19.
Practitioners Act 1981
(SA) v Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary
Tribunal, Prof G Davis and M Pyke KC, 5 January 2023), [95].
Legal Practitioners
(SA) v Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Prof G
Davis and M Pyke KC, 5 January 2023), [97].
Legal Practitioners
(SA)v Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Prof G
Davis and M Pyke KC, 5 January 2023), [111].
Legal Practitioners
(SA)v Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Prof G
Davis and M Pyke KC, 5 January 2023), [111].
Legal Practitioners
(SA)v Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Prof G
Davis and M Pyke KC, 5 January 2023), [113].
Legal Practitioners
(SA)v Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Prof G
Davis and M Pyke KC, 5 January 2023), [114].
Council of the Law
Society New South Wales v Rogers
[2021] NSWCATOD 124
, [33], [44].
Legal Practitioners
(SA) v Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Prof G
Davis and M Pyke KC, 5 January 2023), [135].
Law Society New South
Wales v Koffel
[2010] NSWADT 171.
Legal Practitioners
(SA) v Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Prof G
Davis and M Pyke KC, 5 January 2023), [138].
Legal Practitioners
(SA) v Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Prof G
Davis and M Pyke KC, 5 January 2023), [155], [156].
Legal Practitioners
(SA) v Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Prof G
Davis and M Pyke KC, 5 January 2023), [161].
Legal Practitioners
(SA) v Radin
(Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal, Prof G
Davis and M Pyke KC, 18 July 2023)
[2020] SASC
, [17] (Nicholson J).
Law Society of South
Australia v Murphy
[1999] SASC 83
, [30] (Doyle CJ).
Law Society of New South
Wales v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Clisby
[2012] SASCFC 43
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Clisby
[2012] SASCFC 43
Law Society of South
Australia v Murphy
[1999] SASC 83
, [30] (Doyle CJ);
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Clisby
[2012] SASCFC 43
Council of the Law
Society of New South Wales v Jafari
[2020] NSWCA 53
Council of the Law
Society of New South Wales v Wilson
[2015] NSWCATOD 83.
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Kaminski
[2021] SASCFC 39
, [12] (Livesey P, Bleby and David
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Kassapis
[2015] SASCFC 37
, [37] (Gray, Sulan and Nicholson
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v Kerin
[2006] SASC 393
(White J, with whom Duggan J agreed).
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Moore
[2022] SASCFC 2
(Livesey P, Doyle and
David JJA).
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Moore
[2022] SASCFC 2
, [16]-[19] (Livesey P, Doyle and David
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (476 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter