URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAOmbFOI/2023/2023.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:02:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Adelaide, City of 2022/06805 [2023] SAOmbFOI 2023; 2022/06806; 2022/06975 [2023] SAOmbFOI 5 (29 March 2023)
Determination
External review - section 39
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Mr Phillip Martin
PC0015 CMAR Pty Ltd
ICD Land Pty Ltd
City of Adelaide
Ombudsman reference:
2022/06805; 2022/06806; 2022/06975
Agency reference:
ADEL2022-016
Determination:
The determination of the agency is confirmed, the effect of which is that
documents 1 and 3 are partially exempt on the basis of clause
16(2) and document
2 is to be released in full.
Date of Deputy Ombudsman’s determination:
29 March 2023
Issues considered:
Business affairs
Contract entered into by an agency
Financial or property interest of an agency
Prejudice to
competitiveness of an agency
Exemption clauses relied upon:
7(1)(c), (3)
13(1)(a), (2), (6)
16(1)(a)(iv), (2)
Legislation considered:
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Application for access
application under the
Freedom of Information Act 1991
) the applicant requested access from the agency to:
The contract between the City of Adelaide and ICD for the redevelopment of
the Central Market Arcade, the air rights and any associated
components. I
request the contract signed in December 2019 and each/all of the Annexures and
ease of reference, procedural steps relating to the application and the external
review are set out in Appendix 1.
external review is within the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman as a relevant review
authority under section 39 of the FOI Act.
three applications for external review were lodged beyond the 30-day statutory
period. The Ombudsman has exercised his discretion
under section 39(4) of the
FOI Act to extend the time for making an application for external
the agency made its determination on 11 October 2022, an administrative
oversight resulted in the interested parties not
being advised of that
determination until 3 November 2022. Accordingly, the two external review
requests by the interested parties
on 30 November 2022 were lodged within 30
days of those parties receiving notice of the agency’s determination. It
noted that during a telephone call on 30 November 2022, the agency
advised the Ombudsman’s Legal Officer that it had no objection
applications for external review being accepted out of time.
light of the above, the Ombudsman considered it appropriate to accept the two
applications for external review lodged by the interested
being notified of the commencement of this external review, the agency advised
the applicant that access to any of the documents
in issue would be deferred
until the conclusion of the review. Subsequently, on 7 December 2022 the
applicant contacted this Office
requesting that he be provided a copy of the
Ombudsman’s provisional determination and be given an opportunity to
the same. It was noted that the applicant also took that opportunity
to dispute a portion of the agency’s determination. As
such, the Ombudsman
considered it appropriate to treat the applicant’s request as another
application for external review.
that application was also made out of time, as the Ombudsman was already
conducting an external review at the request of
the interested parties, he was
satisfied that it was appropriate to also exercise his discretion to accept the
applicant’s
Provisional
determination
Ombudsman provided his tentative view about the agency’s determination to
the parties, by his provisional determination
dated 10 January 2023. The
Ombudsman informed the parties that subject to receipt and consideration of
submissions from the parties
he proposed to vary the agency’s
determination.
emails dated 24 February 2023 and 3 March 2023 respectively, the interested
parties and the agency provided submissions in response.
The Ombudsman was
persuaded by the agency’s submissions to depart from the view expressed in
his provisional determination
and therefore considered it appropriate to issue a
revised provisional determination.
Ombudsman provided his revised tentative views about the agency’s
determination to the parties, by his revised provisional
determination dated 10
March 2023. The Ombudsman informed the parties that subject to receipt and
consideration of submissions from
the parties he proposed to confirm the
agency’s determination.
emails dated 24 March 2023 the agency provided submissions in response. The
agency has advised that although it accepts the Ombudsman’s
provisional views, it wished to make further submissions about the
Ombudsman’s comments on the applicability of clause
13. I have addressed
those submissions in this determination.
interested parties also provided a response to the Ombudsman’s revised
provisional views by email dated 24 March 2023. The
interested parties maintain
that the position set out in their February submissions is the preferable
construction of the relevant
provisions of the FOI Act, but also advise that it
would not be constructive to re-state those matters at this point in time,
that the parties have an opportunity to seek a review by the South
Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal.
interested parties did however comment on three specific points in the
Ombudsman’s revised provisional determination. I
confirm that I have
addressed those comments in this determination.
applicant did not respond to the Ombudsman’s revised provisional
determination.
considered the submissions provided, I advise that I am not inclined to depart
from the Ombudsman’s revised provisional
views. Accordingly, save for my
responses to the additional submissions from the agency and interested parties,
this determination
is in the same terms as the Ombudsman’s revised
provisional determination.
Relevant law
person has a legally enforceable right to be given access to an agency’s
documents in accordance with the FOI
FOI Act provides that upon receipt of an access application, an agency may make
a determination to refuse access where the documents
are ‘exempt’.
Schedule 1 lists various exemption clauses which may be claimed by an agency as
a basis for refusing access.
following clauses of Schedule 1 of the FOI Act are relevant to my external
7—Documents affecting business affairs
(1) A document is an exempt document—
(a) if it contains matter the disclosure of which would disclose trade
secrets of any agency or any other person; or
(b) if it contains matter—
(i) consisting of information (other than trade secrets) that has a commercial
value to any agency or any other person; and
(ii) the disclosure of which—
(A) could reasonably be expected to destroy or diminish the commercial
value of the information; and
(B) would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest; or
(c) if it contains matter—
(i) consisting of information (other than trade secrets or information
referred to in paragraph (b)) concerning the business, professional,
or financial affairs of any agency or any other person; and
(ii) the disclosure of which—
(A) could reasonably be expected to have an adverse effect on those affairs
or to prejudice the future supply of such information
to the Government or to an
agency; and
(B) would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest.
(3) A document is not an exempt document by virtue of this clause if it is a
contract entered into by the Crown or an agency after
the commencement of this
13—Documents containing confidential material
(1) A document is an exempt document—
(a) if it contains matter the disclosure of which would found an action for
breach of confidence; or
(b) if it contains matter obtained in confidence the disclosure of
(i) might reasonably be expected to prejudice the future supply of such
information to the Government or to an agency; and
(ii) would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest.
(2) A document that is a contract entered into by the Crown or an agency
commencement of this subclause is not an exempt document by virtue of
subclause (1) unless—
(a) it contains matter the disclosure of which would, under a term of the
constitute a breach of the contract or found an action for breach of
confidence; and
(b) that term of the contract has been approved by—
(i) in the case of a contract entered into by the Crown—a Minister;
(ii) in the case of a contract entered into by a State Government
agency—the responsible Minister for the agency; or
(iii) in the case of a contract entered into by an agency that is not a
Government agency—the agency.
(6) If a Minister or agency approves a term of a contract in accordance with
subclause (2), the Minister or agency must, as soon as
practicable, notify the
Minister administering this Act, in writing, of that
15—Documents affecting financial or property interests
A document is an exempt document if it contains matter the disclosure of
(a) could reasonably be expected to have a substantial adverse effect on the
financial or property interests of the State or an agency;
(b) would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest.
16—Documents concerning operations of agencies
(1) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter the disclosure of
(a) could reasonably be expected—
(i) to prejudice the effectiveness of any method or procedure for the conduct
of tests, examinations or audits by an agency; or
(ii) to prejudice on the attainment of the objects of any test, examination
or audit conducted by an agency; or
(iii) to have a substantial adverse effect on the management or assessment by
an agency of the agency's personnel; or
(iv) to have a substantial adverse effect on the effective performance by an
agency of the agency's functions; or
(v) to have a substantial adverse effect on the conduct of industrial relations
by an agency; and
(b) would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest.
(2) A document is an exempt document if—
(a) it relates to an agency engaged in commercial activities; and
(b) it contains matter the disclosure of which could prejudice the
competitiveness of the agency in carrying on those commercial activities.
section 48, the onus is on the agency to justify its determination ‘in any
proceedings’. This includes the external
review process.
39(11) provides that the Ombudsman may confirm, vary or reverse the
agency’s determination in an external review, based
on the circumstances
existing at the time of review.
Documents in
agency identified three documents within the scope of the application and
determined that two documents are partially exempt and
the remaining document
can be released in full.
Issues in this review
regard to the agency’s submissions and the exemption clauses provided in
Schedule 1 of the FOI Act, it is for me to determine
whether to confirm, vary or
reverse the agency’s determination in regard to the documents in issue in
this external review.
Consideration
agency determined that documents 1 and 3 are partially exempt on the basis of
clause 7(1)(c). In their consultation response,
the interested parties submitted
that all three documents ought to be exempt in their entirety on the basis of
clause 7(1)(a), (b)
his provisional determination the Ombudsman concluded that although the agency
and both interested parties had provided an explanation
for their claim of
exemption, he did not consider it necessary to address those submissions in
detail as he was satisfied that clause
7(3) prevents the application of clause
7(1) to all three documents.
7(3) applies to contracts entered into by an agency after 2005. It is noted that
the applicant specifically requested access
to a contract, and as set out in the
agency’s determination, the documents identified as falling within scope
include a Project
Delivery Agreement, Guarantee and Indemnity and Deed of
Amendment to the Project Delivery Agreement. Each of these documents were
by the agency and other parties in 2019 and 2022.
is noted that both documents 1 and 3 contain annexures. It is clear that both
documents were signed in a format containing the
annexures. Additionally, it is
noted that the contents page of the Project Delivery Agreement indicates that
the substantive terms
of the agreement together with the annexures ought to be
treated as a single instrument. Accordingly, the Ombudsman advised in his
provisional determination that he was satisfied that the annexures in document 1
and 3 therefore form part of each respective document.
light of the above, the Ombudsman stated in his provisional determination that
clause 7(3) operates to prevent the application
of clause 7(1) to all portions
of the documents in issue. Based on the submissions received in response, the
interested parties appear
to have accepted this view and did not make any
further submissions regarding the application of clause 7(1). In contrast, the
has maintained that document 3 is partially exempt.
basis of the agency’s further submissions is that clause 7(3) applies to
contracts, and document 3 is a deed rather than
a contract. The agency submits
that a deed and a contract are distinguishable and has referenced case law
supporting this submission.
Having considered the agency’s submissions and
the referenced cases carefully I advise that, whilst I do not dispute the
differences
between a deed and a contract, in the circumstances I remain
satisfied that clause 7(3) ought to extend to document 3.
although I acknowledge that document 3 is a standalone document, its
relationship to document 1 cannot be ignored. That is,
the Deed of Amendment is
an instrument to amend the Project Delivery Agreement which is accepted to be a
contract. Additionally,
the interpretation clause within the Project Delivery
Agreement specifies that ‘a reference to this agreement or another
includes any variation or replacement of them’. In my view this
clause operates such that although document 3 is a deed, it
can also be
considered part of the substantive contract.
consider that this approach is consistent with the South Australian case
referenced by the agency, in which Justice Stanley considered
whether a document
described as being a deed could nonetheless take effect as a
It is clear that the two
additionally fulfil the
requirements of a binding contract. Whilst it is
accepted that document 3 was executed as a deed, the agency has not established
that the document is not also a contract.
their core, both a deed and a contract reflect an enforceable agreement between
parties. Furthermore, both kinds of documents are
underpinned by common
principles. In all of the circumstances I remain of the view that the
Parliamentary intention of clause 7(3)
would include its application to document
Clause 13(1)
to the submissions above, the agency submits that as document 3 is a deed rather
than a contract, clause 13(2) is not applicable
to that document. For the
reasons set out above, particularly the clause within the Project Delivery
Agreement stating that a reference
to the agreement includes any of its
variations, I remain satisfied that clause 13(2) is relevant to document 3.
his provisional determination the Ombudsman noted that although the interested
parties had not explicitly referred to clause 13(1),
they did refer to the
confidentiality provision contained within the documents. For completeness, the
Ombudsman therefore considered
it appropriate to provide his provisional view
that the contractual nature of the documents would prevent the application of
13(2) states that a contract entered into by an agency may only be exempt
pursuant to clause 13(1) if it contains matter the
disclosure of which would
constitute a breach of a term of the contract, and that term has been approved
by a relevant Minister or
agency; the person who must give that approval is
dependent upon who has entered into the contract. Where the contract has been
into by a non-State Government agency as is the case in this matter, the
term of the contract must be approved by the agency.
his provisional determination the Ombudsman accepted that document 1 contains a
confidentiality provision which might satisfy the
requirements of clause
13(2)(a). The Ombudsman subsequently advised in his revised provisional
determination that he accepted the
interested parties’ submissions that
all three documents ought to be regarded as part of the Project Delivery
Agreement and
therefore the confidentiality provision contained therein extends
to all three documents.
Ombudsman noted in his provisional determination that the substantive contract
does not include an approval by the agency as required
by clause 13(2)(b). The
Ombudsman advised the parties that he had turned his mind to whether the signing
of a contract is sufficient
to amount to an approval for the purposes of clause
13(2), but had formed the view that it is not.
wording of clause 13(2) indicates that the requirement of approval is a
secondary step to a contract having been entered into.
Firstly, in the case of a
contract entered into by the Crown or a State Government agency, the required
approval must be provided
by a person external to the contract. As such, it is
clear that the mere signing of the contract cannot amount to an approval in
those circumstances.
Ombudsman considered that the same logic ought to be applied to contracts
entered into by an agency. To take an alternative approach
would provide an
unfair advantage to non-State Government agencies. Additionally, the Ombudsman
considered that if Parliament had
intended for such contracts to be treated
differently, it would have inserted clause 13(2)(c) in terms such as ‘it
is a contract
entered into by an agency that is not a State Government
agency’, in lieu of clause 13(2)(b)(iii).
light of the above, the Ombudsman concluded in his provisional determination
that clause 13(2) requires approval as a separate
and additional step to the
signing of a contract. The Ombudsman also stated that:
I have also had regard to clause 13(6) which states:
(6) If a Minister or agency approves a term of a contract in accordance with
subclause (2), the Minister or agency must, as soon as
practicable, notify the
Minister administering this Act, in writing, of that fact.
Absent any submission or evidence from the agency indicating a compliance
with clause 13(6), I am satisfied that there has been no
approval as required by
clause 13(2)(b)(iii). Noting that the requirements of clause 13(2)(a) and (b)
are cumulative, I am satisfied
that clause 13(2) operates to prevent the
application of clause 13(1).
In responding to this provisional determination, should the agency wish to
make any claim of exemption pursuant to clause 13(1), I
request that the agency
provide me with a copy of the written notification required by clause 13(6).
response to the Ombudsman’s provisional determination both the agency and
the interested parties provided further submissions
in support of clause 13(1).
Both responses refer to an instrument of delegation which was approved by the
agency at its 25 June 2019
council meeting. The delegation confers the powers
and functions under the FOI Act upon specific employees of the agency.
interested parties submitted that:
The very existence of that standing delegation (specifically tied, as it is,
to clause 13(2)(b)(iii) of Schedule 1 of the FOI Act)
indicates that, separately
to the consideration and authorisation of any specific contract, the Council has
specifically turned its
mind to the requirement of clause 13(2)(b)(iii) and has
given its blanket approval for the inclusion of confidentiality provisions
as that contained in the PDA. That approval must, logically, be assumed to
subsist for so long as an officer of the Council
holds the standing delegation.
The PDA was executed on behalf of the Council by the CEO at a time when the
standing delegation to the CEO (among others) subsisted.
Therefore, in the
language of clause 13(2)(b)(iii), at the time of the execution of the PDA, the
confidentiality provision within
it “...has been approved by - ... - the
Agency”. Not only has it been approved by the Council, but it has been
by the Council for the specific purposes of clause 13(2)(b)(iii).
the agency submitted that:
In Council’s view, all that was necessary for Clause 13(2) to be
engaged is for the relevant contract to contain a confidentiality
Clause, and
for that clause to have been approved by an officer of the Council with the
appropriate authority to do so (or the Council
itself by resolution). In this
case, the fact that the confidentiality clause was included in the contract and
the contract approved
by a person with the specific authority to approve the
clause is sufficient to engage Clause 13(2).
Ombudsman advised in his revised provisional determination that he was not
persuaded by these submissions. Firstly, having reviewed
the agency’s
delegation register, it was noted that a total of 59 functions and powers under
the FOI Act have been delegated;
essentially any reference to an agency being
permitted or required to do something has been included. Contrary to the
parties’ submissions it is clear that no special or specific
consideration was given to clause 13(2)(b)(iii), however even
if that were the
case the Ombudsman advised that he would remain of the view that the
agency’s delegation is not sufficient
to enliven clause 13(2).
13(2) was inserted into the FOI Act by the enactment of the
Information (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act 2004
. It is noted from numerous
Hansard extracts that clause 13(2) was intended to create some consistency
between the exemption clauses
within the FOI Act and South Australia’s
commitment to the proactive disclosure of government contracts. The objects of
Act were simultaneously amended to promote greater disclosure of agency
information.
Ombudsman advised in his revised provisional determination that when considered
in this context, he was not satisfied that a ‘blanket
approval’ is
sufficient to satisfy the requirements of clause 13(2). Rather, the Ombudsman
considered that the agency must
be able to establish that it turned its mind to
approving the specific confidentiality clause in issue, in this case clause 15
document 1. To this point, the Ombudsman confirmed that he had reviewed the
provided agenda reports and decisions from 28 November
2019 and noted that these
documents contain nothing indicating that clause 15 of the contract was
specifically considered in any
greater detail than the contract as a whole.
agency submitted that it is not necessary for an approval of the confidentiality
clause to specifically be included within the
Project Delivery Agreement or for
there to be any record of such an approval. Whilst the Ombudsman acknowledged
that clause 13 is
silent as to whether an approval under clause 13(2) need
actually be contained in the contract itself, he disputed that there need
some record of it. Without such a record it is difficult to see how an agency
could establish that specific consideration
was given to the confidentiality
clause in issue.
a minimum, the approval of a confidentiality clause must be documented in
accordance with clause 13(6) which requires the agency
to notify the
Attorney-General of an approved term of a contract in writing as soon as
practicable.
agency conceded that it had not complied with clause 13(6) but further submitted
that this non-compliance would not invalidate
an approval of the confidentiality
clause by the agency. The Ombudsman agreed. He considered that the notification
required by clause
13(6) is a procedural matter subsequent to the approval
itself, and that a defect in the notification process would not invalidate
valid approval.
said, had the agency been able to produce a clause 13(6) notification to the
Attorney-General from around the time that the contract
was entered into, the
Ombudsman advised that he would have treated such a notification as being
indicative of a valid approval by
the agency. As it stands, the agency is yet to
provide evidence that there has been a valid approval of the confidentiality
Ombudsman noted that the agency advised that:
I note that arising from your office brining [sic] this matter to my
attention, I have now notified the Attorney-General (the relevant
Minister for
the purposes of Clause 13(6) of Schedule 1) of the fact that the Project
Delivery Agreement contains a confidentiality
clause for the purposes of Clause
13(2) of Schedule 1.
to the agency’s submissions is a copy of the clause 13(6) letter to the
Attorney-General dated 3 March 2023. The Ombudsman
advised that he had turned
his mind to whether this notification is sufficient to constitute an approval
for the purposes of clause
13(2)(b)(iii), however he was not satisfied that it
was for two reasons.
having accepted the agency’s submission that a defect in the notification
process should not render an approval invalid,
it has been made clear that the
two processes are separate and distinct. This is also supported in the
interested parties’
submissions that compliance with clause 13(6) is not
determinative of whether a document is exempt because the clause is not
‘cumulative’
as clause 13(2)(a) and (b) are.
and perhaps more importantly, the Ombudsman considered that there must be some
temporal proximity between the execution
of a contract and the approval of its
confidentiality clause. Again noting the intention of clause 13(2) being that an
agency will
actively turn its mind to whether a confidentiality clause ought to
be approved, the Ombudsman was of the view that an approval given
belatedly or
as an afterthought will not be sufficient.
Ombudsman noted that the current South Australian State Records Guidelines
advises agencies that:
Confidential Information
exemption in clause 13 of Schedule 1 can
not be claimed in relation to a contract unless the contract contains a
confidentiality clause
that has been approved by the responsible Minister (or
his or her delegate)
the contract is
[original emphasis]
Ombudsman agreed that requiring approval to be granted prior to a contract being
executed not only makes sense procedurally, but
would best achieve the intention
of clause 13(2). That said, the Ombudsman accepted that the order of events is
not specifically
stipulated within the clause, and would therefore accept an
approval as being valid if granted immediately after a contract has been
executed. In this case the contract was entered into in November 2019 and
notification to the Attorney-General was not provided until
March 2023.
light of the above, the Ombudsman advised in his revised provisional
determination that he was not satisfied that the belated notification
Attorney-General constitutes an approval for the purposes of clause
13(2)(b)(iii). The Ombudsman was also of the view that,
due to the time which
has lapsed since the execution of the contract, the agency is no longer entitled
to approve the confidentiality
clause contained therein and the documents
therefore could not be exempt on the basis of clause 13(1).
agency has submitted that:
The Ombudsman’s revised provisional determination appears to suggest
that the Council’s delegations with respect to its
powers and functions
under the FOI Act more broadly, and in particular with respect to clause
13(2)(b)(iii), are invalid or ineffective.
wish to clarify that this is not correct. It is accepted that the
Government Act 1999
permits the council to delegate a power or function
conferred to it under an Act. Clearly this includes a delegation in respect of
the power set out at clause 13(2)(b)(iii) of the FOI Act.
is not in dispute that the council validly delegated the power to approve a term
of a contract pursuant to clause 13(2)(b)(iii)
to ‘the person occupying
the office of CEO’ at its council meeting on 25 June 2019. Rather, the
reason that I am not
satisfied that the agency complied with clause
13(2)(b)(iii) is because the person occupying the office of CEO failed to
their delegated power at the time of entering into the relevant
to the agency’s further submissions, I remain of the view that clause
13(2)(b)(iii) requires a step which is additional
and separate to the execution
of the contract. If the opposite were true, every contract entered into by the
council would be capable
of exemption under clause 13(1), undermining the
inclusion of clause 13(2) in the first place.
response to the Ombudsman’s revised provisional determination the
interested parties submitted that there was no basis for
the Ombudsman to
conclude that the passage of time between the execution of the contract and the
notification to the Attorney-General
was so long as to render that notification
ineffective. In my view, the Ombudsman reached no such conclusion.
set out in the Ombudsman’s revised provisional determination, the
notification required by clause 13(6) is a separate matter
to the approval
itself, the former being merely indicative of the latter rather than
determinative. The Ombudsman concluded that
there must be a temporal proximity
between the execution of the contract and the
confidentiality term, not the notification to the Attorney-General. As there is
no indication that an approval was validly
given on or around the time that the
contract was entered into, there is simply no need to comply with clause 13(6).
Conversely,
if there were some other indication that an approval was validly made around the
time that the contract was entered into,
a delayed compliance with clause 13(6)
would not render that approval invalid.
Clause 16(2)
the agency and the interested parties have submitted that the documents ought to
be exempt on the basis of clause 16(2). Whilst
the agency’s submissions
relate only to the portions of the documents it initially determined to be
exempt, the interested
parties submit that all three documents are exempt in
Ombudsman noted that the majority of the interested parties’ submissions
focus on how disclosure would cause a competitive
disadvantage to the interested
parties. Whilst these concerns are noted, clause 16(2) applies only to
disclosure prejudicing the
competitiveness of the
. Further, to the
limited extent that the interested parties have referred to the effect of
disclosure on the agency, they have not
identified how its competitiveness would
be prejudiced. Accordingly, the Ombudsman advised in his revised provisional
determination
that he had placed little consideration on these submissions from
the interested parties.
commercial activity is one which reflects ‘a business venture with a
profit-making objective and, strictly speaking, would
involve activity to
generate trade and sales with a view to
I am satisfied that
large-scale redevelopments by the agency, and in particular the redevelopment of
the Central Arcade, falls within
this definition and the requirements of clause
16(2)(a) are met.
to clause 16(2)(b), I accept that the progression of large-scale developments is
a function that the agency will continue
to undertake indefinitely and can
therefore be said to be a commercial activity which the agency is
‘carrying on’.
agency has submitted that:
In the context of a large-scale development such as the Central Market
Arcade, it needs to be recognised that Council has gone into
the marketplace and
sought expressions of interest and then entered into sensitive and complex
commercial negotiations in order to
achieve an outcome as embodied within the
Project Delivery Agreement.
Disclosure of key commercial parameters and other financial information
contained within that document (i.e. those parts of Document
1 to which I have
proposed to withhold access) would clearly prejudice the Council’s ability
to be able to compete in the marketplace
for investment by future potential
developers.
The parties in the marketplace that seek to invest in such projects is
limited and there is, in that sense, a competition in respect
of investment
funds for this project and other comparable developments.
Disclosure of key commercial information would affect the Council’s
ability to be able to attract that investment and prejudice
its competitiveness
as parties and potential investors would seek a premium or otherwise not be
inclined to invest in a project involving
Council, the detail of which was
subject to public disclosure.
Ombudsman accepted that the agency is in competition with other agencies,
businesses and individuals seeking investment for large-scale
developments. The
Ombudsman also accepted that if the information identified by the agency in
documents 1 and 3 were disclosed, this
would likely have a deterrent effect upon
other developers who might otherwise be inclined to invest in projects involving
the agency.
Accordingly,
the Ombudsman advised in his revised provisional determination that he was
satisfied that disclosure of the information
determined to be exempt by the
agency would prejudice the competitiveness of the agency in carrying on a
commercial activity.
set out above, the interested parties submit that clause 16(2) is applicable to
all three documents in issue in their entirety.
Although the Ombudsman was
persuaded by the agency’s submissions that clause 16(2) is indeed
applicable, he advised that he
was not inclined to accept the assertion that it
ought to extend further than the agency has submitted.
16(2) invites a consideration of the negative effect of disclosure upon the
and, in this matter, invites a specific consideration of whether
disclosure of the documents would prejudice the competitiveness
of the agency in
attracting investors for large-scale developments. The Ombudsman observed that
the agency is better placed than
any other party to determine which portions of
the documents prejudice its competitiveness if disclosed.
Ombudsman acknowledged that the interested parties may submit that any
disclosure of the documents would deter them from engaging
with the agency in
future projects, however, the agency’s submissions would indicate that
even if that eventuates, a sufficient
pool of potential investors would remain
interested in the agency’s projects such that partial disclosure of the
would not prejudice the agency’s competitiveness.
Accordingly,
the Ombudsman proposed to confirm the agency’s determination that
documents 1 and 3 are partially exempt on the
basis of clause 16(2), but the
balance of the documents can be disclosed.
response to the Ombudsman’s revised provisional determination the
interested parties submitted that although clause 16(2)
refers to the effect of
disclosure upon the agency, any negative effect suffered by the interested
parties would deter parties from
engaging in commercial activities with the
agency in future, which in turn will affect the agency. The interested parties
also submit
that even if they are the only parties deterred by partial
disclosure of the documents, this would still reduce the agency’s
competitiveness.
agree with the Ombudsman’s reasoning that the agency is best placed to
comment on which portions of the documents would prejudice
its competitiveness
if disclosed. The agency is well aware of the interested parties’ views
and was at the time of making its
determination and providing further
submissions to this Office, and yet it maintains that the documents can be
partially disclosed
without prejudice to its competitiveness. I am therefore not
inclined to depart from the Ombudsman’s reasoning.
Clauses 15 and 16(1)(a)(iv)
agency has also provided submissions about clauses 15 and 16(1)(a)(iv), however
given that I intend to confirm the agency’s
determination and recent
submissions on the basis of clause 16(2), I do not consider it necessary to
address these submissions.
Final comments
Ombudsman noted that in response to his provisional determination the interested
parties requested to be given access to any additional
submissions of the
agency. Given that it is his determination which the parties are invited to
comment on, the Ombudsman did not
consider it appropriate to share the
submissions of one party with another, save to the extent that he had quoted or
summarised those
submissions in his determination.
interested parties also advised that they may wish to seek a review of this
determination by the South Australian Civil and Administrative
and have requested that this Office provide an undertaking
not to release the documents in issue until that review has finalised.
advise the parties that this Office does not intend to release the documents in
issue, nor is it usual practice to do so. Rather,
if the 30-day period to apply
for a review of this determination lapses, it will be up to the agency to give
effect to the determination.
Until that time, or until the conclusion of a
review by SACAT, the agency is required to defer granting the applicant access
documents as they concern the business affairs of the interested
Determination
light of my views above, I confirm the agency’s
determination.
Steven Strelan
29 March 2023
Procedural steps
12 September 2022
The agency received the FOI application dated 9 September 2022.
11 October 2022
The agency’s principal officer determined the application; the
parties were not entitled to seek an internal review.
30 November 2022
The Ombudsman received two requests for external review from two of the
interested parties dated 30 November 2022.
30 November 2022
The Ombudsman advised the agency of the external review and requested
submissions and documentation.
7 December 2022
The Ombudsman received a request for external review from the original FOI
applicant dated 7 December 2022.
9 December 2022
The Ombudsman advised the agency that a third external review application
had been received.
15 December 2022
The agency provided the Ombudsman with its submissions and
documentation.
10 January 2023
The Ombudsman issued his provisional determination and invited submissions
from the parties.
24 February 2023
The interested parties provided submissions in response to the provisional
determination.
3 March 2023
The agency provided submissions in response to the provisional
determination.
10 March 2023
The Ombudsman issued his revised provisional determination and invited
submissions from the parties.
24 March 2023
The agency provided submissions in response to the revised provisional
determination.
24 March 2023
The interested parties provided submissions in response to the revised
provisional determination.
Freedom of Information Act
Bendiog and Adelaide Bank
Limited (CAN 068 049 178) & Ors v Kenneth Ross Picjkard & Anor
[2019] SASC 123
Project Blue Sky v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355.
FOI and Contracting for
State Government
, State Records of South Australia, approved on 13 February
Re Johnston and Australian
Postal Corporation
[2006] AATA 144
Freedom of Information Act
section 27(3)(d).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.08 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter