URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAEOT/2014/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:56:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
WILLIAMS v INDEPENDENT PUB GROUP T/A BRAHMA LODGE HOTEL & WILLIAMS v STEPHENS [2014] SAEOT 1 (19 May 2014)
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
(District Court Administrative and
Disciplinary Division)
comply with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting publication
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person using material
in the judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach
any such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry
of the Court in which it was generated.
v INDEPENDENT PUB GROUP T/A BRAHMA LODGE HOTEL & WILLIAMS v STEPHENS
[2014] SAEOT 1
Judgment of Her Honour Judge
Cole, Member Ms A Bachmann and Member Mr D Shetliffe
19 May 2014
HUMAN RIGHTS -
DISCRIMINATION
HUMAN RIGHTS - DISCRIMINATION - GROUNDS OF DISCRIMINATION - SEX
DISCRIMINATION
Complaint lodged with the Equal Opportunity Commissioner and referred to the
Equal Opportunity Tribunal for determination. The complainant
discrimination by the respondents on the basis of gender identity.
The complainant did not establish the factual basis for a claim of sexual
harassment under the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
against either respondent. The
complainants’ claim of discrimination on the basis of ‘chosen
gender’ must fail
as the complainant does not fall within the meaning of
‘chosen gender’ for the purposes of the Act. The complaint’s
claim is dismissed.
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
WILLIAMS v INDEPENDENT
PUB GROUP T/A BRAHMA LODGE HOTEL & WILLIAMS v
[2014] SAEOT
HER HONOUR JUDGE COLE, MEMBER BACHMANN AND MEMBER SHETLIFFE
complainant, Mr Williams, made complaints to the Commissioner for Equal
Opportunity relating to the Brahma Lodge Hotel and, particularly,
to the alleged
conduct of Mr Scott Stephens, who was a barman at the hotel at the time of
the events complained of. The Independent
Pub Group trades as the Brahma Lodge
Hotel. We will refer to the corporate defendant as “the Hotel”.
The Commissioner
referred the complaints in relation to both the Hotel and
Mr Stephens to the Tribunal. The complaints were heard together. The
Hotel accepts that it is vicariously liable for the acts of
Mr Stephens.
The Complaint
the complaint form lodged with the Commissioner, Mr Williams said that the
Hotel “provides goods and services to me”.
In the section of the
complaint form which asks “Why are you complaining to the
Commission?” Mr Williams ticked the
box for “Do you believe you
have been discriminated against because of your gender identity”,
indicating that he believed
that he had. In his complaint, Mr Williams set
I am referring to 25/8/11 Thursday night. The manager and bar attender (Scott).
On that night I was requested by a friend (Leanne)
to attend her birthday party
dressed in Drag costume as a female. I wanted to go to toilet and started
walking towards female toilet.
in the night Scott sprayed me with water from behind the bar using soft drink
I was going to toilet Scott yelled out from behind the bar, across the room,
that I was not to use female toilets and I had to
use male toilets
calling out Scott came from behind the bar. He came close to me making comment
in reguards to the way I was dressed and laughing
stated he was following the managers direction in this matter.
made negative comments towards me to other patrons and called out on occaisions
in regards to the way I was dressed.
pulled his shirt up infront of me and played with his
Overall I felt intimaded and embarrassed and became scared of the outcome of the
night. By Scott yelling across the room that attracted
unwanted comments from
other patrons that where in hotel. Further more I felt Scott descriminated
against me by the acts he displayed
towards me.
Previously when I have dressed in drag I have been requested to use ladies
toilets for my own safety.
As a result of this night I would like an opoligy with $10,000 compensation for
the embarrassing stigma that Scott displayed towards
me in front of friends and
other patrons. I felt his negative attension was uncalled for and belittling.
Scott and the manager should
display professionally in there conduct to patrons
of the hotel regardless to how the patron dresses. The attension singled me out
and I felt uncomfortable, angry that they would behave in this manner.
I am worried and afraid that The brahma lodge hotel will not allow me to go to
the hotel again because of this matter.
the matter was referred to the Tribunal, further particulars of the complaint
were sought and provided. In the particulars
of his complaint against
Mr Stephens, Mr Williams alleged that Mr Stephens had
“subjected the complainant to sexual harassment”
on 25 August 2011,
when the complainant attended the Brahma Lodge Hotel dressed as a woman in these
Scott threatened to spray the complainant with liquid from behind the bar using
a soft drink hose;
Scott pulled his shirt up in front of him and played with his own nipple. He
thrust out his tongue repeatedly in a lewd
his particulars in relation to Mr Stephens, the complainant said that he
got the impression that Mr Stephens was laughing at him
with another
patron, called “Corey”.
his particulars in relation to the Hotel, Mr Williams said, among other
respondent provides access to bar facilities at the Brahma Lodge Hotel where
regular 8 ball competitions were held in 2011 on
Thursday nights.
complainant regularly attended the 8 ball competitions on Thursday nights in
Thursday night 8-ball community, including numerous staff of the respondent,
knew that the complainant dressed as a female (at
times) and that he was
employed as a female performer at the Mars Bar.
the complainant is dressed as a female, he identifies on a genuine basis as a
woman. For example, he would not expect people
to use bad language in his
presence when he is dressed as a female, he would have a feminine manner and
would expect to use female
complainant is bi-sexual.
respondent is vicariously liable for acts of its employee, Scott Stephens
(“Scott”), during the course of his shift
as a bar attendant at the
Brahma Lodge Hotel on the evening of 25 August 2011.
treated the complainant less favourably that a non-chosen gender person on 25
August 2011 in the following ways:
9.1 by requiring the
complainant, while dressed as a female, not to use the female toilet but to use
the men’s toilet instead;
9.2 in the aggressive way Scott told the complainant that he was not
permitted to use the women’s toilets.
is associated with western gay culture.
appeared to the complainant to feel threatened or offended by the complainant
dressing in drag.
treated the complainant less favourably on the ground of his sexuality on the
evening of 25 August 2011 in the following ways:
12.1 by making
negative comments about the complainant to patrons and calling out to the
complainant loud criticisms of the way he
was dressed (in drag);
12.2 in the aggressive way Scott told the complainant that he was not
permitted to use the women’s toilets;
12.3 by pulling his own shirt up in front of the complainant, playing with
his own nipple and poking out his tongue repeatedly in
a lewd manner while
making eye contact with the complainant;
12.4 by laughing at the complainant’s appearance;
12.5 by threatening to squirt the complainant with liquid from a soft drink
12.6 by not calling hotel patron ‘Corey’ to order when Corey
repeatedly and aggressively called the complainant ‘nothing
but a fucking
12.7 by laughing and joking with Corey when they were repeatedly looking in
the complainant’s direction;
12.8 by not amending his behaviour or apologising after the complainant said
‘you filthy pig’, ‘I can’t go
into the men’s
toilets. I will have to hold it’, and ‘I will see you in
12.9 by not suggesting the option of using the disabled toilet until the
complainant was walking out the door of the pub to go home;
else attending the 8-ball competition in the front bar on 25 August 2011 was
required to put up with loud, aggressive abuse
from patrons and ridicule from
subjected the complainant to sexual harassment in the course of his work as a
bar attendant supplying drinks and overseeing
the 8 ball competition on the
evening of 25 August 2011 in the following ways:
threatened to spray the complainant with liquid from behind the bar using a soft
drink hose;
14.2 Scott pulled his shirt up in front of him and played with his own
nipple. He thrust out his tongue repeatedly in a lewd manner.
behaviour was in response to the complainant attending the hotel dressed as a
woman and singing happy birthday to another member
of the 8 ball community
(because Scott had not behaved this way toward the complainant previously);
response to Scott threatening to squirt the complainant with a hose,
man-handling his own breast and poking out his tongue repeatedly,
complainant said to Scott ‘you filthy pig’.
the complainant sat down with Leanne Croucher at a table, Scott held up a hose a
second time. He was swinging the hose while
Scott was talking to the offensive
patron, Corey. The complainant was concerned that Scott would squirt him with
the hose at this
time. The complainant got the impression from Scott and
Corey’s behaviour that they were talking about him and laughing at
the complainant left the pub that evening with his friend, Bill Papadopoulos,
the complainant said to Scott ‘I will see you
in Court’. Corey
commented ‘you won’t win the case so don’t bother’ and
Scott replied ‘you could
have gone to the disabled toilet’.
complainant felt offended, humiliated and intimidated by Scott’s sexual
harassment. Previously when the complainant has
dressed as a woman, he has been
requested to use the ladies toilets for his own safety.
complainant felt belittled by Scott’s behaviour which occurred in front of
some of the complainant’s friends and other
patrons. The complainant felt
singled out, uncomfortable and angry that Scott and some patrons would behave in
this manner.
complainant says that a reasonable person, having regard to all the
circumstances, would have anticipated that he would be offended,
humiliated or
intimidated by Scott’s conduct because Leanne Croucher told him
‘just ignore it’ and early in the
evening he had told Scott
‘you filthy pig’.
provides, in s 87(6) and (9),
in so far as they are relevant:
(6) It is unlawful for a person to
subject another to sexual harassment in the course of –
(a) offering or supplying goods to that other person; or
(b) offering or performing services to which this Act applies for that other
(9) For the purposes of this section –
(a) a person
sexually harasses
another (the
(i) the person makes an unwelcome sexual advance, or an unwelcome request for
sexual favours, to the person harassed; or
(ii) engages in other unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature in relation to the
person harassed,
in circumstances in which a reasonable person, having regard to all the
circumstances, would have anticipated that the person harassed
offended, humiliated or intimidated; and
conduct of a sexual nature
includes making a
statement of a sexual nature to a person, or in the presence of a person,
whether the statement is made orally or
in writing; ...
Act provides, relevantly, in relation to discrimination:-
is unlawful for a person who offers or provides
(a) goods; or
(b) services to which this Act applies,
(whether for payment or not) to discriminate against another on the ground of
sex, chosen gender or sexuality –
refusing or failing to supply the goods or perform the services; or
(d) in the terms or conditions on which or the manner in which the goods
are supplied or the services are performed.
the purposes of this Act, a person discriminates on the ground of chosen
(a) if he or she treats another unfavourably because
the other is or has been a person of a chosen gender or because of the
past sex; or
(c) if he or she treats another unfavourably on the basis of a characteristic
that appertains generally to persons of a chosen gender,
or on the basis of a
presumed characteristic that is generally imputed to persons of a chosen gender;
(d) if he or she requires a person of a chosen gender to assume
characteristics of the sex with which the person does not identify;
(e) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of an attribute of or a
circumstance affecting a relative or associate of the
other, being an attribute
or circumstance described in the preceding paragraphs.
(3) For the purposes of this Act, a person discriminates on the ground of
sexuality –
(a) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of the other's sexuality
or past sexuality;
(c) if he or she treats another unfavourably on the basis of a characteristic
that appertains generally to persons of the other's
or presumed sexuality,
or on the basis of a presumed characteristic that is generally imputed to
persons of that sexuality;
(d) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of an attribute of or a
circumstance affecting a relative or associate of the
other, being an attribute
or circumstance described in the preceding paragraphs.
Act provides, in s 5(5):
For the purposes of this Act, a person is a person of a chosen gender if
(a) the person identifies on a genuine basis
as a member of the opposite sex by assuming characteristics of the opposite sex
by means of medical intervention, style of dressing or otherwise) or by
living, or seeking to live, as a member of the opposite sex;
(b) the person, being of indeterminate sex, identifies on a genuine basis as
a member of a particular sex by assuming characteristics
of particular sex
(whether by means of medical intervention, style of dressing or otherwise) or by
living, or seeking to live, as
a member of the particular sex.
Act provides, in s 5:
means heterosexuality, homosexuality or
bisexuality;
The Evidence
complainant gave evidence in his own case. He did not seek to call any other
complainant is now 56 years old. His evidence was that he has been dressing as
a woman from time to time since he was 25 years
old. In evidence, he
first dressing as a woman when you were 25, how frequently have you dressed
to The Fringe and all these other places, like the Mars Bar and stuff like that
and do drag shows. I was invited to the Mars
Bar by Malt
not an answer to the question. The question was how frequently – so how
many times a year.
nights, every Thursday night.
Thursday night.
any other occasions.
Thursday nights and The Fringe and The Feast that they have.
participated in an eight ball tournament at the
Brahma Lodge Hotel. For those
eight or so weeks, he attended at the hotel for the tournament dressed as a man.
He met a group of
people, including a person called “Leanne”, and
the barman, Scott. The complainant spoke about the fact that he sometimes
dressed in “drag”, Leanne asked him to come to her birthday
celebration at the Brahma Lodge Hotel on 25 August 2011,
dress in drag and sing
“Happy Birthday” to her.
in the evening of 25 August 2011, the complainant dressed in two dresses (a
black dress underneath a blue dress), stockings,
high heels and a wig and
makeup. At about 7.45pm, the complainant went to the Brahma Lodge Hotel with
his friend, Bill Papadopoulos.
The complainant waited outside the hotel and
Mr Papadopoulos went in to fetch Leanne. Leanne came out with a cake and
the complainant. She lit the candles and then went back into the
hotel. The complainant then brought the cake into the hotel, singing
“Happy Birthday”. The complainant put the cake down and sat with
Leanne and her friends.
evidence, the complainant said that at some point after he had sat down, he
turned to see Scott, the barman, holding a dripping
hose in his hand. The
complainant said:
the way he was holding it and looking at me at the same time, he had his tongue
poked out at the same time as he was holding
it and then he lifts up his shirt
and started playing with his boob.
was the water going, was there water coming out of the hose.
there was, it was dribbling out, it wasn’t pouring out, it was just
drizzling out.
was that going.
the sink, I think it was.
complainant said that, after that, the complainant stood up and moved toward the
ladies toilets. He said that Scott then said
to him “You effing
can’t go into that
The complainant
Scott turned around and said, ‘You effing can’t go into the ladies
toilet, you’ve got to go into men’s
toilet’, and I said,
‘Well, I can’t go into the men’s toilet’ and then I
turned around to him and said,
‘Well, I will not go into the men’s
toilet’, but I ended up going in there but I couldn’t go to the
in there because the floor was filthy, totally dirty in there. There was
like urine all over the floor, or water all over the floor,
that’s classed
as urine to me. But that’s was like... I just could not go in there. So
I came back out, sat down by
Leanne and said to Leanne, I said, ‘I’m
going now’ and then just as I was walking out the door, I turned around
and said, ‘Well, I’ll see you in court then because
then Scott turns around and said, ‘You effing won’t get
anywhere’ and then two other guys, like, Corey and
boyfriend, ganged up on me and said, ‘You effing won’t get
anywhere’ and I just walked out the door
and said, ‘Well,
fine’. Jumped in my car and went home and I was howling all the way home,
I wasn’t impressed.
complainant said that, on previous evenings at the hotel, Mr Stephens had
called him a dickhead, a wanker and a jerk.
complainant’s evidence was that it was his understanding, based on his
experience at other licensed premises, that it was
a “rule” that men
in drag were to use the ladies’ toilets. He said that when he was at the
Brahma Lodge Hotel
dressed as a man, he would use the men’s
in the complainant’s evidence, he
When he said you can’t go to the toilet, the ladies toilets, had he spoken
prior to that to you that night.
he chatted with me and I just looked over and he said you know ‘You look
ravishing...’... to do to a drag queen.
You don’t whistle at a drag
queen. You might talk to them, you don’t whistle at
in cross examination, the complainant said that he was bisexual and that he
considered himself to be “half man, half
Later, in cross
examination, however, the complainant said that he only had sex with men, and
then he said that he only had sex
with his partner, who is
In cross examination, the
following exchange took
you consider yourself to be trans-sexual.
If I had a choice I’d have that operation and turn into a woman,
that’s how I feel right now.
gave evidence that you dress as a woman to perform drag shows.
you do that, when you perform at the Mars Bar and I think you mentioned the
Fringe as well.
purpose of doing that is to be entertaining isn’t it.
purpose of you dressing up to perform in drag, is to entertain the people who
are watching.
correct, yes.
cross examination, the complainant said that the reason he had wanted to go to
the toilet was to take off the outer, blue dress
to reveal the black dress
The complainant denied
that he knew that there were toilets for the disabled at the Brahma Lodge Hotel,
and he further denied that
Scott told him that he could use those toilets.
Mr Williams
said that he had never been back to the Brahma Lodge Hotel since the incident,
and that he had been “walking around
my house like a zombie since this
Mr Williams indicated in evidence that, since the incident, he had been too
upset to do his usual performances at the Mars
However, later in his
evidence, he said that he was, in fact, still performing in drag at The Fringe
and at the Mars Bars on Thursday
Stephens gave evidence in the respondents’ case. Mr Stephens said
that he began working at the Brahma Lodge Hotel in
2010 as a maintenance worker,
then progressed to working in the bottle shop and finally, in 2011, began
working in the bar as a barman.
As a barman at the Hotel, Mr Stephens came
to know Mr Williams and other customers who were playing in the eight ball
competition
on Thursday evenings. Mr Stephens said that in the weeks
before 25 August 2011, Mr Williams dressed as a man whilst attending at
hotel. Mr Stephens recalled Mr Williams telling him that he performed
as a drag queen on Thursday nights at the Mars
Mr Stephens said
that, he did not draw any conclusions about Mr Williams’ sexuality,
based upon what Mr Stephens told him
Mr Stephens’
evidence was that Leanne told him that Mr Williams would be attending the
hotel in drag on 25 August 2011 to help
her celebrate her birthday. Between
7.15pm and 7.45pm, Mr Williams arrived at the hotel, dressed in a blue
dress, a blonde wig and
make-up. Mr Stephens said, in
you describe to the best of your recollection what he did when he arrived at the
because I was serving another customer when he walked in, so I had my attention
to this incident with the toilets do you recall having any interaction with
James on that night.
come to the bar and got a drink of water and I laughed because he was in drag,
you don’t obviously see that in a
pub too often. Now, that wasn’t
anything against him, it was just me being, you know, me, unfortunately. He got
walked back over and stood next to Leanne.
James appear to you to be upset.
not at all.
he enjoying himself.
looked like he was, yes.
you say anything to James prior to the incident with the toilets.
heard Mr Williams’ evidence that at one point he saw you standing
with a hose, that water was dribbling out of
the hose behind the bar and that
you pulled your shirt up and that you rubbed your breast, while poking out your
tongue and looking
the gun as said, [sic] is a post mix gun we use to dispense soft drink and water
for patrons. If I had the gun in my hand
I probably would have serviced a
customer or was pouring myself a drink at the time. And as for pulling up my
shirt, there was no
possibility of that because I wear a shirt underneath tucked
in a button up shirt.
Mr Stephens
denied being rude to Mr Williams prior to 25 August 2011. He denied
calling Mr Williams a dickhead, a wanker or a jerk
at any time. In cross
examination, Mr Stephens said, in effect, that his laugh expressed his
surprise at the effect of seeing a
drag queen at the Brahma Lodge Hotel. It was
not intended to be rude.
Mr Stephens
expressed a tolerant view towards gay people and people who dress as the
opposite sex. He agreed that he had a sense
of humour and enjoyed his rapport
with his customers when he worked at the hotel.
examination in chief, Mr Stephens
me to the best of your recollection about the incident where James attempted to
use the female toilets.
incident from my recollection is I was at the TAB area, which is a distance say
from the window to the door where the judges are
sitting, and it was peripheral
vision to my right and I saw James walk around and I yelled out ‘James
wait’, and then
I have approached him and I said ‘You can’t
use the female toilets’, because I’d noticed two young girl
going in – and their dad, who I was serving at the time, had
noticed Mr Williams walking towards the female toilets. I then
‘You can use the males toilets or the disabled toilets at the front of the
father you mentioned, how did he react.
didn’t react, as such, he’s walked around the bar, he didn’t
get involved in any sense, he just stood in the
background. He saw I handled
the situation, and his children had walked out in the meantime and they were on
Mr Stephens
said that Mr Williams objected, saying that he didn’t feel safe in
the men’s toilets and that he had been
told “by other pubs” to
use the female toilets. Mr Stephens denied swearing at Mr Williams in
the course of their exchange
his voice might have been louder than necessary when he called out to
Mr Williams
to stop him going towards the ladies toilets. Mr Stephens
agreed that Mr Williams called him “a filthy pig” when
Stephens would not relent and added “See you in Court”.
Mr Stephens said that Mr Williams was obviously upset at being
that he could not use the ladies toilets. Mr Stephens said that
Mr Williams stayed at the hotel for some time after that.
Mr Stephens did not speak to him again. Immediately after his exchange with
Mr Williams, Mr Stephens telephoned the duty
manager to speak to him
Corey or Leanne’s boyfriend,
and he did not observe Mr Williams leave
the hotel that night.
Mr Stephens
said that Mr Williams came to the hotel again on the following Thursday
night for the eight ball competition. He said
that, on that night, he
approached Mr Williams and apologised for any embarrassment he had caused
Mr Williams the week before. Mr
Williams did not respond to the
apology. Mr Stephens said that Mr Williams attended at the hotel for
another two weeks, but then
stopped. On the last occasion that Mr Williams
was at the hotel, Mr Stephens said that he said to Mr Stephens that he
could no longer
speak to him and that he’d got a lawyer and was going to
Mr Stephens
said that, in preventing Mr Williams from going to the ladies toilets, he
was concerned about the girls, who he thought
were about 12 to 14, who were in
the ladies toilets at the time, and the women in the bar as well, who
Mr Stephens thought, might
be uncomfortable with a “noticeable
going to the ladies
toilet. He said that Mr Williams had never told him that he considered
himself genuinely to be female.
Mr Monaghan,
a regular customer of the hotel who was present in the bar on 25 August 2011,
gave evidence in the respondent’s
case. Mr Monaghan said that he
drew Mr Stephen’s attention to the fact that Mr Williams was
heading in the direction of the
ladies toilets. Mr Monaghan sits at the
bar when he drinks at the hotel, and, apart from the times when he goes outside
or goes to the toilet, he is constantly observing the barman. He said
that he did not see Mr Stephens make any gestures, such as
rubbing his
nipple, whilst looking at Mr Williams, and nor had he ever heard
Mr Stephens call Mr Williams an abusive name or swear
Mr Monaghan recalled Mr Williams playing eight ball whilst in drag,
though Mr Williams denied, in evidence, that he had
Mr Monaghan did not notice anyone go to the ladies toilets just prior to
Mr Williams walking in that direction.
Burden of Proof
order to succeed in his complaint against the respondents, the complainant must
prove the factual basis for his case on the balance
probabilities.
Sexual harassment
relevant sections of the Act in relation to sexual harassment are set out above.
As we understand his case, the complainant alleges
that Mr Stephens
unlawfully sexually harassed him, in the manner in which he supplied
Mr Williams with the services of a hotel, by
engaging in unwelcome conduct
of a sexual nature, namely, the alleged holding of the drink hose, whilst poking
out his tongue and
then lifting his own shirt and rubbing his own nipple.
are inconsistencies between the allegations initially made by the complainant in
his complaint and the evidence he gave at the
hearing before us. In his
complaint, which he signed on 1 September 2011, the complainant said that
Mr Stephens had sprayed him
with water from behind the bar with a soft
drink hose. In his evidence, Mr Williams did not mention any such
incident, but complained
that Mr Stephens held the hose while it dripped
into the sink, and that this was sexually suggestive, when combined with the
poking out of Mr Stephens’ tongue and the pulling up of his
shirt. In his complaint, Mr Williams said that, after he had prevented
from going to the ladies toilet, Mr Stephens approached him, making
comments about the way he was dressed and laughing at him.
Mr Williams
complained that Mr Stephens called out to other patrons in relation to
Mr Williams. The account Mr Williams gave in
evidence was rather
different from his account in his complaint. We understand that the incident
complained of occurred some years
prior to trial. It may be that
Mr Williams’ ruminations upon that evening have led to some
embellishments of the incidents
in his mind. We find, however, that his
evidence was unreliable in many respects.
Mr Stephens
admitted laughing when he first saw Mr Williams in drag, but it was the
incongruity of seeing a man dressed as a woman
in the Brahma Lodge Hotel which
prompted the laughter, and not any intention to cause offence, humiliation or
intimidation to Mr
Williams. It seems to us that Mr Stephens’
laughter was a spontaneous reaction to an unfamiliar event in familiar
surroundings.
It was not deliberate. Pursuant to the Act, in order for a
course of conduct to constitute sexual harassment in the manner relevant
case, the conduct must be such that “a reasonable person, having regard to
all the circumstances, would have anticipated
that the person harassed would be
offended, humiliated or
intimidated”.
circumstances of this matter, a reasonable person, who was experiencing a
spontaneous reaction, simply would not have directed
his or her mind to the
potential reaction of the other person. The opportunity for anticipation simply
does not arise where a reaction
is spontaneous. Part of the context for
Mr Stephens’ reaction is that he understood, quite reasonably, that
Mr Williams dressed
in drag in order to be entertaining. Mr Williams had
told Mr Stephens that he did shows at the Mars Bar. He had not mentioned
as a woman in any other context and, indeed, there is no evidence that
he does so. We do not consider that Mr Williams’ laughter,
context, constituted sexual harassment. We note, in any event, that
Mr Stephens’ laughter upon first seeing Mr Williams
was not the
subject of any complaint by Mr Williams.
Mr Stephens
denied doing anything with the drinks hose which could have constituted sexual
harassment, and he denied pulling his shirt
up and playing with his nipple or
poking out his tongue. He denied saying anything to Mr Williams which
could constitute sexual
harassment. Mr Monaghan, who was sitting at the
bar, said that he saw and heard nothing directed at Mr Williams, except for
discussion about whether he could use the ladies toilets.
Mr Williams
has not established, on the balance of probabilities, any conduct directed at
him which falls within the definition of
sexual harassment under the
Discrimination
Mr Williams
complains that he was discriminated against on the basis of chosen gender by
Mr Stephens when Mr Stephens prevented him
from using the ladies
toilets. In s 5(5), the Act describes a person who is a person of a chosen
For the purposes of this Act, a person is a person of a chosen gender if
(a) the person identifies on a genuine basis
as a member of the opposite sex by assuming characteristics of the opposite sex
by means of medical intervention, style of dressing or otherwise) or by
living, or seeking to live, as a member of the opposite sex;
(b) the person, being of indeterminate sex, identifies on a genuine basis as
a member of a particular sex by assuming characteristics
of particular sex
(whether by means of medical intervention, style of dressing or otherwise) or by
living, or seeking to live, as
a member of the particular sex.
Mr Williams
is male. His evidence was that, in his own mind, he is half male and half
female, but there was no evidence, medical
or otherwise, that, physically,
Mr Williams is anything other than what he appears to be, which is male.
At the trial, Mr Williams
dressed as a male, and had well groomed facial
hair which was inconsistent with any attempt to appear to be female.
Mr Williams said,
in evidence, that, if he could afford it, he would start
the process of a sex change. Implicitly, he has not begun such a process,
nor did he give evidence of any imminent, realistic plans to do so.
accept that Mr Williams regularly, perhaps as frequently as weekly, dresses
up in women’s clothes, shoes and makeup to perform
at the Mars Bar and
elsewhere. There was no evidence, however, that Mr Williams dresses in
women’s clothes, shoes and makeup
other than to perform. He is neither
living, nor seeking to live, as if he were a woman. He describes himself as a
queen”. This is play acting as a woman. It is implicit in
the concept of “chosen gender” in s 5(5) that the choice
to dress as
a member of the opposite sex is taken for much of the time, on an enduring
basis. A person of chosen gender chooses
to live, for much if not all of the
time, in the manner of the gender he or she was not identified with at birth.
Performing as
a drag queen for a few hours a week is not a case of chosen
gender. It is not intended, by the concept of chosen gender in the Act,
include a person who chooses to dress as a woman for the purpose of giving a
performance once a week for a few hours.
Mr Williams
is not a person of chosen gender. He cannot succeed in a claim for
discrimination on the basis of chosen gender under
Summary and Conclusion
complainant has not established the factual basis for a claim for sexual
harassment under the Act, on the balance of probabilities.
As a result of the
inconsistencies between the complainant’s evidence and the substance of
his complaint, together with the
contrary evidence of Mr Stephens and
Mr Monaghan, we are unable to be satisfied of the occurrence of any events
which constituted
sexual harassment under the Act.
complainant’s claim for discrimination on the basis of chosen gender must
fail because he was not, at the time of the incident,
a person of chosen gender
within the meaning of the Act.
The complaint is set out
precisely as it was written
Equal Opportunity Act
Transcript p 4-5
Transcript p 7-8
Transcript p 8
Transcript p 11-12
Transcript p 18
Transcript p 15
Transcript p 19
Transcript p 21
Transcript p 21
Transcript p 23
Transcript p 13
Transcript p18 line 24
Transcript p 34
Transcript p 38
Transcript 41-42
Transcript p 43
Transcript p 45
Transcript p 47
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (234 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter