URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCA/2025/118.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MCNULTY v THE KING [2025] SASCA 118 (16 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Court of Appeal: Criminal)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
MCNULTY v THE KING
[2025] SASCA 118
Judgment of the Court of Appeal
(The Honourable President Livesey, the Honourable Justice S Doyle
and the Honourable Justice David)
16 October 2025
CRIMINAL LAW - APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - VERDICT UNREASONABLE OR
INSUPPORTABLE HAVING REGARD TO EVIDENCE - APPEAL DISMISSED
CRIMINAL LAW - APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - MISCARRIAGE OF JUSTICE - PARTICULAR
CIRCUMSTANCES NOT AMOUNTING TO MISCARRIAGE - IMPROPER ADMISSION
OR REJECTION OF
CRIMINAL LAW - APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - MISCARRIAGE OF JUSTICE - PARTICULAR
CIRCUMSTANCES NOT AMOUNTING TO MISCARRIAGE - MISDIRECTION
NON-DIRECTION
CRIMINAL LAW - PARTICULAR OFFENCES - OFFENCES AGAINST THE PERSON - SEXUAL
OFFENCES - RAPE AND SEXUAL ASSAULT - CONSENT
CRIMINAL LAW - PARTICULAR OFFENCES - OFFENCES AGAINST THE PERSON -
This is an appeal against conviction.
Following a trial by jury, the appellant was convicted of one count of
assault causing harm, contrary to
Criminal Law Consolidation
(SA) (‘the CLCA’) and two counts of rape, contrary to
of the CLCA.
The complainant met the appellant at a hotel on the evening of 20 August
2022. They socialised with one another and consumed several
alcoholic drinks.
They left the hotel together in the early hours of the morning and travelled to
the complainant's home. The complainant
had no recollection of leaving the hotel
or returning to her home. Her first recollection was lying in her bed, naked,
with the appellant
beside her. She checked her phone and the time was
It is alleged that over the course of that morning, the appellant engaged in
sexual intercourse with the complainant, without her
consent, on two separate
When the complainant woke up and realised the appellant was engaging in the
first charged act of sexual intercourse with her, she
resisted. In response, the
appellant punched the complainant to the nose with a clenched fist (Count 1).
The complainant's account
of the assault was supported by medical evidence and
observations of the injury to her nose, as well as photographs. The appellant
allegedly continued to have sexual intercourse with her (Count 2). The
complainant received a telephone call at 10:41am which she
did not answer.
Shortly after this telephone call, the appellant again engaged in sexual
intercourse with her (Count 3). By this
stage, the complainant had become
fearful of the appellant and did not attempt to stop him when he again engaged
in sexual intercourse
The appellant now appeals his convictions on two grounds: first, that there
has been a miscarriage of justice (Ground 1); and secondly,
that his convictions
are unreasonable and cannot be supported by the evidence (Ground 2). As to
Ground 1, the appellant complains
there has been a miscarriage of justice by
reason of the following:
admission of evidence of the complainant’s statement to a friend, HC, that
the appellant ‘punched’ her and the
trial Judge’s directions
admission of evidence of bruises to the complainant’s body and the trial
Judge’s directions on the topic of the injuries
(Ground 1(b));
prosecutor’s submissions in his closing address which purportedly reversed
the onus of proof and, as a result of the trial
Judge's inadequate directions
(Ground 1(c)).
Held, per the Court, granting permission to appeal
but dismissing the appeal:
to Ground 1(a), the evidence of the complainant's out of court statement was
admissible and the trial Judge adequately instructed
the jury as to the
impermissible use of the evidence.
to Ground 1(b), the independent evidence of the bruises to the
complainant’s body was capable of supporting her account as
appellant forcefully had sexual intercourse with her.
to Ground 1(c), the trial Judge’s directions as to the prosecutor’s
address, and the burden of proof, removed any risk
of a miscarriage of justice
caused by the prosecutor’s submissions as to the bruising.
There was no miscarriage of justice.
to Ground 2, the complainant’s account was not inherently implausible such
that it must have given rise to a doubt in the
mind of the jury. It was open to
the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the appellant’s guilt
of all three offences.
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Evidence Act 1929
, referred to.
Anderson (A Pseudonym) v The King
[2024] SASCA 36
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
[2020] HCA 12
(2020) 268 CLR 123
(2017) 128 SASR 340
(2014) 119 SASR 22
, considered.
MCNULTY v THE KING
[2025] SASCA 118
Court of Appeal – Criminal: Livesey P and Doyle and David
Following a trial by jury, the appellant was convicted of one count
of assault causing harm, contrary to
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) (‘the CLCA’) and two counts of rape,
contrary to
of the CLCA.
complainant met the appellant at a hotel on the evening of
20 August 2022. They socialised with one another and consumed several
alcoholic drinks. They left the hotel together in the early hours of the morning
and travelled to the complainant's home. The complainant
had no recollection of
leaving the hotel or returning to her home. Her first recollection was lying in
her bed, naked, with the appellant
beside her. She checked her phone and the
time was 5:30am.
complainant gave evidence that over the course of that morning the appellant
engaged in sexual intercourse with her, without
her consent, on two separate
complainant gave evidence that she woke up and realised that the appellant was
engaging in the first charged act of sexual intercourse,
whereupon she resisted.
In response, the appellant punched the complainant to the nose with a clenched
fist (Count 1). The complainant's
account of the assault was supported by
medical evidence and observations of the injury to her nose, as well as
photographs.
appellant allegedly continued to have sexual intercourse with her
complainant received a telephone call at 10:41am which she did not answer.
Shortly after this telephone call, the appellant again
engaged in sexual
intercourse with her (Count 3). By this stage, the complainant had become
fearful of the appellant and did not
attempt to stop him when he again engaged
in sexual intercourse with her.
complainant made an initial complaint that she had been raped to her friend, HC,
later that morning. She then reported the allegations
to the police. During the
evening, the complainant was medically examined.
appellant did not give or call any evidence at trial.
issues at trial were whether the prosecution had proved, beyond reasonable
doubt, that the appellant punched the complainant,
and her lack of consent to
the two acts of sexual intercourse. There was no dispute that the appellant had
sexual intercourse with
the complainant. Rather, defence counsel put to the
complainant that the appellant had not punched her, and the two acts of sexual
intercourse were consensual.
appellant now appeals his convictions on two grounds: first, that there has been
a miscarriage of justice (Ground 1); and secondly,
that his convictions are
unreasonable and cannot be supported by the evidence (Ground 2). These appeal
grounds raise the following
there has been a miscarriage of justice occasioned by the admission of evidence
of the complainant’s statement to a
friend, HC, that the appellant
‘punched’ her and the trial Judge’s directions about the
limited use to be made
of that evidence (Ground 1(a));
there has been a miscarriage of justice occasioned by the admission of evidence
of bruises to the complainant’s body
and the trial Judge’s
directions on the topic of the injuries (Ground 1(b));
the prosecutor’s submissions in his closing address called on the jury to
speculate in a manner which reversed the onus
of proof and, if so, whether the
trial Judge’s directions were adequate to ameliorate any risk of
impermissible reasoning (Ground
on an independent review of the evidence, the jury must have had a doubt that
the complainant did not consent to engaging
in sexual intercourse with the
appellant, and he knew, or was recklessly indifferent to that fact (Ground 2).
the reasons which follow, we grant permission to appeal on both grounds but
dismiss the appeal. Given there is an unreasonable
verdict ground, it is
necessary to outline the main features of the evidence at
The evidence at trial
prosecution relied primarily on the complainant’s evidence as to the
relevant events.
complainant gave evidence that she and two friends attended the Gully Hotel
at about 9:30pm on 20 August 2022. The appellant
approached her during the
evening, and they engaged in conversation. Over the course of the evening, the
complainant consumed a number
of alcoholic drinks. She was also taking
prescribed medication, Gabapentin, which she said could ‘intensify the
alcohol’. No other evidence was led by the prosecution in
relation to the effects of alcohol combined with Gabapentin.
was evidence adduced as to CCTV
of events at the
Gully Hotel which depicted the appellant and the complainant kissing. The
complainant had no memory of this interaction
with the appellant. Nor did she
have any memory of events after about 12:30am, when one of her friends left the
was independent evidence that the complainant paid for an Uber which left the
Gully Hotel at about 2:27am.
was also evidence that there were two phone calls from the appellant’s
phone to the complainant’s phone at 4:53am.
It was put to the complainant
that the appellant had made the calls to help her locate her phone, but she
could not recall that having
first memory the complainant had after being at the hotel was waking to find
herself naked and in bed with the appellant. She
said she was ‘shocked and
disorientated’, and that her vagina felt sore. The complainant thought it
was possible that
she had engaged in sexual intercourse with the appellant prior
to that time, although she had no recollection of doing so. She said
appellant was awake. She checked her mobile telephone which indicated it was
complainant said her next recollection was that the appellant was positioned on
top of her and holding her by the upper part
of both arms, just below the
shoulder. She said that the appellant’s penis was inside her vagina, and
he was engaging in sexual
intercourse with her. She was unable to recall what,
if anything, occurred between her checking her mobile telephone and the
positioning himself on top of her. In cross-examination, the
complainant said the appellant was on top of her ‘not long after
checked [her] phone’.
complainant gave evidence that at some point she pushed him with her left hand
and said: ‘You need to relax, stop’.
In response, he told her to
‘Shut up you little slut’. Then, using his right hand, the appellant
punched her to the ‘front’
of her nose with a closed fist (Count 1).
She said that the appellant continued to engage in sexual intercourse with her
She estimated that the sexual intercourse lasted for about an
hour. She said that the appellant kept laughing and calling her a
and ‘slut’, that he was acting ‘quite
strange’, and she was scared. The complainant was unsure whether the
appellant ejaculated.
complainant gave evidence that she received a call from her friend HC when
the appellant was on top of her, but not engaging
in sexual intercourse with
her. She gave evidence that she did not answer the phone call because the
appellant slammed his hand down
on her phone and said, ‘Fuck off, [HC],
you bitch’.
was independent evidence that the complainant received a missed phone call from
HC at 10:41am.
complainant said that following the missed phone call, the appellant positioned
himself on top of her and engaged in sexual intercourse
with her (Count 3).
On this occasion, the complainant remained silent throughout the sexual
intercourse, as she was scared as ‘he had punched [her]
in the face, and
[she] felt like he was being very erratic and non-predictable’. The sexual
intercourse came to an end as the
appellant ejaculated.
complainant said that she went to the bathroom and sent a text message to her
sister-in-law. That message was sent at 10:59am
need an escape call! Call me and say you were meant to be here 10 mins ago.
Hurry up!! Xx’.
sister-in-law responded by text, and then telephoned her (as requested) asking
her where she was and reminded her that she was
late and needed to be somewhere.
The complainant put the phone call on speaker so that the appellant could hear
her conversation
with her sister-in-law, hoping that this would prompt the
appellant to leave.
the alleged assault and sexual assaults, the complainant explained that she was
fearful of the appellant and was concerned
for her safety. She said she was too
frightened to ask him to leave. She said she tried to remain calm by acquiescing
in his request
for access to her phone (to access her social media account). She
told him she had to leave and headed to her vehicle in an attempt
to do so, but
he followed her. She asked him if he needed her to take him anywhere and he
asked her to take him home, which she did.
appellant took a video of her as she drove him
On the defence case, this
video depicts her smiling and behaving in a manner inconsistent with her account
as to the alleged offending.
was evidence that later that day, the appellant sent a text message to the
complainant at 1:11pm stating: ‘The real question
– did you actually
arrive safely?’ This was a reference to the complainant lightly colliding
with another vehicle when
she drove the appellant home.
to the evidence of initial complaint, the complainant gave evidence that after
she returned home, she telephoned her friend, HC,
who drove to the
complainant’s home and then took the complainant to HC’s home.
complainant’s conversations with HC, over the course of that day, are the
subject of appeal Ground 1(a).
that day, the complainant attended the Holden Hill Police Station and reported
the matter to police. There, crime scene investigators
took photographs of the
complainant’s face.
Sergeant Matthews observed a red area across the bridge of her nose. The
complainant also attended the Yarrow Place Rape
and Sexual Assault Service that
evening and underwent a forensic examination. Photographs were taken of injuries
to the complainant’s
24 August 2024, at 8:20am, Brevet Sergeant Van Der Wielen observed swelling and
faint yellow-brown bruising to the bridge of the
complainant’s nose and
left eye area. She took some further photographs of the injury and bruising to
the complainant’s
admissibility of evidence as to the bruising to the complainant’s body is
the subject of appeal Ground 1(b).
mentioned earlier, the appellant did not give evidence nor call any evidence at
trial. The defence case was that the prosecution
had not disproved the appellant
believed that the complainant was consenting to the sexual intercourse, and
therefore, he did not
know nor was he aware that she was not consenting.
counsel emphasised that the complainant’s behaviour, both before and after
the alleged rapes, supported the defence
case: before leaving the
Gully Hotel she was seen kissing the appellant; they travelled to the
complainant’s home together;
and she dropped the appellant back at his
emphasised that
there was a period of approximately four or five hours between
12:30am and 5:30am, and several hours between 5:30am and 10:40am,
for which the
complainant was unable to account. In those circumstances, defence counsel
contended she was an unreliable witness,
and her evidence could not be relied on
to prove the prosecution case.
to the bruising identified on the complainant’s body, defence counsel
submitted that the bruises were non-specific, and
unable to be dated such that
the prosecution had not excluded that they were caused in a way other than as
alleged by the complainant.
addition, defence counsel submitted that the appellant’s behaviour, in
telephoning her the following day and sharing his
information with her,
supported his case that he believed she was consenting to sexual intercourse
Ultimately,
defence counsel submitted that by reason of the unsatisfactory state of the
evidence, the jury could not be satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt of any of the
Appeal grounds
grounds of appeal (as amended) are particularised as follows:
has been a miscarriage of justice by:
admission of, then the directions given in relation to, hearsay evidence in
relation to the assault;
admission of, and the omission of directions given in relation to, evidence of
bruising on the complainant’s body not arising
from the charged acts;
Insufficient
directions being given to negate the prosecutor’s submissions that
amounted to a reversal of the onus of proof.
convictions are unreasonable and not supported in the evidence by reason of
inconsistencies, discrepancies, and other inadequacies
complainant’s evidence and the jury, acting rationally, ought nonetheless
to have entertained a reasonable doubt as
to proof of guilt.
complainant accepted that she possibly had intercourse with the [appellant]
before 5:30am but could not recall the same.
complainant gave inconsistent evidence as to when the first rape was alleged to
have occurred, whether shortly after 5:30am or
sometime before 10:40am.
complainant was either unable to or could not recall what happened between the
first alleged rape and the second alleged rape
and approximately 4 to 5 hours
was unaccounted for by the complainant.
complainant was unable to recall facts or things that must have occurred because
objective evidence such as drinking glasses shown
in photos of the alleged crime
scene supported the version of events said to have occurred by defence counsel.
Ground 1(a) – the complaint
this particular of the first ground of appeal, the appellant complains that the
evidence of the complainant’s statement
to HC (at the complainant’s
evidence resulted in
a miscarriage of justice.
appellant also separately contends that the trial Judge’s directions as to
the impermissible use of the evidence were inadequate
because of the failure to
explicitly state that the evidence could not be used by the jury when
considering the complainant’s
credibility on Count 3.
outlined earlier, there was evidence of a series of conversations between the
complainant and HC as to the alleged offending.
The entire series of
conversations related to their interactions, but only the final conversation was
adduced as evidence of initial
first conversation involved a telephone call made by the complainant to HC
shortly after the complainant dropped the appellant
call, HC was out with her partner and children. The complainant said she told
HC: ‘something bad’s
happened and that [she] was hurt’. HC
gave evidence to the same effect.
the complainant said that HC (and her family) came to her home and collected
her. In evidence, the complainant said that she
spoke with HC, but she did not
recount the content of that conversation. HC said that the complainant was
highly distressed. In response
to a question about the demeanour of the
complainant, HC said that the complainant told her that ‘he punched
then took the complainant to HC’s home. When there, the complainant
disclosed the alleged sexual offending to HC. Only this
conversation was adduced
as evidence of an ‘initial complaint’. The complainant gave evidence
that she told HC that something
bad had happened and that she was hurt. HC then
asked her what had happened and if she had been hit and the complainant
'Yes, but it was a lot worse'. She said she told HC that she had been
raped. The complainant could not recall the exact words she
gave evidence that when they arrived at HC’s home and her partner took
their children away, the complainant started crying
and said that ‘he
the above evidence, as to the series of conversations between the complainant
and HC, were led by the prosecution without objection.
the conclusion of the case for the prosecution, the trial Judge raised the topic
of the evidence of initial complaint. After a
discussion with the parties, his
Honour ruled that the conversation at the complainant's house when she said that
‘he punched
me’ was not admissible as evidence of initial complaint
as it was not referable to a sexual offence.
his summing up, the trial Judge gave comprehensive directions in relation to the
evidence of initial complaint. His Honour
instructed the jury that the relevant
evidence of initial complaint was the complainant's statement to HC, at
HC’s house, to
the effect of, ‘I have been raped’. His Honour
set out the permissible uses of that evidence in relation to the sexual
(Counts 2 and 3). His Honour said:
complainant] gave evidence that, when she got back to [HC’s] house, she
told her that she had been raped, or said words
to that effect. [HC] said, in
effect, the same thing; that after they got home, having collected [the
complainant] from her house,
[the complainant] complained to her about what had
happened. She said she was crying and said ‘I have been raped’. You
heard that, not long after that, [the complainant] was taken to the police
station and the matter was reported to the police.
I need to give you a legal direction as to the way in which you may use the
complaint evidence and how you may not use it.
In effect, you can only use the complaint evidence for a limited purpose, or
First, the evidence allows you to understand how the allegations first came
to light, so it explains that to you.
Second, the evidence allows you to consider the degree to which [the
complainant] has acted consistently with what she says occurred
to her; that is,
to what extent did [the complainant] complain about the offending at a time
that you would expect her to and to
what extent has [the complainant’s]
account remained consistent from when she first reported these allegations. This
is sometimes
called ‘consistency of conduct’ and ‘consistency
of account’.
the jury were directed that they could have regard to the complainant's distress
at the time of making her initial complaint
when assessing whether her evidence
demonstrated consistency of conduct.
to the impermissible use of the evidence, the trial Judge instructed the jury
that they could not use the evidence of initial
complaint as evidence of the
truth of its content. His Honour said:
But, just to underline the
way you cannot use it, you cannot use this evidence to demonstrate the truth of
what is alleged. So to
decide the truth of what occurred, you must rely on
[the complainant’s] firsthand evidence in court. This is probably the
important thing about this direction: just because she complained that she
had been raped, does not prove, and cannot be relied on
as proof that she was.
Relevantly,
the trial Judge then explicitly directed the jury that the complainant’s
evidence that ‘he punched me’
was not relevant as evidence of
consistency of conduct when assessing the complainant’s credibility, as it
did not relate to
a sexual offence. His Honour also explicitly directed the jury
the evidence was not relevant to the offence of assault causing harm
His Honour instructed the jury that the only limited use of the evidence was to
‘explain the chronology of things’.
His Honour said:
Following on from that, I direct you to ignore [HC’s]
evidence that, when [HC] first arrived at [the complainant’s] house
collect her, that [the complainant] kept saying that ‘he punched
me’. You will recall that evidence.
Being punched is not an allegation about a sexual offence and, in those
circumstances you may not use what she said to [HC] about
being punched as
evidence that may support her credibility in relation to count 1 or count 2.
As I say, the general rule is that just because you tell someone something
happened does not mean it did happen and cannot be used
for that purpose, nor
does it make someone’s account more credible because they told someone if
it is not a sexual offence.
So, for that reason, I direct you to ignore the evidence for that purpose. So
you have no regard to it for the purposes of assessing
her evidence in relation
to the assault charge.
The only limited use of that evidence, that is that [the complainant] told
[HC] that she had been hit, is that it may explain why
[HC] decided to take [the
complainant] back to her house because of her presentation, she was upset and
what she said.
So you will recall that [HC] said that [the complainant] said a guy punched
her in the face and she was crying and she was not making
sense and that,
because of that, she said she would take her back home. So that is the only
limited use of that evidence, that is
to explain the chronology of things and
that is the extent of it.
I repeat though, that it provides no evidence as to the commission of any
offence and is not evidence that you can use to support
complainant’s] credibility.
appellant’s complaints in relation to the evidence of initial complaint,
and the legal directions mentioned, are two-fold.
First, that the evidence was
not admissible as part of the narrative or ‘to explain the chronology of
things’ and its
admission was productive of a miscarriage of justice; and
secondly, that the directions as to the impermissible use of the evidence
inadequate because the trial Judge failed to instruct the jury that they could
not use the evidence when assessing the complainant’s
credibility on Count
do not agree. While it is well settled that evidence of an initial complaint
Evidence Act 1929
(SA) must be referable to a charged
sexual offence,
the impugned
statement ‘he punched me’ was not led as evidence of an initial
The trial Judge’s
directions made plain that it was only the complainant’s latter statement
‘I have been raped’
which the jury could use to demonstrate
consistency of conduct, and only with respect to the sexual offences. His Honour
directed the jury that the evidence of initial complaint, and all of
the evidence of the conversations between the complainant and
HC, were not
relevant when assessing the complainant’s credibility on the first count.
the impugned evidence was relevant and admissible for the limited purpose for
which it was adduced, namely as part of the
complainant’s narrative as to
her behaviour following the alleged rape and to explain the chronology of events
leading up to
the initial complaint. Her statement ‘he punched me’
was capable of providing some explanation as to why HC decided to
complainant back to her home. It also put the terms of the initial complaint in
their complete context. At HC’s home,
HC asked the complainant if she had
been hit, and the complainant responded by saying, ‘yes, but it was a lot
worse' and then
disclosed that she had been raped. Without the earlier
conversation, the way HC elicited the complaint might have seemed unusual
or, indeed, unlikely.
Notwithstanding
the impugned evidence was admitted for a limited purpose, we consider it would
have been preferable had the prosecutor
simply adduced HC’s observations
of the complainant’s distress and injury at the complainant’s house
without leading
evidence of the content of her statement ‘he punched
However, the careful and
comprehensive directions given by the trial Judge effectively neutralised the
impermissible use (and prejudicial
effect) of the evidence.
to the appellant's submission, we do not consider that the trial Judge failed to
direct the jury that the complainant’s
evidence ‘he punched
me’ was not relevant on the issue of the complainant’s credibility
on Count 3. His Honour
directed the jury to ignore this evidence when assessing
the complainant’s credibility, as it did not involve an allegation
relating to a sexual offence. His Honour reiterated the general rule that a
previous consistent statement which does not relate to
a sexual offence cannot
be used in support of a person’s credibility. Moreover, his Honour
instructed the jury in clear terms
that the statement ‘provides no
evidence as to the commission of any offence and is not evidence that you can
use to support
[the complainant’s] credibility’.
it is to be accepted that the trial Judge highlighted the evidence was
inadmissible in relation to Counts 1 and 2, that was
obviously by reason of the
temporal connection between those acts, and the consequential heightened risk of
impermissible reasoning
in relation to Count 2. However, taking into account the
whole of the legal directions on this topic, we are satisfied his Honour
adequately instructed the jury as to the impermissible use of the evidence with
respect to all counts.
was no error in the trial Judge's approach either to the admissibility or
directions in relation to the impugned evidence.
Ground 1(b)
– the evidence of the bruising
the course of the trial, defence counsel objected to the prosecution leading
evidence from Dr Pedler as to observations and
photographs of bruising to
various parts of the complainant’s body. By this stage, the prosecutor had
already adduced limited
evidence from the complainant as to an injury to her
face and the mechanism by which the appellant inflicted the first alleged rape.
The prosecutor had also tendered photographs taken by crime scene investigators
of bruising to the complainant’s face.
hearing legal argument from both parties, the trial Judge excluded the evidence
of bruising to the complainant’s legs,
but permitted the prosecution to
lead evidence as to the following injuries observed (and photographed) during
the medical examination:
Injury marked
number 10 - a red bruise to the bridge of the complainant's
Injury marked
number 2 - two faint purple/blue bruises to the complainant's upper left
Injury marked
number 3 - a brown/red bruise to the back the complainant's right
Injury marked
number 11 - a bruise to the complainant's right upper
counsel objected to the admission of injury 11, but otherwise conceded that
there was an evidential foundation for injuries
2, 3 and 10. The trial Judge
ruled that the injury 11 was admissible given its proximity to injury 3.
to the appellant’s written submissions, the evidence of injury 2 was not
excluded by the trial Judge. His Honour simply
misspoke when he included injury
2 in the list of exclusions but immediately corrected himself after enquiry by
the prosecutor.
The rest of the
trial, including during the evidence of Dr Pedler and the addresses of counsel,
was conducted by both parties on
the basis that injury 2 was admitted by his
was no dispute at the trial, nor on this appeal, that the evidence of the
bruising to the complainant’s nose was relevant
and admissible. The
complainant gave evidence that she was punched to the nose during the first
alleged rape, and this resulted in
a red mark to the bridge of her nose, which
developed into a bruise. She also gave evidence that she did not have any
bruising to
her face or body prior to attending the Gully Hotel on 20 August
2022. Her evidence of the nose injury was supported by the following
the observation
of HC on the afternoon of 21 August 2022 that the complainant’s nose was
the observations
of Brevet Sergeant Matthews’ on 21 August 2022 at 3:15pm of a red area
across the bridge of the complainant’s
nose, and photographs of the
the observations
of Ms Tracey Markham’s (a nurse) during the forensic examination conducted
on 21 August 2022 between 9:25pm
and 11:25pm of a visible red mark or bruise on
the bridge of the nose, and photographs of the injury; and
the observations
of Brevet Sergeant Van Der Wielen’s on 24 August 2022 of
swelling and faint yellow-brown bruising to the bridge
of the complainant's nose
and her left eye, and photographs of the injury.
appellant now contends that the evidence of bruising to the complainant’s
upper left arm (injury 2), upper right arm (injury
3) and her back (injury 11)
were inadmissible as they were not referable to the alleged offending, and the
admission of the evidence
was productive of a miscarriage of justice.
appellant’s contention ignores the complainant’s evidence as to the
mechanism by which both sexual offences took
place. As to the bruising to the
complainant's upper arms (injuries 2 and 3), while the complainant was not asked
any questions about
whether she had any injuries to her arms, she gave evidence
that during the first act of sexual intercourse, the appellant held her
her upper arms. Dr Pedler gave evidence that injuries 2 and 3 could have been
caused by someone holding a person's arms but
accepted that she could not rule
out other possible causes for the bruising she observed on the
complainant’s arms. No evidence
was elicited from Dr Pedler as to the
possible causes of bruising to the complainant’s back (injury 11).
complainant’s evidence as to the mechanism by which the first rape was
inflicted, combined with the medical evidence from
Dr Pedler, provided an
evidentiary basis for the admission of the evidence (and photographs) of the
bruising to the complainant’s
arms. The evidence of bruising was
consistent with, and provided some support for, the complainant’s account
as to Count 2.
to the bruising to the right outer side of the back (injury 11), this was near
the bruises on the upper arms (injuries 2 and 3)
and, in the context of the
complainant's evidence that the appellant pinned her to the bed by holding her
upper arms (whilst she
was on her back), the evidence was properly admitted.
While there were other possible causes for the bruising to the
complainant’s
arms and back, the evidence was nonetheless capable of
supporting her account as to how the appellant forcefully had sexual intercourse
admission of this evidence was not productive of a miscarriage of justice.
Ground 1(c) – reversal of the onus of proof
this appeal ground, the appellant complains that the reference by the prosecutor
in his closing address to the absence of any
other evidence of possible causes
of bruising to the complainant’s nose and body had the effect of reversing
the onus of proof.
his closing address to the jury, the prosecutor made
two related submissions about the evidence of the bruises. He
We heard the evidence of Dr Pedler. That injury is consistent
with being punched in the face. That is the uncontradicted expert evidence
Now, Dr Pedler can’t exclude other possible mechanisms. She said
bruising requires or is most commonly caused from blunt force
trauma. But in
this trial we don’t have any other evidence of possible alternative
explanations. None.
The only evidence we have that could have caused the
bruising is the punch, what [the complainant] told us, and what I suggest is
supported by the uncontradicted evidence of [HC] and Dr Pedler and the agreed
evidence of Brevet Sergeant Matthews.
Again, [the complainant’s] account is the only evidence in this
trial that explains the bruising. There’s no other evidence
That sort of independent, objective evidence in relation to the assault is
crucial because it doesn’t just come from [the complainant],
and that act
of assault immediately prior to the intercourse, if you find that it happened,
is a clear indication that this was not
consensual sex.
(emphasis added)
to the prosecutor’s submissions, the trial Judge said:
point, [the prosecutor] said that there was no other evidence anywhere as to the
cause of those injuries.
Now, that was probably not intentional, but it was an inappropriate
submission in the sense that there were other alternative explanations
injuries and Dr Pedler admitted as much.
Further, to the extent that the submission suggested that there was some
obligation on the defence to provide an explanation or an
alternative
explanation for those injuries, I direct that you cannot reason in that way.
the appellant accepts that the trial Judge attempted to correct the
prosecutor’s error in his closing address, he submits
that the jury were
not directed, in specific terms, that the appellant bore no onus to prove any
such possible alternative explanation,
or to present contradicting evidence to
rule out other causes for the bruises on the complainant’s face or body.
Accordingly,
the appellant submits there was a miscarriage of justice.
consider that the trial Judge’s directions ameliorated any risk of
impermissible reasoning by the jury. His Honour made
clear that the appellant
bore no obligation to provide an alternative explanation for the
complainant’s bruising. Bearing
in mind that his Honour also gave
thorough and orthodox directions as to the burden of proof, there was no risk
that the jury would
have reasoned impermissibly by reversing the onus of proof
when considering the evidence of the bruises.
to the appellant's related complaint that the trial Judge's directions with
respect to the absence of challenge by defence counsel
to Dr Pedler's evidence
reinforced an erroneous approach generated by the prosecutor's address, this
contention mischaracterises
this portion of his Honour’s summing up.
Before summarising Dr Pedler’s evidence, his Honour gave the jury orthodox
as to the correct approach to assessing expert evidence. At the
conclusion of those directions, his Honour said:
Ultimately, after
giving that evidence careful consideration, you do not have to accept the
evidence of any witness, including an
expert witness. So just because they are
an expert does not mean you have to accept everything that they have said, if
think it is reasonable.
Having said that, in this case, you might think that the expert opinion of
Dr Pedler was not challenged in any way and that what is
in dispute is the
inferences that can be drawn from her evidence and the balance of the evidence
in this case.
(emphasis added)
At this point, the trial Judge was simply emphasising that Dr Pedler’s
evidence was not in dispute but, rather, the parties
contested what inferences
were open to be drawn from the evidence.
On the defence case, the evidence of the injuries was inconclusive, and of
limited relevance, given that Dr Pedler could not exclude
other causes for the
injuries. When the trial Judge proceeded to summarise Dr Pedler’s
evidence, he highlighted this aspect
of her evidence. His Honour also emphasised
this evidence when summarising defence counsel’s closing address.
When considered as a whole, we are satisfied that the trial Judge’s
directions as to the prosecutor’s address, and the
burden of proof,
removed any risk of a miscarriage of justice caused by the prosecutor’s
submissions as to the bruising.
We grant permission but dismiss this ground of appeal.
2 – unreasonable verdicts
appellant complains that the convictions are unreasonable and a jury acting
reasonably ought to have experienced a reasonable
doubt. In making this
submission, the appellant relies on the following aspects of the
complainant’s evidence:
The complainant
was unable to account for a period of time between her first recollection at
5:30am (prior to Count 1) and 10:59am
when she sent the text message to her
sister-in-law after the second incident of rape (Count 3).
The complainant
was unable to recall any of the evening from about 12:30am at the Gully Hotel up
to 5:30am (including kissing the
appellant at the hotel, taking an Uber with the
appellant to her home, and possibly engaging in sexual intercourse with him
to 5:30am).
complainant’s evidence of receiving a closed fist punch to the face
connecting with her nose was inconsistent with the photographic
evidence of the
apparent bruising to the complainant’s face.
complainant’s behaviour after the alleged offending was inconsistent with
her account.
test to be applied in determining whether a jury verdict is unreasonable or
cannot be supported by the evidence was outlined
by the High Court in
notwithstanding that as a matter of law there is evidence to sustain a verdict,
a court of criminal appeal is asked to conclude
that the verdict is unsafe or
unsatisfactory, the question which the court must ask itself is whether it
thinks that upon the whole
of the evidence it was open to the jury to be
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty. But in answering
question the court must not disregard or discount wither the consideration
that the jury is the body entrusted with the primary responsibility
determining guilt or innocence, or the consideration that the jury has had the
benefit of having seen and heard the witnesses.
On the contrary, the court must
pay full regard to those considerations.
undertaking the task of determining whether upon the whole of the evidence it
was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that the appellant
was guilty, the appeal court must have regard to the jury’s advantage of
directly observing and hearing
the complainant’s evidence.
the High Court explained in
The function
of the court of criminal appeal in determining a ground that contends that the
verdict of the jury is unreasonable or
cannot be supported having regard to the
evidence, in a case such as the present, proceeds upon the assumption that the
of the complainant was assessed by the jury to be credible and
reliable. The court examines the record to see whether, notwithstanding
assessment – either by reason of inconsistencies, discrepancies or other
inadequacy; or in light of other evidence –
the court is satisfied that
the jury, acting rationally, ought nonetheless to have entertained a reasonable
doubt as to proof of
(citations omitted)
an assessment of the whole of the record, we are satisfied that it was open to
the jury to find each of the three offences proved
beyond reasonable doubt.
After having regard to the whole of the evidence and bearing in mind the
appellant’s criticisms of
the complainant’s evidence, we have
reached that conclusion for the following reasons.
was material support for the complainant’s account that the appellant
punched her to the nose. The assault underpinned
the prosecution case as to the
complainant’s lack of consent and the appellant’s state of mind. As
outlined above, this
evidence included: HC’s observation on the afternoon
of 21 August 2022 that the complainant’s nose was red; the
observations
by Brevet Sergeant Matthews on the afternoon of 21 August 2022
of an injury to the nose; the observations by Ms Markham during the
forensic examination conducted on the evening of 21 August 2022 of an
injury to the nose; and the observations by Brevet Sergeant
Van Der Wielen on
the morning of 24 August 2022 of swelling and bruising to the bridge of the
nose. There were also photographs
taken by police on 21 August 2022
and 24 August 2022 depicting redness and bruising to the bridge of the
complainant's nose.
the extent that the appellant now submits that the alleged nose injury is
inconsistent with the photographic evidence of the apparent
bruising to the
complainant’s face, the photographs do not stand alone but must be
considered in the context of the various
observations made of the injury. The
photographs do not materially undermine the combined force of that evidence.
appellant made a related submission to the effect that there was an
irreconcilable inconsistency in the complainant’s evidence
timing of the sexual intercourse the subject of Count 2. This submission should
be rejected as it is predicated upon an
artificial view of the
complainant’s evidence. It is true that the complainant described waking
at 5:30am and then next recalled
the appellant having sexual intercourse with
her; that she thought the sexual intercourse lasted about an hour; and that the
intercourse was interrupted by the missed call from HC at
10:41am. However, this evidence can be reconciled on the basis that the
complainant at all times acknowledged that there were gaps in her memory, which
is hardly surprising given her intoxication the previous
evening and the
traumatic nature of the events that morning. It was entirely plausible, and
certainly open to the jury to accept
that the complainant had lost track of time
at some point in the narrative. Acceptance of this did not require doubt about
the credibility
or reliability of her allegation of violent and sexual offending
against her.
is also true that the complainant was unable to recall any of the evening from
until about 5:30am when she woke
and checked the time on her phone. However, again, the complainant readily
conceded that there were
gaps in her memory, and proffered that she may have had
consensual sexual intercourse with the appellant after returning home from
Gully Hotel and before checking her phone at 5:30am. Nonetheless, her evidence
was clear that when the appellant was on top of
her having sexual intercourse
with her, she told him to stop whereupon he verbally abused her and punched her
to the nose. On her
account, it was open to the jury to find that from that
point on she was not consenting to sexual intercourse; and the appellant
was recklessly indifferent to her lack of consent. As outlined above, there was
independent support for her evidence that
the appellant punched her to the
relation to the submission that the complainant’s behaviour after the
alleged offending was inconsistent with her allegations,
the complainant gave
various explanations for her conduct following the offending. She explained that
she was trying to placate the
appellant as she was fearful that he would hurt
her again. When assessing how a victim of sexual assault is expected to behave
a sexual assault, courts must exercise caution to avoid imposing
stereotypical expectations which do not always conform with the
individual responses which may be made to alleged sexual offending. Bearing in
mind the whole of the complainant’s
evidence as to her response to the
alleged offending, and in particular her explanation for driving the appellant
that her account was not inherently implausible such that
it must have given rise to a doubt in the mind of the jury.
an independent review of the whole of the evidence having regard to the
jury’s advantage of having seen and heard the
complainant give evidence,
and notwithstanding the appellant’s criticisms of the complainant’s
credibility and reliability
as a witness, we are satisfied that it was open to
the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the appellant’s guilt
of all three offences. This was not a case where the jury must, as distinct from
might, have entertained a doubt as to the appellant’s
those reasons, we grant permission but dismiss this ground of
We grant permission but dismiss the appeal.
Trial Exhibit P2.
Trial Exhibit P3.
Trial Exhibit P1.
Trial Exhibit P3, Tab 2, pp
Trial Exhibit P4.
Trial Exhibit P3, Tab 3.
at [46] (Kourakis CJ).
For the reasons which follow,
it is not necessary to consider whether this evidence might have been admissible
as complaint evidence
on the basis that it was inextricably linked with the
allegation of sexual offending, analogously with
at [79]-[80] (Blue J, Vanstone and Doyle JJ agreeing).
In a manner similar to the
approach suggested in
Anderson (A Pseudonym) v The King
[2024] SASCA 36
(Livesey P, Doyle and Bleby JJA).
Trial Exhibit P4, page 1
(images 21, 22 and 23).
Trial Exhibit P4, page 2
(images 5, 6 and 7).
Trial Exhibit P4, page 3
(images 8, 9 and 10).
Trial Exhibit P4, page 3
(images 24, 25 and 26).
Alternatively, rather than
the Judge misspeaking, it may be that the Judge said that he intended to exclude
bruise ‘1 times
2’ but this was mis-transcribed. This
explanation is supported by the fact that bruise 1 appeared in the relevant
two bruises and was described as bruise ‘1 x 2’.
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
(Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson and Toohey JJ).
[2020] HCA 12
(2020) 268 CLR 123
(Kiefel CJ, Bell, Gageler, Keane, Nettle, Gordon and Edelman JJ).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (492 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter