URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SALC/2024/91.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:00:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SGL Hotels Pty Ltd t/as Ovingham Hotel (Bombay Bicycle Club) [2024] SALC 91 (29 July 2024)
SGL Hotels Pty Ltd t/as Ovingham Hotel (Bombay Bicycle Club)
LICENSING COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
HOTELS PTY LTD T/AS OVINGHAM HOTEL (BOMBAY BICYCLE CLUB)
Application for Review of a decision of the
Commissioner
LC-24-00075
HEARING DATE:
24 June 2024
JUDGMENT OF:
Judge BP Gilchrist
DELIVERED ON:
29 July 2024
CATCHWORDS:
Application for review of a delegate of the Liquor and Gambling
Commissioner’s rejection of an application to vary the authorised
hours in respect of the gaming machines at the Bombay Bicycle Club to align them
with its liquor licensed hours – The
delegate refused the application
because she was concerned that within the relevant locality there was an over
representation of
young men and renters, whom she thought were more likely to
experience gambling related harm; she did not consider that the residential
stakeholder consultation indicated a particularly high level of support for the
application; she was concerned about the potential
for players using gaming
machines in the early hours of the morning to experience gambling related harm;
she was dissatisfied with
the applicant’s evidence of the measures it
intended to implement to address this; she found that there was a demonstrable
increase in gaming at the venue between midnight and 2.00 am and found it
reasonable to draw the inference that to grant the application
would result in
increased gaming at the premises and increased gambling related harm; she
concluded that the application should be
refused – The role of the Court
on review discussed – The use of statistical evidence in assessing
potential harm discussed
– The use of survey evidence considered –
that the delegate erred in being concerned that within the relevant
community there is a higher than average number of young men
as this fact was
not relevant in predicting gambling related harm caused by the use of gaming
that factually the delegate erred in finding that
the locality had a sufficiently higher proportion of renters to be statistically
significant in terms of identifying the potential to experience gambling related
that although the delegate was right to be concerned
the potential risk and potential harm that the grant of the application might
that concerns about the consequences of granting the
application could have been effectively allayed by granting the application on
an interim basis, with a review at the end of twelve months and adjourning
further consideration –
Gambling Administration Act 2019
Gaming Machines
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
Mansfield Park Hotel (SA) Pty Ltd
[2023] SALC 83
Fairview Park
[2023] SALC 18
Marks and Spencer PLC v Interflora Inc &
[2012] EWCA Civ 1501
Macedon Ranges Shire Council v Romsey Hotel
Pty Ltd & Anor
[2008] VSCA 45
Cavan Trading Pty Ltd t/as Cavan
[2023] SALC 89
Liquorland (Australia) Pty Ltd (Park Holme)
[2020] SALC 37
Liquorland McLaren Vale (No. 2)
[2022] SALC
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr G
Representative:
Applicant: Australian Hotels Association
– SA Branch
is an application seeking a review of a decision made by a delegate of the
Liquor and Gambling Commissioner refusing an application
made by SGL Hotels Pty
Ltd (SGL) to vary its authorised gaming hours in respect of the gaming machines
it operates at the Ovingham
Hotel, otherwise known as the Bombay Bicycle Club,
which is situated at 29 Torrens Road, Ovingham.
connection with the application, the delegate determined that it was to be a
designated application for the purposes of the
Machines Act 1992
As such, the delegate could
only grant the application if satisfied that it was in the community interest to
do so. As it was, she
was not so satisfied and therefore refused it.
application comes before this Court pursuant to
Administration Act 2019
(the GA Act). Pursuant to s 54(6) of the GA
Act, on review, this Court may:
(a) affirm, vary or quash the decision subject to the review;
(b) make any decision that should, in the opinion of the Court, have been made
in the first instance;
(c) refer a matter back to the decision-maker for rehearing or
reconsideration;
(d) make any incidental or ancillary order.
contends that the delegate made several errors in reaching her conclusion and
that this Court should determine the application
for itself and should grant
Bombay Bicycle Club trades under a general and hotel licence. Its licence
permits it to sell liquor for consumption on the premises
between 5.00 am
to 3.00 am the following day, Monday to Saturday, and from 8.00 am to
3.00 am the following day, on Sunday. It is
therefore permitted to sell
liquor for on premises consumption until 3.00 am, seven days a week.
owns 40 entitlements for gaming machines at the premises, all of which have been
exercised, such 40 gaming machines operate at
the Bombay Bicycle Club.
Under the gaming machine licence issued for the premises, the current authorised
gaming hours are between
6.00 am to midnight, Monday to Thursday, and from
9.00 am to 3.00 am the following day, on Friday, Saturday and Sunday.
Special conditions
apply for Good Friday, Christmas Day and New Years Day.
sought to vary these hours to permit gaming at the premises from 9.00 am to
3.00 am the following day, seven days a week. The
effect of the
application, if granted, would be to align the closing time for gaming with the
closing time for the sale of liquor
for consumption on the premises. The
application did not seek to vary the special conditions.
a designated application, it had to comply with the community impact assessment
guidelines,
as well as any
additional requirements imposed by the
Commissioner.
In conformity with
these, SGL had to demonstrate that it had engaged with the relevant community
and any relevant stakeholders; that
it had identified whether there were at risk
groups or sub‑communities within the relevant locality, which is loosely
as being within a two‑kilometre radius of the gaming venue; and
that it had given particular focus on how it sought to minimise
the adverse
effects of gambling on the wellbeing of members of those groups/communities that
it had identified.
purported to do these things through a document titled “Community Impact
Assessment Submission for a Variation in Approved
Hours of Gaming” dated
16 October 2023 and a subsequent submission dated 22 April 2024 that
it provided in response to a request
for further submissions from the delegate.
In these reasons I shall refer to both documents collectively as “the
Submission”.
this point it is appropriate that I make some observations about the Bombay
Bicycle Club by reference to the surrounding areas.
uncontroversial.
Bombay Bicycle Club is located to the north‑west of the City of Adelaide
beyond the parklands in the north‑west of
North Adelaide. Those parklands
are bounded by Fitzroy Terrace to north and Park Terrace to the west. Torrens
Road commences at the
junction of Park Terrace and Fitzroy Terrace and heads
towards Port Adelaide in a north‑westly direction. The Bombay Bicycle
is a short distance to the west of that junction on the south side of Torrens
Road. A short distance further to the west, on
the northern side of Torrens
Road, is the junction of Torrens Road and Churchill Road. Park Terrace and
Churchill Road are formidable
roads and might fairly be regarded as constituting
barriers in terms of defining the relevant locality. To the immediate north of
the premises is the suburb of Prospect, which is bounded to the west by
Churchill Road, to the south by Fitzroy Terrace and to the
east by Main North
Road. To the immediate south and west of the premises are the suburbs of
Hindmarsh and Brompton, which are bounded
by Torrens Road to the north and Park
Terrace to the east/south.
Submission noted that the Bombay Bicycle Club is situated on the border of
Hindmarsh/Brompton to the south, and Prospect to the
north‑east, and that
it is within the Charles Sturt local government area. It submitted that the
relevant locality comprised
of the suburbs of Hindmarsh/Brompton and Prospect.
It stated that within a two kilometre distance of the premises there were
venues that operate gaming machines, being: the Windmill Hotel, at
94 Main North Road, Prospect, which has 32 gaming machines that
authorised to operate from 9.00 am to 3.00 am the following day,
seven days a week; the Hope Inn, at 348 Port Road, Hindmarsh,
has 36 machines that are authorised to operate from 9.00 am to
3.00 am the following day, seven days a week; the Hotel Excelsior,
Coglin Street, Brompton, which has 33 machines that are authorised to
operate from 6.00 am to midnight, seven days a week;
and the Joiner Arms,
at 9 Manton Street, Hindmarsh, which has 20 machines that are
authorised to operate from 8.00 am to 2.00 am
the following day, seven
days a week.
Submission noted that based on the 2021 Census, the suburbs of
Hindmarsh/Brompton and Prospect have a collective population of
34,861 with a
median age of 36 years; the Council area of Charles Sturt has a population
of 121,840 with a median age of 37 years;
and the overall State population
is 1,781,516 with a median age of 41 years.
Submission noted that in a study of socio-demographic characteristics of a
regular gambler conducted by Armstrong and Carrol in
2017, high gambling rates
were associated with males between 18 and 29, persons generally over 50,
individuals living alone, Indigenous
persons, the unemployed, those renting,
those living in low socio‑economic areas, and low income earners.
Submission then set out a table outlining the relative percentages of each of
these categories by reference to the suburbs of
Hindmarsh/Brompton and Prospect,
the Council area of Charles Sturt, and the State of South Australia. The table
demonstrated that
the percentage of males between 18 and 29 was 15.00% in
Hindmarsh/Brompton and Prospect, compared to a State percentage of 7.0%;
percentage of persons over 45 was 46.8% compared to a State percentage of 54.6%,
the percentage of persons living alone was 29.4%
compared to a State percentage
of 28.5%, the percentage of Indigenous persons was 1.6% compared to a State
percentage of 2.8%, the
percentage of unemployed persons was 4.7% compared to a
State percentage of 5.4%, the percentage of those renting was 18.2% compared
a State percentage of 27.6%, and the average income was $890 per week compared
to a State average of $734 per week. It referred
to the SEIFA
(Socio‑Economic Indexes for Areas) data published by the Australian Bureau
of Statistics in 2016 and stated that
it demonstrated that the suburbs of
Hindmarsh/Brompton and Prospect are relative advantaged compared to the State
Submission noted that a survey had been conducted. One hundred and fifty
residents living with two kilometres of the premises
were contacted either
directly or by email. Of these, 34 responded. 18 did not support the
application. 11 did, and 5 were neutral.
Submission noted that a patron petition had been provided to the premise’s
patrons and of the 268 who responded 218 supported
the application.
Submission submitted that the grant of the application would increase the
accessibility to entertainment that gaming machines
provide and would therefore
enhance the cultural and recreational facilities available in the locality. It
referred to a document
titled “Western Adelaide Tourism
Alliance‑Tourism Destination Action Plan 2024” and noted an expected
in international tourism post COVID‑19. It inferentially
contended that the grant of the application would enhance this area
Adelaide’s attractiveness as a tourist destination.
Submission noted that various community groups were consulted and that two
expressed opposition to the proposal, being Relationships
Australia and
Anglicare SA.
Submission acknowledged some evidence that indicated that those using gaming
machines between midnight and 8.00 am were more likely
to be intense
gamblers and were more likely to experience gambling harm; that venue closure
limited access to gambling and reduced
the potential for harm; and that those
who experienced venue closure who wished to continue using gaming machines were
unlikely to
go elsewhere to another gaming venue.
Submission stated that the Bombay Bicycle Club is a family friendly venue that
provides a safe environment for those who wish
to eat, drink and use gaming
machines and that SGL is a very experienced and well‑respected gaming and
liquor operator. It
added that SGL had and would continue to have in place a
range of strategies to mitigate the potential for harm from the use of its
gaming machines.
Submission provided details of the net gaming revenue (NGR) for the venue and
made comparisons with State averages. It noted that
in the period between
18 December 2022 and 16 January 2023, of the 40 machines
available at the venue, on average over the whole
day, 20 machines were in
use each hour that collectively resulted in an average NGR of $436.93 per
Submission also provided details of the NGR for machines in use over this period
that identified the losses after midnight, which
indicated that between midnight
and 1.00 am each machine in use had a NGR of $47.18, between 1.00 am
and 2.00 am a NGR of $52.37
and between 2.00 am and 3.00 am
$12.43. It noted some evidence that in South Australia in 2011/12 the State
average NGR per machine
per hour was $160 and submitted that by comparison, the
premise’s NGR was substantially lower.
application drew formal responses by from Relationships Australia and Anglicare
SA, both of whom made submissions opposing the
application on the basis that the
change in hours would result in increased accessibility to gaming machines which
would exacerbate
the harm that they cause.
The delegate’s decision
delegate accepted SGL’s submission that the relevant locality comprised of
the suburbs of Hindmarsh/Brompton and Prospect.
delegate noted that the grant of the application would result in the creation of
some additional employment at the premises and
that the SEIFA index indicated
that the people living within the locality were not particularly advantaged or
disadvantaged with
respect to their socio‑economic status.
delegate made a finding that within two kilometres of the premises there were
two existing venues that were authorised to permit
gaming until
3.00 am every day and that another was authorised to permit gaming until
2.00 am every day. She therefore found that
late-night access to gaming
machines was already reasonably available within the locality.
delegate expressed concern about an over representation of young men and renters
whom she thought were more likely to experience
gambling related harm.
delegate expressed reservations about the potential for the grant of the
application to positively impact tourism, noting that
the area was not a known
drawcard for tourists.
delegate noted that within the locality there were three drug and alcohol
treatment centres and two pawnbrokers.
delegate found that the residential and stakeholder consultation did not
indicate a particularly high level of support.
delegate expressed particular concern about the potential for players using
gaming machines in the early hours of the morning
to experience gambling related
harm and expressed her dissatisfaction of SGL’s evidence of the measures
it intended to implement
to address this. She added that the evidence indicated
that there was a demonstrable increase in gaming at the venue between midnight
and 2.00 am and found it reasonable to draw the inference that to grant the
application would result in increased gaming at the premises
and increased
gambling related harm.
balance, the delegate was not persuaded that the grant of the application was in
the community interest and hence she refused it.
contended that the delegate erred in her approach to the application. It
submitted that she appeared to merely make an arithmetic
assessment of the pros
and cons of the application and having determined that the cons were numerically
higher, that the application
had to be refused. It submitted that a much more
nuanced approach was required and that a holistic assessment was called for.
SGL contended that the delegate erred in concluding that the fact that there
were some venues in the locality that could
operate gaming machines in the early
hours of the morning seven days a week was a negative. It submitted that quite
to the contrary,
it was a positive in the sense that it demonstrated that there
was a demand within the locality for the provision of gaming venues
operating in
the early hours of the morning, seven days a week. It referred to the objects of
the GM Act, of which include:
to ensure that the club and hotel gaming machine industry develops in a manner
consistent with the needs and aspirations of the community
and is in the
community interest.
also referred to the GA Act, the objects of which include:
to facilitate the balanced development and maintenance, in the public interest,
of an economically viable and socially responsible
gambling industry in the
State recognising the positive and negative impacts of gambling on
communities;
to ensure, as far as practicable, that the conduct of gambling is consistent
with the expectations of the
submitted that in light of the established demand within the locality for the
provision of gaming venues operating in the early
hours of the morning, seven
days a week, the addition of a further facility to meet that demand, thereby
adding choice and convenience,
was consistent with the needs and aspirations of
the community and was consistent with the expectations of the public.
it contended that the delegate erred in expressing concern about an over
representation of young men likely to experience
gaming related harm. It
submitted that there was no proper evidentiary basis to reach this conclusion.
Whilst it accepted that there
was statistical evidence that indicated that there
was an over representation of young men in the cohort of problem gamblers, it
submitted that there was evidence that young men are unlikely to use gaming
machines, and indeed the evidence pointed against this.
It submitted that this
Court could take judicial notice of the fact that the likely area of concern
relating to this group was online
sports betting.
it contended that the delegate erred in expressing concern about an over
representation of renters. It submitted that factually
the number of renters in
the locality was 18.2%, compared to a State average of 27.6%. It submitted that
if rental status is a relevant
factor, in this case it should have been treated
as a positive, not a negative.
it contended that the delegate erred in not giving sufficient weight to the
higher than average incomes of those living in
the locality. It submitted that
the evidence established that the personal, family and household average incomes
were all 20% or
more higher than the State average.
it contended that the delegate erred in not giving sufficient weight to the
relatively high number of persons living in the
locality who have tertiary
qualifications. It submitted that the evidence established that 37.2% of adults
living in the locality
had tertiary qualifications compared to a State average
it contended that the delegate erred in finding that residential and stakeholder
consultation did not indicate a particularly
high level of support for the
application. It submitted that the evidence established that 218 of the 268
venue’s patrons who
participated in a survey supported the application,
that number representing 86%.
review SGL adduced further evidence which revealed the intra day gaming figures
for various days in May and June 2024. These figures
demonstrate that the peak
times for gaming machine use at the venue are between mid-afternoon until
7.00 pm and that there is a progressive
reduction in use from midnight. It
submitted that this demonstrated that the grant of the application was unlikely
to lead to increased
gambling related harm.
Consideration
to the first complaint, the delegate made it clear that she approached the
application by undertaking “an evaluative exercise
that involves weighing
the positive and negative consequences that could be expected to flow from the
grant of this application”.
There is no reason to suppose that in
undertaking this exercise the delegate did no more that conduct an arithmetic
assessment.
for the second complaint, with respect, I think there might be something in it,
albeit that I do not think much turns on it.
must be accepted that in some circumstances the fact of existing venues in the
locality that can operate gaming machines in the
early hours of the morning
seven days a week can be a negative. If the locality were already awash with
such venues, even without
direct evidence, it might be open to conclude that
saturation point had been reached and that the addition of yet another late
gaming venue might add an unacceptable risk of gambling related harm.
But this was not that case. The evidence establishes that in
2021 there were
just under 35,000 living in the locality. In light of that number, I would not
readily draw the inference that the
fact of three existing venues in that
locality that can operate gaming machines in the early hours of the morning,
seven days a week,
means that saturation point has been reached. If there was
evidence of a relatively high NGR at each venue and evidence of much use
gaming machines after midnight at each venue, the position might be different.
But absent that evidence, I think it would be wrong
to regard this as a
negative. By the same token, the lacuna in the evidence prevents this from being
treated as a positive. We know
that these venues are authorised to trade in the
early hours of the morning, seven days a week. But what we do not know is
they are all exercising that right and if so, how many machines are
actually used at each venue and what amounts are gambled. Without
that evidence,
the mere fact of the authorisation tells us very little.
dealing with the submissions made in connection with the statistical evidence, I
wish to make some general observations about
such evidence.
primary purpose of statistical evidence in connection with an application
concerning gaming machines is to address the issue of
potential gambling related
was observed by this Court in
Mansfield Park
Hotel (SA) Pty Ltd,
with this issue the Commissioner, and on review, this Court, can act upon
evidence of potential harm that falls short
of establishing proof on the balance
of probabilities. But that does not mean that any evidence of any potential harm
can be acted
upon. If the potential harm could be catastrophic, little by way of
proof might be required to act upon evidence tending to establish
that harm. But
in cases where the potential harm is relatively slight, depending upon the
circumstances, something close to or equalling
the standard burden of proof
would be required.
evaluating what is to be made of statistical evidence it is also important to
appreciate its shortcomings. It is directed to how
populations behave, rather
than how individuals behave. It therefore can pale into insignificance in the
face of real evidence of
what is actually taking place within a particular
community. The point is that people do not necessarily behave in the way that
statistical
evidence might predict.
there is the risk of misconstruing what the statistical evidence establishes and
reaching a conclusion of predictive behaviour
based upon false or fuzzy
example, statistical evidence might establish that gamblers living in low income
households are more likely to spend a greater
proportion of the
household’s disposable income on gambling than high income households.
logical conclusion that could be drawn from this is that a low income household
that contains a problem gambler is likely to experience
higher than average
gambling related financial stress.
without more, the mere fact that a person lives in a low income household might
not mean that that person is more likely to be
a problem gambler, nor does it
establish that the person’s household is more likely to experience higher
than average gambling
related financial stress. Even with statistics comparing
the rate of problem gamblers in the general population to those living in
income households, care would need to be exercised. A small difference in
percentage figures could be meaningless. Moreover,
there might be particular
characteristics of some low income households, indicative of a higher risk of
problem gambling, such as
age, sex, partner status, ethnicity or level of
education. If the person does not share the characteristics associated with a
risk of problem gambling, the fact that the person lives in a low income
household might be meaningless.
if it were established that the person is a problem gambler and that the person
lives in a low income household, there are limits
as to what can be deduced from
these facts. If there was evidence that those living in a low income household
are more likely to
use gaming machines than the norm, all of this might provide
evidence that the person is at a greater than average risk of gambling
harm associated with the use of gaming machines. But it does not follow that a
higher risk of gambling related harm associated
with the use of gaming machines
is evidence of a higher risk of gambling related harm in connection with all
forms of gambling. For
example, without more, this evidence provides no logical
basis to conclude that that the person is at a greater than average risk
gambling related harm associated with on‑line sports gambling, or indeed
any other form of gambling, except the use of gaming
statistical evidence that was adduced in this case illustrates the point.
am permitted to know that the study of socio-demographic characteristics of a
regular gambler conducted by Armstrong and Carrol
in 2017 that was referred to
in the Submission is a reference to a report conducted by those authors that was
commissioned by the
Federal Government based on a survey of gambling activity
across Australia in 2015. Whilst the survey suggests that there is an
over‑representation
of young men in the category of “problem
gamblers”, it also suggests that the gaming machine participants are
over-represented
by people for whom welfare payments formed their main source of
income, and that regular race and sports betters are over‑represented
men on higher incomes and sports betters are more likely to be younger and live
in an inner‑regional area or major city.
Thus, the survey might establish
that a community in which a relatively high number of young men reside might
have a higher than
average number of problem gamblers. But that statistic does
not, of itself, indicate that within that community this cohort are likely
over‑represented in the group within that community that experience
gambling related harm associated with their use of
gaming machines.
follows that the delegate should not have been concerned that within the
relevant community there is a higher than average number
of young men.
the percentage of renters in the locality is slightly higher than the number in
the relevant local council area, the number
is well below the State average.
Thus, in finding that the locality had a sufficiently higher proportion of
renters to be statistically
significant in terms of identifying the potential to
experience gambling related harm, the delegate erred.
accept that the average incomes and the number of tertiary qualified people
living in the locality do not appear to have gained
much, if any traction, with
the delegate. If she was going to rely upon statistical data to assist her in
determining the potential
for persons within the locality to experience gambling
related harm if the application were granted, she should have regarded these
matters positively.
also accept that the delegate’s characterisation of the surveys may not
have been completely accurate. That said, it does
not appear that this was a
finding that was critical to the delegate in reaching her conclusion. Moreover,
in my view, the results
of the surveys were of little probative value. The
residential survey was extremenly small and suffered as a
The survey conducted at the
premises suffered from the fact that its participants were from a selective
group who by the fact that
they were present at the premises meant that they
already had a connection with the application such that their responses lacked
objectivity. There is a world of difference between a statistically reliable and
well conducted survey and a petition expressing
the views of a few hand-picked
members of the
former might be highly probative. The latter fails to prove
follows that to some extent the delegate’s decision is attenuated by error
in the sense that her decision was infected by
some erroneous findings of fact.
As such, I must conduct an independent review of the evidence and form my own
view as to the appropriate
is not to say that the views expressed by the delegate should be ignored. The
Liquor and Gambling Commissioner is given extensive
administrative powers under
s 6 of the GA Act, that includes developing and promoting strategies to
reduce the incidence of problem
gambling and for preventing or minimising the
harm caused by gambling; undertaking, assisting in or coordinating ongoing
into matters relevant to gambling; and providing a proactive
whole-of-industry and client‑centric responsive approach to the
of responsible gambling practices and the prevention or minimisation of harm
caused by gambling. As such, the Commissioner
and the Commissioner’s
delegates might be expected to have specialist expertise and unique experience
in dealing with the issues
which arise under the GA Act and the GM Act and if it
is apparent that those matters formed part of the delegate’s reasoning
connection with the decision under review, this Court should take them into
Should the application be granted?
first issue concerns the identification of the relevant locality. In connection
with this, I respectfully agree with the delegate’s
finding that the
relevant locality is Hindmarsh/Brompton to the south, and Prospect to the
north-east.
next issue concerns the identification of the pros and cons of the
application.
is a relatively modest application to change the trading hours which if granted,
will result in gaming trading hours that are
broadly consistent with three other
gaming venues in the general vicinity of the premises, and will bring them into
line with its
authorised trading hours for the consumption of liquor on the
think it can be taken as a given that there will be some in the relevant
community who would welcome the opportunity to use gaming
machines in the early
hours of the other days of the week, when the premises are already licensed to
sell liquor. It also must also
be accepted that the grant of the application
will result in a very modest positive impact upon employment at the premises.
are therefore some positive aspects of the application.
for the negative aspects of the application, it must be accepted that every
increased opportunity to use gaming machines carries
an additional risk of
gambling related harm.
connection with an application to vary gaming hours in
Mansfield Park
The applicant is a commercial entity. It can be assumed that it is seeking to
vary its trading hours in the expectation of increased
use of its gaming
machines. ... It must be accepted that some of this additional gaming will be by
patrons who presently visit the
nearby venues. But in my opinion, there is a
real possibility that some will be patrons who, for now, leave the Hotel at
around 3.00
am and do not go elsewhere to use gaming machines who, if this
application is granted, will remain at the Hotel to continue to use
Hotel’s gaming machines and that some of these patrons will reside in
Mansfield Park.
same is likely to be true here. The grant of this application is likely to
result in an increased use of gaming machines.
the issue is whether there are sufficient concerns about the risk of gambling
related harm associated with the grant of the
application to either refuse it,
or otherwise impose measures to deal with that risk.
to the statistical evidence purporting to identify the characteristics of
problem gamblers, as I said in
Mansfield Park Hotel
actually happening at the premises is much more probative. In this case, I give
it much more weight than the relative numbers
of young men, renters, high
average incomes and educational status within the relevant community. I add that
to the extent that these
matters are relevant, they are either neutral or
support the granting of the application.
this case, if the collective average hourly NGR of $436.93 per hour for the
December 2022 – January 2023 period is divided
by the 40 (being
the number of gaming machines available to be used), and then multiplied by 18
(being the number of hours per day
that the machines are authorised to operate)
and multiplied again by 365, to produce an annual figure, the net annual NGR
for the venue is $71,766 per entitlement. Whilst it must be accepted that
this figure is rubbery, it does provide a basis for comparison
with annual NGRs
generally. In
Mansfield Park Hotel
there was evidence that in the
2021‑2022 financial year figures, on average, every gaming machine in this
State led to losses
of $71,537 per annum. Based on this figure, the NGR at the
Bombay Bicycle Club is about the same as the State average. It is markedly
that the NGR at the Mansfield Park Hotel of $124,445 per annum. It is also
markedly higher than the NGR that featured in the
recent case of
Trading Pty Ltd t/as Cavan
that was $44,236 per
this I add the evidence of the use of machines in the period after midnight at
the venue and the NGR of those machines. It indicates
that at least in the
period between midnight and 2.00 am, the use of gaming machines and the NGR
associated with that use is not
insubstantial.
also take on board the delegate’s reservations about the strategies that
SGL had and intended to implement to minimise the
potential for gambling related
harm. As explained above, I am entitled to assume that this statement arises
from the delegate’s
specialist expertise and unique experience in dealing
with gaming machines and it therefore carries some weight.
regard to these matters, in my respectful opinion the delegate was right to have
some concerns about the application, and she
was right to approach it with some
caution. But I think she went too far. Whilst the Commissioner, and on review,
this Court can
act on the mere possibility of harm, the response to that
possibility needs to be proportionate.
making this observation I make it clear that I do not underestimate the damage
that gambling related harm can cause. In
Liquorland (Australia) Pty Ltd (Park
common experience informing us that for many in the community, alcohol is a
problem, and that it can create health risks,
fuel domestic violence, shatter
relationships, cause families to become dysfunctional, create financial
problems, and result in people
making risky and poor decisions. All of this is
true of gambling. Common experience informs us that for problem gamblers,
becomes a compulsion, as does the need for money to feed that
compulsion. This may result in problem gamblers distorting the allocation
their money to the detriment of themselves and those who are dependent upon
them; damaging their relationships with friends and
family because of borrowing
money from them; incurring debts that they are unable to service, resulting in
them being the subject
of legal action and the possibility that that action may
result in the loss of their assets and potentially their bankruptcy, and
case of borrowings from unscrupulous sources, potentially becoming targets of
threats and violence; committing criminal offences
such as embezzling from their
employer or stealing from others; causing stress on their family relationships
and the potential for
those relationships to become dysfunctional and break up;
and not the least, causing stress to themselves, that can result in a myriad
physical and mental ailments, and in extreme cases, their death.
just as alcohol is a substance that is widely used in the community and for the
most part is enjoyed without adverse
consequences,
so it is with
gambling. And, as with alcohol, in connection with gambling, and in particular
the use of gaming machines, Parliament
must be taken to understand that by not
prohibiting their use, there will be some adverse
consequences.
Thus, a finding of
a possibility of increased risk of gambling related harm does not compel the
refusal of an application. Consideration
needs to be given to the extent of the
possibility, the extent of the potential harm, and whether the implementation of
short of refusal might be appropriate.
this case, there is nothing about the population profile of the relevant
community that sends alarm bells ringing. The relevant
locality is not socially
or economically challenged. The evidence indicates that the current average NGR
is about average for the
State such that there is no reason to infer that the
locality or the premises have more problem gamblers than is the norm. The
can already operate gaming machines until 3.00 am on Saturday,
Sunday, and Monday mornings. In my opinion, it can be inferred that
that the use
of gaming machines at the premises is likely to be more on those mornings, than
on the mornings on the other days of
the week, should this application be
all of these matters into account, I think it is likely that at worst, the grant
of the application might result in a very
small increase in gambling related
harm. To have refused the application outright, was, in my respectful opinion,
disproportionate
to that risk. In my opinion, any concerns about the
consequences of granting this application could have been effectively allayed
granting the application on an interim
with a review at the end
of twelve months, at which time the grant could be revoked, the interim grant
extended, or the grant made
absolute. This is the order that the delegate should
have made in this case. This is the conclusion that I reach having conducted
independent review of the evidence and submissions.
Summary and conclusions
delegate made some erroneous findings in reaching her decision to refuse an
application to vary the authorised gaming hours in
respect of the gaming
machines at the Bombay Bicycle Club to align them with its liquor licensed
identified these errors, subject to affording the delegate’s reasoning
some weight on matters within her knowledge and
experience, the Court must
conduct an independent review of the evidence and form its own view as to the
appropriate outcome.
the delegate was right to have some concerns about the application and its
potential to result in increased gambling related
harm, and was right to
approach it with some caution, her outright refusal of the application was a
disproportionate response to
that possibility and extent of that potential
proportionate response would be to grant the application on an interim basis and
adjourn further consideration for a period of twelve
months, to enable
appropriate trading data to be provided to the Court to enable the consequences
of the grant of the application
to be considered.
application to vary the authorised gaming hours in respect of the gaming
machines at the Bombay Bicycle Club to permit
gaming at the premises from
9.00 am to 3.00 am the following day, seven day a week, subject to the
special conditions that apply
on Good Friday, Christmas Day and New Years Day is
granted on an interim basis for a period of twelve months from this day, at
time the application can be given further consideration.
adjourn the application for a directions hearing to take place at 9.30 am
on Friday 4 July
Section 27AA(4) of the GM Act
The Commissioner may, after receiving an application for variation of a
gaming machine licence, determine that the application is
to be a designated
application for the purposes of section 17A.
Section 17A(2)(b) of the GM
Section 17A(3) of the GM
Section 2(e).
Section 3(2)(c).
Section 3(2)(e).
[2023] SALC 83
Fairview Park Cellars
[2023] SALC 18
Marks and Spencer PLC v
Interflora Inc & Anor
[2012] EWCA Civ 1501
Ibid at [99].
Macedon Ranges Shire
Council v Romsey Hotel Pty Ltd & Anor
[2008] VSCA 45
Mansfield Park Hotel (SA)
[2023] SALC 89.
[2020] SALC 37
Liquorland McLaren Vale
[2022] SALC 53
Ibid at [140].
Amongst other things
s 9 of the GA Act enables the Commissioner to grant an application on an
interim basis.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (302 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter