URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACAT/2025/63.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:53:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Department for Environment and Water v Patrick [2025] SACAT 63 (25 June 2025)
Department for Environment and Water
Rex Patrick
NEUTRAL CITATION
Department for Environment and Water v Patrick
[2025] SACAT 63
President Hughes
25 June 2025
HEARING DATES
On the papers
SACAT FILE NO.
2024/SA000161
ON REVIEW FROM
The Ombudsman
The Department challenged a decision by the Ombudsman, that two documents
held by it were not exempt from disclosure under cl 17 of
schedule 1 of the
Freedom of Information Act 1991
(FOI Act) on the basis of infringing
Parliamentary privilege. The relevant documents were two briefing notes prepared
for the Department's
chief executive for the purpose of attendance before a
Parliamentary Committee.
The respondent submitted that the disclosure of documents to him under the
FOI Act would not amount to impeaching or questioning the
proceedings of
Parliament in a 'court or place out of parliament', contending that 'other
place' out of parliament was to be understood
to connote a place holding the
power to compel discovery and production of evidence. The respondent further
submitted that for disclosure
under the FOI Act to constitute impeachment of the
proceedings of parliament, the agency must establish that disclosure would
a harm to the freedom of debate in the Parliament.
The Department contended that 'other place' was consonant with the regime
established by the FOI Act as a result of the obligation
that an FOI officer has
to disclose non-exempt documents. The Department did not adduce evidence of harm
from disclosure of the two
documents, but contended that where there is a
connection between the documents and Parliamentary proceedings, mere disclosure
constitute infringement of privilege.
Held, setting aside the Ombudsman’s decision and making the
determination that the documents are exempt pursuant to cl 17(c)
of Schedule 1
of the FOI Act:
The right of
access to non-exempt documents under the FOI Act creates an obligation, upon
request, for an agency to determine whether
the requested document is exempt and
to a requirement to grant disclosure if not exempt. The executive arm of
Government, in the
fulfilment of its statutory obligations under the
legislation, is endowed with the status of 'other place'.
No particular
harm is required to be established where documents fall within the class of
documents that are closely connected to
the proceedings of Parliament, such as
in this case.
The intended use
of the document by the person requesting access need not be known for a
determination of infringement to occur. Further,
the content of a document is
not necessarily the determinant of its privileged status, but rather privilege
may arise from the purpose
of the document's creation or adoption of purpose by
a Member of Parliament or witness in parliamentary proceedings.
Administrative review –
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Agency aggrieved by a determination of the Ombudsman – Whether a document
is an exempt document – Parliamentary
LEGISLATION CONSIDERED
Freedom of Information Act 1991
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
CASES CONSIDERED
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
(2009) 239 CLR 27
Australian Capital Territory v SMEC Australia Pty Ltd
[2018] ACTSC 252
(2018) 337 FLR
CPB Contractors Pty Ltd and Hansen Yunken Pty Ltd v South Australia
[2024] SASC 46
Department for Environment and Water v Patrick
[2024] SACAT 73
Ellis v The King
[2023] SASCA 28
In the matter of Opel Networks Pty Ltd (in Liq)
[2010] NSWSC 142
(2010) 77 NSWLR
JJK v Police
(2023) 143 SASR 303
Mees v Roads Corporation
[2003] FCA 306
(2003) 128 FCR 418
President of Legislative Council of Western Australia v Corruption and
Crime Commission (No 2)
[2021] WASC 223
[2010] NSWSC 142
(2010) 77 NSWLR 128
Re Saffioti v Minister for Transport
[2012] WAICmr
Rowley v O’Chee
[2024] SASC 46
Sportsbet Pty Ltd v New South Wales (No 3)
[2009] FCA 1283
(2009) 262 ALR 27
Tebbutt v Minister for Lands and Water
[2015] NSWCATAD 95
Tziolas v NSW Dept of Education and Communities
[2012] NSWADT
Zonnevylle v Minister for Education and Early Childhood Learning
[2023] NSWCATAD 135
REASONS FOR DECISION
Set aside and substitute decision
Made under the
South Australian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
s 37(1)(c)(i)
Findings of the Tribunal
Introduction
Patrick, the respondent, seeks access to documents held by the applicant, the
Department for Environment and Water (‘the
Department’), under the
Freedom of Information Act 1991
(‘FOI Act’). The documents to
which Mr Patrick seeks access are two briefing notes prepared for the
Department’s
chief executive for the purpose of attendance before a
Parliamentary committee.
documents about which these proceedings were brought are referred in this
decision to as documents 5 and 6, which preserves the
manner in which they have
been referred to in the proceedings and before the Ombudsman. They are also
referred to as “Parliamentary
briefing notes” or “PBNs”.
Department contended that the documents are exempt because their disclosure
would infringe Parliamentary privilege. The applicant
contended that the
documents do not attract the exemption.
a decision issued on 14 December 2023 on an external review brought by Mr
Patrick, the Ombudsman determined that the documents
were not exempt.
Department brought an application for review in this Tribunal. An application
for review by an agency may only be brought on a
question of law and this must
be decided by a Presidential Member of the
a decision issued on 21 October 2024, I determined two questions of law referred
under the FOI Act by the parties to me as
The effect of answering those questions was to establish that the Ombudsman had,
on 14 December 2023, incorrectly applied the law
when undertaking the external
review of the Department’s decision in relation to Mr Patrick’s
application for documents.
the course of that exercise, I found that the two requested documents attracted
Parliamentary privilege. Having done so, on 3
December 2024, I invited the
parties to provide any further evidentiary materials and submissions as to
whether the public disclosure
of the documents would infringe the privilege for
the purpose of clause 17(c) of Schedule 1 of the FOI Act.
parties subsequently filed affidavits and submissions between 29 November 2024
and 24 January 2025. The parties agreed that,
thereafter, the Tribunal should
determine the issue without a further hearing unless the Tribunal required one
to clarify the parties’
positions. This is my decision and my reasons.
have had regard to:
joint appeal book dated 2 May 2024;
joint list of authorities filed on 24 June 2024;
Department’s original written submissions dated 2 April 2024;
Department’s further written submissions dated 24 December 2024;
Patrick’s original notice of alternative contention dated 5 March 2024;
Patrick’s original submissions dated 30 April 2024;
Patrick’s further submissions filed on 29 November 2024, 24 January 2025
and 4 February 2025.
Patrick’s affidavit affirmed on 2 December 2024.
parties were ably represented by counsel: Mr M Wait SC, Solicitor-General, with
Mr J Metzer for the applicant, and Mr S McDonald
and subsequently Mr C Jacobi
KC, with Mr D Lorbeer for Mr Patrick.
Reprising the original application
background to Mr Patrick’s request is described in paragraphs [1] to [19]
of my decision of 21 October 2024.
It is not necessary to repeat them to be able to read these reasons. However, it
is convenient to set out the Department’s
asserted facts in relation to
the documents to which access is sought. In its written submissions dated 2
April 2024 in respect of
the referred questions of law, the Department provided
the following information regarding documents 5 and
The Chief Executive of the Department was requested to attend as a witness
before the Budget and Finance Committee of the Legislative
Council on 30 January
The Budget and Finance Committee has broad terms of reference, including
“all matters relating to the state budget and the
financial administration
of the State, any related policy matter and any other related matter”.
The Chief Executive requires the Department to prepare comprehensive PBNs for
appearances before the Budget and Finance Committee,
as its hearings may be
wide-ranging and cover all aspects of an Department’s operations and
Documents 5 and 6 were prepared by staff within the Department and provided to
the Chief Executive “on 27 January 2023 for
the purpose of an upcoming
appearance before the Budget and Finance Committee on 30 January 2023”.
Each of Documents 5 and 6 include a header stating “Budget and Finance
Committee 2023 - Parliamentary Briefing Note”,
and the content is, on its
face, directed to the attendance before the Budget and Finance Committee and
contains matter within the
terms of reference of the Budget and Finance
Printed copies of Documents 5 and 6 were brought by the Chief Executive to the
hearing before the Budget and Finance Committee on
30 January 2023. Copies were
also provided to other DEW staff who attended that hearing.
5 and 6 were not tabled in Parliament and for the purposes of these proceedings,
the documents were not “used”.
The exemption
20 of the FOI Act provides that an agency may refuse to disclose an exempt
document. Exemptions are set out in Schedule 1
of the FOI Act. Clause 17 of
Schedule 1 provides:
17—Documents subject to contempt
A document is an exempt document if it contains matter the public disclosure
of which would, but for any immunity of the Crown—
(a) constitute contempt of court; or
(b) contravene any order or direction of a person or body having power to
receive evidence on oath; or
(c) infringe the privilege of Parliament.
issue to be considered in disposing of the balance of the proceedings is whether
the public disclosure of documents 5 and 6 would
infringe the privilege of the
Parliament. If disclosure would do so, the documents are exempt.
Principles and framework for interpretation
parties agree that the dispute concerns the proper construction of clause 17 of
Schedule 1 of the FOI Act and its application
to documents 5 and 6. The approach
to be taken to statutory construction is well-established. In
Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory
... the task of statutory construction must begin with a consideration of the
text itself. Historical considerations and extrinsic
materials cannot be relied
on to displace the clear meaning of the text. The language which has actually
been employed in the text
of legislation is the surest guide to legislative
intention. The meaning of the text may require consideration of the context,
includes the general purpose and policy of a provision, in particular the
it is seeking to remedy.
(Footnotes omitted)
terms of the purpose and policy of the FOI Act, the starting point for
consideration are those provisions that Parliament has enacted
to guide the
construction of the Act. The objects of the FOI Act are to promote openness and
accountability in government and facilitate
effective participation by members
of the public in the making and administration of laws and
3(1) of the FOI Act states that those objects are consistent with the principle
of the executive government’s responsibility
to parliament. Section 3(2)
provides that the means by which it is intended to achieve these objects
(a) ensuring that information concerning the operations of government is readily
available to members of the public and to members
of parliament;
(b) conferring on each member of the public and on members of parliament
“a legally enforceable right” to be given access
to documents held
by government, “subject only to such restrictions as are consistent with
the public interest (including maintenance
of the effective conduct of public
affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions) and the preservation
of personal privacy”;
(c) enabling each member of the public to apply for the amendment of government
records pertaining to them.
3A sets out Parliament’s intention regarding the administration of the FOI
Act. Relevantly, it states that it is the
intention of Parliament that the FOI
Act should be interpreted and applied so as to further the objects of the FOI
Act (as described
that a person or body exercising an administrative discretion conferred by the
FOI Act exercise that discretion, as far as possible,
in a way that favours the
disclosure of information of a kind that can be disclosed without infringing the
right to privacy of
individuals.
is no presumption in favour of disclosure. As the Court of Appeal said in
It can immediately be seen that a person's right to access an agency's documents
is qualified in the sense that it is a right to
access documents “in
accordance with this Act”. As elaborated upon below, there is no
presumption in favour of disclosure,
nor is there a presumption against
disclosure. The extent of a person's right to access documents falls to be
determined by reference
to the terms of the FOI Act.
those objects and principles in mind, it is necessary then to consider the words
of the exemption, and the advice of Hall
President of Legislative
Council of Western Australia v Corruption and Crime Commission (No
The importance of parliamentary privilege should not result in it being treated
with unquestioning reverence. The invocation of parliamentary
privilege is one
that is apt to dazzle lawyers and judges. However, the phrase is not a magical
one that, once uttered, should result
in meek acceptance by the courts. In fact,
it is largely in the courts that the meaning, extent and application of the
has been developed.
(Footnotes omitted)
“Court or place out of parliament”
characteristics of parliamentary privilege have been set out in my earlier
decision of 21 October 2024 which should be read in
conjunction with these
Central to the
disposition of the balance of the proceedings is consideration of how
parliamentary privilege, as it operates in South
Australia, protects impeachment
of parliamentary proceedings in a “court or place out of
parliament”.
respondent has made further submissions in respect of the question of whether
disclosure pursuant to the FOI Act interacts with
the concept of a “court
or place out of parliament”. It is appropriate to expand the
consideration given to this in
paragraphs [76] to [91] of my decision dated 21
October 2024.
can be accepted that the words “out of parliament” which derive from
Article 9 and its application to the United Kingdom
and in particular the fact
that the House of Lords is a court, do not add anything in the application of
the privilege in the South
Australian constitutional framework. It is sufficient
to reduce the phrase to ‘court or other place”.
the circumstances of much of the litigation that has given rise to the
jurisprudence concerning parliamentary privilege, these
proceedings do not
concern a challenge to production of documents to a court. Pursuant to the FOI
Act, an officer of the executive
arm of Government receives an application for
documents for purposes that are not required to be disclosed. The FOI officer is
to determine whether the documents are exempt.
Patrick submitted that the release of documents 5 and 6 to him in response to an
application under the FOI Act would not involve,
or amount to, impeaching or
questioning the proceedings of Parliament in a “court or other
place”. He maintained that
it was evident that the disclosure of the
documents was not “in a court” and that provision to him should not
be construed
to amount to disclosure in an “other place”. He
submitted that “other place” must be understood to connote
that shares certain characteristics with a court, and crucially the power to
compel discovery and production of evidence
and compel the attendance of
witnesses. Underpinning this reasoning is the privilege reflecting the
“doctrinal struggle for
supremacy between absolute monarchy and
parliamentary democracy”,
which necessitated the courts being restricted in their ability to make
incursions into the freedom of parliamentary debate.
Patrick was open to the proposition that “places” that enjoyed
powers to compel production of documents or evidence
on oath might come within
its scope. However, an agency of the executive is not such a body, and the
circumstances in which disclosure
of documents occurs pursuant to the FOI Act
are of quite a different character.
of this significant distinction between the circumstances of disclosure pursuant
to the FOI Act and disclosure pursuant to
a court process, Mr Patrick submitted
that the authorities upon which the Department has relied to argue that the
documents are exempt,
are distinguishable. In each of those cases, the
contemplated disclosure was pursuant to the exercise of a power of compulsion
as discovery and production.
Department contended that the regime established by the FOI Act is consonant
with an “other place” because it entails
disclosure in circumstances
in which the officer of the executive is obliged to disclose documents that are
not exempt documents.
Department also referred the Tribunal to various occasions on which tribunals
and decision-makers have decided that disclosure
of documents under a freedom of
information regime would constitute an infringement of parliamentary privilege,
and are therefore
exempt. It is convenient to turn to those decisions.
Tziolas v NSW Dept of Education and
Communities
parliamentary privilege was considered under the equivalent New South Wales
access to information regime.
The legislation has material differences to the South Australian scheme. Under
the New South Wales regime, there is a presumption
in favour of disclosure of
documents held by Government.
Certain information is subject to a conclusive presumption against
disclosure.
A document which
would, but for any immunity of the Crown, infringe the privilege of Parliament,
is conclusively presumed to carry
an overriding public interest against
disclosure.
disclosure of information which would infringe the privilege of the parliament
is one such type of information.
The NSW Administrative and Disciplinary Tribunal was required to consider the
status of speech notes and a briefing for a Minister
which had been prepared but
not used. The Tribunal applied
In the matter of Opel Networks Pty Ltd (in
and, after finding that the documents were as described by the
Department,
determined that the
disclosure of the documents would infringe the privilege of the
Parliament.
Tebbutt v Minister for Lands and
the question of whether documents attracted parliamentary privilege arose again
in the context of the NSW access to information legislation.
The document in
question was a “House folder note”, being a briefing for the Deputy
Premier to use when appearing before
a parliamentary
The Tribunal followed
Jagot J’s approach in
Sportsbet Pty Ltd v New South Wales
in relation to the use to which the jurisprudence concerning
Parliamentary Privileges Act 1987
(Cth) could be relied upon. The New
South Wales Administrative and Disciplinary Tribunal considered that privilege
attached and that
disclosure for the purposes of the New South Wales legislation
would infringe it.
Zonnevylle v Minister for Education and Early Childhood
the same Tribunal considered a parliamentary briefing prepared “for the
purpose of responding to questions that might arise
parliament”,
that parliamentary privilege encompassed the document. The Tribunal relied on
to find that a House Folder
in relation to which
evidence was led and accepted that it was prepared for the Minister, was
privileged and that disclosure would
infringe the
Re Saffioti v Minister for
Western Australian Information Commissioner found that parliamentary privilege
applied in respect of parliamentary briefing notes
regardless of whether they
were actually used or read from.
The Information Commissioner formed the view that there was a sufficient
connection between the documents and parliamentary
That is, the question
of connection to parliamentary proceedings was treated, in the absence of a
general waiver, as conclusive of
infringement.
Consideration: court or other place
accept Mr Patrick’s contention that there is no authority that has engaged
directly with his arguments as to “court
or other place” in the
context of an access to documents regime. Further, the tribunal decisions
referred to by the Department
are not binding upon me. It is therefore necessary
to determine what is meant by “any court or other place” in the
of the FOI Act.
expression “any court or other place” is not to be understood
literally in its broadest sense. In
Mees v Roads
Corporation
Gray J of the
Federal Court said:
... [Article 9] of the Bill of Rights cannot be taken absolutely literally. It
is a fundamental tenet of a Westminster-style democracy
that there be debate in
the community about political issues. People are free to challenge and criticize
what is said in Parliament
and to do so publicly, vociferously and stringently
President of Legislative Council of Western Australia v CCC (No
Hall J of the Supreme
Court of Western Australia was required to consider how the privilege might
operate in relation to the Western
Australia Conduct and Crime Commission
(“CCC”). His Honour
The privilege finds its primary operation in the courts, but article 9 extends
beyond this. The reference to ‘any court or
other place’
contemplates that the proceedings of Parliament can be impeached or questioned
in places other than courts. This
cannot be taken absolutely literally as it
would then operate to prevent debate in the community or the media about
political issues.
It is beyond question that people are free to challenge and
criticise what is said in Parliament and do so publicly, vociferously
stringently. So what are the other places that article 9 refers to?
The growth in the number of Commissions and Tribunals has been a remarkable
feature of the last 50 years. Many of these bodies are
provided with wide powers
to conduct investigations, compel witnesses and make determinations of fact.
These determinations can include,
as is the case with the CCC, findings or
opinions regarding misconduct. Whilst no penal sanction or civil liability flows
findings, they can be published in reports. The potential for impact
on reputation and public standing is obvious (and, indeed, intended).
Furthermore, the CCC, like many other similar bodies, is protected from actions
for defamation. This is analogous to the privilege
enjoyed by courts and those
who appear in courts. These features support the conclusion that the
‘other places’ referred
to in article 9 must encompass bodies of
this type. If it did not, then the protection that it affords would be
significantly watered
down. Having regard to the context and the
principle of interpretation, the other places that article 9 refers
to must be places that are analogous to courts. In my view this
means tribunals,
commissions or executive inquiries that determine liability or make findings as
to character or conduct.
(Footnotes omitted)
may be observed that the CCC is much closer in character to a court than a
government agency fulfilling functions under an access
to documents regime.
learned author Professor Enid Campbell expresses the view that a broad
interpretation might be given to the phrase “place
parliament” so as to include a disciplinary body, but expresses doubt as
to whether it extends to agencies of the executive
government in the exercise of
non-coercive powers. She says:
While courts today may be prepared to read Article 9 has having prohibited the
impeaching or questioning of proceedings in parliament
by any body which has
power to impose sanctions, including disciplinary sanctions, they would probably
not construe Article 9 as
having prohibited the questioning of proceedings in
parliament by agencies of the executive government in exercise of non-coercive
the weight that should be given to that considered view, it was not expressed in
consideration of parliamentary privilege
as an exemption to the disclosure of
documents pursuant to a statutory access to documents regime.
FOI Act does not compel disclosure of non-exempt documents. Indeed, there is no
“place” at which an FOI disclosure
occurs, except insofar as it
occurs by a Government Department. The FOI Act does not concern itself with
compulsion and prohibition.
It concerns itself with rights. It grants a right of
access to an applicant.
effect of the failure of an officer of a Department to comply with the FOI Act
is that the conduct may be reported to relevant
authority (which in respect of
the Department is the Department’s
However, in respect of actions that are within the proper performance of
functions, an FOI officer’s actions are protected
in respect of
defamation, breach of confidence and has available a defence of honest and
reasonable mistake in respect of criminal
proceedings.
FOI Act creates a statutory right of access to documents held by Government for
applicants that does not exist at common law.
It creates a corresponding
obligation on the part of an agency to make a determination as to whether a
requested document is exempt.
There are consequences for agencies that do not fulfil their
Clause 17(c) of
Schedule 1 of the FOI Act carves out from the Department’s obligation to
disclose documents where to do so
would infringe the privilege.
consider that the FOI Act creates a statutory circumstance by which the
executive arm of Government, in the fulfilment of its statutory
obligation to
administer the freedom of information laws, is endowed with the status of
“other place”.
Must harm be proved, and can mere disclosure ever establish an
infringement of the privilege?
Patrick maintained that the act of disclosure under the FOI Act will not
constitute, with a few exceptions, an impeachment of the
proceedings of
parliament. Mr Patrick said that disclosure pursuant to FOI legislation is
merely the giving of a document to a person
for unspecified purposes.
exceptions Mr Patrick advanced are that a disclosure of a document will infringe
the privilege of parliament where a House of
Parliament or a parliamentary
committee has made an order or determination prohibiting the publication of
particular information
or documents. Another circumstance would be where a
general standing order of a House of Parliament applies to impose a prohibition
on the publication of a particular class of information or documents. A further
example is where disclosure would otherwise be a
contempt of a House (including
a committee). Mr Patrick submits that none of those circumstances arise in
respect of documents 5
Patrick contended that on an occasion of disclosure pursuant to the FOI Act, the
Department must establish that the disclosure
of the requested documents would
create a harm to the freedom of debate in the Parliament. He submitted that
there is necessarily
a factual finding to be made by the Tribunal. He submitted
that the Department cannot succeed because it has not adduced any evidence
the actual harm alleged to flow from the disclosure to him of documents 5 and 6.
He submitted that it could not reasonably be
concluded, without evidence, that
such a proposition was self-evident.
Patrick maintained that the public disclosure of a parliamentary briefing note
does not necessarily entail an impeachment of the
proceedings with which it is
connected. It was contended that impairment was established by reference to
whether the information
within the briefing note was obtainable in other ways.
He submitted that no harm, in terms of a diminution in the flow of comprehensive
information and advice to Ministers, could be assumed when it is incumbent on
public servants to furnish that advice.
Patrick filed an affidavit affirmed on 2 December 2024. In it, he outlines his
career as a senator and the establishment of his
business “Transparency
Warrior” which assists others to obtain access to information held by
governments. He provides
his observations as to how government officials
undertake the process of giving evidence before Parliamentary committees in the
of the Commonwealth, and he says that he has watched South Australian
parliamentary committees “in action”. He believes
that the processes
of the South Australian committees are relevantly the same as those in the
Commonwealth Parliament.
Patrick stated in his affidavit that his experience is that briefing materials
prepared for government officials for the purposes
of anticipated evidence
before committees of the Commonwealth Parliament are “regularly and
routinely” released by the
Departments and published on the
Department’s “disclosure logs”, without any suggestion arising
that the documents
attract parliamentary privilege. He says that, in his
experience, no Senator has taken issue with such a disclosure and the Privileges
Committee has not seen fit to consider whether such disclosures infringe the
privilege of the parliament.
Department did not adduce evidence of the harm that would flow if the documents
were released. It relied upon several authorities,
Sportsbet v NSW (No
CPB Contractors
Pty Ltd and Hansen Yunken Pty Ltd v South
as support for the proposition that where a connection between the documents and
proceedings of Parliament has been established,
mere disclosure may constitute
the infringement and enliven the exemption. It submitted that some documents,
including documents
5 and 6, are so closely connected to the proceedings of
Parliament that the impairment of the freedom of debate is inevitable and
requiring of proof. The Department referred to various examples of courts having
accepted that the exercise of applying the protection
of parliamentary privilege
entailed no more than being satisfied of that proximity to the parliamentary
function. It submitted that
the purpose of documents 5 and 6, as evident from
their face, requires no further evidence that their disclosure was apt to impede
the free provision of information to witnesses before parliamentary
committees.
Consideration: mere disclosure and evidence of
President of Legislative Council of Western Australia v CCC (No
Hall J said that the use
to which the documents are proposed to be put, and the effect of such use on a
Member of Parliament, is
an element of establishing an infringement. His Honour
In my view parliamentary privilege as provided for in article 9 is concerned
with the use to which the evidence of the proceedings
is put. A requirement to
produce records does not as such breach the privilege, particularly when it is
borne in mind that confidentiality
is not the essence of what is protected.
Thus, whether production of records will breach privilege depends on what use is
the evidence or document. That is, does that use put any member of
Parliament at risk of adverse consequence by reason of what has
been said or
done in Parliament? In this case, the question is how does production of
documents that are connected to proceedings
put a member of Parliament at such
Honour’s remarks were made in the context of the production of documents
in an enquiry, rather than a freedom of information
regime. Even so, there is
some tension between those remarks and McPherson JA’s statements in
Rowley v O’Chee
... If it is necessary to go further and find some independent basis or reason
for concluding that ... [documents were prepared
for the purposes of
proceedings in Parliament], it is in my opinion enough to say that recording and
compiling notes of information
supplied and writing letters on a particular
subject in anticipation of imminent discussion or debate on the same subject in
Senate is what one would ordinarily expect a member of parliament to do
before speaking on that topic in the House.
... One would expect that a senator, who was planning to ask a question or speak
on a particular topic in the House, would first
set about collecting such
documentary information as could be obtained in order to inform himself or
herself sufficiently on that
... There must (one may hope) be few parliamentarians who do not at some times
in their careers take steps to assemble or record
information in writing for
purposes of or incidental to transacting business in the House by using it in
debate, at question times,
or in other parliamentary proceedings.
Patrick’s assertion that consideration of the use to which the documents
will be put is a necessary step in determining whether
privilege is infringed,
is not consistent with more recent statements to the effect that the mere
disclosure of documents, if sufficiently
connected to parliamentary proceedings,
will infringe the privilege.
CPB Contractors Pty Ltd v State of South
involved a dispute as to the production of documents which were discovered in
arbitral proceedings concerning the construction of
a hospital. Certain
documents were the subject of a claim of parliamentary privilege. In that case,
evidence was adduced to establish
the purpose of the documents, because they
were not in a format that disclosed their purpose on their
Upon accepting the
witness’ evidence that the purpose of certain documents was to brief
Ministers appearing before a budget
and finance committee of Parliament,
Kourakis CJ upheld the claim that production could not be compelled because the
documents attracted
No consideration was
required to be given as to whether the infringement was caused by the
inevitability of questioning (impeachment)
the documents’ content, or
because the proximity of briefing notes to the proceedings of Parliament was
such that production
alone would infringe of the privilege. The harm was
implicit in the circumstances of production.
Kourakis CJ was also required to consider some documents that were in the form
The Court accepted
the evidence that these notes were parliamentary briefing
In upholding the claim of
parliamentary privilege in respect of these documents, the Chief Justice
The preparation of notes for a Minister to participate in parliamentary debate
and answer questions which might be raised either
directly or in the course of
the debate falls well within the core purpose of parliamentary privilege and the
privilege is essential
for the purposes of ensuring free debate in Parliament
and, in particular, for the purposes of ministerial accountability to
Parliament.
Australian Capital Territory v SMEC Australia Pty
McWilliam AsJ of the
Supreme Court of the Australian Capital Territory emphasised the purpose of the
creation of the document as
the determinant of whether the privilege attaches to
it. The circumstances arose in the context of an application for production
discovered documents in a dispute between the ACT and a construction company in
relation to an infrastructure project. After
setting out the history and
purpose of the privilege, her Honour
As to the scope of the words of Article 9, “impeached or questioned in any
court”, if documents are protected by parliamentary
privilege, then
ordering production of documents on discovery is a form of
“impeachment” of the proceedings of the parliament,
because the risk
of disclosure through a court process would have a chilling effect on the
activities of and incidental to the parliament
and would thus impede, hinder or
prevent proceedings in parliament. It is therefore contrary to Article 9:
Rowley v O'Chee
[2000] 1 Qd R 207;
O'Chee v Rowley
FLR 1 (Rowley
v O'Chee) at 222, 227; 14, 18.
quoting a passage from
A document will be protected by parliamentary privilege when it is created
“for purposes of or incidental to ... the transacting
of the business of a
House ... ” in s 16(2) of the Act. That phrase does not transform every
action of a parliamentarian in
the pursuit of his or her vocation into
proceedings in Parliament:
Rowley v O'Chee
at 221, 12 per McPherson JA.
Nor is it established if a document prepared for a non-parliamentary purpose is
later used in Parliament:
Carrigan v Cash
[2016] FCA 1466(Carrigan)
referring to
In the matter of the Board of Inquiry into Disability
Szwarcbord v Gallop
[2002] ACTSC 28
(2002) 167 FLR 262
per Crispin J.
The focus is thus on the purpose for which the document was created, or the act
was done. That is a question of fact which requires
an assessment of the
subjective purpose of the actor in question: Carrigan at [44] per White J
(confirmed on appeal: see
Carrigan v Cash
[2017] FCAFC 86).
subjective element is why the affidavit evidence as to the circumstances in
which the document in question came to be created
may be critical to whether a
claim can be maintained.
decision built on the analysis of Jagot J who endorsed the significance of the
connection of the document to the proceedings
of parliament in
Sportsbet v
NSW (No 3).
Connection may be taken from content or from the face of the
Her Honour found that
where the connection between the documents and the business of parliament is
“distant and tenuous”
the documents may not be
Jagot J was called upon to assess a document labelled Exhibit CM1, Vol 2, 56
which was a note for a Minister’s use in parliament.
... I accept that one document as identified above (Exhibit CM1, Vol 2, 56)
should be inferred to have been created for the purpose
of a Minister conducting
business in Parliament. It is thus protected by parliamentary privilege.
Consistent with the approach in
Rowley v O'Chee
, I consider that the
privilege protects the document from disclosure and not mere use ...
approach is consistent with the decision in
Ellis v The
in which the Court of
Appeal considered parliamentary privilege in respect of unredacted copies of
allowance claim forms that were
held by the Finance Section of the Parliamentary
Joint Service Division, these documents were sought to be tendered by the
prosecution.
Separately, the
Speaker of the House of Assembly tabled a bundle of documents which included
copies of the claim forms that had been
printed and redacted by
The unredacted copies
sought to be tendered were received by the Finance Section prior to Parliament
tabling the latter documents.
While the Court held that the tabled documents did
attract privilege by reason of the Speaker tabling them in circumstances where
the tabling occurred ‘as a consequence of, and in response to, the
transacting of the business of the
the unredacted
documents sought by the prosecution were not created for the purpose of being
tabled in Parliament.
subsequent tabling of copies of the documents could not ‘cas[t] a backward
light over the original such as to alter the
for which the
original was created’,
unredacted documents did not attract privilege as they were not created and
stored for a purpose of or incidental to the transacting
of the business of a
House or of a committee.
these concepts to the freedom of information framework, I am satisfied that it
is not contemplated in the FOI Act that the
use by the end recipient of the
documents is required to be known in order for an assessment to be made that an
infringement will
occur. Indeed, the use of the words “public
disclosure” in the chapeau of clause 17 of Schedule 1, establishes that
has recognised that the use to which the end recipient will put the
documents will not necessarily be known. For that reason, the
legislature
directs in the chapeau to clause 17 that the documents are to be assumed to be
publicly disclosed. I consider that the
approach taken by Jagot J in
Sportsbet v NSW (No 3)
and Kourakis CJ in
CPB Contractors Pty Ltd v
when extrapolated to the
circumstance of disclosure by an FOI officer to an FOI applicant, has the result
that no particular harm
is required to be established where documents fall
within the class of documents that are closely connected to the proceedings of
Parliament.
follows that the content of a document is not necessarily the determinant of its
privileged status. Privilege may arise from the
purpose of a document’s
creation and, if the author is not the user of the document, the adoption of
that purpose by the Member
of Parliament or witness in parliamentary
proceedings.
focus is the document and its connection to Parliamentary proceedings, rather
than the subject matter within it or any other
version of the document that may
have been created with similar content. To shift the focus of the exercise to a
consideration of
the content of the document is to undermine the rationale of
the privilege, which is the protection of the processes of parliament
particular, the freedom of debate.
is not strictly necessary to consider whether evidence of harm will ever be
required in order to establish whether clause 17(c)
is enlivened. This is
because documents 5 and 6 are of such a nature as to come squarely within the
class of document that does
not require any further proof of harm to the
operations of the Parliament to enliven the exemption.
remains open to be determined in a future matter whether there may be
circumstances in which the connection between the document
and the proceedings
of Parliament does not allow of an immediate conclusion, and can only be reached
on the basis of evidentiary
5 and 6 have been established to have been created for the purpose of briefing a
witness to a parliamentary committee. The
documents attract parliamentary
privilege. In the circumstances of the clear purpose of their creation, their
public disclosure would
infringe the privilege and they are exempt.
determination of the Ombudsman is set aside in respect of documents 5 and 6. In
substitution, the Tribunal makes a determination
that the documents are exempt
pursuant to clause 17(c) of Schedule 1 of the FOI Act.
Correction request to Tribunal’s decision dated 21
October 2024
Patrick raised a separate issue in his further written submissions in relation
to my decision of 21 October 2024. At paragraph
[23] of those reasons, I stated
that the respondent contended that documents 5 and 6 do not attract
parliamentary privilege. Mr Patrick
submitted that his position was that the
documents did not attract the exemption, but had accepted in his original
submissions that
the documents were closely connected to proceedings in
parliament and that they would “attract parliamentary privilege”.
That distinction has been recognised in this decision but to the extent
necessary, I acknowledge that paragraph [23] of my reasons
dated 21 October 2024
fails to accurately describe his position. That has not had a material bearing
on the outcome of this decision.
Orders of the Tribunal
to s 37(1)(c)(i) of the SACAT Act, the Ombudsman’s decision dated 14
December 2023 is set aside in respect of documents
5 and 6. In substitution, the
Tribunal makes a determination that the documents are exempt pursuant to clause
17(c) of Schedule 1
of the FOI Act.
FOI Act s 40(1a).
Department for Environment
and Water v Patrick
[2024] SACAT 73.
The submission dated 4
February 2025 was a note supplementing Mr Patrick’s reply submissions
dated 24 January 2025.
Now Hon Justice S McDonald,
Federal Court of Australia.
Department for Environment
and Water v Patrick
[2009] HCA 41
(2009) 239 CLR 27 (Hayne
Heydon, Crennan and Kiefel JJ).
FOI Act s 3(1).
Ibid s 3A(1)(a).
Ibid s 3A(1)(b).
(2023)143 SASR 303, [9]
(Lovell, Doyle and David JJA).
[2021] WASC 223
President of Legislative Council of Western Australia v CCC (No
Ibid [127].
Department for
Environment and Water v Patrick
This term derives from
Article 9 of the
Bill of Rights 1689
(1 Wm &M, s 2, c 2); See
paragraph [25] onwards of
Department for Environment and Water v Patrick
Mees v Roads
Corporation
[2003] FCA 306
(2003) 128 FCR 418
[2012] NSWADT 69 (JM
Government Information
(Public Access) Act 2009
Ibid sch 1, cl 4.
[2010] NSWSC 142
(2010) 77 NSWLR 128
[2015] NSWCATAD 95 (SM
[2009] FCA 1283
(2009) 262 ALR 27
Sportsbet v NSW (No 3)
) [71]-[72].
[2023] NSWCATAD 135 (SM
Ibid [161].
[166]-[168].
[2012] WAICmr 10.
Ibid [33]-[34].
[2003] FCA 306
(2003) 128 FCR 418.
Ibid [136]-[137].
Enid Campbell,
Parliamentary Privilege
(Federation Press, 2003) 21.
FOI Act s 12.
Ibid ss 39(17), 42.
Ibid ss 50-51.
See footnote
[2024] SASC 46
CPB Contractors Pty Ltd v SA
Ibid [150].
(1997) 142 FLR 1
Ibid [110].
Ibid [114].
Ibid [122].
Ibid [124].
[2018] ACTSC 252
(2018) 337 FLR 390.
Ibid [48]-[49].
[2023] SASCA 28 (Livesey
Bleby JA and Nicholson AJA).
Ibid [34]-[37].
Ibid [52]-[59].
Sportsbet v NSW (No 3)
CPB Contractors Pty Ltd
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.33 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter