URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRComm/2017/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
El Shafei v Chief Executive, Department of the Premier and Cabinet (on behalf of the Chief Executive, Department for Health and Ageing) [2017] SAIRComm 5 (5 April 2017)
El Shafei v Chief Executive, Department of the Premier and Cabinet (on
behalf of the Chief Executive, Department for Health and Ageing)
] SAIRComm 5
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION (SA)
EL SHAFEI, Dr Ayman
CHIEF EXECUTIVE, DEPARTMENT OF THE PREMIER AND CABINET (on behalf of THE
CHIEF EXECUTIVE, DEPARTMENT FOR HEALTH AND AGEING)
s 106 Unfair Dismissal Application
2245 of 2016
HEARING DATES:
14-17 November 2016 and 6 December 2016
JUDGMENT OF:
Deputy President KM Bartel
DELIVERED ON:
5 April 2017
CATCHWORDS:
Termination of employment - Applicant recruited from overseas - Failure to
meet registration requirements for overseas trained physicians
- Inability to
practice medicine - Relevance of respondent’s conduct - Breakdown in key
relationships - Apparent conflict in
requirements of regulatory bodies -
Circumstances in existence at time of termination - Procedure at termination -
Impact of dismissal
- Valid reason for dismissal -
- Dismissal harsh
and unreasonable - Remedy considered - Whether irretrievable breakdown in the
employment relationship -
- Re-employment appropriate - Ss 108;
109; Sch 7; Sch 8
Fair Work Act 1994
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
Thompson v IGT (Australia) Pty
[2008] FCA 994
Chubb Security Australia Pty Ltd and
, Print S2679, 2 February 2000
Selvachandran v Peteron Plastics
[1995] IRCA 333
(1995) 62 IR 371
J Boag and Son Brewing Pty Ltd v Button
[2010] FWAFB 4022
(2010) 195 IR 292
R v Darling Island Stevedoring and Lighterage Co. Ltd;
Ex Parte Halliday; Ex Parte Sullivan
[1938] HCA 44
(1938) 60 CLR 601
Dr Falk v ACT
Health Operating as The Canberra Hospital
[2007] AIRC 613
Colson v Barwon Health – Geelong Hospital
[2013] FWC 766
Health – Geelong Hospital v Colson
[2013] FWCFB 4515
(2013) 233 IR 364
Colson v Barwon Health
[2013] FWC 8734
Australasian Meat Industry
Employees’ Union v G & K O’Connor Pty Ltd
Quinn v Overland
[2010] FCA 799
Perkins v Grace Worldwide
(Aust) Pty Ltd
[1997] IRCA 15
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr M Griffin, QC
Respondent: Mr A Keane
Solicitors:
Applicant: Gilchrist Connell
Respondent: Crown
Solicitor’s Office
Introduction
El Shafei migrated to Australia in late 2012 to fill the position of Senior
Medical Practitioner
with the Central Adelaide Local Health Network (CALHN). He was recruited from
the United Kingdom, where he held the position of Consultant
in Spinal Injuries
at the Duke of Cornwall Spinal Treatment Centre, Salisbury. The initial approach
to the applicant had been made
by Medical Connect Australia, a specialist
medical recruiting company. The applicant was recruited because of his extensive
and qualification as a consultant in spinal cord injuries.
applicant came to Australia with his wife and two adolescent children. The
decision to accept the position in Adelaide was a decision
of considerable
magnitude; it not only involved leaving an established career in the United
Kingdom to start a career in a new country,
it also disrupted his
children’s education and his wife’s career.
offer of employment
was subject to the applicant having limited/general registration with the
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (AHPRA).
His position was
initially based at the Hampstead Rehabilitation Centre (HRC) and he commenced
employment on 14 January 2013.
terms of the applicant’s employment included an offer for future
employment as a Consultant, providing he met the requirements
for that position
within a period of two years from his commencement date. It was also
contemplated, and conveyed to the applicant,
that he may ultimately replace the
current Director, SA Spinal Cord Injury Service (SASCIS), Associate Professor
Ruth Marshall, who
was nearing retirement.
applicant was dismissed on 11 May 2016, with twelve months’ pay in lieu of
reasonable notice. At the time the applicant
was unable to practice medicine and
had not been in a position to do so since 25 November 2015. The termination
letter from Ms Julia
Squire, the Chief Executive Officer of CALHN at the time,
does not identify a reason/s for dismissal but states that “...
determined to exercise my right to terminate your employment on giving you
her witness statement, Ms Squire referred to the applicant’s inability to
practice and that his absence from the workplace
on full pay “...
not continue indefinitely having regard to the operational requirements of
broad terms, the applicant’s case is that his inability to practice was a
situation brought about by the respondent, who
frustrated and undermined the
process by which the applicant could obtain the registration that would enable
him to practice in his
medical speciality. The applicant holds Associate
Professor Marshall largely responsible for his failure to gain registration. He
contended that Associate Professor Marshall actively frustrated the achievement
of his registration, including through bypassing
obvious placements and
undermining other potential placements, discrediting him to potential
supervisors and withdrawing as his supervisor.
is the respondent’s case, also in broad terms, that it was entitled to
terminate the contract of employment on the giving
of reasonable notice. The
reasonableness of the notice given is not challenged. There was a valid reason
for the dismissal, being
that the applicant did not hold, and had not held for
some time, the professional registration which was an essential qualification
for his role. The applicant lacked the capacity to perform his role and, at the
date of termination, there was no prospect that he
would gain the necessary
qualification in the foreseeable future.
Registration requirements
make sense of the circumstances that led to the applicant’s dismissal it
is necessary to set out the requirements upon overseas
trained physicians
(OTP’s) in order to practice in Australia.
doctor cannot practice unless he or she holds limited or general registration
with AHPRA. Limited registration carries with it a
requirement that the OTP is
supervised by a person approved by the Medical Board of Australia (the Board).
The supervisor must be
appropriately qualified to supervise the OTP’s
field of medicine and is required to provide reports to the Board at regular
Board determines the level of supervision that is to be provided to the OTP.
Four levels of supervision are defined, based around
the extent, if any, to
which the OTP assumes responsibility for individual patients. Level 1 is the
closest level of supervision
and at this level the supervisor takes direct and
principal responsibility for individual patients. At Level 4 the OTP takes
responsibility for individual patients, albeit with some oversight. The
Board determined that the applicant should have Level 2 supervision.
employer arranged for the applicant to be granted limited registration with
AHPRA under the supervision of Associate Professor
applicant was seeking registration as a specialist rehabilitation physician. The
set out the
pathways to specialist registration. The applicant was required to apply to the
Royal Australasian College of Physicians
(the College), for an assessment to
determine the ‘practice’ requirements that he would have to satisfy.
applicant initiated the process in February 2013 and the Australian Medical
College (AMC) Report (Report 1) was issued on 29 October
determined that the applicant was:
“substantially
comparable” in the limited scope of practice of Spinal Cord Rehabilitation
Medicine and that he was required
to complete twelve months practice under peer
review and complete two external training modules.
comparable” in the full scope of practice of Rehabilitation Medicine. In
order to achieve specialist recognition
the applicant was required to complete
twelve months of peer reviewed practice in Rehabilitation Medicine, complete a
written examination
and clinical examination, complete two external training
modules, and undertake two Formal Long Case Assessments (FLCA).
applicant sought a review of this assessment and the AMC Amended Report (Amended
Report 1) was issued on 13 February
requirements in the limited scope of practice of Spinal Cord Rehabilitation
Medicine were unchanged. The requirement for twelve
months of peer reviewed
practice in the full scope of practice of Rehabilitation Medicine remained, but
the requirement for written
and clinical examinations was removed and the
external training requirement was reduced to one module.
Peer reviewed practice
twelve month period of peer reviewed practice could be one period of twelve
months with the same peer reviewers, or two or more
placements of at least three
months with different peer reviewers. At the successful conclusion of the first
three months of peer
reviewed practice an OTP is able to apply to the College to
have the remainder of the peer reviewed period reduced or waived in its
peer review requirements include:
Peer reviewers
will ideally be at the level of consultant physician but must be at least at the
level of a senior registrar;
The role of the
peer reviewer is to provide oversight and constructive feedback;
The position
being peer reviewed must expose the person to the full range of clinical
activities required in the specialty;
clinical skills and professional attributes are observed and assessed by the
peer reviewers;
Regular meetings
are held with the person being reviewed;
Regular reports
are provided to the College; and
Any change in
peer review arrangements must be approved by the
The evidence
applicant’s witness statement included a book of the documents that were
referred to in his
documents included numerous emails created during his employment, including many
which were disclosed to the applicant for
the first time subsequent to his
dismissal. As such, his statement was a chronological recital of the events as
they unfolded but
it was not necessarily consistent with his contemporaneous
knowledge of those events. Some of the later disclosed documents were
from Associate Professor Marshall which contained comments adverse to, or
referenced complaints about the applicant. Not unsurprisingly,
this caused the
applicant to reconsider his view of the events as they had unfolded.
difficulty with his evidence arose when he attempted to justify his actions at a
particular time in his employment based on later
acquired knowledge. The
applicant was clearly embittered by the revelations in the subsequently
disclosed documents and not without
some justification. However at times his
attitude distorted benign events into malicious acts and he drew certain
inferences about
Associate Professor Marshall’s motivations and actions
which were not credible.
applicant was animated and at times belligerent in the witness box. On occasions
he was loose with detail and/or intent on focusing
on the big picture and an
explanation of his position and context, rather than the questions he was asked.
That being said, there
are a number of issues connected to the applicant’s
attempts to obtain registration upon which he was justifiably frustrated
have taken this into account in assessing his evidence. These matters and any
factual disputes are dealt with in the narrative
that follows.
witnesses were called by the applicant under subpoena. I find that both
witnesses were genuine and direct in the evidence given
and, subject to one
matter that is discussed in my findings, it is accepted:
Dr John Maddison
was, at the relevant time, the acting Executive Director of Medical Services for
the Northern Adelaide Local Health
Network (NALHN). Dr Maddison had some
involvement in the placement of the applicant at Modbury Hospital in late 2015
and early 2016.
Quadros, was, at the relevant time, the Director of Rehabilitation Services at
the Queen Elizabeth Hospital (TQEH) and St
Margaret’s Rehabilitation
Hospital. Dr Quadros was involved with a potential placement of the
applicant within his service
in mid-2014.
respondent called Ms Julia
commenced in the position of Chief Executive Officer of CALHN in October 2015.
As noted earlier, she took the decision
to dismiss the applicant. Her evidence
went to the basis for her decision and her understanding of, and involvement
with circumstances
pertaining to the applicant’s placements in the period
preceding his termination. She was a credible witness.
respondent did not call Associate Professor Marshall to give evidence, giving
rise to a submission from Mr Mark Griffin QC, for
the applicant, that the
Commission should infer that her evidence would not assist the respondent and
that the applicant’s
evidence should be accepted. (
Keane, of counsel for the respondent, submitted that the applicant’s
evidence in relation to Associate Professor Marshall’s
actions was
unreliable, but moreover her actions are irrelevant to the decision to dismiss
and to the Commission’s consideration.
The decision to dismiss was based
solely on the applicant’s inability to practice medicine.
Keane also submitted that a
Jones v Dunkel
inference could be drawn from
the applicant’s failure to call a number of witnesses who were subpoenaed
to appear, and whom
the applicant alleged were pressured or influenced by
Associate Professor Marshall to his detriment. Of the subpoenaed witnesses
could give evidence in this regard, only Dr Quadros was called and his
evidence does not support the applicant’s contention
that he was pressured
by Associate Professor Marshall not to provide a placement for the
do not intend to deal here with the submission that the Commission should be
confined in its determination as to whether the dismissal
was harsh, unjust or
unreasonable by reference to the applicant’s inability to practice
medicine. In the first instance I will
make findings on the relevant facts in
existence as at the date of dismissal, in accordance with the respective cases
advanced by
the parties. There is a significant amount of correspondence which
enables the Commission to form a view as to the applicant’s
credibility
and if relevant, any
Jones v Dunkel
inference will be discussed in this
the commencement of his employment in January 2013, the applicant worked
predominantly in the spinal injury Wards 2C/D under
the supervision of Associate
Professor Marshall, and to a lesser extent in the orthopaedic, amputee and
general rehabilitation Ward
2A, under the supervision of
Dr Bastian.
The applicant would cover for Associate Professor Marshall and Dr Bastian
in their absence and participated in an on-call roster
covering these wards. He
conducted outpatient clinics at the HRC and would conduct educational sessions
with patients and their family
in relation to the patient’s condition and
daily management thereof. After the initial few weeks of employment the
worked with a significant degree of autonomy and limited oversight
which was more akin to Level 4 supervision under the APHRA Supervision
guidelines.
applicant also worked at the Royal Adelaide Hospital (RAH) in acute admissions
as part of his regular roster, supervised by Dr
February 2014 – October 2014
the amended report was issued by the College in February 2014, there was a
further delay of nine months before the first peer-reviewed
placement commenced
in October 2014.
this period there were complaints from the applicant’s two supervisors and
others within HRC about his conduct. These
complaints included a letter from Dr
Bastian in April 2014, which concluded with the following statement: “...
I feel it untenable that I could work with Dr El Shafei on my ward. I
would consider alternative employment options if this was to
There was a five-page document sent from Associate Professor Marshall in July
2014 to Dr Satterthwaite, Executive Director Medical
Services CALHN,
Dr Christopher Zeitz, Clinical Director, Medical Services at CALHN and
Carolyn Sutherland, Human Resources, outlining
her concerns with the
followed various emails from Associate Professor Marshall to one or more of
these officers where she raised concerns about the
applicant’s
of these concerns were formally raised with the applicant at the time. He
continued to pursue a placement in Ward 2A and/or Wards
2C/D for some
months as the most logical and easily arranged option to progress his
registration. Nonetheless, the applicant would
have become aware of a developing
problems: In mid-March 2014 he was aware of “difficulties” with
continuing in Ward
2A; on 4 July 2014 Associate Professor Marshall forwarded an
advertisement to him for a Consultant in Spinal Cord Injury in
and sometime before 31 July 2014 the
applicant had expressed a concern that Associate Professor Marshall was
excluding him from certain
response of the senior clinicians to the concerns raised by Associate Professor
Marshall was to seek a placement for the applicant
outside Ward 2A and Wards
April 2014 the applicant was corresponding with Professor Maria Crotty, Director
of Rehabilitation and Aged Care at the Repatriation
General Hospital (RGH).
Professor Crotty was agreeable to providing a placement for the applicant but
could not do so until July
2014 because of renovations and ward movements, the
commencement of the Enterprise Patient Administration System (EPAS) and the
of relevant personnel on
25 June 2014, Dr Zeitz advised the applicant by email that a three month
placement had been arranged at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital
(TQEH)/St Margaret’s Hospital that would commence at the end of July
2014. Dr Quadros and Dr Winsor were to be the applicant’s
supervisors,
subject to their
Quadros gave evidence that he was upset that no prior discussion had taken place
with him. He felt he was being railroaded into
a situation by Dr Zeitz, who in
his view had no authority to direct him in relation to supervisory activities
and peer review placements.
He also felt railroaded by the applicant, who,
consistent with Dr Zeitz’s advice, had attended at the TQEH and left
documentation
to be signed by Dr Quadros and forwarded to the
addition, Associate Professor Marshall had contacted Dr Quadros and alerted him
to issues between herself and the applicant as
well as other concerns in
relation the
Quadros advised Dr Zeitz that a meeting to discuss the applicant needed to take
place before any decision is made and that he
would like Associate Professor
Marshall to be
placement did not proceed.
Professor Marshall emailed Professor Crotty on 31 July 2014 after the placement
with Dr Quadros fell through. The email
sought to persuade Professor Crotty to
take the applicant as an extra numerary doctor, but in the same email stated
that she was
still having problems with the applicant and that Drs Quadros and
don’t want him
”. Associate Professor Marshall
referred to the applicant needing close supervision, while also functioning as a
consultant,
but that he “
doesn’t like reporting what he is doing
further factor which contributed to the delay in securing a placement for the
applicant was a level of upheaval in a number of areas
that were potential areas
for a placement. Transforming Health initiatives and the roll out of EPAS
created a state of
which diverted personnel who would have otherwise been available to supervise
and/or peer-review the applicant.
period of the delay was significant for the applicant in view of the contractual
term that he would be engaged as a consultant
if he obtained accreditation
within two years.
The first peer reviewed placement 6 October 2014 – 5 January 2015
applicant commenced his first peer reviewed placement at HRC in Ward 1C (Stroke)
and Ward 1D (General Rehabilitation and Geriatrics).
There were three peer
reviewers. One peer reviewer, Dr Lecamwasam, withdrew in December 2014, after a
workplace incident that involved
comments and actions by the applicant toward a
registrar and an intern, which the registrar considered to be objectionable. The
was investigated and the applicant apologised to the complainants. The
other two peer reviewers assessed the placement as satisfactorily
however the withdrawal of Dr Lecamwasam meant that the placement was not
recognised by the College as having been satisfactorily
January 2015 to November 2015
applicant applied to the Appeals Committee of the College to have his placement
approved. He had been removed from Ward 1D but
remained in Ward 1C. On 24
January 2015 he requested that he remain in this ward while his application to
the appeals committee was
considered and expressed the view that he could most
likely commence a further placement in General Rehabilitation if required. The
applicant expressed concern that going back to the spinal unit would cause
problems with the College, would impede a further attachment
and would place him
into a same situation that existed in February 2014 “...
the obstructions/problems/issues associated with
1 February 2015, Dr Ayesha Mohamed, Deputy Director of Geriatric and
Rehabilitation Medicine at RAH/HRC emailed Dr Satterthwaite
suggesting that
there be some discussion about a further placement and supervision for the
applicant, including time spent within
her department.
2 February 2015 the applicant was directed by Dr Zeitz to return to the spinal
unit under the supervision of Associate Professor
Marshall. The folly of this
move is evidenced by an email from Associate Professor Marshall to Dr Zeitz
barely one week later asking
At what can stage can we sack
interpose that it is staggering to me that, whatever the veracity of any or all
the complaints against the applicant, there was
an abundance of evidence
available to Dr Zeitz that Associate Professor Marshall was unable to address
her concerns in a structured
12 February 2015 Associate Professor Marshall provided a nine-page letter to the
College in her capacity as the applicant’s
supervisor. The letter
commences “
I write to you regarding Dr Ayman El Shafei’s progress
towards obtaining his recognition as a Specialist in Rehabilitation Medicine,
particularly in light of the positive reports provided in April 2013 and January
To say that it was a less than positive account of her dealings with the
applicant and his conduct would be to understate the criticisms
in the report.
The report was provided at a time when the College Appeals Committee had
received the applicant’s appeal in
relation to the placement in Wards 1C
March 2015 the applicant requested that Dr Winsor, who was head of the
Rehabilitation Department at that time, conduct a further
FLCA. The applicant
stated that the request was declined by Dr Winsor, whereas, as Mr Keane
pointed out, Dr Winsor replied that he
would not be prepared to undertake the
for a period of time – a minimum of 3
.” Having regard to the tone and content of Dr Winsor’s
response, which seems quite out of proportion compared to the
manner in which
the applicant requested his assistance, it was not unreasonable for the
applicant to form the view that his request
would not be
accommodated.
applicant stated that he also requested a placement with Dr Winsor, which was
declined, but there is no reference to this in
any of the relevant emails.
early August 2015 the applicant requested that Associate Professor Marshall be
replaced as his Supervisor and he approached Dr
Freeman at the RAH who was
willing to act in this capacity. This was refused by Dr Satterthwaite on
the basis that preliminary advice
from AHRPA suggested that a supervisor who
worked at a different site was unlikely to be approved. Dr Satterthwaite
indicated that
he could assume this role, but subsequently withdrew the offer on
the basis that he and Dr Zeitz considered that, in light of “
difficulties we have had
”, a facility based, rather than remote
supervisor should be
Appeals Committee of the College, by decision dated 24 November 2015, determined
that the applicant’s progress under the
peer review period was
satisfactory.
decision noted that two of the peer reviewers assessed the applicant as having
satisfactorily completed the review period, and
that Dr Lecamwasam had
assessed the applicant as satisfactory in clinical and
administrative/organisational skills. He had assessed
the applicant as
unsatisfactory in “communication and relationship skills” and
“moral and ethical behaviour”,
principally as a result of the
complaint. The satisfactory completion of this period enabled the applicant to
apply to reduce the
period of peer-reviewed assessment.
Professor Marshall completed a further work performance report on the applicant
in November 2015 in her capacity as his
AHPRA-approved supervisor. She assessed
the applicant as below the required standard in the categories of
Professionalism, Communication
and Safe Practice.
25 November 2015 AHPRA contacted Associate Professor Marshall to request further
information and clarification on the applicant’s
progress in relation to
the points addressed in her previous reports, and “...
the activities
undertaken by Dr El Shafei to address the issues listed in the
the same day, Associate Professor Marshall withdrew as the applicant’s
supervisor.
had dramatic consequences for the applicant. AHPRA immediately issued the
applicant with a ‘cease practice’ notice
as he no longer complied
with the registration requirements concerning supervision.
December 2015 to dismissal
applicant had remained on full pay since ceasing practicing on 25 November
2015. On 24 December 2015 the respondent, through the
Crown Solicitor’s
Office (CSO) proposed that the applicant be located at the RAH Emergency
Department but noted that the respondent
had been unable to identify a
supervisor and/or a suitable peer review
29 December 2015 the applicant received advice from AHPRA that the Board would
be unlikely to approve a supervisor until such time
as the placement including
the supervisory arrangements, had been approved by the College. There is no
evidence that this information
was shared with the respondent.
15 January 2016 the applicant’s solicitors threatened legal action unless
the respondent organised a replacement
supervisor.
respondent subsequently advised that placement had been arranged for the
applicant to work as a Resident Medical Officer (RMO)
under the supervision of
Dr Winsor. This offer was then withdrawn. There appear to have been two reasons
for this. Firstly, the applicant
had objected to the RMO position on the basis
that it was inconsistent with his employment contract and was unlikely to be
it was the view of the South Australian Salaried Medical Officers Association
(SASMOA) and Dr Winsor’s legal representative
that medical staff could not
be directed to undertake supervision or peer-review of OTP’s.
applicant’s annual registration lapsed on 8 January 2016 but there was a
one month grace period after this date. He was
directed to attend Modbury
Hospital to undertake the duties of a Senior Medical Practitioner reporting to
Dr Kochiyil.
applicant duly attended a meeting with Dr Kochiyil on 9 February 2016, the
day his registration lapsed, wherein he was advised
that he would be performing
the duties of an RMO. The applicant had presented a draft supervisory plan which
was based on the supervisory
plan developed by Associate Professor Marshall when
he first commenced employment. Dr Kochiyil refused to sign and advised that
would draft an alternative supervisory plan.
10 February 2016 the applicant sought the respondent’s intervention to
facilitate his resumption of duties as an
is convenient to deal with Dr Maddison’s evidence at this point. He had
received requests from Dr Satterthwaite in November
2015 and January 2016 to
consider a placement for the applicant at Modbury Hospital. Dr Maddison was
unable to accommodate these
requests at the time. He stated that the
rehabilitation service was in a consolidation period after an influx of
transferring doctors;
the service had moved to a new ward; and Dr Kochiyil was
the most senior consultant, but he only had five to six years’ experience
at this level. Dr Maddison also considered that there was a potential conflict
of interest with Dr Kochiyil, who, in his capacity
as a member of a College
committee, had been privy to a range of correspondence about the
further request was made to Dr Maddison in February 2016 after Mr Swan, the
Chief Executive Officer of the Department for Health
and Ageing (DHA), became
involved in the applicant’s situation. As noted above it was agreed that a
placement would be arranged
under Dr Kochiyil’s supervision. Dr
Maddison was firmly of the view that the obligation upon his service was to meet
supervision requirements and that the terms of the placement were
matters to be organised primarily between the doctor and the College.
“And we were in a bit of a pickle, because you’ve got a doctor who
is of some decades’ experience and very senior.
He’s got these
competing - it seems somewhat competing requirements of the College and the
Medical Board that had to be weighed
up. So we had to individualise a plan which
is, you know, the kind of pathway we were heading down.
Can I just ask you this - - - ?---Well, just to clarify, in terms of my role and
my view of this matter, there is absolute primacy
of the Medical
24 February 2016, the applicant’s solicitors advised the CSO that no
alternative supervisory plan had been provided by Dr
Kochiyil. The CSO responded
on 25 February 2016 by providing notice that Mr Swan intended to treat the
applicant’s contract
of employment as having ended as at 9 February 2016
by reason of the operation of the doctrine of frustration. The applicant was
invited to respond to the Chief Executive’s intention.
applicant’s solicitors responded that day stating that the applicant had
raised legitimate concerns in relation to the proposed
duties, but that it was
never his intention not to comply with the direction that he take up duties at
Modbury Hospital. A request
was made that the respondent arrange for a
supervisory plan to be provided by Dr Kochiyil.
email from AHPRA on 4 March 2016, consistent with its earlier advice on 29
December 2015, advised that the application for registration
could only proceed
if the applicant attached written confirmation from the College that the
proposed position, location/s and supervision
arrangements were
provided to the respondent.
applicant then forwarded his application for peer review placement to the
College on 1 April 2016. On 29 April 2016 the College
advised that the position
did not appear to be at the minimum level of Senior Registrar as required for
peer review. The applicant
informed Ms Squire of this on 9 May 2016 and on 11
May 2016 he was dismissed.
The dismissal
Squire first she became aware of the applicant’s situation was when he
sent her an email on 25 January 2016 requesting that
she meet with him and his
wife to discuss the events which have led to his current predicament. A document
was attached to the email
apparently setting out an “outline of the
situation”, although this was not put in evidence. Ms Squire responded
she was always happy to meet with clinicians but sought a few days to
familiarise herself with the relevant
sought advice and subsequently received a chronology of events from Ms Mandy
Palumbo, of the Human Resources (HR) section within
DHA. Ultimately she did not
meet with the applicant at any stage.
Squire stated that she relied on the advice from Dr Satterthwaite in relation to
issues such as potential supervisory and placement
arrangements as well as HR
advice from Ms Palumbo.
Squire adopted the view, similar to that expressed by Dr Maddison, that the
immediate priority was registration with AHPRA. She
stated that the
respondent’s efforts were directed to finding a replacement supervisor and
structuring a position that met
the Level 2 supervision requirements, and that
these matters were pursued by Dr Satterthwaite and Dr Zeitz.
circumstances surrounding the applicant’s recruitment, the history of
delays and problems with obtaining placements for
him and the circumstances
leading to Associate Professor Marshall’s withdrawal as his supervisor
were not matters that Ms Squire
considered relevant to her decision about the
applicant’s continued employment.
Squire took into account the following matters in reaching the decision to
terminate the applicant’s employment:
he failed to
gain accreditation and registration as a consultant within the two year
opportunity provided under his contract of employment
or after that time;
his own conduct
was a contributing factor – there was limited goodwill toward him among
potential supervisors;
authority to direct employees to undertake supervision of the applicant;
AHPRA required
Level 2 supervision however the College required at least a Senior Registrar
role and this impasse was unlikely to
be resolved in the near future;
the continued
payment of a salary to the applicant when he was unable to practice could not be
justified having regard to the operating
requirements of DHA and funding
accountability
requirements.
Squire considered that the respondent made reasonable attempts to obtain a
position for the applicant. She identified six rehabilitation
physicians who had
been approached during January 2016 to see if they would be willing and able to
supervise the applicant if he
agreed to “
limit correspondence to
clinical matters expressed in a measured and professional manner
Bastian and Dr Maddison declined without stating reasons, as did Professor
Crotty (RGH). I interpose that an email from
Professor Crotty identified
understaffing and transforming health processes as the main reasons, and that
unable to help in
Dr Winsor (TQEH) advised that the placement would cause “
disruption, given existing relationship issues
”. Dr Marie Paul
declined on the basis of her past experience supervising the applicant and that
she did not have the resources
to provide supervision. Dr Quadros (TQEH) also
declined, citing a lack of any previous experience in supervising a
Post-dismissal
8 November 2016, the College decided to reduce the period of practice under peer
review for the purposes of the applicant’s
specialist recognition in the
limited scope of practice of Spinal Rehabilitation Medicine, to three months.
The College further decided
that such period had been satisfactorily
March 2017, AHPRA approved the application for registration in the limited scope
of practice of Spinal Rehabilitation Medicine.
Findings on the evidence
are a number of intersecting and overlapping circumstances apparent from the
above narrative which culminated in the situation
that existed at the time of
the applicant’s dismissal.
The applicant
applicant came to Australia as an experienced consultant. He had an expectation
that he would be assisted by the respondent in
meeting the requirements for
registration and that he would be engaged as a consultant once he gained
registration. He understood
that he would specialise in spinal cord
should be noted at the outset that the applicant’s clinical skills are not
in issue. However, he clearly had a manner and/or
demeanour which a number of
people found confronting or upsetting and I do not accept that he is a blameless
victim of others’
malice or conspiracies. The concerns identified by the
persons who made complaints against the applicant were primarily about the
manner in which the applicant engaged with them. This is a situation beyond that
addressed by Ms Squire, during an exchange with
Mr Griffin, where she stated
that personality conflicts between medical personnel are common because
senior doctors are very smart people with very strong
Notwithstanding
the complaints about the applicant’s manner and/or behaviour, he also
received positive references from a range
of medical and allied health
professionals, including Associate Professor Marshall and Dr Bastian in
2013 and early 2014, and other
doctors and allied health professionals with whom
he worked. These references included not only positive comments about the
applicant’s
clinical skills but a number of them referred in positive
terms to his general demeanour and
professionalism.
applicant’s view of the conduct of Associate Professor Marshall was at
times irrational and included unsubstantiated allegations
brought the
applicant to South Australia under false pretences;
instigated Dr
Bastian’s complaint about him;
allegations that staff would resign;
encouraged Dr
Kochiyil to limit the proposed duties at Modbury Hospital so that they would be
rejected by the College; and
influence to intimidate others.
applicant also suggested that Associate Professor Marshall misled him regarding
matters concerning his registration, recognition
and employment. There may have
been some error in advice she provided to the applicant about registration
requirements but the evidence
does not establish that there was a deliberate
attempt to mislead.
were allegations that Associate Professor Marshall undermined proposed
attachments with Professor Crotty at RGH and Dr Quadros
St Margaret’s Hospital. In my view there is some truth in this
allegation insofar as it concerned her representations to
Dr Quadros. Dr
Quadros’ evidence was that Associate Professor Marshall’s advice was
the least significant of the factors
that led him to decline to supervise the
applicant, but the position he conveyed to Dr Zeitz on 27 June 2014 suggests
email from Associate Professor Marshall to Professor Crotty sought a placement
for the applicant, but also drew attention to
his perceived deficiencies, which
at the least was counterproductive.
further allegation was that Associate Professor Marshall advanced the interests
of more junior doctors ahead of his interests by
appointing them to permanent
positions in her department. I do not regard their respective interests as
necessarily competing or
their circumstances to be comparable.
Notwithstanding
the litany of complaints attributing malicious intent on the part of Associate
Professor Marshall, the applicant stated
that he felt he was able to work with
Associate Professor Marshall and the failure to
is open on the evidence to conclude that Associate Professor Marshall took
active steps to air her complaints and the complaints
of others about their
respective dealings with the applicant. In the absence of evidence from her, I
have formed no view on her motives
in doing so, but note that it is not
unreasonable that she would seek to raise her concerns with her superiors. There
are questions
be requested to assist with placements and supervision for the
applicant and to
the College while the applicant’s appeal was before it. However, the
significant fact in my view is that her
complaints and the complaints of others
were never properly investigated. Consequently, the applicant was not afforded
an opportunity
to respond to the complaints and there was no opportunity for a
resolution of the concerns.
Professor Marshall was struggling to deal with the situation and this was made
known to a range of other clinicians. Numerous
emails from Associate Professor
Marshall to Dr Satterthwaite and others made clear her frustrations and/or
sought their assistance
in the lead up to her decision to withdraw as the
applicant’s
supervisor.
early as July 2014 she advised Dr Satterthwaite and Dr Zeitz that
I do not believe that I can continue to supervise [the applicant] in
a potential placement presented itself in early 2015 in general rehabilitation,
the matter was not properly investigated and
the applicant was referred back to
the spinal unit under Associate Professor Marshall. When the applicant sought a
change in supervisor
in August 2015, the matter was not investigated with the
diligence that would be expected given the circumstances.
addition there is no evidence of any assistance being offered to Associate
Professor Marshall in the form of a structured performance
plan or an offer of
third party mediation between the relevant parties. The absence of any practical
intervention, in what was clearly
a situation that needed to be addressed, is
difficult to understand on several levels.
situation between the applicant and Associate Professor Marshall and
Dr Bastian had serious implications on the applicant’s
obtain accreditation. Wards 2A and 2C/D were the obvious areas for him to
complete his peer reviewed practice requirements
having regard to the nature of
these wards and the fact that alternatives were in short supply. There was also
an obvious risk that
Associate Professor Marshall may withdraw as the
applicant’s supervisor.
respondent gave undertakings of assistance to the applicant to obtain his
accreditation when he was recruited from the United
Kingdom. In my view, the
respondent’s failure to deal with the situation between the applicant and
his AHPRA supervisors was
an abrogation of this undertaking.
the applicant’s accreditation was important for the future operation of
SASCIS. The evidence before the Commission
is that there is a significant
deficit of rehabilitation specialists which impacts on the security of the
spinal injury service.
A letter to AHPRA from Associate Professor Marshall and
the General Manager of HRC in November 2012 notes that rehabilitation is
area of greatest medical specialist shortage in Australia and that South
Australia “
is particularly affected
.” The letter stated that
the lack of spinal cord injury specialists increases the vulnerability of the
spinal cord injury service
and the people it
Associate Professor Marshall withdrew as the applicant’s supervisor in
November 2015 she did so in her ‘private’
capacity as an AHPRA
supervisor. However in my view her actions cannot be divorced from the
respondent’s failure to manage
the situation between her and the
summary, the responsible senior clinicians and the HR Department failed to take
any practical steps to address the issues between
the applicant and Associate
Professor Marshall. Alternative options, when they did present, were not pursued
with the diligence that
might have been expected given the state of Dr
Marshall’s concerns. The result of these failures was that the damaged
relationship
between Associate Professor Marshall and the applicant continued
until it disintegrated with her withdrawal as the applicant’s
supervisor.
am satisfied that Associate Professor Marshall understood the consequences of
her withdrawal as the applicant’s supervisor
in circumstances where no
replacement supervisor had been approved by AHPRA.
College/AHPRA requirements and processes
the evidence before the Commission it is difficult to identify whether the
particular circumstances of this case were complex or
whether the process of an
OTP obtaining registration is always attended by this level of complexity. In
any event, the evidence suggests
that the extent of the paperwork required to be
completed was substantial, the time taken to obtain determinations from the
accreditation bodies and appeals committees was extensive and the
interrelationship between AHPRA’s supervision requirements
and the College
peer review placement requirements was complex.
November 2015, the respondent increased its efforts in seeking a placement for
the applicant, however the complexity of the requirements
interrelationship between AHPRA and the College were not clear and/or well
understood by the persons who were making decisions.
The nature of the Modbury
Hospital placement, which was seen as a secondary requirement by Dr Maddison and
others, was a primary
condition to be satisfied before AHRPA would approve the
supervision arrangements. In addition there was an apparent inconsistency
between the AHPRA requirement for a relatively close level of supervision and
the College requirement of a placement at a sufficiently
senior level to be
consistent with the specialist pathway to registration.
Transforming health initiatives and other disruptions
was disruption in a number of areas which could have otherwise been realistic
options for a peer reviewed placement for the
applicant. Initiatives associated
with Transforming Health, systems-related initiatives and/or physical
relocations were cited as
a reason for declining to accommodate an immediate
placement for the applicant by Professor Crotty, Dr Maddison (in November 2015
and January 2016),
and Dr Paul.
Submissions
Griffin submitted that, even if the narrow basis of the respondent’s
decision to dismiss was accepted, the dismissal was
harsh, unjust or
unreasonable on the following grounds:
the perceived
impasse between AHPRA and the College was misconceived and a suitable position
could have been structured which met
the requirements of AHPRA and the
respondent’s assumption of limited goodwill toward the applicant was
the assumption
that the applicant’s colleagues would not supervise him was unfounded
– both Dr Quadros and Dr Maddison
indicated a preparedness to
consider a supervisory role and saw it as part of their professional
responsibilities;
the assumption
that the respondent could not direct its consultants to assume a supervisory
role for AHPRA and the College’s
purposes was erroneous
the adverse
indication of the College regarding the duties at Modbury Hospital under the
supervision of Dr Kochiyil was not sufficient
reason to proceed to
termination;
respondent’s assumption that the applicant’s registration could not
be renewed within a reasonable time frame was
the employer
failed to genuinely, constructively and collaboratively work through the issues
with relevant parties, including AHPRA
and the College.
applicant’s primary submission is that the decision to terminate should
have been informed by all of the circumstances of
the applicant’s
employment including his recruitment. Mr Griffin contended that the decision
maker should have taken into account
the matters set out below, and that the
failure to take these matters into account rendered the dismissal harsh, unjust
or unreasonable:
circumstances leading to the lapsing of the applicant’s registration;
the promises and
assurances made to the applicant during the recruitment process;
what was and was
not done to progress the applicant’s registration as a specialist;
applicant’s clinical contribution since he commenced employment and his
ability to make a contribution in the future;
employer should have supported the applicant in obtaining specialist
registration in the limited scope of practice of spinal
cord rehabilitation
the exceptional
circumstances attending the applicant’s recruitment and the catastrophic
career consequences of the decision
to terminate;
the need to
provide an opportunity for the applicant to be heard;
employer should have worked collaboratively and constructively with the
applicant, his colleagues, AHPRA and the College
to preserve the
applicant’s employment and progress his specialist registration.
Keane stressed that the dismissal was not related to the performance or conduct
of the applicant, but that he was dismissed because
he was unable to perform the
duties for which he had been contracted.
submitted that the applicant was an unreliable witness and his evidence
contained a number of inaccuracies and embellishments which
collectively
portrayed a distorted view of events and which had been constructed
retrospectively.
applicant’s case rests on a conspiracy by Associate Professor Marshall
because it absolves him of any responsibility for
the situation in which he
found himself and ignores the issues with AHPRA and the College. The
applicant’s allegations against
Associate Professor Marshall are without
foundation or distort her actions. The persons whom the applicant alleges were
by her conduct to his detriment were not called to give
respondent does not accept that the applicant had taken all possible steps to
further his accreditation: he could have revisited
a position with Professor
Crotty in July 2014 after the placement with Dr Quadros fell through and he
could have organised a placement
post-October 2013 whilst awaiting the decision
on his appeal against the AMC’s Report No. 1. Instead, the applicant
on further placement in Ward 2A and Wards 2C/D, regardless of whether
this would limit his ability to obtain a Fellowship of the
Squire’s evidence was clear that her decision to terminate placed no
weight on the allegations concerning the applicant’s
conduct, but noted
that people were unwilling to supervise him and that this was unusual. She
focused on the attempts that had been
made to find a pathway forward for the
applicant and the employer and it was only when she formed the view that all
avenues had been
exhausted that she determined that termination was
appropriate.
Keane noted there was no time frame put forward by the applicant in which it was
suggested that he could organise a replacement
supervisor and a suitable
placement. It was open to Ms Squire to form the view that termination was
appropriate in circumstances
where there were no options ‘on the
table’ and the applicant had not performed duties for six months
whilst in receipt
of a salary.
was submitted that the usual authorities relating to misconduct do not apply to
the present matter as this was not the basis for
the dismissal and questions of
procedural unfairness do not strictly arise. While the applicant appears to
assert a right to be assisted
to obtain specialist recognition and a right to
pursue opportunities to resume practice, no such rights exist.
respondent had a valid reason for dismissal connected with the capacity of the
applicant. It was acknowledged by Mr Keane that
dismissal for a valid reason
could still be harsh, unjust or unreasonable. He contended that the real
question in these proceedings
is whether the dismissal was harsh, and that the
applicant bears the evidentiary onus this regard. Mr Keane also suggested that
the authorities on ‘harsh dismissal’ are of limited assistance,
other than the general proposition that the Commission
needs to balance the
consequences of the dismissal on the employee with the consequences of continued
employment for the employer.
payment of twelve months’ salary on termination was said to adequately
compensate the applicant for the adverse consequences
of the termination. The
fact that the applicant has now obtained specialist recognition in the limited
scope of practice of Spinal
Rehabilitation Medicine can only be of limited
relevance to the question of whether the termination of employment was harsh.
employer was unaware until the hearing that the applicant had applied to
reduce the period of peer review supervision. Mr Keane argued
that, in any
event, the employer was required to make a decision on the information available
at the time. There was no guarantee
at that point that the applicant would ever
be in a position to return to duties or that the obstacles to a successful and
co-operative
employment relationship would be resolved.
applicant’s subsequent registration in the limited scope of practice of
spinal cord rehabilitation medicine would enhance
his employability and may be
relevant to the issue of remedy.
reply to the applicant’s submissions, Mr Keane submitted that:
the question for
the Commission is whether the decision to terminate was reasonably open to the
respondent and the Commission should
not place itself in the position of the
decision maker;
Professor Marshall had no role in the decision to terminate and the respondent
did not seek her views;
the impasse
between AHPRA and the College was real, not perceived, and a different scenario
existed once the applicant’s registration
lapsed. The applicant’s
previous placement and prior employment arrangements had operated under
different parameters and accordingly
could not be relied upon by the applicant
as evidence that a further placement was capable of being structured.
Consideration
Fair Work Act 1994
(the Act) mandates the approach of the
Commission in considering an unfair dismissal
application:
108—Question
to be determined at the hearing
(1) At the hearing of an application under this Part, the Commission must
determine whether, on the balance of probabilities, the
dismissal is harsh,
unjust or unreasonable.
(2) In deciding whether a dismissal was harsh, unjust or unreasonable, the
Commission must have regard to—
Termination of Employment Convention
(b) the rules and procedures for termination of employment prescribed by or
(c) the degree to which the size of the relevant undertaking, establishment or
business impacted on the procedures followed in effecting
the dismissal; and
(d) the degree to which the absence of dedicated human resource management
specialists or expertise in the relevant undertaking,
establishment or business
impacted on the procedures followed in effecting the dismissal; and
(e) whether the employer has failed to comply with an obligation under
section 58B
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
(f) any other factor considered by the Commission to be relevant to the
particular circumstances of the dismissal.
(3) If a redundancy payment is made on the dismissal in accordance with a
relevant industrial instrument, the dismissal cannot be
regarded as harsh,
unjust or unreasonable solely on the ground that the payment is
inadequate.”
injunction that the Commission “must have regard to” the matters in
s 108(2) of the Act means that the Commission
is required to take these
matters into account and give weight to them as a fundamental element in
deciding whether the termination
is harsh, unjust or
unreasonable.
There is a caveat that certain matters in s.108(2) may be of no relevance in a
particular case and are therefore of no weight in
the Commission’s
consideration.
overarching statutory directive however, is contained in s 108(1) of the Act and
directs that the Commission “must determine”
whether “the
dismissal is harsh, unjust or unreasonable”. This requires the Commission
to weigh the findings made on
the matters in s 108(2) of the Act (and s 108(3)
where relevant).
The Termination of Employment Convention (the TEC)
relevant article of the TEC is Article
which provides
The employment of a worker shall not be terminated unless there is a valid
reason for such termination connected with the capacity
or conduct of the worker
or based on the operational requirements of the undertaking, establishment or
is significant case law on the concept of a “valid reason”,
predominantly in the Commonwealth jurisdiction. The
following oft cited passage
Selvachandran v Peteron Plastics Pty Ltd
Selvachandran
is apposite. While
Selvachandran
was decided in a different statutory
context, the phrase under consideration there had its genesis in the wording of
Article 4 of
“In its context in s 170DE(1), the adjective ‘valid’ should be
given the meaning of sound, defensible or well founded.
A reason which is
capricious, fanciful, spiteful or prejudiced could never be a valid reason for
the purposes of s 170DE(1). At the
same time the reason must be valid in the
context of the employee's capacity or conduct or based upon the operational
requirements
of the employer’s business. Further, in considering whether a
reason is valid, it must be remembered that the requirement applies
practical sphere of the relationship between an employer and an employee where
each has rights and privileges and duties and
obligations conferred and imposed
on them...”
applicant, at the time of termination and for approximately six months
prior, was unable to undertake the work he was contracted
to perform. An
inability to fulfil the inherent requirements of an employee’s substantive
position will generally constitute
a valid reason for
case a determination must be made as to whether the applicant’s inability
to perform work was a matter that could be
rectified within a reasonable time
consider that Mr Griffin’s submission about the willingness of others to
supervise the applicant was an overly optimistic
view of the evidence. The
provision of additional resources to support Dr
example, is improbable given the current and publicised financial constraints of
Maddison had no in-principle opposition to providing an attachment for the
applicant, and felt that there could be a pathway to
navigate between the
apparently competing requirements of AHPRA and the College. His primary concern
was whether Dr Kochiyil would
feel able to objectively supervise the applicant.
On this point there is no evidence.
evidence establishes that, rightly or wrongly, there was a level of resistance
by some clinicians toward accommodating a placement
for, or supervision of the
applicant. In addition, there was a level of upheaval in some departments which
militated against accommodating
the applicant’s requirements.
this backdrop, Ms Squire adopted the view, on advice, that there was no power to
direct an employee to act as a supervisor
for AHPRA purposes or direct an
employee to be a peer reviewer. As such, she regarded CALHN’s ability to
organise a placement/supervisor
for the applicant to be significantly limited.
Griffin argued that it was within the respondent’s authority to direct
employees to undertake the supervision and/or peer-review
requirements. He
submitted that employees are obliged to follow the lawful and reasonable
directions of their employer, and referred
in support. The
passage relied upon by Mr Griffin also reaffirms the test for assessing the
lawfulness of a command or direction as
stated by Dixon J in
Darling Island
Stevedoring
“... If a command relates to the subject matter of the employment and
involves no illegality, the obligation of the servant
to obey it depends at
common law upon its being reasonable. In other words, the lawful commands of an
employer which an employee
must obey are those which fall within the scope of
the contract of service and are reasonable”.
assume that the nub of the controversy over directing employees to accept
responsibilities in relation to an OTP’s pathway
to local recognition is
whether such duties fall within their contract of employment, and possibly in
some cases, whether the direction
is reasonable taking into account existing
workloads. I am not in a position to make a finding on whether the position
Ms Squire was legally correct or otherwise, but it was not an
unreasonable position in the circumstances.
a placement under the supervision of Dr Kochiyil had been identified in early
February 2016, the nature of the duties to be undertaken
by the applicant became
an issue. Apart from the conflict between the respondent’s direction that
he assumes the position of
SMO at Modbury Hospital and Dr Kochiyil’s
advice that the applicant would work as an RMO, there were issues with the
appropriate
level of duties that would satisfy the College and delays in
Dr Kochiyil’s provision of a supervisory plan. The competing
requirements
of AHPRA and the College created further difficulties in
structuring a suitable placement at Modbury Hospital.
accept Dr Maddison’s view that the impasse between the requirements of
AHPRA and the College were not insurmountable. To accept
otherwise is to accept
that AHPRA and the College would maintain incompatible requirements that
deprived an OTP of the specialist
pathway that had been assessed as available.
However based on the material before the Commission, this situation was unlikely
be resolved within a short period of time.
is unfortunate that the relationship between the parties, which was somewhat
strained to start with, deteriorated further during
January and February 2016.
When the difficulties with the Modbury Hospital placement emerged, the nature of
the relationship that
had developed was not conducive to an exploration of
common interests and possible resolutions.
have taken into account that Associate Professor Marshall’s decision to
withdraw as supervisor, which was the precursor to
the events that followed, was
not a matter which was within the control of the respondent. That it could and
should have intervened
is dealt with below. The respondent then took steps to
find an appropriate placement for the applicant but this proved difficult
result of a level of antipathy toward him, the disruption caused by Transforming
Health and other initiatives and finally the
impasse between the AHPRA and
College requirements. During this period the applicant continued to receive his
salary. As at May 2016
when the Modbury placement was rejected by the College,
in its current form at least, I am satisfied that the applicant was unable
fulfil the inherent requirements of his position; that this was a situation that
existed since November 2015; and was unlikely
to be resolved in the near
balance I find that there was a valid reason for termination.
Schedule 8—Rules for terminating employment
8 of the Act deals with three matters relating to the process of terminating an
employee’s employment. The first is
that the prescribed period of notice
must be given or paid out. This provision has been met by the respondent. The
second matter
relates to a conduct or performance based dismissal, and is not
relevant to the present case. The third matter concerns compliance
regulations relating to an employee’s opportunity to respond before a
decision to dismiss is taken, or that relate
to the TEC. There are no such
regulations.
Sections 108(2)(c), (d) and (e)
respondent has access to human resource specialists and advice and there are no
workers compensation proceedings. Accordingly,
these criteria are of no weight
in the present case.
Section 108(2)(f) – other relevant factors
consider that the Commission is entitled to take into account the circumstances
of the applicant’s employment that are relevant
to the matters relied upon
by the employer in deciding to terminate his employment. The fact that the
dismissal was not based on
the applicant’s performance or conduct does
not, in this case at least, mean that such matters are not relevant.
unfair dismissal cases which concern the capacity of an employee to fulfil the
inherent requirements of their position are concerned
with the employee’s
medical and physical capacity and/or whether potential modifications to the
workplace or systems of work
could accommodate any restrictions. In such cases
the employee’s conduct or performance will rarely be relevant. In this
the applicant’s ability to perform the position under his contract
of employment depended on the co-operation of others within
the workplace
including a willingness to act as the applicant’s AHPRA appointed
supervisor. Accordingly the actions of others
are relevant to the
applicant’s capacity to fulfil the registration requirements upon which
his employment was based.
following matters are relevant factors. I am inclined to the view that both the
applicant and Associate Professor Marshall contributed
to the deterioration in
the relationship between them, namely that the applicant’s approach and
manner presented difficulties
that Associate Professor Marshall was unable to
constructively manage. The manner in which she sought to deal with her concerns
was prejudicial to the applicant.
applicant must also bear some responsibility for certain other events as they
unfolded throughout his employment. For example,
his conduct played some part in
the withdrawal of Dr Lecamwasam prior to the completion of his placement in
Wards 1C/D and which
delayed approval of the placement.
The decision to terminate
reaching the decision to dismiss the applicant Ms Squire took the following
matters, among others, into account:
applicant bears some responsibility for the unwillingness of potential
supervisors to undertake the AHPRA supervisor role;
respondent lacked the authority to direct an employee to assume the supervisory
applicant had failed to gain accreditation and registration as a consultant
within the two year period.
matters are factually correct or reasonably based. However the first two matters
do not appear to take into account that at
the time of dismissal
Dr Kochiyil was prepared to undertake the supervisory role. The Modbury
placement did not proceed because of
problems structuring a position acceptable
to both the College and AHPRA, not because there was no one willing to undertake
the supervisory
role. The failure of the applicant to gain accreditation and
registration within the expected two year period was no doubt a disappointment
to all parties. It was not a breach of the employment contract and accordingly
should have been given limited weight.
Squire took into account the financial and operational impact of continuing the
applicant’s employment. The applicant’s
undisputed clinical skills
and the shortage of spinal injury rehabilitation specialists are also matters
that had an operational
impact but it does not appear that these matters were
taken into account.
taking the decision to dismiss, the respondent should have given the applicant
an opportunity to put a position on his continued
employment. The
applicant’s inability to undertake his role was not an irretrievable
situation in the sense that it was, of
necessity, a permanent situation.
the point of dismissal the applicant was working under a subclass 457 visa
that expired on 28 November 2016, and which included
a condition that that he
was only permitted to work for the nominating business, in this case DHA.
Accordingly, the applicant was
unable to work for any other employer, and he and
his family faced
deportation.
applicant was given no opportunity to raise these matters with the respondent
before the decision to dismiss was taken. The payment
of twelve months’
pay in lieu of reasonable notice of termination is generous on any view, but
does not ameliorate the requirement
to afford procedural fairness to the
have concluded that the applicant was not an easy employee to manage, albeit
that the respondent did not take appropriate steps
to do so or to manage the
situation that developed. It appears that the respondent viewed the Modbury
Hospital position as the ‘last
roll of the dice’. From the
correspondence before the Commission it is reasonable to infer that
Drs Sattherthwaite and Zeitz
had expended considerable energy on matters
related to the applicant’s employment, be it in dealing with Associate
Marshall’s complaints or securing a placement for the applicant.
The relationship between the parties was steadily deteriorating
during late 2015
and early 2016 with threats of legal action and termination. When finally a
placement appeared to have been secured
the impasse between the College and
AHPRA requirements was the proverbial ‘straw that broke the camel’s
am required to attribute weight to all the matters under s 108(2) of the Act.
The finding that there was a valid reason for the
dismissal is significant but
not conclusive on the question of whether the dismissal was harsh, unjust or
unreasonable.
respondent’s decision to dismiss the applicant did not take into account
that Dr Kochiyil was prepared to act as the applicant’s
AHPRA appointed
supervisor at that point in time. Consequently, the employer attributed undue
weight to the lack of goodwill toward
the applicant from potential supervisors
and the respondent’s inability to direct employees to assume the
supervisory role.
In addition, the applicant was denied an opportunity to put
forward a case for his continued employment or address the consequences
dismissal upon him. I consider that these matters rendered the dismissal
also consider that the decision to dismiss was harsh because of the consequences
of the dismissal upon the applicant as a result
of his visa status, namely, that
he was unable to work elsewhere and faced deportation unless a further
application was approved
by the Department of Immigration and Border
Protection.
provisions of the Act concerning remedies for unfair dismissal are found in s
109, as follows:
109—Remedies
for unfair dismissal from employment
(1) If the Commission is satisfied on application under this Part that an
employee's dismissal is harsh, unjust or unreasonable,
the Commission
(a) order that the applicant be
re-employed in the applicant's former position without prejudice to the former
conditions of employment;
(b) if it would be impracticable for the employer to re-employ the applicant
in the applicant's former position, or re-employment
in the applicant's former
position would not, for some other reason, be an appropriate remedy—order
that the applicant be re-employed
by the employer in some other position (if
such a position is available) on conditions determined by the Commission; or
(c) if the Commission considers that re-employment by the employer in any
position would not be an appropriate remedy—order
the employer to pay to
the applicant an amount of compensation determined by the Commission.
(1a) Re-employment is to be regarded as the preferred remedy, and the Commission
may only award an alternative remedy if satisfied
that there are cogent reasons
to believe that re-employment would not, in the circumstances of the particular
case, be an appropriate
(1b) However, the Commission need not regard re-employment as the preferred
remedy if the position to which the applicant would be
re-employed is in a
business or undertaking where, at the time of the Commission's decision on the
application, less than 50 employees
(2) If the Commission makes an order for
re-employment under this section, then, subject to any contrary direction of the
Commission—
(a) the employee must be remunerated for the period intervening between the
date that the dismissal took effect and the date of re-employment
employee's employment in the position from which the employee was dismissed had
not been terminated; and
(b) the employer is entitled to the repayment of any amount paid to the
employee on dismissal on account of or arising from the dismissal;
(c) for the purposes of determining rights to annual leave, sick leave, long
service leave, and parental leave, the interruption to
the employee's continuity
of service caused by the dismissal will be disregarded.
(3) The Commission must not order compensation exceeding 6 months'
remuneration at the rate applicable to the dismissed employee immediately
the dismissal took effect, or $33 100 (indexed), whichever is the
(4) An order for the payment of a monetary amount under this section may
provide for payment by instalments if—
(a) the Commission is satisfied that exceptional circumstances exist
justifying the making of the order; and
(b) insofar as the order compensates loss of remuneration—the instalments
of compensation are at least as favourable to the
employee as the payments of
remuneration (to which the order relates) would have been if the employment had
continued.”
Submissions
applicant seeks re-employment. His primary submission is that he should be
re-employed as a consultant, notwithstanding that he
held the position of SMO at
the date of dismissal. A term of the applicant’s employment contract
provided that he would be
employed as a consultant providing he met the
requirements for appointment to this position. Mr Griffin argued that, but for
actions of the employer, the applicant would have satisfied the requirements
to be appointed as a consultant. An order that the applicant
be re-employed in a
position different to that which he held at the time of dismissal is open to the
Commission pursuant to s 109(1)(b)
of the Act.
Griffin highlighted that re-employment is the primary remedy under the Act and
an order for re-employment is required to overcome
the detriment to the
applicant’s career and the reputational damage suffered as a result of the
argued that the applicant’s registration as a specialist in Spinal Injury
Rehabilitation means that he no longer requires
supervision by an AHPRA approved
supervisor or College approved peer reviewed placements. Accordingly, the nature
of the working
relationship with Associate Professor Marshall on re-employment
would be of a different quality, requiring less interaction between
the applicant and Associate Professor Marshall would be required to work
professionally and collaboratively and there
would be consequences if either
were to fail to do so.
Griffin argued that the problems in the relationship between Associate Professor
Marshall and the applicant are not sufficient
to render a re-employment order as
impracticable or unworkable. A lack of trust and confidence should not be a
mantra that can be
relied upon by the employer to defeat an order for
re-employment. The issue is whether a professional and workable relationship can
be re-established, not whether there may be some friction or embarrassment
associated with an order for re-employment
Griffin drew parallels with
where the Fair Work Commission (FWC) was
critical of the employer in failing to deal appropriately with complaints
against Dr Falk
and critical that the decision making responsibilities of the
Chief Executive Officer of ACT Health were delegated to a newly appointed
was argued that the respondent had failed to provide cogent reasons to believe
that re-employment would not be the appropriate
remedy. If the conduct of the
respondent and some of its senior personnel were the cause of the
applicant’s views about the
way he had been treated, those views could not
be relied upon as a cogent reason against re-employment.
Keane argued that the claim that the applicant be re-employed as a consultant
was a claim for re-employment and promotion, a matter
that is not within the
Commission’s power to award. He submitted that the only positions to which
the applicant could be re-employed
as a Spinal Rehabilitation specialist in
South Australia are limited to the South Australian public health system and in
to SASCIS. The applicant would be required to report to Associate
Professor Marshall. He would also be working with others who were
Associate Professor Marshall’s alleged conspiracy against him.
Keane submitted that it was untenable and unrealistic to suggest that the
relationship between the applicant and Associate Professor
Marshall could be put
back on track. The applicant believed that she was the architect of his
downfall; had actively conspired to
undermine his progress toward registration;
and poisoned his relationship with others who were in a position to assist him
his registration requirements. Mr Keane submitted that it was
” for the applicant to suggest that the problems
would disappear now that he has obtained registration in the limited scope
144 Mr Keane suggested that ongoing litigation between the parties is further
evidence that the relationship between them has broken
Keane also pointed out that
had been overturned on
the order for re-employment was quashed. I interpose that the FWC Appeal Bench
concluded that the Commissioner at first
instance had made a number of
significant errors of fact but determined that the dismissal was harsh, unjust
or unreasonable. The
issue of the appropriate remedy was referred to another FWC
member for determination in light of the findings of the Appeal Bench.
determined that reinstatement (the terminology employed in the
Fair Work Act
(Cth)), was inappropriate,
, because the
respondent’s managers who were responsible for Dr Colson had lost trust
and confidence in him and that ongoing
employment was
unworkable.
Consideration
to the conclusion of the hearing on 8 December 2016, there were further
telephone conferences with the parties to discuss
any developments in the
applicant’s visa status and to clarify whether there were any
opportunities for employment outside
the public health system within South
Australia and/or whether the foreshadowed opening of the new Royal Adelaide
Hospital (nRAH)
had any impact on the positions available within the
applicant’s scope of practice within DHA.
Griffin advised that the applicant and his family had been granted permanent
residency. Mr Keane advised that there would be positions
available at the nRAH
in the applicant’s limited scope of practice as a result of a transfer of
some beds from HRC, but they
would remain part of SASCIS under the Directorship
of Associate Professor Marshall.
consideration of the remedy is guided, in the first instance, by the terms of s
109(1a) of the Act, that:
“Re-employment is to be regarded as the preferred remedy, and the
Commission may only award an alternative remedy if satisfied
that there are
cogent reasons to believe that re-employment would not, in the circumstances of
the particular case, be an appropriate
section indicates that re-employment is the ‘default remedy’ in the
case of a determination that a dismissal is harsh,
unjust or unreasonable. An
alternative remedy to re-employment is only to be awarded if the Commission is
persuaded that there are
“cogent reasons” to believe that
re-employment would not be an appropriate remedy in the circumstances of the
is clearly relevant that the matters that formed the basis of the decision to
dismiss the applicant have effectively dissolved
now that he has achieved
specialist registration. It is also relevant that the applicant came to South
Australia to make a career
within the public health system in this State. The
only employment opportunity he has in South Australia to practice in his
area of spinal rehabilitation medicine is within SASCIS.
considering Mr Keane’s submissions on the irretrievable breakdown in key
relationships, I have had regard to cases concerning
the issue of “trust
and confidence” in the context of an application for reinstatement
following a determination of harsh,
unjust or unreasonable dismissal. These
decisions generally concern performance or conduct based dismissals where the
employer opposed
reinstatement on the basis that it had lost trust and
confidence in the employee. As such, the circumstances differ from the present
application. However, the assistance provided by these cases is in the framing
of what is required in the relationship between the
employee and their manager
when considering whether to make an order for re-employment:
What effect, if
any, loss of trust by a manger in an employee is likely to have on the operation
of the workplace concerned. (
AMIEU v G & K
What is required
is a sufficient level of cooperation for a proper working relationship to
resume; mutual affection and friendship
are not essential (
important is that there is sufficient trust to make the relationship viable and
productive (
Perkins v Grace
am not persuaded by the argument that there is a breakdown in the employment
relationship between the parties, being the applicant
and DHA, or the applicant
and CALHN. The employer’s case is grounded on the very fact that the
dismissal concerned operational
matters rather than the conduct or performance
of the applicant. I am also satisfied that the employment relationship could
any ongoing litigation, as it has in the past.
following summation from Gray J in
AMIEU v G & K O’Connor
relation to trust and confidence, is
instructive:
“42 The law relating to the need for trust and confidence in an employment
relationship was developed at a time when employment
invariably involved a close
personal relationship between employer and employee. The advent of corporate
employers has diminished
the importance of this element of the employment
relationship. A corporation has no sensitivity. The crucial question must be
effect, if any, loss of trust by a manager in an employee is likely to have
on the operation of the workplace concerned. It might
be more significant, for
instance, to know the name of [the worker’s] immediate supervisor and to
know the attitude of that
person towards him... It would also be relevant to
know what effect any lack of trust by any manager or supervisor in a particular
employee might have on the conduct of operations in the
workplace...”
is not disputed that an order for re-employment in the present case would
require the applicant to have a working relationship
with Associate Professor
Marshall. I do not have the benefit of her views about re-establishing a working
relationship with the applicant,
which is significant in circumstances where the
crucial issue to be determined in considering an order for the applicant’s
re-employment is whether a co-operative and productive relationship could be
established between them.
is apparent that, once the applicant became aware of the documents generated by
Associate Professor Marshall during the course
of his employment, all of his
frustrations over the delays with placements, his subsequent inability to
practice and ultimately his
dismissal have crystallised in his mind around
Associate Professor Marshall’s conduct. While this is an exaggerated view,
have found that some of her actions were prejudicial to his interests.
more serious issue in my view is the applicant’s attribution of malicious
intent to Associate Professor Marshall’s
actions; that she was conspiring
to frustrate the achievement of his specialist registration from the time of his
recruitment from
the United Kingdom. The respondent raises a legitimate question
as to how a co-operative working arrangement could be re-established
circumstances. In my mind, the issue is whether the applicant is capable of at
least putting his feelings to one side to
enable a professional relationship to
be re-established with Associate Professor Marshall.
applicant has given evidence that he could do so. Under cross-examination he
acknowledged his differences with Associate Professor
Marshall but stated that
there are differences in every workplace and that people have to work
professionally. Despite his view that
Associate Professor Marshall conspired
against him he considered that now that he has achieved specialist registration
have separate caseloads and their interactions would generally relate
to departmental management
in the decision I indicated that it was not appropriate for the Commission to
attribute motives to Associate Professor Marshall’s
actions in the absence
of evidence from her. I have proceeded to consider the issue of re-employment on
this basis.
consider that the applicant is capable of putting his personal views to one side
in the interests of maintaining a professional
relationship. In reaching this
view, I have taken into account that the pressures that both he and Associate
Professor Marshall were
under in relation to supervised placements no longer
exist and that their working relationship will be of a different quality as
result of his specialist registration.
have also taken into account that the particular employment is one where the
applicant has a range of professional and legal duty
of care obligations to his
patients and where his clinical skills are not in issue. Any discomfort or
embarrassment associated with
the applicant’s re-employment should be able
to be managed if both parties adopt a mature and professional approach. Senior
medical management and HR personnel would be expected to properly
investigate any issues that may arise in accordance with their
responsibilities including those under the SA Health (Health Care Act) Human
Resources Manual.
109(1)(b) of the Act empowers the Commission to order that an employee be
re-employed to an alternative position if it would
be impracticable to return an
employee to their former position or there is some other reason why returning
the employee to their
former position would not be appropriate.
is not impracticable for the applicant to return to the position of SMO. I am
not persuaded by Mr Griffin’s argument that
the applicant should be
re-employed as a consultant. His contract of employment provided an opportunity
for employment as a consultant
if he met the requirements for this position
within two years of commencing employment, which expired in March 2015. He did
so. The reasons why this was the case are not matters that are
appropriately taken into account in the form of an order for re-employment.
would expect that the applicant would take into account my findings that the
extent of Associate Professor Marshall’s emails
and reports reflect the
absence of appropriate intervention to investigate her complaints/concerns.
Ultimately however, it is how
the applicant conducts himself rather than what he
believes that is important. I consider that he is capable of acting in a
professional
and co-operative manner with all the clinicians and other health
professionals with whom he will be required to work, a number of
previously provided positive references for him. An order for re-employment into
his previous position will be issued.
applicant has been compensated for lost income since his dismissal by way of
twelve months payment in lieu of notice on termination,
which will expire on 10
May 2017. It is not appropriate for the applicant to retain both the money paid
in respect to a period which
falls after he is re-employed up to the expiration
of the twelve month notice period in May 2017 in addition to salary for work
in this period. The parties are requested to confer on a date for
re-employment and arrangements in respect to payment for any period
appropriate order will be issued once the parties report back to the Commission,
on a date to be advised.
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
It is the practice of this Commission to publish its reasons for decision in
full on the Internet. If any party or person contends
that these reasons for
decision should not be published in full the party or person must make an
application within seven days of
the delivery of these reasons. The application
shall be by an Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should
addressed to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within
the time specified these reasons will be published
in accordance with the
Commission’s usual practice.
Also referred to
as a Senior Medical Officer
Contract dated 18 March
Annex JS4, Statement of Julia
Ex A9, Tab 1;
Medical Board of Australia, Guidelines: Supervised Practice for limited
registration v.1.1, 1 May 2012.
Ex A9, Tab 4;
Medical Board of Australia, Registration Standard for Specialist Registration,
14 June 2011.
A1 at p 91.
Statement of Julia Squire; Ex R15 Supplementary Statement of Julia
[1959] HCA 8
101 CLR 298
approved Dr Bastian as a secondary supervisor for the
at pp 150-155
110; 147-148; 164; tr
A1 at p 163.
Ex A1 at p 129, email from Professor Crotty of the Repatriation General Hospital
pp 202-204.
pp 209-210.
at p 217-218.
pp 222-223.
pp 98-100; pp
104, 116, 118.
Ex A1 at pp 123c, 136, 140-141, 150-155, 162, 163, 164-165, 169, 175,
at pp 49-50.
Tr 235, 236.
Thompson v IGT (Australia) Pty Limited
Security Australia Pty Ltd and Thomas
, Print S2679, 2 February 2000 at
Article 7 is
also relevant in cases where the worker’s conduct or performance is the
basis of the
[1995] IRCA 333
(1995) 62 IR 371
and Son Brewing Pty Ltd v Button
[2010] FWAFB 4022
(2010) 195 IR 292
R v Darling Island Stevedoring and Lighterage Co. Ltd; Ex Parte Halliday;
Ex Parte Sullivan
[1938] HCA 44
(1938) 60 CLR 601
R16, Ex A16.
Dr Falk v ACT Health Operating as The Canberra Hospital
[2007] AIRC
Mark Colson v Barwon Health – Geelong Hospital
6 December 2016.
that there were proceedings between the parties in the District Court concerning
a breach of contract claim by the applicant,
which was resolved, but I am
unaware of the details of any current litigation.
Health – Geelong Hospital v Colson
[2013] FWCFB 4515
(2013) 233 IR
Mark Colson v Barwon Health
[2013] FWC 8734
109(1b) is an exception to s 109(1a), but is not relevant to this case.
Australasian Meat Industry Employees’ Union v G & K O’Connor Pty
[2000] FCA 627
Quinn v Overland
[2010] FCA 799
v Grace Worldwide (Aust) Pty Ltd
[1997] IRCA
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (360 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter