URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAET/2025/108.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:57:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Adrian Siegfried & Ors v Temple Christian College Incorporated T/A Temple Christian College, Marcel Rijken [2025] SAET 108 (26 September 2025)
Adrian Siegfried & Ors v Temple Christian College Incorporated T/A
Temple Christian College, Marcel Rijken
[2025] SAET 108
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNAL
TRELOAR, Mark
CHANG, Karen
PAPPAS, Christopher
ROBSTERSON,
TEMPLE CHRISTIAN COLLEGE INCORPORATED T/A TEMPLE
CHRISTIAN COLLEGE
RIJKEN, Marcel
South Australian Employment Court
Fair Work Act 2009
ET-23-01072,
ET-23-01074
HEARING DATE:
25 July 2025
JUDGMENT OF:
Her Honour Deputy President Eaton
DELIVERED ON:
26 September
CATCHWORDS:
Application for directions by respondents
to strike out or summarily dismiss the application by applicants Adrian
Siegfried and Mark
Treloar for imposition of pecuniary penalties –
Reliance on release clause in Terms of Settlement documents signed by applicants
in settlement of unfair dismissal claim – Whether factual or evidentiary
issues justify matter going to hearing – Document
not executed by first
respondent – Whether confirmed by conduct – Whether first respondent
did not complete a term conditional
for release – Whether timing of the
essence – HELD – Sufficient uncertainty as to the content and status
agreements to settle the unfair dismissal claims – Factual and
legal issues to be determined would require further evidence
and argument
– Criteria for strike out or summary dismissal not
Webster v Lampard
[1993] HCA 57
(1993) 177 CLR 598
Victorian Co Railways Cmrs
(1949) 78 CLR 62
Pearson v Supporting Care
Pty Ltd and Ors
[2025] SAET 55
Hatchard & Ors v Chief Executive,
Attorney General's Department (South Australian Metropolitan Fire Service)
[2024] SAET 69
Reilly v Return to Work SA
[2018] SAET
Marchenko v South Australia Police
[2020] SAET 168
Thiess Pty Ltd & Return to Work Corporation of South Australia
Scott v Steritech Pty Ltd
[2025] FCFCA 110
South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Aboriginal Corporation
Scott v Steritech Ptd Ltd
REPRESENTATION:
Applicants: In
Respondent: Mr J.
Solicitors:
Applicants: Self-representing
Respondent: Sparke
Helmore Layers
present application was filed on 7 March 2023 by six applicants, all former
employees of the first respondent, Temple Christian
College Incorporated
(‘the College’) for pecuniary penalties to be ordered against the
College, and its Principal, Marcel
Rijken (‘the penalties
application’).
decision is on an application for directions by the respondents seeking orders
for the penalties application in respect of two
of the applicants,
Mr Siegfried and Mr Treloar, to “be dismissed or struck out pursuant
South Australian Employment Tribunal Act 2014
(SA)”(‘SAET Act’) and for the applicants to “pay the
respondents’ costs in accordance with s 88 of
the SAET Act and/or
Fair Work Act 2009
(‘the strike out
application’).
the purpose of this decision, when I refer to ‘the applicants’ I am
referring to Mr Siegfried and Mr Treloar only.
penalties applicants allege that the College contravened s 50 of the FW Act,
a civil remedy provision, when it summarily terminated their employment on
10 December 2021 for not providing proof of vaccination
against the Covid-19
virus. They allege that there were not valid grounds for summary dismissal and
consequently they were each
entitled to payment in lieu of notice of 12 weeks
salary, pursuant to cls 24 and 25 of the
Temple Christian College Inc
Enterprise Agreement 2021
. (‘the Enterprise Agreement’)
penalties application does not include a claim for payments in lieu of notice to
be ordered, only for the imposition of penalties,
in relation to the failure of
the College to comply with its obligations pursuant to the Enterprise Agreement
and the FW Act. It
alleges that Mr Rijken is also liable as a person involved
in the contravention by the College, pursuant to s 550 of the FW Act.
of the penalties applicants, Stewart Robertson, also pursued a claim for orders
for the payment in lieu of notice and interest,
which was heard separately.
Although Mr Siegfried and Mr Treloar gave evidence in that matter, they were not
parties to it. The
penalties application was adjourned by consent for a
considerable period of time to await a final outcome in that matter.
grounds upon which the respondents rely for the strike out application are that
Mr Siegfried and Mr Treloar’s application
is “frivolous, vexatious
or otherwise an abuse of process” where they are “prohibited by way
of Deed from maintaining
proceedings”
their dismissals, Mr Siegfried and Mr Treloar both filed applications seeking
remedy for unfair dismissal in the Fair Work
Commission (‘FWC’).
Both unfair dismissal applications were resolved by agreement at a telephone
conciliation conference
in the FWC on 24 March 2022, when the applicants each
signed documents entitled “Terms of Settlement”. The terms of
documents are identical but for the amount the College agreed to pay to each of
respondents have applied for the current penalty applications to be struck out
on the grounds that cl 3.5 of the Terms of Settlement
provides that the
applicants released the College and any of its employees from liability arising
out of or connected with their
employment with the College, which would include
this application for penalties.
applicants have opposed the strike out applications on the grounds that the
Terms of Settlement were never signed on behalf the
College and so were not
executed; and that the release in cl 3.5 was conditional on the College
complying with cl 3.4, which they
allege it did not do. Consequently they say,
the release is not effective and they should be allowed a hearing on their
Court has jurisdiction to hear the penalties claim as an
eligible state
, pursuant ss 12, 539 and 546 of the FW Act and reg 1.05 of the
Work Regulations
power to make the orders sought by the respondents is provided by s 41 of
the SAET Act:
41 – Frivolous, vexatious or improper
proceedings
(1) This section applies if the Tribunal believes that a
proceeding—
(a) is frivolous, vexatious, misconceived or lacking in substance or
involves a trivial matter or amount; or
(b) is being used for an improper purpose; or
(c) is otherwise an abuse of process.
(2) If this section
applies, the Tribunal may order that the proceeding be dismissed or struck out
and may make any related or ancillary
(3) The Tribunal may act under
subsection (2)
on the application of a party or on its own initiative.
(4) If a proceeding is dismissed or struck out under this section, another
proceeding of the same kind in relation to the same matter
cannot be commenced
before the Tribunal without the leave of a Presidential member.
can be seen from the wording of this provision, the power is discretionary.
respondents submitted that the Court would exercise this power where a matter
should not be allowed to go to hearing because it
is apparent that it must
and that a proceeding is
vexatious where it is unsupportable in law or
groundless.
This is a reference to
the common law test.
guidance has been provided specifically in relation to the application of s 41
in of the SAET Act, which is a statutory power.
onus is on the respondent as the party bringing the application that the case is
appropriate to dismiss.
involves a practical assessment as to whether the applicant has a ‘real,
as opposed to merely fanciful, prospects of success’,
or whether their
claim is ‘so uncertain that it would be an abuse of process of the Court
to allow the action to go
Where there is
found to be a real question of either fact or law to be determined, or at least
‘some basis to think that [the]
case could possibly succeed’, then
an applicant is entitled to pursue their claim and have their day in
There must be a high degree
of certainty about the outcome of a proceeding for it to be appropriately struck
out or dismissed; it
is not sufficient for the court to merely conclude, without
more, that the applicant has poor prospects of
As such, the bar is
noted by the Full Court of the Federal Court, the onus of establishing an abuse
of process is on the person alleging it and it
is a heavy one, noting also that
relitigating proceedings that have been finalised constitutes an abuse and that
this can extend
to proceedings that have been
discontinued.
“if a prima facie case in support of summary judgment is established, the
onus shifts to the opposing party to point
to some factual or evidentiary issue
making a trial
of the dispute
strike out applications were each supported by an affidavit of
Daria McLachlan, solicitor for the respondents dated 26 November
deposing to her instructions that the Terms of Settlement recorded the agreement
between the applicants and the College to
settle their unfair dismissal claims.
These affidavits were relevantly identical, and attached a copy each of the
Terms of Settlement
documents that her clients rely on.
I listed the strike out application for hearing, I made orders for the
applicants to file any affidavits of evidence upon which
they sought to rely and
for the respondents to file their evidence in reply.
Siegfried and Mr Treloar each filed affidavits dated 13 June 2025.
respondents then filed a further affidavit of Ms McLachlan dated 26 June 2025,
again deposing to her instructions and attaching
further documents.
pause here to note that the application was for a strike out or summary
dismissal of the applications. It was not for a hearing
on a preliminary issue.
The decision of the respondents not to file direct evidence and to rely on their
solicitor deposing to her
instructions needs to be viewed in that context. The
applicants, being self-represented, did not have that option.
the affidavits were tendered by consent with no witness being required for cross
examination. Although no objection was taken
to any of the content of the
affidavits, I informed the parties that I would disregard statements within them
of hearsay, opinion,
speculation or argument, and admitted them on that basis.
Following the hearing, in the context of leave to the parties to file
further authorities, Mr Treloar filed a further affidavit dated 1 August 2025
which was not objected to although its content
was limited to argument, and
which I admitted on the same basis as those tendered at the hearing.
considering the evidence and competing arguments, I set out the text of the
Terms of Settlement. In each case the reference
to Respondent is a reference to
the College.
Terms of Settlement
Applicant has made an application to the Fair Work Commission for a remedy
alleging the Applicant was protected from unfair dismissal
and was unfairly
Respondent denies the allegations.
Applicant and the Respondent agree to fully and finally settle the matter on the
following basis:
Respondent will pay to the Applicant the amount of $[redacted] gross, taxed as
applicable, in addition to any other monies
previously paid to the Applicant by
the Respondent.
3.2. The dollar
amount specified in these terms of settlement will be paid by the Respondent
within 7 days of the Applicant and the
Respondent signing these terms of
settlement.
3.3. The dollar
amount specified in these terms of settlement will be paid by the Respondent by
electronic funds transfer into the
Applicant’s nominated financial
Statement of service
Respondent will within 7 days of the Applicant and the Respondent signing these
terms of settlement, provide the Applicant
with a statement of their service
with the Respondent, outlining the Applicant’s position, duties and period
of service with
the Respondent. The Respondent will make no further comment in
relation to the Applicant’s employment relationship with the
outside that contained in the statement of service.
3.5. On the
Respondent complying with clauses 3.1 to 3.4 above, the Applicant releases and
forever discharges the Respondent, its
directors, employees, assignees or
successors from any liability past, present or future from all claims, suits,
demands, actions
or proceedings arising out of or connected with the
Applicant’s employment with the Respondent, including but not limited to
the cessation of the employment.
Respondent releases and forever discharges the Applicant from any liability
past, present or future from all claims, suits,
demands, actions or proceedings
arising out of or connected with the Applicant’s employment with the
Respondent, including
but not limited to the cessation of the employment.
3.7. Nothing in
these terms of settlement affects any claims, suits demands, actions or
proceedings the Applicant has or may have
under statute, an industrial
instrument or common law for a work-related injury, illness, disease or death,
or under superannuation
legislation.
Confidentiality
Applicant and the Respondent will keep the provisions of these terms of
settlement confidential, provided that the Applicant
and the Respondent may
disclose provisions to their legal or financial advisors or any other person
that by law must be informed
of the provisions.
Non Disparagement
3.9. Neither the
Applicant nor the Respondent will disparage or denigrate the
Counterparts
3.10. These
Terms of Settlement may be executed in counterparts, meaning that the execution
will be complete when each party holds
a copy of this Terms of Settlement signed
by the other party, even though the signatures of both parties do not appear on
Notice of Discontinuance
3.11. By signing
these terms, the Applicant discontinues Fair Work Commission unfair dismissal
application [matter number redacted]
followed an execution page of two columns, each containing typing designating
the date, signature and name of the party and
the name and signature of the
witness to the party’s signature with space for those details to be
written in.
make the observation that the Terms of Settlement appear to be very much in the
form of a template provided by the FWC as an aid
to the parties to finalise any
agreement reached within an unfair dismissal conciliation conference. They are
brief and written
in plain language to assist ordinary people without legal
representation to record their agreements, incorporating terms common in
settlement of unfair dismissal proceedings. They are not comprehensive deeds of
settlement legally drafted to encompass a wide
range of issues specific to the
particular parties.
Failure to execute and complete the Terms of
Settlement.
each copy attached to Ms McLachlan’s affidavits, on the execution page the
date of 24 March 2022 was written in, above the
name and signature of Mr
Siegfried on the one document and Mr Treloar on the other document, both
witnessed by their solicitor Jay
Vidanage, while there was no signature or
writing in the column for the College.
applicants’ evidence was that they had never received the counterpart
signed by the College, as required for execution to
be complete according to cl
Ms McLachlan’s evidence was limited to conveying her instructions and
attaching documents from the College, this evidence
did not address at all the
issue of the Terms of Settlement not being executed by the College.
for the respondents confirmed that they were submitting no evidence of the Terms
of Settlement ever being signed by the College.
He conceded on his
clients’ behalf that the College had not completed execution in the terms
of cl 3.10. There is no time limit
expressed in the document for the respondent
to sign, only that execution is not complete until it is both signed and a copy
to the other party.
parties were agreed that the payments referred to in cl 3.1 had been paid on 30
March 2022 to the accounts nominated by the applicants,
being the trust account
of their legal representative, Old Port Chambers. Clearly this was within seven
days of the applicants signing
on the day of the conciliation conference,
although cl 3.2 stipulated the payment to be made within seven days of both
and respondent signing.
timing in cl 3.4 for the respondent to provide the statements of service is the
same as for the payment in cl 3.2 – within
seven days of both the
applicant and the respondent signing the Terms of Settlement. No statements of
service were provided at the
time the payments were made.
Treloar in his affidavit gave evidence that he had requested a statement of
service from the College by internal email on 3 December
2021 before his
termination took effect, then again via his personal email account on 14
December 2021 after his dismissal on 10
December 2021. Despite a same day
response from Ms Cheryl Barnes, Senior HR/Payroll officer, to his 14 December
2021 request, that
she had made a note to provide him with a statement of
service, none was provided.
mention this aspect of his evidence because the provision of a statement of
service upon termination of employment and upon request
is an obligation on the
College pursuant to cl 24.4 of the Enterprise Agreement. This clause
Upon the termination of employment of an Employee (other than a casual employee)
the employer will provide upon the request of the
Employee, a statement of
service setting out the commencement and cessation dates of employment.
to do so is also a contravention of s 50 of the FW Act, which requires
compliance with the terms of an Enterprise Agreement,
and which is a civil
remedy provision attracting pecuniary
Treloar’s uncontradicted evidence was that no statement of service was
provided in response to his requests in December 2021,
by the time of the FWC
conciliation conference in March 2022.
her affidavit dated 26 June 2025, Ms McLachlan deposed that she had been
instructed by Mr Toshi Umehara on behalf of the College
that it was unable to
locate any evidence of the statements of service being issued to the applicants
Mr Treloar’s evidence, on 6 December 2024, he received an email from
solicitors for the respondents saying “We are
instructed that it is our
client’s belief that these were sent to your legal representative in March
2022” and attaching
a copy of a statement of service dated 30 March 2022
that he said was not accurate.
3.5 makes the release by the applicants conditional on the respondent complying
with cls 3.1 to 3.4 inclusive.
can be seen from cl 3.11 of the Terms of Settlement, which appears under the
Notice of Discontinuance
, the FWC proceedings were immediately
discontinued by signature of only the applicants. Nothing more was required for
effective, not even a signature on behalf of the College.
Criteria for strike out or summary dismissal
noted above, the discretion to strike out or summarily dismiss a proceeding is
to be used only where it is apparent that a matter
should not be allowed to go
to hearing because it must fail.
strike out application by the respondents relied on the Terms of Settlement
providing them with a release by the applicants from
proceedings of this kind.
The fact of an agreement in writing to settle earlier proceedings which includes
a release from future
proceedings, establishes a prima facie case for summary
dismissal or strike out.
question then is whether the applicants have met the onus to point to some
factual or evidentiary issue making a trial necessary.
is a separate issue in relation to abuse of process which is, leaving aside the
status of the Terms of Settlement, whether by
the penalty application the
applicants are seeking re-litigate a matter that has already been litigated.
matter already litigated and settled was an application to the FWC for a remedy
for unfair dismissal. It was not an application
for the imposition of a penalty
for breach of the Enterprise Agreement. The FWC does not have jurisdiction to
hear such matters.
This Court does. The same factual substrata can give rise
to different actions for different remedies. An application for remedy
unfair dismissal is a separate claim and a different jurisdiction to a claim for
payment of entitlements or an application for
the imposition of penalties
pursuant to the FW Act. Both can be pursued concurrently or sequentially.
an effective release from further claims in relation to the employment, there is
no bar to the applicants pursuing applications
for the payment of an amount owed
pursuant to an Enterprise Agreement or to an application for the imposition of
penalties for breach
of the Enterprise Agreement and consequent contravention of
a civil penalty provision. These matters were not the subject of the
proceedings in the FWC.
Consequently,
the strike out application depends on whether it is beyond argument that the
agreement reached between the parties in
the settlement of the unfair dismissal
claim includes a currently binding obligation on the applicants to release the
respondents
from a claim of this kind.
execution and completion of the Terms of Settlement it is arguable that the
document served only as a Notice of Discontinuance
in the context of a verbal
agreement to settle the unfair dismissal claims.
parties’ submissions
the course of the hearing, counsel for the respondents conceded that the Terms
of Settlement had never been executed and that the
release upon which his
clients sought to rely was conditional on the College providing the statements
of service referred to in cl
argued that the agreement entered into in settlement of the unfair dismissal was
that recorded in the Terms of Settlement, was
contractual and that common law
contractual principles applied.
argued that the parties were bound in contract by the agreements that they had
made to settle the unfair dismissal claims. The
failure to execute the Terms of
Settlement was of no significance as the College had confirmed its consent to
the agreement reached
between the parties in the FWC conciliation conference by
paying the amount recorded in cl 3.1 within seven days of it being agreed.
relation to the failure to provide the statements of service soon after, he
argued that the Terms of Settlement did not make timing
of the essence and so it
was irrelevant that the statements of service were not provided within seven
days of the applicants signing
the Terms of Settlement. If not of the essence
he said it would not matter whether they were provided after eight days or at
much later time. He relied on his instructions that there had been no
notice received by his clients from either of the applicants
statements of service not being provided in a timely manner. Thus, he argued,
the contractual condition for release became
effective on 6 December 2024 when
the copies of the statements of service were eventually provided.
that contractual condition had not been complied with at the time the applicants
filed their penalty application, the argument
went that the effect of the
release then later becoming effective prevented the applicants from continuing
with their application
and they were contractually obliged to withdraw it.
Consequently,
he argued, the applicants could not continue to claim the benefit of the payment
and the statements of service while
denying the respondent the release to which
they had agreed. To deny the release was to allege recission of the contract
were no grounds to do so and no steps had been taken by the
applicants to rescind the contracts. He maintained that if the contracts
been breached by his client, the remedy was to be found in an action for
damages, not a denial of the release.
applicants argued that they understood the Terms of Settlement to mean what they
said, that they had to be executed and complied
with to be binding. They had not
been. Mr Treloar argued that the copy of the statement of service supplied to
him on 6 December
2024, but dated 24 March 2022 was “too little too
late” to be of any value and anyway still did not comply with the Terms
Settlement as it was not accurate.
Consideration
these arguments do is move beyond the actual Terms of Settlement documents and
raise issues about whether, regardless of the
lack of execution or compliance by
the College, there were binding contracts between it and the applicants, what
the agreed terms
were, including consequences of failure or delay by a party to
comply with those terms, and whether that is sufficient to preclude
applicants from pursuing their penalties application.
also raise the issue of whether, as a matter of law and public policy,
agreements reached between employers and employees in
settlement of their
disputes pursuant to the FW Act are subject to the same common law contractual
principles that apply to commercial
contracts or whether they are to be
considered any differently by reference to employment contractual relationships
subject to the
provisions of the FW Act.
the Terms of Settlement been executed and their terms complied with by the
College, the conditions for the release in cl 3.5 would
unarguably have been
met. However, that is not what has happened.
question for a summary dismissal is whether there are factual or evidentiary
issues that require further hearing. Absent execution
of the Terms of
Settlement, the documents themselves cannot be relied upon to decide the
relevant questions. The content and status
of the agreement between the parties
falls to be determined by evidence of their conduct in the formation of the
agreement and subsequently.
the absence of direct evidence from a relevant party, it might be possible that
the issue could be determined on agreed or uncontested
this matter though, the agreed and uncontested facts do not answer the question
of whether the respondents are entitled to the
release that they claim.
has been no explanation from the College for why it did not execute the Terms of
Settlement or attend to the timely provision
of the statements of service.
Their counsel suggested to me that I should infer an explanation of
administrative oversight. I am
unable to do that. In the absence of evidence
it would be just as speculative as inferring that it was intentional.
issues of entitlement and obligation are to be determined by reference to the
conduct of the parties, relevant evidence may
include not only what actions were
or were not taken, but also why. In an organisation, whether particular action
or inaction is
the result of a deliberate decision by a person with authority or
by administrative error may be relevant to how that conduct is
viewed by a
court. Where a belief is relied upon, it would be relevant who held the belief
and whether that belief was reasonable
in the circumstances.
for the respondent raised the issue of why, if the timing of the provision of
statements of service was important to the applicants,
they did not follow up on
them. In the event of administrative oversight, the College would have been
alerted to its error and had
the opportunity to rectify it.
argued that the applicants could not simply sit back and seek to rely on
non-compliance by the College without putting it on notice.
the conduct of the applicants in all the circumstances could be characterised
that way depends on evidence about what they
did or did not do in relation to
that issue and why. Also, at issue as a matter of fact is whether any follow up
they did attempt
reached the College. Mr Treloar has deposed that he did raise
the issue with his solicitor and was told that it was followed up.
There was no
evidence from Mr Siegfried on that issue.
is also a matter for argument then about the importance of the content and
timing in the provision of the statements of service.
purpose of providing an employee with a statement of service following a
termination of employment, for whatever reason, is to
assist their transition to
new employment by providing a verification of their employment history that they
can present to a prospective
new employer. That is the benefit of a statement
of service – assisting with transition to new employment.
relation to employment disputes and their settlement, the argument put by
counsel for the respondents that time was not of the
essence in the provision of
the statements of service requires consideration of that context. There is no
time limit in cl 24.4
of the Enterprise Agreement for the provision of a
requested statement of service. That means it must be within a reasonable time
given its purpose, or the College would be considered in breach.
is arguable that an agreement to provide a statement of service as a term of
settlement of an unfair dismissal claim should be
assessed by the same criteria.
Whether or not it should be in a particular case may depend on
criteria for strike out or summary dismissal of the application for penalties in
reliance on the Terms of Settlement signed by
the applicants on 24 March 2022
have not been met.
documents were not signed by the College and so were not executed. They were
effective as Notices of Discontinuance of the
applicants’ unfair dismissal
proceedings in the FWC but their status beyond that would require consideration
of further evidence
argument that the Terms of Settlement nonetheless reflected the College’s
agreement to their terms, were confirmed and completed
by the conduct of the
College such as to entitle it to the benefits expressed therein would require
supporting evidence from it.
any conduct by the applicants was such as to prevent them from relying on
failures or errors by the College to avoid providing
the release referred to in
cl 3.5 of the Terms of Settlement also would require further evidence.
would also need to be the opportunity for the parties to make submissions on
such evidence.
are matters which could be determined as a preliminary issue, but are not
amenable to determination on a summary dismissal or
application.
application dated 26 November 2024 by the respondents seeking orders to strike
out or summarily dismiss the application by Mr
Siegfried and Mr Treloar for the
imposition of penalties is
Applications for Directions
filed 26 November 2024.
R1 & R2, Supporting
Affidavits of Daria McLachlan dated 26 November 2024 at [5].
Respondent outline at [5]
Webster v Lampard
[1993] HCA 57
(1993) 177 CLR 598.
Ibid at [6] citing
Victorian Co Railways Cmrs
(1949) 78 CLR 62
Harradine v Chief Executive
for the Department for Education
[2020] SAET 38
Pearson v Supporting Care
Pty Ltd and Ors
[2025] SAET 55
[15], citing
Hatchard & Ors v Chief
Executive, Attorney General's Department (South Australian Metropolitan Fire
[2024] SAET 69
Reilly v Return to Work
[2018] SAET 7
[37]-[39] (‘
Marchenko v
South Australia Police
[2020] SAET 168
Rogers v Thiess Pty Ltd & Return to
Work Corporation of South Australia
[2021] SAET 108
[40], [43]-[44].
(n 7) [38];
(n 7) [40];
(n 7) [43]-[44].
Scott v Steritech Pty
[2025] FCFCA 110 at [12] endorsing the approach of the primary judge in
Scott v Steritech Ptd Ltd
[2023] FCA 1401
Prior v South West
Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Aboriginal Corporation
[2020] FCA 808
as cited in
Scott v Steritech
[2025] FCFCA 110.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (256 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter