URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASC/2025/172.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:05:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
REALM PROPERTY MANAGEMENT PTY LTD & ANOR v COMMUNITY CORPORATION NO 42055 INC [2025] SASC 172 (21 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
REALM PROPERTY MANAGEMENT PTY LTD & ANOR v COMMUNITY
CORPORATION NO 42055 INC
[2025] SASC 172
Judgment of the Honourable
Justice Kimber
21 October 2025
EQUITY - GENERAL PRINCIPLES - FIDUCIARY OBLIGATIONS - FIDUCIARY DUTY -
ACCOUNT FOR BENEFITS GAINED
EQUITY - GENERAL PRINCIPLES - FIDUCIARY OBLIGATIONS - FIDUCIARY DUTY -
EQUITY - EQUITABLE REMEDIES - EQUITABLE COMPENSATION - BREACH OF FIDUCIARY
OBLIGATIONS
EQUITY - EQUITABLE REMEDIES - RESCISSION - BREACH OF FIDUCIARY
OBLIGATIONS
CONTRACTS - PARTICULAR PARTIES - PRINCIPAL AND AGENT - DUTIES AND
LIABILITIES OF AGENT TO PRINCIPAL - DUTIES AND LIABILITIES ARISING
FIDUCIARY CHARACTER OF RELATIONSHIP - CONFLICT BETWEEN DUTY AND INTEREST -
RECEIPT BY AGENT OF SECRET PROFITS AND BRIBES
CONTRACTS - PARTICULAR PARTIES - PRINCIPAL AND AGENT - DUTIES AND
LIABILITIES OF AGENT TO PRINCIPAL - DUTIES AND LIABILITIES ARISING
FIDUCIARY CHARACTER OF RELATIONSHIP - CONFLICT BETWEEN DUTY AND INTEREST -
STATUTORY PROVISIONS RELATING TO SECRET COMMISSIONS
These proceedings relate to a building in Austin Street, Adelaide known as
the Realm Building (
the Realm Building
). Eklipse Capital Pty Ltd (now in
liquidation) (
Eklipse or the second applicant
) was the developer of the
Realm Building.
The proceedings were commenced by the first applicant, Realm Property
Management Pty Ltd (
RPM or the first applicant
), and Eklipse to restrain
two community corporations from amending their respective by-laws (
amended by-laws
) to prohibit the letting of apartments in the Realm Building
for periods of less than two months (
short-term letting
community corporations are the first respondent, Community Corporation No 42054
the Low-Rise Corporation or LRC
), and the second respondent,
Community Corporation No 42055 Inc (
the High-Rise Corporation or HRC
Before trial, and with respect to the second respondent, a motion to amend the
by-laws to prohibit short-term letting was passed.
However, subject to any
contrary order made in these proceedings, the second respondent is restrained
from acting on the amended
by-laws. With respect to the first respondent, the
proceedings involving it have been discontinued.
The second applicant did not appear at trial. Default judgment was entered
against the second applicant in respect of its statement
RPM seeks an order that the second respondent continue to be restrained from
acting on its amended by-laws on the grounds that to
do so will be in breach of
contract and/or unlawfully interfering with contractual relations. For its
part, the second respondent
seeks a declaration that the by-laws before the
amendment (
the existing by-laws
) are invalid to the extent that they
permit short-term letting and resists any order that might restrain it from
acting on its amended
During the developer control period for the Realm Building, and when Eklipse
held all the lots in the Realm Building, Eklipse caused
the second respondent to
enter into certain Letting and Caretaking Agreements with RPM (
) and ensured that the by-laws of the second respondent would
permit short-term letting. The agreements were for an effective period
years. The second respondent contends that, at least in part in return for the
foregoing, Eklipse was paid a procurement sum,
the payment of which was not
disclosed to the second respondent. The second respondent contends that the
procurement sum was a ‘secret
commission’ and contends that entitles
the second respondent to recission of the agreements between it and RPM and/or
procurement sum.
In addition, the second respondent alleges that by accepting the procurement
sum, and in other ways, Eklipse breached both its statutory
duty to the second
respondent and the no conflict and/or no profit rule/duty. The second
respondent alleges that one or both of
those breaches entitle it to an order
that the agreements be rescinded. The second respondent further alleges that
when Eklipse
acted in breach of its duty to the second respondent, RPM knowingly
procured that breach and/or knowingly participated in a fraudulent
and dishonest
design by Eklipse. On that basis, the second respondent also contends that it
is entitled to recission of the agreements.
Held, inter alia:
application of the second respondent for a declaration that its existing by-laws
prohibit short-term letting is refused.
application of the second respondent for a declaration that the existing by-laws
are invalid to the extent that they permit short-term
letting is refused.
application of the second respondent for an order pursuant to
Community Titles Act 1996
(SA) that the agreements between it and the
first applicant be varied, avoided or terminated is refused.
application of the second respondent that the agreements between it and the
first applicant be rescinded is refused.
first applicant paid a secret commission to the second applicant. As a result,
the second respondent is entitled to an order
that the benefit obtained by the
second applicant because of the receipt of that secret commission be accounted
to the second respondent.
The first applicant and the second applicant are
jointly and severally liable for that benefit. However, on the evidence and
submissions
to date, the precise sum to which the second respondent is entitled
cannot be determined as it is not the whole of the procurement
sum. Further
submissions, at least, will be needed before that sum may be determined.
application of the first applicant for an order that the second applicant
continue to be restrained from acting upon its the amended
by-laws is refused.
7. The parties will be heard as to any further orders which may be
appropriate.
Community Titles Act 1996
, referred to.
Aequitas v AEFC
[2001] NSWSC 14
Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd v
Delor Vue Apartments
[2022] HCA 38
(2022) 277 CLR 445
Attorney-General v Reid
[1994] 1 AC 324;
Baden v Société Générale
pour Favoriser le Développement du Commerce et de l’Industrie en
[1993] 1 WLR 509
Barnes v Addy
(1874) LR 9 Ch App 224
Breen v Williams
[1995] HCA 63
(1995-1996) 186 CLR 71
Boardman v Phipps
[1966] UKHL 2
BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Ltd v President, Councillors and
Ratepayers of the Shire of Hastings
(1977) 180 CLR 266;
Broadway Plaza
Investments Pty Ltd v Broadway Plaza Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWSC 1778
Cartwright v MacCormack Trafalgar Insurance Co Ltd
[1963] 1 WLR 18
Chan v Zachariah
[1984] HCA 36
(1984) 154 CLR 178
Elders Trustee v EG Reeves
[1987] FCA 332
(1987) 78 ALR 193
Farah Constructions Pty Ltd & Ors v Say-Dee Pty Ltd
(2007) 230 CLR 89
Ford Motor Company of Australia Ltd v Arrowcrest Group
[2002] FCA 1156
Grimaldi v Chameleon Mining (No 2)
[2012] FCAFC 6
200 FCR 296
Gwembe Valley Development Co Ltd v Koshy (No 3)
[2003] EWCA
Hide & Skin Trading Pty Ltd v Oceanic Meat Traders Ltd
(1990) 20 NSWLR 310
Industries & General Mortgage Co Ltd v Lewis
[1949] 2 All ER 573
Johnson v FirstRand Bank Limited (London Branch) t/a
MotoNovo Finance in Hopcraft & Anor v Close Brothers Limited & Ors
[2025] UKSC 33
Mahesan S/O Thambiah v Malaysia Government
Officers’ Cooperative Housing Society
[1979] AC 374
[2005] EWCA Civ 959
Neat Holdings v Karajan Holdings
[1992] HCA 66
110 ALR 449
O’Keefe v Williams
[1910] HCA 40
(1910) 11 CLR 171
(Hastings) Ltd v Gulliver
[1967] 2 AC 137
South Steyne Hotel Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Taxation
[2009] FCA 13
Swindle v Harrison
[1997] EWCA Civ 1339
Tang Man Sit (Deceased) v Capacious Investments Ltd
[1995] UKPC 54
Williams v Hursey
[1959] HCA 51
(1959) 103 CLR 30
Community Association DP No. 270180 v Arrow Asset Management Pty Ltd
[2007] NSWSC 527
Daraydan Holdings Ltd & Ors v Solland International
[2004] EWHC 622;
Grant v The Gold Exploration and
Development Syndicate Ltd
[1899] UKLawRpKQB 220
[1900] 1 QB 233
Great Investments Ltd v Warner
[2016] FCAFC 85
(2016) 243 FCR 516
Industries & General Mortgage Co Ltd v Lewis
[1949] All ER 573;
Meriton Apartments Pty Ltd v The Owners Strata Plan
[2015] NSWSC 202
Taheri v Vitek
[2014] NSWCA 209
(2014) 87 NSWLR 403
Vic Beef Holdings Pty Ltd v Chen
[2021] VSC 546
, distinguished.
Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v Clark
[2003] NSWCA 91
(2003) 57 NSWLR 113
v Noris Group of Companies (Including SA Helicopters Pty Ltd and Captured Pty
[2006] SASC 23
(2006) 94 SASR 126
Howard v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2014] HCA 21
(2014) 253 CLR 83
Lumley v Gye
[1853] EngR 15
(1853) 118 ER 749
Ors v Duke Group Ltd (in liq) & Ors
[2001] HCA 31
(2001) 207 CLR 165
Australia Pty Ltd v McCann
[1999] VSC 58
(1999) 30 ACSR 651
, considered.
REALM PROPERTY MANAGEMENT PTY LTD & ANOR v COMMUNITY
CORPORATION NO 42055 INC
[2025] SASC 172
Introduction/background
proceedings relate to a building at 9 to 19 Austin Street, Adelaide which is
known as the Realm Building (
the Realm Building
proceedings were commenced by the first applicant, Realm Property Management Pty
the first applicant
), and the second applicant,
Eklipse Capital Pty Ltd (in liquidation) (
), to restrain two community corporations from altering their
respective by‑laws to prohibit the short-term letting of apartments
Realm Building for periods of less than two months (
). Subject to any order made by me, that restraint is in place as
the result of an order made in the District Court on 28 February
The two community corporations are the first respondent, Community Corporation
No 42054 Inc (
the Low-Rise Corporation
second respondent, Community Corporation No 42055 Inc (
the High‑Rise
Corporation
). Both corporations were established pursuant to
Community Titles Act 1996
second applicant did not appear at trial. Default judgment was entered against
the second applicant in respect of its statement
of claim. The proceedings
against the first respondent have been discontinued.
is a subsidiary of a group now called CLIIX. CLIIX has extensive experience in
the letting and caretaking of large-scale apartment
complexes, particularly
interstate. RPM’s core business is the management of apartments for
short‑term rental. Mr Tianyi
Michael Song
) is the sole director and secretary of RPM. RPM first
became involved in the Realm Building in late March 2020. At that time,
became involved in negotiations with Eklipse to enter letting and caretaking
agreements, including such agreements with the HRC.
Such agreements were
ultimately executed on 1 July 2020. At that time, Eklipse held all relevant
lots as the developer of the Realm
the negotiations with RPM, and at the time of the execution of the relevant
agreements, Eklipse owed a fiduciary duty to the
HRC. The agreements between
the HRC and RPM are contracts for services. As a result, pursuant to
s 142B of the CT Act, Eklipse
was also obliged to exercise reasonable
skill, care and diligence and to act in the best interests of the HRC (
statutory duty
). Among the issues in the proceedings is whether Eklipse
breached its fiduciary and/or statutory duty and, if so, what remedy is
available against Eklipse.
agreements just mentioned were part of a set of agreements negotiated at the
same time. Also negotiated between RPM and Eklipse
was a Procurement Agreement,
pursuant to which RPM paid Eklipse consideration of about $1,760,000 (
procurement sum
). There were two such agreements, both of which were
between Eklipse and RPM. The first Procurement Agreement (
the initial
Procurement Agreement
) was executed on 17 April 2020 and during
negotiations with respect to the Caretaking and Letting agreements. Although
the initial Procurement Agreement was, at least to a degree, treated
as a working instrument. The second Procurement Agreement (
Procurement Agreement
) was executed on 21 August 2020. Neither
the existence of the Procurement Agreement, nor the payment of the procurement
disclosed to the HRC. Among the issues is whether the procurement sum
was a ‘secret commission’ and, if so, whether
that gives the HRC a
remedy of recission of the agreements with RPM to which it is a party and
entitles the HRC to an order that
the procurement sum be paid to it by Eklipse
and/or RPM. Among the other issues are, if it is established that Eklipse
a duty to the HRC, whether RPM knowingly procured that breach and/or
knowingly participated in a fraudulent and dishonest design
by Eklipse and, if
so, what remedy is available to the HRC.
The standard of
standard of proof is on the balance of probabilities. As set out immediately
above, some aspects of the claims in this matter
involve allegations of knowing
breaches of fiduciary duty by Eklipse and dishonesty on behalf of Eklipse and/or
RPM. Findings that
such allegations have been proved must not be made lightly.
Notwithstanding, the standard of proof remains on the balance of probabilities
and that is the standard that has been applied when determining whether the
claims made by a party have been made out and in making
Neat Holdings v Karajan
the High Court
The ordinary
standard of proof required of a party who bears the onus in civil litigation in
this country is proof on the balance
of probabilities. That remains so even
where the matter to be proved involves criminal conduct or
fraud. On the
other hand, the strength of the evidence necessary to establish a fact or facts
on the balance of probabilities may
vary according to the nature of what it is
sought to prove. Thus, authoritative statements have often been made to the
effect that
clear or cogent or strict proof is necessary “where so serious
a matter as fraud is to be found”. Statements to that
effect should not,
however, be understood as directed to the standard of proof. Rather, they
should be understood as merely reflecting
a conventional perception that members
of our society do not ordinarily engage in fraudulent or criminal conduct and a
judicial approach
that a court should not lightly make a finding that, on the
balance of probabilities, a party to civil litigation has been guilty
(citations omitted)
The Realm Building
the purposes of the issues in these proceedings, there is no relevant dispute
Realm Building; its development;
and the creation of the relevant lots and community corporations within the
Realm Building has 39 stories above ground and two levels below ground. It is
predominantly comprised of apartments from Levels
8 to 39, with a provision for
retail use at ground level. Levels 1 to 7 comprise a podium car park. Levels 8
to 20 comprise residential
apartments in what is sometimes called the ‘Low
Rise’ or ‘Park’ section of the Building. Levels 21 to 39
comprise apartments in what is sometimes called the ‘High Rise’ or
‘Sky’ section of the Building. Level
8 also accommodates an
amenities area for the use of all residents. Level 39 accommodates an amenities
area for the use of the residents
of the High-Rise section, as well as
accommodating a portion of the penthouse apartments.
ground level, there is a residential entry which includes what has been
described as a concierge desk and an open foyer or meeting
area adjacent to the
lifts. There are two sets of lifts, one of which accommodates the car park and
the Low-Rise floors and the
other of which accommodates the car park and the
High-Rise floors. The entrance to the lifts to the High-Rise section on the
floor is behind a set of security doors which can only be accessed by
individuals with access to the High-Rise section of the Building.
Building was constructed by the developer (i.e. – Eklipse) over the land
comprised in six certificates of title which were
then incorporated in a
community title scheme, established pursuant to the CT Act. Section 14 of
the CT Act allows for the registered
proprietor of an estate in fee simple in
land comprising allotments to apply to the Registrar-General for division of the
a plan of community division. The application must be accompanied with
that plan, the scheme description, the first by-laws of the
scheme and, in
certain cases, a development contract.
the application is accepted by the Registrar-General, the Registrar-General is
to file the community plan together with the
scheme description, the by-laws and
any development contract. Thereafter, the existing certificates of title for
the land the subject
of the plan are to be cancelled and new certificates of
title issued.
s 30 of the CT Act, a scheme description is required to describe the
purpose or purposes for which the lots and common property
may be used. The
scheme description of any secondary or tertiary scheme must not be inconsistent
with the scheme description or
by-laws of any underlying scheme.
s 34 of the CT Act, the by-laws must, inter alia, regulate the use and
enjoyment of the community lots to the extent necessary
to give effect to the
scheme description. Further, in certain cases provided for in s 13, a
developer must execute a development
contract and, by s 49, where that is done,
the developer, by s 47, comes under a binding obligation to develop a
community lot in
accordance with the scheme
description.
The marketing of the
is no dispute that on or about 15 June 2016, Eklipse engaged Urban
Activation Pty Ltd (
) to act as its agent to market the Building. For
reasons to be given, I am satisfied that, with the knowledge of Eklipse but not
with the knowledge of RPM, the Building was marketed as one which would not
involve short-term letting.
Documents deposited pursuant to
will be necessary to refer in more detail later to the terms of some of the
documents deposited with the Registrar-General but,
by way of background, there
is no dispute about the following matters.
Community Plan in respect of Community Corporation No. 42055 was deposited on
30 June 2025, establishing the HRC and the LRC.
At this time, Eklipse
was the owner of all the lots. On the same day, the Development Contract,
Scheme Description and Tertiary
by‑laws were deposited.
Scheme Description relevant to the Realm development in providing for the
purposes for which the community lots and common property
could be used declared
that ‘[t]he lots may only be used for residential purposes (including
residential serviced apartments)
car parking and storage subsidiaries, and
common property’.
by-laws, as deposited with the Registrar-General, provided by
by‑law 28 that ‘[t]he Tertiary Lots may only be used
residential accommodation (long term or short term including serviced
apartments)’.
this case, the scheme description applicable to the High-Rise apartments had
attached to it an endorsement by the relevant development
authority (i.e.
– the State Commission Assessment Panel) dated 4 April 2019, in accordance
with s 14(4) of the CT Act. The
attached Decision Notification Form dated
4 April 2019, and revised on 17 December 2019, described the
proposed development as comprising
‘community strata allotments for
residential purposes’.
scheme of division pursuant to s 7 of the CT Act allows for division by a
method of stratification. At the first level, land
comprised in existing
allotments may be divided into two or more community lots (in addition to common
property). Here, the original
allotments were initially divided into
Lot 11, which was designated for retail purposes, and Lot 12, which
was designated for residential
purposes. Lots so created at the first stage are
called primary lots. At the second stage, a primary lot may be divided into two
or more community lots designated as secondary lots (in addition to common
property). Here, Lot 12 was designated as residential
and, at the second
stage, was divided into Lot 21 and Lot 22, with both lots designated
as residential. Lot 21 was designated on
a secondary plan of community
division as comprising the lower section of a high-rise building and Lot 22
comprising the higher section
of that high-rise building. Section 7 then
provides for a tertiary plan of community division by which a secondary lot
a secondary plan is divided into two or more community lots. In this
case, Lot 21 was divided into 150 tertiary community lots and
was divided into 160 tertiary community lots.
ultimate result of the lodged plan of community division was the creation of
titles to sections of the Realm Building comprising
150 apartments in the Low
Rise or Park section, 160 apartments in the High‑Rise or Sky section,
together with lots comprising
common property essentially made up of the car
park and amenities section on Level 8. This includes a swimming pool,
which was available
to all persons entitled to access the apartments, and a
further amenities section on Level 39, which was available to persons
to access the High-Rise part of the Building.
s 71 of the CT Act, the deposit of a plan of community division in the
Lands Titles Registration Office establishes a community
corporation comprised
of the owners for the time being of the community lots into which a community
parcel has been divided. Hence,
when the deposited plan established primary
Lots 11 and 12, a Primary Corporation was established which was comprised
of the owners
of Lots 11 and 12. That was designated Community Corporation
No 42052. The owner or member of that corporation comprised of Lot
is the Secondary Corporation. There is another community corporation that owns
Lot 11, the lot designated for retail purposes.
In turn, the Secondary
Corporation is comprised of Lots 21 and 22. The Secondary Corporation was
designated Community Corporation
No 42053. The owners of the Secondary
Corporation are the Tertiary Corporation designated Community Corporation
No 42054 (i.e. –
the LRC) which owns Lot 21 and the Tertiary
Corporation designated Community Corporation No 42055 (i.e. – the
HRC) that owns
Lot 22. At the time of incorporation all lots in the LRC
and HRC were held by Eklipse as the developer. The current owners of those
tertiary corporations are respectively the lot owners or holders of apartments
in the Park section and the lot owners or holders
of apartments in the Sky
there are, in all, four community corporations involved in the operation of the
Realm Building: the Primary Corporation (No
42052), Secondary Corporation
(No 42053) and two Tertiary Corporations (Nos 42054 and
The meeting on 1 July
is no dispute that on 1 July 2020 a meeting was held. This was the day after
the above documents were deposited and following
negotiations that commenced on
hand, and RPM on the other.
Present at the meeting on 1 July 2020 were
Messrs Anthony Pattinson, Paul Smith and Eric Breda.
Messrs Pattinson and Smith were
present on behalf of Eklipse.
Mr Breda is a body corporate manager with Whittles Body Corporate
Management Pty Ltd (
Minutes of the above meeting describe the meeting as the ‘Inaugural
General Meeting’ of the second
respondent.
There is no dispute
that, at this time, Eklipse held all the lots within the Realm Building,
including within the HRC. What occurred
at the meeting is set out in the
Minutes and what follows is drawn from those Minutes.
Minutes set out that Mr Breda conducted the meeting. Under the heading
‘Declaration of Interest’, the following
All owners or
their nominees, were reminded that they are required to advise the meeting if
they have any direct or indirect pecuniary
interest in any matter to be
considered by the meeting. Whittles refers all Members to the Corporation's
Agreement for disclosure
of all its relevant interests.
Minutes do not record that any interest was disclosed.
to what appears on the face of the Minutes, purportedly pursuant to s 76(9)
of the CT Act, a motion was carried that Whittles
be appointed as Manager. A
motion was carried that Eklipse, represented by either Mr Pattinson or
Mr Smith, be appointed as interim
office bearers and committee members
designated as Presiding Officer, Secretary and Treasurer.
were also carried with respect to a Caretaking Agreement and a Letting
Agreement. The motions carried were in the following
Caretaking Agreement
That the Community Corporation enter into and execute under common seal with
Realm Property Management Pty Ltd ACN 640 099 485 (the
'Caretaker') the
Caretaking Agreement which is in substantially the same form as that tabled with
this motion for an initial period
of 5 years commencing on the date this motion
is passed ('Commencement Date') and ending on the date 5 years from the
Commencement
Date with four automatic options of 5 years each and for an initial
remuneration of $122,320 plus GST for the first year of the term
and that Mr A
Pattinson and Mr P Smith as the authorised representative of Eklipse Capital Pty
Ltd (the 'Developer') and sole member
of the Community Corporation be authorised
to affix the common seal of the Community Corporation thereto.
MOTION CARRIED
18. Letting Agreement
That the Community Corporation enter into and execute under common seal with
Realm Property Management Pty Ltd ACN 640 099 485 (the
'Letting Agent') the
Letting Agreement which is in substantially the same form as that tabled with
this motion for an initial period
of 5 years commencing on the date this motion
is passed ('Commencement Date') and ending on the date 5 years from the
Commencement
Date with four automatic options of 5 years each and for no fee,
and an associated Deed relating to the Letting Agent's Lot (Deed)
substantially the same form as tabled with this motion and grant to the party to
the Letting Agreement the licence to use the
area/s of common property described
in and on the basis set out in the Letting Agreement in common with others and
that Mr A Pattinson
and Mr P Smith as the authorised representatives of Eklipse
Capital Pty Ltd (the 'Developer') and sole member of the Community Corporation
be authorised to affix the common seal of the Community Corporation to the
Letting Agreement.
MOTION CARRIED
reference appears in the Minutes to a Procurement Agreement. As set out above,
the initial Procurement Agreement had been executed
on 17 April 2020.
I find that it was not raised during the meeting.
the same day, further caretaking agreements were entered into with the two other
community title schemes within the Realm Building
in respect of the common
areas. Those caretaking agreements, and a letting agreement with the LRC, were
entered into following resolutions
made at like meetings of the other relevant
community corporations.
overview of the agreements
were several caretaking agreements ultimately executed on 1 July 2020
the Caretaking Agreements
is a caretaking agreement between RPM and the primary corporation which relates
to caretaking activities to be performed in
certain areas of the common property
within the Realm Building. The initial annual contract price was $43,120.00.
The caretaking
agreement with the secondary corporation relates to caretaking
activities in other areas of common property belonging to the secondary
corporation, including – most significantly – the foyer at ground
level and the pool and other facilities on Level eight.
The initial contracted
price was $213,400.00. The caretaking agreements with the HRC and the LRC
involved the performance of caretaking
activities in and about the common areas
of both, including the corridors. In addition, in the case of the HRC, it
involves the
performance of caretaking activities in and about the common
amenity area on Level 39. The initial contracted price was $61,160.00
the LRC and $122,320.00 for the HRC. The Caretaking Agreements are for
25 years (an initial term of five years with provision
for four extensions
of five years, with the power to extend being held by the caretaker). In these
proceedings it is the caretaking
agreement with the HRC which is in issue.
letting agreements were executed, one between RPM and the HRC and one between
RPM and the LRC (
the Letting Agreements
). In these proceedings, it is
the letting agreement with the HRC which is in issue. The Letting Agreements
are also for 25 years
(an initial term of five years with provision for
four extensions of five years, with the power to extend being held by the
agent). A practical effect of the Letting Agreements is to give RPM the
exclusive right of a physical presence in the Realm Building.
The Letting
Agreements do not prohibit owners of apartments from using other agents, but RPM
is the only agent which can facilitate
leasing from within the Building. RPM
does so utilising a concierge desk on the ground floor. RPM obtained rights to
concierge desk through the purchase of a lot on Level 19 (Lot
1911), in which associated subsidiary rights were attached to that
lot as part
of the purchase agreement. The lot subsidiaries thereby attached to Lot 1911
include the area occupied by the concierge
desk, the right to a storage cage
within the carpark and the right to occupy a storage area on Level 15. To
facilitate or augment
its caretaking activities under the Caretaking Agreements,
RPM also entered a 25-year lease of Apartment 805 on Level 8. RPM
that apartment for the storage of cleaning equipment and linen.
The Procurement Agreement
entry by RPM into the Caretaking Agreements and Letting Agreements came as part
of an arrangement or agreement struck between
RPM and Eklipse, the centrepiece
of which was a Procurement Agreement. As mentioned, the initial Procurement
Agreement was entered
into by a document in writing on 17 April 2020.
It was treated by the parties as a kind of working instrument for their
negotiations
and not as a final agreement. This was the result of the inclusion
in the initial Procurement Agreement of a due diligence clause
in cl 18.1,
the effect of which was to permit RPM and its solicitors to satisfy themselves
of all aspects of the proposed arrangement
and, absent such satisfaction, to
terminate the agreement.
held copies of the Caretaking Agreements and the Letting Agreements executed on
However, RPM did
not deliver up those agreements as executed by it until there was a final
agreement that the Procurement Agreement
had become unconditional, something
which came to be reflected in the final Procurement Agreement executed on
21 August 2020.
essential effect of the final Procurement Agreement was that Eklipse agreed to
cause the relevant community corporations at their
first general meeting to
resolve to enter into the Caretaking Agreements and the Letting Agreements and,
further, Eklipse agreed
to assist RPM entering into letting appointments with
owners of apartments in the Realm Building in consideration of RPM paying
an amount described as the ‘Procurement Sum’, being a
minimum sum of $1,363,636.36 plus GST (i.e. – $1.5 million
inclusive of
GST, apparently representing the rounded value of 68 letting appointments at
$22,000 per appointment), but in total
equal to the number of such letting
appointments held by RPM on what was designated the ‘Adjustment
Date’ multiplied
by $20,000 plus GST per appointment. Effectively, that
meant that RPM was to pay for each appointment which it had secured by
September 2021.
paid the procurement sum in instalments. The sum of $1,363,636.36 plus GST of
$136,363.64 (i.e. – $1.5 million inclusive
of GST) was paid by way of the
release to Eklipse of the deposit sum paid by RPM on 17 April 2020 to
ClarkeKann Lawyers in two tranches.
First, on 21 August 2020 in the
sum of $500,000 and, second, on 19 October 2020 as to the remaining
sum of $1,000,000. A further
sum of $160,000 (apparently erroneously charged as
inclusive and not exclusive of GST) was invoiced and paid on
20 January 2021 in
respect of a further eight letting appointments. A
final sum of $100,000 (apparently inclusive and not exclusive of GST) was
and paid on 7 April 2021 in respect of a further five letting
appointments.
The resolution of
the HRC on 23 December 2022
set out above, by an order made in the District Court, the HRC is currently
restrained from giving effect to a resolution passed
to amend its by-laws in a
way which would expressly prohibit lots being used for short-term letting.
December 2021, the HRC took steps to hold an Extraordinary General Meeting
) for the purpose of passing a special resolution to introduce such a
by-law. A meeting was held on 7 December 2021 but for reasons
are not relevant, that meeting did not proceed. There was a further attempt to
hold an EGM on 1 March 2022, but on 28 February
2022 orders
were made in the District Court which, among other things, restrained the HRC
from holding the EGM on 1 March 2022 and
from altering its by-laws
until further order. On 17 November 2022, this Court removed the
injunction with prevented the EGM being
Annual General Meeting (
) was held on 23 December 2022. At
the AGM, a special resolution was passed to alter what may be described as the
existing by‑laws
which had been filed with the community plan. There were
103 votes in favour and 35 votes against. The special resolution was
the existing by-laws be amended with the effect that the owner of a lot
‘may only use a Lot or allow a Lot to be used for residential
accommodation’ and must not grant a right of occupation ‘in respect
of the Lot for valuable consideration for a period
of less than [two]
is no longer any opposition by the first applicant to the by-laws as amended by
the special resolution at the AGM on 23 December
2022 being lodged
pursuant to s 39(2) of the CT Act. To the extent necessary, I order that
can occur. Importantly, the order prohibiting
effect being given to the by-laws
as amended by the resolution on 23 December 2022 remains in place.
Whether that prohibition should
be removed is one of the issues to be determined
in these proceedings.
The first issue: is short-term letting
already prohibited?
the issues in the proceedings are whether the by-laws, as lodged on
30 June 2020 (
the existing by-laws
), already prohibit on their
terms short-term letting and, if the existing by-laws do not prohibit short-term
letting, whether those
by-laws are invalid to the extent that short-term letting
is permitted.
this point, it is helpful to set out that, relevant to these proceedings, there
are, in effect, three sets of by-laws. First,
the by-laws as apparently
provided to purchasers at the same time as the sales contracts and before
30 June 2020 (
the indicative or sample by-laws
). Second, the
by-laws deposited on 30 June 2020 with the community plan, development
contract and scheme description (
the existing by-laws
). Third, the
by-laws as amended following the resolution on 23 December 2022
the amended by-laws
turning to whether short-term letting is already prohibited by the existing
by-laws, I give some further background to the
three sets of by-laws. That
background begins with the way in which the Realm Building was promoted and
repeats some matters outlined
The way the Realm Building was
promoted and the indicative by-laws
period pre-dates any involvement of RPM in the Realm Building. RPM only became
involved on about 26 March 2020.
of apartments in the Realm Building commenced in around mid‑2016. As
mentioned, in June 2016, Eklipse appointed
UA as its agent to manage the
sales process. The Building was marketed both in Australia and overseas. The
first applicant submits
that it was envisaged from the outset by Eklipse and UA
that a substantial proportion of the apartments in the Realm Building would
sold to overseas investors, with sales activities apparently undertaken in Hong
Kong and Singapore.
is no dispute, and I find, that during the pre-sales process the Building was
marketed by UA to at least some purchasers as
being ‘residential
only’, with no hotels or Airbnb accommodation permitted. For reasons to
be given, I find that Eklipse
was aware of that at all relevant times.
The indicative scheme
is no dispute that sales contracts had attached within the appendices what was
described as ‘indicative scheme
documents’.
indicative scheme documents included by-laws (i.e. – the indicative or
sample by-laws) and a copy of the Scheme Description
the indicative Scheme
Description
). An example of the sales contracts is the contract dated
27 November 2017 with Mr and Mrs Hendrick (or
The contract is in
the standard form Law Society of South Australia Contract, with substantial
special conditions and appendices.
28 of the indicative by-laws was in the following
28.1 Subject
to the provisions of these By-Laws, the Scheme Description and the Development
Plan for the Corporation of the City of
Adelaide and any other relevant
statutory enactments:
28.1.1 the [lots] will only be used for residential accommodation.
other than the use specified in By-Law 28.1, an Owner or Occupier is
prohibited from leasing or granting rights of occupation in respect
of a Lot for
valuable consideration for a period of less than 2 months.
28.2 This By-Law 28 does not preclude an Owner entering into a lease, licence
or management agreement on normal commercial terms for
use of that Lot in
accordance with a use authorised by a relevant development authority.
may be observed that the above clause may be read in a way that permits the
grant of a lease for less than two months. On one
reading, such a lease is
permitted provided the lot is being used for residential accommodation.
to the permitted use of the Realm Building, the indicative scheme description
states in cl 2.1 that:
The lots may only be used for residential purposes (including
residential serviced apartments) and common property and car parking
subsidiaries.
The discretion reserved to Eklipse to amend
the indicative documents
special conditions to the contracts, however, reserved substantial discretion to
Eklipse as the developer. The special conditions
made clear to purchasers that
the indicative documents were subject to change by Eklipse ‘in its
absolute discretion’.
Appendix 1 – Special Conditions, cl 1.1.11 contained a definition of
‘by‑laws’ to the following
by-laws of the Primary Scheme, Secondary Scheme (Residential) and Tertiary
Scheme (Residential) as the Vendor declares from time
to time and; [sic] sample
By-Laws are contained in Appendix 5A and 5B as may be varied by the Vendor in
its absolute discretion.
Clause 11.1
of the Special Conditions then included the
11.1 The Purchaser expressly acknowledges and agrees with the
Vendor as follows:
11.1.12 the Purchaser acknowledges that the Purchaser has received and read a
copy of the Scheme Documents which are annexed to the
Agreement at Appendices 5A
11.1.13 the Purchaser agrees to be bound by the By-laws of the Scheme and the
provisions of the Act and agrees not to attempt to vary
the By-laws until after
settlement of the sale of all community lots comprising the Scheme referred to
in the Community Plans;
11.1.14 notwithstanding anything expressed or implied to the contrary in
Special Condition 11.1.12 prior to the deposit of each of
the Community Plans
the Vendor shall be entitled to alter or amend any of the sample Scheme
Documents (including, without limitation,
by adding further by-laws) in such
manner as the Vendor shall reasonably determine in order to ensure that the
by-laws are appropriate
(a) the safe efficient and harmonious administration management and control of
the Common Property and other common areas;
(b) the regulation of the use and enjoyment of the primary, secondary and
tertiary Common Property and other common areas;
(c) the regulation (to the extent necessary to give effect to the Scheme
Description) of the use and enjoyment of the Land; and
(d) dealing with any other issues covered by
Community Titles Act
by the Corporation having regard to the nature of the Development and the
Purchaser shall have no claim or recourse against the Vendor
Vendor’s agents in respect of any such alteration or amendment and must
not delay or refuse to settle by reason of such
alteration of [sic]
first applicant submits that the extent to which representations made during the
period of promotion and/or the documents attached
to the sales contracts were
relied upon is unclear. Evidence adduced by the HRC of at least five witnesses
to the clear effect that
they relied upon such matters in informing their
purchase decision
challenged by the first applicant. Nevertheless, the first applicant submits
that there may be a question as to how the Building
was marketed to overseas
buyers purchasing as investors and as to whether any given purchaser read and
relied upon the indicative
by-laws. In my view, those matters are not necessary
to determine. I simply observe at this point that, on the evidence adduced,
reasons to be given, I find the Realm Building was marketed locally on the basis
that short-term letting would not be permitted.
On the evidence, I see
insufficient reason to conclude that a different approach might have been taken
overseas. However, that
is not necessary to decide, and I have made no finding.
the pre-sales process, purchasers entered contracts with Eklipse. Pre-sales
occurred substantially in late 2017 and into
2018. By April 2018,
contracts or reservations in respect of 85 per cent of the apartments
across the Realm Building had been entered,
with most buyers being overseas.
The existing by‑laws –
existing by-laws were deposited on 30 June 2020, which was after RPM became
involved in negotiations with Eklipse with respect
to the agreements earlier
mentioned. RPM became involved in negotiations on about
26 March 2020. However, as will be seen, that
the indicative by-laws
might be amended in a way consistent with those deposited on
30 June 2020 had been raised before RPM became
involved and during
negotiations between Eklipse and another party, Imagine Hotels and Resorts
), which had an interest in caretaking and letting agreements
like those ultimately entered by RPM.
existing by-laws are different to the indicative by-laws. For present purposes,
it is not necessary to detail the circumstances
in which that came to be so.
28 of the existing by-laws
lots may only be used for residential accommodation (long term or short term
including serviced apartments).
deposited on 30 June 2020 was the Development Contract and the Scheme
Description.
cl 4.2, the Development Contract provided that the relevant lots were
‘intended for residential
cl 2.1, the Scheme Description provided that the relevant lots ‘may
only be used for residential purposes (including residential
apartments)’.
The amended by-laws
relevant terms of the special resolution passed on 23 December 2022 is
set out above. In short, the amended by-laws would prohibit
letting for a
period of less than two months.
contentions of the second respondent
The first contention
second respondent’s first contention is that existing by-law 28.1
already prohibits short-term letting. The second respondent
contends that a
lease of less than two months does not come within a use described in the
existing by-laws as ‘residential
accommodation (long term or short term
including serviced apartments)’.
two reasons, I reject the first contention of the second respondent.
I reject that the words ‘residential accommodation’ denotes only
accommodation of more than two months or any
other fixed or minimum period. To
find that ‘residential accommodation’ only denotes accommodation of
a greater permanence
than some fixed minimum period and/or a permanence of at
least two months would be inconsistent with authorities which have found
‘residential accommodation’ should not be given such a meaning.
South Steyne Hotel Pty Ltd v Commissioner of
reviewed authorities which had considered the term ‘residential
accommodation’ and held that it was not a term
to be construed as meaning
accommodation for a fixed or minimum period. Stone J referred to three
authorities which were summarised
in the following
the issue before the Tribunal was whether accommodation provided for
students at the college was correctly described as residential
accommodation.
The Tribunal described the accommodation thus:
“Each study-bedroom has a single bed, desk and at least one arm chair
and a bathroom or shower room. ... Although each room
has a kettle, teapot and
cup and saucer and tea and coffee, there are no other cooking facilities in
either building. The college
has a dining room in which students attending
courses can eat.”
The Tribunal accepted that the building was not a “residence” but
said that it did not follow that it was not “residential”
accommodation.
Urdd Gobaith Cymru
concerned the same statutory words as
. The accommodation was for students attending for short periods
(the average period was four days) mainly to learn the Welsh language.
Tribunal chairman agreed that “a residence” clearly implied a
building with a significant degree of permanence of
occupation but added:
“However, the word loses that clear meaning when used as an adjective.
In ordinary English ‘residential accommodation’
merely signifies
lodging, sleeping or overnight accommodation. It does not suggest the need for
such accommodation to be for any
fixed or minimum period.”
the Court of Appeal expressed a similar view as to the meaning
of “residential accommodation” used in the context of the
Gains Tax Act 1979
. The position was put succinctly by Leggat LJ who
“In my judgment the expression ‘residential accommodation’
does not directly or by association mean premises likely
to be occupied as a
accommodation.”
and separately, the words ‘residential accommodation’ must be
construed in the context of the words ‘long
term or short term including
serviced apartments’. I find that the words ‘short term’
denote that a stay can be
of a period that is less than at least
two months. Further, in my view, the reference to ‘serviced
apartments’ only
further confirms this. To my mind, those words should
not be construed in a way which would prohibit letting for a designated period,
let alone one that must be at least two months.
the above reasons, I decline to declare that the existing by-laws prohibit
short-term letting of less than two months.
The second contention – is the
existing by-law invalid?
second contention of the second respondent is that existing by-law 28.1 should
be declared invalid.
contention has several limbs, namely:
the by-laws must be consistent with, and give effect to, the scheme description
pursuant to ss 11(4), 34(2)(d), 41(1)(b) of the
by cl 2, the Scheme Description provides that the lots (i.e. - apartments)
‘may only be used for residential purposes (including
residential serviced
apartments)’;
‘residential purposes’ in the Scheme Description is to be given the
same meaning as in the CT Act, the negative definition
in s 3(1) of the CT
Act being that, in relation to the use of land, it does not include the use of
land for the purposes of a hotel,
motel or hostel or to provide any other form
of temporary residential accommodation for valuable consideration; and
the use of apartments for short-term stays (of less than two months) is within
the excluded category (i.e. – it is not
within ‘residential
purposes’).
Section 11(1)
of the CT Act obliged Eklipse to lodge the Scheme Description.
Section 11(3)
and (4) provide:
scheme description
(3) Its purpose is to provide a brief description of the nature of the scheme
to which the relevant development authority has given
its consent for the
benefit of persons considering purchasing or entering into any other dealing
with a lot created by the scheme.
(4) The by-laws of the scheme and a development contract (if any) relating to
the scheme must be consistent with the scheme description.
Section 34(2)(d)
provides that the by-laws must ‘regulate the use and enjoyment of the
community lots to the extent necessary
to give effect to the scheme
description’.
Section 41(1)(b),
(c) and (f) of the CT Act provide that by-laws are invalid to the extent to
which they are inconsistent with the
scheme description or development contract
Section 41(2) provides:
(2) A by-law will be taken to be inconsistent with a scheme description, the
by-laws of another scheme or a development contract if,
and only if, there are
no circumstances in which the by-law can operate consistently with the scheme
description, by-laws or development
Explanatory Note—
instance if the scheme description provides that the community lots will be used
for residential purposes without specifying the
kinds of residential use, the
by-laws may prohibit some kinds of residential use such as flats or boarding
house accommodation but
cannot prohibit all kinds of residential use.
Section 3(10)
of the CT Act provides that the explanatory note is not part of the provision to
which it relates.
relevant terms of the scheme description as lodged are set out above. Namely,
that the use of the lots was for ‘residential
purposes (including
residential serviced apartments)’.
Section 3(1)
defines the meaning of ‘residential purposes’ as used in the Act
and, unless a contrary intention appears,
in the following way:
Residential purposes in relation to the use of land does not
include the use of land for the purposes of a hotel, motel or hostel
provide any other form of temporary residential accommodation for valuable
consideration.
issue is not how guests and others might, in practice, be using the Realm
Building. The issue is whether the existing by-law
28 is inconsistent with
the Scheme Description.
second respondent submits the words in the Scheme Description (i.e. –
‘residential purposes (including residential
serviced apartments)’)
must be construed bearing in mind the negative definition in s 3(1). The
second respondent submits
that so construed, the words ‘residential
purposes’ in the Scheme Description are not to be construed as permitting
uses described in s 3(1) (i.e. – ‘a hotel, motel or hostel
or to provide any other form of temporary residential accommodation
for valuable
consideration’). That is, the Scheme Description should be construed as
not permitting short-term letting. Construed
in that way, the second respondent
submits that the Scheme Description is inconsistent with the existing by-laws
and the existing
by-laws are, to the extent of that inconsistency, invalid
pursuant to s 41(2) of the CT Act.
respect to s 3(1), the first applicant submits that the words ‘any
other form of temporary residential accommodation’
are to be construed
ejusdem generis
with the class of accommodation established by the
expression ‘hotel, motel or hostel’.
Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v
Spigelman CJ discussed the
ejusdem generis
rule in the context
of the phrase ‘other good
...It is essential for the application of the ejusdem generis rule
that some common characteristic capable of being described as a
genus is able to
be identified. (See, eg,
R v Regos and Morgan
[1947] HCA 19
(1947) 74 CLR 613
Cody v J H Nelson Pty Ltd
[1947] HCA 17
(1947) 74 CLR 629
at 648.) I agree with Lord
Diplock that unless at least two different species are identified it is not
possible to determine a relevant
genus which may be used to read down the
general words which follow. (See
Quazi v Quazi
[1980] AC 744
807-808.) Some have left open the possibility, however unusual its application
may be, that a genus may appear from a statutory
provision where only one word
precedes the general formulation. (See, eg,
Lake Macquarie Shire Council v
[1977] 1 NSWLR 126 at 129;
Director of Public Prosecutions v
[1998] VSC 119
(1998) 104 A Crim R 65
at 73 and 75; F A R Bennion, Statutory
Interpretation, 4th ed (2002) London, Butterworths, at 1060.) In the field of
statutory interpretation
it may be best never to say ‘never’.
The process of reading down general words in a statute is a frequently
recurring issue in statutory interpretation. (See, for example,
the authorities
I referred to in
(1999) 46 NSWLR 681 at 689 [23]-[29].)
Application of the ejusdem generis rule is a specific example of this process.
The application
of this rule, in substance, gives the immediate verbal context
determinative weight in the process of construing general words.
In my opinion,
this is rarely justified. Whether or not general words ought be read down is to
be determined by the whole of the
relevant context, including other provisions
of the statute and the scope and purpose of the statute.
As Dixon J said in
Cody v J H Nelson
‘But the truth is that it is wrong to use the rule for an ejusdem
generis construction as a piece of abstract or mechanical
reasoning. It must be
applied not simpliciter but secundum quid. It should be used as a guide in a
process of interpretation which
takes into account the whole instrument and the
subject matter.
“As Lord Diplock said in
Quazi v Quazi
‘The fact that the ejusdem generis rule is not applicable does not,
however, necessarily mean that where the expression “other”
in a statute preceded by only one expression of greater specificity its
generality may not be cut down if to give it its
wide prima facie meaning would
lead to results that would be contrary to the manifest policy of the Act looked
at as a whole or would
conflict with the evident purpose for which it was
What can be regarded as ‘good reason’ in one statute will not
necessarily be acceptable as ‘good reason’ in
another statute. The
context provides the relevant limitation. For this reason I do not agree with
Palmer J that the words in s
588H and s 588FGB(5) are ‘as wide as they
could be in order that the court may determine each case on its own particular
my view, the words ‘hotel, motel or hostel’ have a common
characteristic capable of being described as a genus. That
characteristic of a singularly run commercial operation involving the provision
of short-term accommodation for valuable
consideration. In this case, while
some lot holders choose to use the same letting agent, there is no commercial
operation in which
all lot holders permitting short-term letting utilise the
same operator. In my view, the words ‘any other form of temporary
residential accommodation’ should be read down to accord with the type of
accommodation identified by the words ‘hotel,
motel or hostel’. The
words just mentioned are not defined in the CT Act.
Macquarie Dictionary definitions of hotel, motel and hostel are as
a building in which accommodation and food, and sometimes other facilities,
are available.
a roadside hotel which provides accommodation for travellers in
self-contained, serviced units, with parking for their vehicles.
a supervised place of accommodation, usually supplying board and lodging,
provided at a comparatively low cost, as one for students,
nurses, etc.
reject the second contention of the second respondent. I decline to declare
that the existing by-law is inconsistent with the
Scheme Description. I decline
to do so as I find that there are circumstances in which the existing by-law can
operate consistently
with the Scheme Description in a way permitted by
s 41(2) of the CT Act. That the existing by-law permits an individual lot
used for short‑term residential accommodation does not mean that the
by-law is invalid as it is permitting the lot to be used
as a hotel, motel or
hostel or other form of temporary residential accommodation of that genus for
valuable consideration.
second issue – was the meeting on 1 July 2020 a meeting held in
pursuance of s 79(1) of the CT Act such that the resolution
passed has no cause
and effect?
set out above, the relevant agreements between the HRC and RPM were entered into
on 1 July 2020 following motions passed at what
the Minutes describe
as the ‘Inaugural General Meeting’ of the HRC the same day.
second respondent contends that the relevant motions were not valid resolutions
and so have no cause and effect. This is said
to be the case for three reasons.
First, that Messrs Pattinson and Smith purported to enter into the agreements as
officers of the
HRC but were in fact employees or agents of Eklipse. Second,
that the meeting on 1 July 2020 which purported to authorise the HRC
to enter into the agreements was not one authorised by the CT Act (i.e. –
as it did not comply with s 79(1) of the CT Act as
there was then only one
member of HRC, not two members as
Third, contrary to
s 95(1) of the CT Act, Messrs Pattinson and Smith failed to disclose that
Eklipse had a direct pecuniary interest
in the relevant motions by virtue of the
initial Procurement
Characterisation
of the meeting on 1 July 2020
the contentions of the second respondent, it is necessary to characterise the
meeting on 1 July 2020 and, more specifically,
to determine if a finding
should be made that it was one to which either ss 79 or 95 applied.
Section 79 of the CT Act
of the CT Act provides for the convening of a ‘first statutory
meeting’ and s 80 stipulates what must occur
at that meeting. The
terms of those two sections are as follows:
statutory general meeting
(1) The developer must convene a general meeting of the community corporation
within 3 months after the day on which there are at
least 2 different members of
the community corporation (not including the developer or any person who the
developer knows, or ought
reasonably to know, is an associate of the
developer).
Maximum penalty: $15 000.
(2) A member of the corporation may convene the meeting required under
subsection (1) if the developer fails to do so.
80—Business at first statutory general meeting
(1) The developer must deliver to the corporation at the first statutory
general meeting—
(a) a copy of the plan of community division deposited in the Lands Titles
Registration Office which shows the service infrastructure
by which the lots and
common property are provided with water, gas, electricity and other services;
(b) a copy of—
(i) the scheme description (if any); and
(ii) the by-laws; and
(iii) the development contract or contracts (if any),
filed by the Registrar-General with the deposited plan; and
(c) a copy of specifications, diagrams and drawings relating to the buildings or
other improvements (if any) on the community parcel;
(e) all policies of insurance taken out by the developer; and
(f) a statement of the corporation's assets and liabilities; and
(g) an expenditure and contribution statement complying with section 113; and
(h) books of account and other records relating to the corporation; and
(i) the corporation's common seal; and
(j) a copy of all other documents in the developer's possession that are likely
to be of use to the corporation.
Maximum penalty: $15 000.
(2) The following matters must be addressed at the first statutory general
(a) the appointment of the presiding officer, treasurer and secretary;
(b) the custody of the corporation's common seal and the manner of its use;
(c) the corporation's recurrent and non-recurrent expenditure in its first
financial year and the amount to be raised by contributions
from owners of
community lots to cover that expenditure;
(d) the appointment of an auditor of the corporation's accounts in its first
financial year or a special resolution that the accounts
for that year need not
be audited;
(e) such other matters as are required by regulation.
(3) If a document of a kind referred to in subsection (1) comes into the
possession of the developer within 12 months after the corporation's
statutory general meeting, the developer must deliver it, or a copy of it, to
the corporation.
Maximum penalty: $15 000.
The meeting on 1 July 2020 –
not ‘the first statutory meeting’
is no dispute that on 1 July 2020 Eklipse, as the developer, held all
the lots of the second respondent. I reject that the
meeting on 1 July 2020 was
the ‘first statutory meeting’. That characterisation cannot apply
to a meeting at which the
developer holds all the lots of the community
corporation. At that time, there are not ‘at least 2 different
members of the
community corporation’ as required by s 79.
Division 1 and Division 3 of the CT
second respondent further contends that the meeting on 1 July 2020 was
a ‘management committee meeting’ pursuant
to Division 3 of the
CT Act. On that premise, the second respondent contends that, pursuant to
s 95 of the CT Act, there was a duty
upon Eklipse or its representatives to
disclose a direct or indirect pecuniary interest. It is submitted that if
s 95 was breached,
then the second respondent may apply for relief under
Part 14 of the CT Act on that
the face of the Minutes, there is some ambiguity as to the proper
characterisation of the meeting on 1 July 2020. First, the
refer to both s 76 and s 90 of the CT Act. Section 90 is within
Division 3 of Part 9 which deals with the establishment
of a management
committee as is s 95 which mandates disclosure of an interest at a meeting.
However, s 76 is not within Division
3 of Part 9.
Section 76 is within Division 1. Second, the Minutes record that the
meeting was the ‘Inaugural General Meeting’,
which is not a term
within Division 3 of Part 9 within which s 95 appears. Indeed,
that term is not found elsewhere in the CT Act.
Minutes also record the following with respect to the appointment of office
bearers and committee:
8. Election of Office Bearers and Committee
In accordance with Section 76(1) & 90 (1) of the Community Titles Act
1966, the meeting appointed the following Interim Office
Bearers and Committee
Presiding Officer
Eklipse Capital Pty Ltd, Rep'd by Mr A Pattinson
Lot 2101 - 3802
Eklipse Capital Pty Ltd, Rep'd by Mr P Smith
Lot 2101 - 3802
Eklipse Capital Pty Ltd, Rep'd by Mr P Smith
Lot 2101 - 3802
Limitations Imposed
The Corporation Manager advised that the Management Committee and officers of
the Corporation do not have powers to resolve matters
subject to special or
unanimous resolutions. Committee Meetings should be conducted in accordance
Sections 91
Community Titles Act 1996
. An agenda should be
forwarded to all committee members and decisions at the meeting minuted, copies
of which are to be included
with the Corporation's records.
MOTION CARRIED
the Minutes record that the motion that Whittles be appointed was pursuant to
s 76(9) of the CT Act was carried.
Division 1 of Part 9
of the CT Act is within Division 1 of Part 9. That Division does not
deal with the creation of a management committee
or its obligations.
Section 76 provides:
76—Presiding
officer, treasurer and secretary
(1) A community corporation must, by ordinary resolution, appoint a presiding
officer, treasurer and secretary.
(2) Subject to this
section, the offices of presiding officer, treasurer and secretary must be held
by natural persons who are members
of the corporation.
(3) In the case of a community scheme—
(a) comprising ten community lots or less—two or all of those offices may
be held by one person;
(b) comprising eleven or more community lots—two of those offices may be
held by one person.
(4) A person for the time being appointed by a body corporate that is a
member of a corporation to attend and vote at meetings of
the corporation is a
member of the corporation for the purposes of
subsection (2)
(5) If the community parcel is subject to a leaseback arrangement the
corporation may appoint a person, or persons (who need not be
a member, or
members, of the corporation), nominated by the lessee to hold one, two or all of
the offices of presiding officer, treasurer
and secretary.
(6) The presiding officer, treasurer and secretary must be appointed for a
term that expires at or before the next annual general
meeting of the
corporation.
(7) The office of a
person appointed under this section becomes vacant if he or she—
(a) dies; or
(b) completes his or her term of office and is not reappointed; or
(c) in the case of a person who was a member of the corporation when he or
she was appointed to the office—ceases to be a member
of the corporation;
(d) in the case of a person appointed by a body corporate that is a member of
the corporation to attend and vote at meetings—ceases
to hold that
appointment; or
(e) resigns by written notice to the secretary or, in the case of the
secretary, to the presiding officer; or
(f) becomes bankrupt or applies to take the benefit of a law for the relief
of insolvent debtors; or
(g) is convicted of an indictable offence or sentenced to imprisonment for an
offence; or
(h) is removed from
office by special resolution of the corporation.
(8) A resolution referred to in
subsection (7)(h)
can only be passed on one or more of the following grounds—
(a) misconduct;
(b) neglect of duty;
(c) incapacity or failure to carry out satisfactorily the duties of the
(9) A community corporation may appoint or engage a person to assist the
presiding officer, treasurer or secretary.
Division 3 of Part 9
Sections 90,
92 and 95 are within Division 3 of Part 9. It is necessary to give
attention to the terms of several sections within
Division 3 of the CT
provides that a community corporation may, but is not obliged to, establish a
management committee provided that such
a committee is established by ordinary
resolution of the corporation. Section 90 further provides that members must be
natural persons
and must include the Presiding Officer, the Treasurer and the
Secretary of the corporation.
establishes the functions and powers of the management committee. It
92—Functions
and powers of committees
(1) Subject to any limitations imposed by the corporation, it is the
function of a management committee to carry out the functions
and perform the
duties of the corporation within the limits of the committee's powers.
(2) Subject to this Act and to any limitations imposed by the corporation or
by the by‑laws of the community scheme, a management
committee has full
power to transact any business of the corporation.
(3) A committee cannot delegate its functions or powers but a community
corporation may appoint or engage a person to assist the
committee in the
performance of the committee's functions.
(4) A committee does not have power to do anything for which a special or
unanimous resolution of the corporation is required.
provides for the convening of a management committee meeting. It
93—Convening
of committee meetings
(1) A meeting of a management committee may be convened by the presiding
officer, treasurer or secretary of the corporation or by
any two members of the
(2) A meeting is convened by giving written notice of the day, time and place
of the meeting to all members of the committee at least
three days before the
date of the meeting.
(3) The day, time and place of the meeting must be reasonably convenient to a
majority of the members of the committee.
(4) The notice convening a meeting must set out the agenda for the
provides for the procedure at meetings. It
94—Procedure at committee meetings
(1) The presiding officer will preside at committee meetings but in his or
her absence the members present may appoint a member to
preside at that
(2) The quorum for the transaction of business at a committee meeting is
determined by dividing the number of members of the committee
disregarding any fraction and adding one.
(3) A decision supported by a majority of the members present at a management
committee meeting is a decision of the committee.
(4) A member of a committee may appoint another person to act as his or her
proxy at a committee meeting that the member is unable
(5) The person appointed must, if each of the community lots is used, or is
intended to be used, solely or predominantly for residential
purposes, be
another member of the committee or a member of the community corporation.
(6) A decision is made by a committee without meeting if—
(a) written notice setting out the proposed decision is served on every member
of the committee; and
(b) within seven days after the notice is served on all members of the committee
a majority of the members give written notice to
the secretary setting out the
proposed decision and expressing their agreement with it.
(7) A management committee must cause accurate minutes to be kept of
proceedings at its meetings.
(8) Subject to this Act, the by-laws and to any direction of the community
corporation, a committee may regulate procedures at its
meetings as it thinks
then provides:
95—Disclosure of interest
(1) A member of a committee who has a direct or indirect pecuniary interest
in a matter under consideration by the committee—
(a) must disclose the nature of the interest to the committee; and
(b) must not take part in any deliberations or decisions of the committee in
relation to that matter.
Maximum penalty: $15 000.
(2) It is a defence to a charge of an offence against subsection (1) to prove
that the defendant was not, at the time of the alleged
offence, aware of his or
her interest in the matter.
(3) A disclosure under this section must be recorded in the minutes of the
(4) In this section—
pecuniary interest
of a member of a committee does not include
an interest arising solely from the fact that the member is also a member of the
corporation
Further discussion
find that at the meeting on 1 July 2020, Messrs Smith and
Pattinson, on behalf of Eklipse, did not disclose that they had a pecuniary
interest in, at least, the Letting Agreement the subject of a motion at that
meeting. Messrs Smith and Pattinson had a pecuniary
interest in at least
the Letting Agreements. As mentioned above, Eklipse was to be paid based upon
the number of letting appointments
provided to RPM. That there was no
disclosure of that is obvious from the Minutes. However, in the context of the
pleadings of
the second respondent, the second respondent seeks to establish
that the meeting on 1 July 2020 was one to which s 95(1) applied.
accept that the Minutes may not support, in some respects, that it was a
management committee meeting. As mentioned, the Minutes
refer to s 76.
Further, aspects of Division 3 may not have been the subject of compliance. At
the same time, as mentioned, the
Minutes also refer to s 90. Section 93 of
the CT Act provides for how a meeting of the management committee may be
convened. There
is no express reference in the Minutes to such a meeting being
convened and given that, at best for the second respondent, the management
committee was formed the same day, the process for convening such a meeting set
out in s 93 was not followed. In addition, the Minutes
refer to it being
an ‘Inaugural General Meeting’.
the same time, s 90(1) was referred to in the Minutes and the Minutes are
strongly suggestive of a management committee having
been established given the
reference to the Corporation Manager having given certain advice. There would
be no need to refer to
a management committee if one had not been created.
characterisation of the meeting is attended by several difficulties. The
meeting has features of a first statutory meeting as
office holders were
However, as
mentioned, such characterisation cannot accommodate there not being two
different members of the community
corporation.
The meeting has
features of a management committee meeting. The Presiding Officer, the
Treasurer and Secretary of the corporation
s 90 is expressly
referred to in the Minutes; there is also reference within the Minutes to the
Corporation Manager providing advice
have the power to do.
same time, the procedure for convening such a meeting was not the subject of
and a Presiding
Officer; Treasurer and Secretary were appointed at the meeting and that may
occur outside of a management committee
do not overlook that it is not essential that the meeting be characterised as
being either the first statutory meeting or a management
committee meeting. I
do not overlook the possibility of it being neither. However, I find that this
meeting was a management committee
meeting. I do so because of the features of
such a meeting outlined immediately above. It follows that
Messrs Pattinson and Smith
breached s 95 of the CT Act.
follows that the applicant may seek relief under s 142 of the CT Act on the
ground of a breach of the Act. However, even if I
am wrong that s 95 of
the Act was breached, for reasons to be given, that breach does not entitle the
contracts to be rescinded pursuant
to s 142 of the Act. Before further
considering that, I turn to whether Eklipse breached its fiduciary duty and/or
whether Eklipse
breached the statutory duty in s 142B of the CT Act (
statutory duty
). I do so as even if the meeting on 1 July 2020 was neither
the first statutory meeting nor a management committee meeting, there
doubt about the following. Eklipse owed both a fiduciary duty to the HRC and
the statutory duty pursuant to s 142B of
the CT Act. If the statutory duty was
breached, s 142B provides the remedies in s 142 of the CT Act may be available
of how the meeting on 1 July 2020 is properly characterised. It
follows that, if the statutory duty was breached, how the meeting
on 1 July 2020
is characterised is not material to whether s 142 may provide the statutory
remedies for which the second respondent
contends. Further, as will be seen, s
142(18) does not limit the potential remedies for a breach of fiduciary duty or
for the payment
of a secret commission to those set out within s 142.
The statutory duty –
s 142B of the CT Act
mentioned, the Caretaking Agreements and Letting Agreements are contracts for
services. The CT Act contemplates that a developer
which holds all the lots of
a community corporation, such as Eklipse, will enter contracts for services.
Section 142B
of the CT Act provides:
142B—Developer stands in fiduciary
relationship with community corporation
(1) For the avoidance of doubt—
(a) the developer stands in a fiduciary relationship with the community
corporation and, before the community corporation is established,
proposed community corporation; and
(b) the duties owed by the developer under this Act are in addition to, and do
not derogate from, the duties arising out of that
fiduciary relationship.
(2) Without derogating from subsection (1), where the community corporation
intends, during the developer control period, to delegate
functions or powers to
a body corporate manager or to enter into a contract for services, the developer
must exercise reasonable
skill, care and diligence and act in the best interests
of the community corporation (as it will be constituted after the developer
control period ends).
Explanatory Note—
An application may be made under section 142 if the developer contravenes
this subsection.
(3) In this section—
developer control period
means a period during which—
(a) the community corporation is constituted solely by the developer; or
(b) the developer owns the majority of lots in the community scheme or in any
other way controls the voting of the corporation.
second respondent contends that Eklipse breached the statutory duty. On that
premise, the second respondent further contends
that it is entitled to an order
terminating the contracts either pursuant to s 142 of the CT Act or at law
or in equity.
turning to whether Eklipse breached its fiduciary duty or the statutory duty
– and the remedies available with respect
to any such breach – it is
necessary to set out in greater detail what occurred during the process of
negotiations with respect
to the Letting Agreements and Caretaking Agreements.
Further background to the entry
into the agreements
The initial involvement of Imagine Hotels and
Resorts before RPM
is no dispute that before RPM became involved in any negotiations with respect
to agreements relating to the Realm Building,
Eklipse had been engaged in
negotiations with Imagine with a view to Imagine being approved as the letting
agent and caretaker for
the Realm Building. Imagine operated serviced
apartments and, at all relevant times, Mr Song knew that Imagine operated a
business model to that of RPM (or CLIIX). That is, a business model
with a specific focus upon short-term
the negotiations with Imagine, and later with RPM, Eklipse was represented by
solicitors, Lynch Meyer. Imagine was represented
by its solicitors, Mahoneys.
By no later than 30 March 2020, the negotiations between Eklipse and
Imagine had reached the stage
of draft Letting, Caretaking and Procurement
Agreements being proposed.
the agreements the subject of these proceedings, those draft Caretaking
Agreements and draft Letting Agreements provided for,
in effect, four automatic
renewals of the initial five-year agreement, each renewal for a period of five
Also, by no later than
30 March 2020, Mahoneys had prepared and sent to Lynch Meyer draft
suggested motions for the ‘inaugural
EGMs’ with respect to the entry
into the Letting and Caretaking Agreements by all community corporations within
the Realm Building.
am also satisfied that, by no later than 25 March 2020 and before RPM
became involved in any discussion about by-laws, the indicative
by-laws and what
became the existing by-laws had been the subject of discussion and/or
negotiations between Lynch Meyer and Mahoneys.
On 25 March 2020,
Mr Appleyard of Lynch Meyer sent an email to Mahoneys in which Mr Appleyard
attached marked‑up copies of
the indicative by‑laws for the LRC and
the HRC. The marked-up copies of both sets of indicative by-laws drew a line
substantial aspects of the indicative by-law 28 and made other
amendments which matched the existing by-laws as later deposited with
Registrar-General. Within the email to Mahoneys dated 25 March 2020,
Mr Appleyard gave an explanation about why the amendments
to the indicative
by-laws had been made. That email made clear that the indicative by-laws had
been marked-up with changes to permit
short-term letting because the intention
of Imagine was to conduct short-term letting. Mr Appleyard
your consideration, we have left the documentation in mark-up format to reflect
the changes of relevance to your clients
[sic] proposed operations ....
marked-up by-laws attached to the above email were also marked-up with
amendments providing for the corporation to enter into
an agreement with a
caretaker and an agreement with a letting
with the above, and given the draft motions sent on 30 March 2020 to
Lynch Meyer by Mahoneys, Imagine was, at least in
its view, still involved in
negotiations with respect to the Realm Building on 30 March 2020. I
mention this as although Imagine
was still corresponding with Lynch Meyer on
30 March 2020, as will be seen, Mr Song of RPM had been
approached before 30 March 2020.
There is no direct evidence from
Imagine, Mahoneys, UA or Eklipse as to why Imagine ceased negotiations,
including that, to my understanding,
there is no written communication from
Imagine or Mahoneys on that issue.
the evidence, I cannot find that Imagine ceased negotiations because of any
concern about the legality of any amendment to the
indicative by-laws to
accommodate its business model or because of any concern about the legality of
draft agreements negotiated
at the time Imagine ceased negotiations. That is so
for two reasons. First, it is insufficient in the evidence, if there is indeed
anything, which permits an inference that Imagine had expressed such a concern.
As mentioned, the marked-up by-laws were sent on
25 March 2020, and
negotiations were continuing five days later. Further, as mentioned, there is
no written communication, or other
direct evidence, about why those negotiations
came to an end. Second, I cannot exclude that Imagine may have withdrawn from
negotiations
because of the COVID‑19 pandemic and the anticipated impact
upon travel and short-term letting. It is not disputed that on
20 March 2020 the Australian government banned incoming travel for
non‑residents and, on 25 March 2020, substantially banned
outgoing travel. Travel within Australia was restricted, with the South
Australian border being closed to non‑essential
interstate travel from
24 March 2020.
involvement of Mr Song and RPM
is the chief executive officer of Song Properties Pty Ltd, trading as CLIIX
Apartments and Hotels (formerly Arise Hotels
and Apartments (
mentioned, Mr Song is the sole director and secretary of the first
applicant, RPM. RPM is a wholly owned subsidiary of Arise.
through Mr Song, did not become involved in the Realm Building until about
26 March 2020. On about 26 March 2020, Mr George
letting services in the Realm Building. The evidence
of Mr Song included
that Mr George put to him
developer of the Realm building was Eklipse; Eklipse was offering a rental yield
guarantee of 5% to purchasers who bought for
investment purposes and would be
renting out their apartment, which meant that professional management services
were required for
the building. Under the terms of the rental guarantee,
purchasers were required to appoint Eklipse’s nominated agent to arrange
and manage the letting of their apartments; the purchasers were often based
overseas in particular in Hong Kong as there had been
sales efforts focused on
the Chinese market; Eklipse had reached an agreement with Imagine for the
provision of management and letting
services in respect of the Realm building,
but Imagine was looking to pull out of the deal because of the impact of COVID
such that Imagine was concerned that it would make significant losses
as a result of taking responsibility for rental guarantees
that had been given
to purchasers of units by Eklipse; and there was urgency to the situation as the
building was nearing completion.
and RPM were experienced operators in the short-term letting business and
caretaking business interstate. Mr Song and RPM
had not previously been
involved in caretaking and letting agreements in South Australia. Nevertheless,
I accept that what was proposed
was a transaction like that previously
negotiated by Mr Song and RPM in other buildings in other states. That is, the
acquisition
of property management appointments and assistance from the
developer in providing such appointments (e.g. – through rent roll
information and restraints upon the developer or its agents competing for such
appointments) combined with entry into the letting
and caretaking agreements
with the owners’
corporations.
been approached by Mr George, Mr Song acted quickly. By no later than
27 March 2020, Mr Song had engaged his solicitors,
Pevy Lawyers,
to provide advice. It must be that by no later than 27 March 2020
Mr Song had been provided with a copy of a draft
Procurement Agreement as,
towards the end of that day, Mr Pevy of Pevy Lawyers provided advice
by email with respect to a draft of
that agreement.
1 April 2020, Mr George sent Mr Song several documents by
email which included documents that had been the subject of negotiations
Imagine. They included the indicative by-laws but with the tracked amendments
to by‑laws 28, 45 and 46; and draft Letting
and Caretaking
Agreements. In evidence I have not rejected, given that Mr Song was likely
dealing with the COVID‑19 pandemic
and as he had engaged
Pevy Lawyers, Mr Song says that he did not read the documents
Nevertheless,
Mr Song did comment on what his view would have been had the indicative
by-laws been in place. In evidence I accept,
at least because long-term letting
is not a focus of the business of RPM, Mr Song said he would not have been
interested in entering
contracts with respect to the Realm Building had the
indicative by-laws become the existing
is no dispute that Mr Song sent the documents received on
1 April 2020 to Mr Pevy to review.
of 1 April 2020, the terms being negotiated between Mr George and
Mr Song with respect to a Procurement Agreement was consideration
upon $22,000 per short‑term letting appointment and $6,000 per each
long‑term letting appointment with a minimum
payment of $1,500,000. UA
was to be responsible for the management of leases and have responsibility for
rental guarantees for the
first 12 months.
3 April 2020, Mr Pevy forwarded to Mr Song a marked-up copy
of the draft Procurement Agreement. An aspect of the redrafting done
Mr Pevy was to include that the procurement sum was based on a payment of
$22,000 (inclusive of GST) for each letting appointment
which was defined to be
‘an appointment of RPM by an owner as agent to let out the owner’s
on a short-term
7 April 2020, in an email to Mr Song, Mr George provided
comments on the suggested re-drafting which included ‘Letting
delete reference to short term
Mr Song and Mr George must have discussed the email as, later the same
day, Mr Song replied by email ‘Refer [sic] our phone
conversation...’ attaching Mr George’s email of 7 April
and commenting within that email that, contrary to the aspect
of the email of
Mr George about deleting reference to ‘short-term basis’,
‘We need to have the short term in there
as we [sic] paying for short term
the same day, Mr George sent to Mr Song a draft proforma document
headed ‘Rental Guarantee Agreement’, which was
six pages in length,
and another draft proforma document headed ‘Property Management Agreement
– Realm Adelaide –
Long term tenancies’, which was five pages
Mr Song forwarded
the email and other documents to Mr Pevy later that day.
the proforma Rental Guarantee Agreement, cl 3 provided that as the vendor,
Eklipse was to guarantee an annual rental return
of 5 per cent of the
purchase price, payable in equal monthly instalments across a 24-month period
from 90 days after settlement.
The guaranteed amount was payable on the
condition that the purchaser appointed the vendor’s nominated agent to
secure a tenant
under a lease in terms set out in cl 6.2. The terms within
cl 6.2 are not consistent with the sorts of terms that would be appropriate
in the case of short‑term letting. As set out above, the proforma
Property Management Appointment included the heading ‘Long
tenancies’.
9 April 2020, Mr George emailed Mr Song with changes to the
draft Procurement Agreement as it existed at that time. Within the
Mr George wrote that ‘Key bits are
references to short term
...’ and that in the definition of Letting Appointment he had
deleted reference to ‘
immediately forwarded that email to Mr Pevy. Mr Pevy replied to Mr
Song by email later that day. Among other things, the
advice of Mr Pevy
was that reference to ‘
short term letting is essential
what the [procurement sum] is based on’ and that the deletion of reference
to ‘short term basis’ in
the definition of Letting Appointment
‘can’t work for the reasons noted [earlier in the
The zoom teleconference on 9 April
the above emails, Mr Pattinson suggested a teleconference to ‘clarify
items rather than going round in
teleconference was held later that day. The participants were Mr Song,
Mr Pevy and Mr Pattinson.
find that whether short-term letting was to be referred to in the Procurement
Agreement was discussed in the teleconference given
the emails just mentioned
and as, following that teleconference, Mr Pevy emailed
to the teleconference, I’ll make some further amendments to the contract
remove the references/concepts concerning short term
(emphasis added)
Song did not admit in his evidence that removing reference to short-term letting
from the Procurement Agreement was discussed
in the meeting on
9 April 2020. Mr Song said about what was
recall there was a Zoom call around that time, was between all of us.
you say 'all of us', Kelsey Huebner wasn't on the call, was she.
she wasn't. I think Trent Pevy, Anthony, yeah, Trent Pevy, Anthony, Matt, me,
the most and we had to discuss all the critical
points, which is rental
guaranteed starting time, who is covering rental guaranteed starting time, who
is actually paying for what
and then because of COVID, because of COVID, I'm not
able to actually take short-term letting, there's no business for short-term
letting. I'm not able to take the letting from it. Eklipse was worry, Eklipse
would worry about, you know, matters of Urban Activation,
if they only paying
long-term agency and they only know how to manage long-term rental
Nevertheless,
Mr Song was aware that short-term letting would not appear in the
Procurement Agreement because of the communication
from Pevy Lawyers to which I
have just referred.
Events after
9 April 2020
10 April 2020, Mr Pattinson emailed the Scheme Descriptions for
each of the Primary, Secondary and two Tertiary Schemes and the
Development
Approval to Mr Pevy. The Scheme Descriptions provided at cl 2.1 and
cl 2.2 that the lots could only be used for ‘residential
(including residential serviced apartments) and ... common property and car
parking subsidiaries’.
The Development Approval contained within the draft Scheme Description for what
became the HRC that the nature of the development
was the division of one
allotment into two community strata allotments for ‘residential
earlier set out, the Letting Agreements and Caretaking Agreements were entered
into for terms of, in effect, 25 years. On 10
April 2020,
Mr Pattinson communicated with Mr Pevy about that and copied to him
legal advice Mr Pattinson had received from Lynch
Meyer about s 142B
of the CT Act. That email was as
This is one the reasons we a (sic) must act carefully in particular stating
upfront 25 year term (even though it essentially is but
eh (sic) manger (sic)
can be terminated prior to the full 25 year term. The current Motions already
email (sic) to you have not
be (sic) vetted as yet and are subject to
To overcome this position our legal advice is noted in the last 2 items.
COMMUNITY TITLES ACT 1996
142B—Developer stands in fiduciary relationship with community
corporation
(1) For the avoidance of doubt—
(a) the developer stands in a fiduciary relationship with the community
corporation and, before the community corporation is established,
proposed community corporation; and
(b) the duties owed by the developer under this Act are in addition to, and do
not derogate from, the duties arising out of that
fiduciary relationship.
(2) Without derogating from subsection (1), where the community corporation
intends, during the developer control period, to delegate
functions or powers to
a body corporate manager or to enter into a contract for services, the developer
must exercise reasonable
skill, care and diligence and act in the best interests
of the community corporation (as it will be constituted after the developer
control period ends).
An application may be made under section 142 if the developer contravenes
this subsection.
(3) In this section—
"developer control period" means a period during which—
(a) the community corporation is constituted solely by the developer; or
(b) the developer owns the majority of lots in the community scheme or in any
other way controls the voting of the corporation.
You may have formed the view that in (sic) to maintain the high standards of
the development and expectations of purchasers
it is necessary
to enter into such Agreements with an experienced operator for the ongoing
benefit of the proposed Corporations, and
that the Corporations are otherwise
entitled to determine the Agreements if the Caretaker fails to remedy breaches
(as in Clause
9 you adverted to), and
as experienced
developers have exercised reasonable skill, care and diligence in your judgement
of entering the agreements.
on 10 April 2020, UA provided several documents to Mr Pevy for the
purposes of conducting due diligence. An attempt was made
to address the email
to Mr Song, but his email address was misspelt. I do not find that
Mr Song received the email and its attachments.
11 April 2020 at 9.52am, Mr Song emailed Mr Pevy and
instructed him to attend to due diligence. Mr Song stated in that
only project we properly want at Adelaide at this stage. Even we risk ourselves
a bit. We do have buyers [sic] information
and if we can made [sic] the
workable areas for our use only. And make sure Brett can’t be in the
building in any form then
I think we are ok with take (sic) the risk as long as
we can get 68 or 100 letting appointments.
11 April 2020 at 2.32pm, Mr Pevy emailed a solicitor within his
firm, Ms Huebner. Ms Huebner was also engaged in work for RPM.
Mr Pevy stated in his email to
Ms Huebner:
By-laws going to be crucial. PLs (sic) keep an eye out for any
possible restrictions on conducting a short term letting operation.
In summary, Michael wants to buy this and is happy to take risks to achieve
this. So we need to cover backsides to protect us in
the likely event he goes
ahead even though we might not be 100% onboard.
The Due Diligence Report
15 April 2020, Pevy Lawyers provided Mr Song with a legal due
diligence report (
the Due Diligence
In the opening
‘Disclaimer’ section of the Due Diligence Report, the first
applicant emphasises that the following points
report had been prepared for RPM as purchaser of the proposed off the plan
management rights business in the Realm building;
purpose of the report was said to be to draw the client’s attention to
matters of a material nature that relate to the business,
and which may
influence the decision as to whether to proceed with the purchase but with a
focus on issues which might impact upon
the operation of the business and its
eventual sale;
general nature of the risks to such a business were adverted to;
advice was given in relation to planning permits of the building or the
management rights business;
advice was given in relation to the viability of the long-term make-up and size
of the letting pool.
first applicant also places emphasis upon the following risks identified in the
Due Diligence Report:
risk that market reviews of salary under the caretaking agreements could see
revenue decrease;
the obligations under the caretaking agreements as to staffing could become
onerous if short term letting were not able to commence
in the future;
risk that owners might band together and seek to pass resolutions to have the
effect of reversing previous decisions of the community
corporations to enter
into agreements with RPM;
recommendation that Mr Song might consider purchasing property in the building
to better protect his rights in the event of adverse
conduct by the
corporations;
the by-laws might be changed adversely to RPM;
the sample property management agreements contemplated a structure whereby
properties would be leased long-term to an associate
of the manager, who would
then sub-let or sub-license the properties for short-term usage, and queried
whether this structure was
the most efficient from a tax and accounting
perspective.
first applicant submits there is nothing in the Due Diligence Report to suggest
that there was ‘anything possibly untoward
with the transaction as regards
the acquisition of property management appointments and associated [L]etting and
[C]aretaking [A]greements
pursuant to the proposed [P]rocurement
[A]greement’.
applicant submits that there is nothing in the Due Diligence Report to suggest
that Eklipse was in breach of a fiduciary
or other duty, or that there might be
a dishonest and fraudulent design at play. That being so, the first applicant
submits that
Mr Song had no reason to consider that there might have been a
breach of fiduciary or other duty and no reason to consider that there
fraudulent or dishonest design on behalf of Eklipse.
the ‘Summary of Findings’ section, the opening statement of the Due
Diligence Report states:
Subject to the qualifications set out in this report, our report
has identified no issues or defects in title which we believe would
cause you to
reconsider your proposed purchase.
said that this was the advice that mattered to him and that he did not read any
further and it, in effect, gave him the comfort
Report at page 4 referred to legislative protections for community
corporations to set aside some contractul arrangements, either
because that
contract arose via a developer during the developer control period or because
the contract amounted to a particular
kind of delegation. It also referred to a
right for community corporations to reverse resolutions under s 89 of the
this context, the Due Diligence Report advised that there was a
genuine risk that a lot owner could try to mobilise support amongst
other owners
for setting aside a management rights arrangement merely by ordinary resolution,
something which highlighted the importance
in having owners on-side and
supportive of the services provided by RPM and the value they offered. The
Report went on to explain
that that risk placed a significant concern on the
value of agreements given the uncertainty of their term. The Report further
that uncertainty could affect or reduce value on resale, unlike the
position in Queensland and Victoria.
accepted in cross-examination that, while he had no recollection, it was
possible that his solicitors may have raised with
him a concern about the
possibility of the Caretaking Agreement and Letting Agreements being
terminated.
However, he
expressly rejected that the risk of termination was to do with the length of the
agreements and said the only risks
he could recall being raised was the
commercial risk and that lay in the fact that RPM may not do a good
Report noted at page 5 that the solicitors had reviewed proposed by-laws with
tracked amendments for the four community corporations.
was observed at page 12 that the termination provisions in cl 9 of the
Caretaking Agreements were commercial and standard for
management rights
arrangements, but it was also suggested that, under s 142B of the CT Act,
the agreements would constitute a contract
for services under the developer
control period and that an application could be made under s 142 if there
was a concern the developer
had contravened the legislative requirements under
s 142B to act in the best interests of the community corporation in putting
place the Caretaking and Letting Agreement arrangements. I pause to observe
that there is a dispute between the parties about whether
that is correct.
Report noted at page 13 that the effect of cl 4.2 of the Letting
Agreement was that RPM could ‘carry on a letting business
for permanent,
short term and holiday letting in the
development’.
applicant emphasises that there was no suggestion in the Report that this
precluded short-term letting for less than two
months and submits that what
later appears in the Report at page 16 is to the contrary.
Report noted at page 14 that lot owners were free to engage external agents
to let their lots and this was confirmed by cl 4.6
of the Letting
noted at page 5 that the solicitors had reviewed the by-laws with tracked
amendments which were proposed for the four community
corporations, the Report
went on at pages 15 and 16 to expressly address the by-laws of the Secondary and
Tertiary Schemes and stated
that ‘they are relatively standard and do not
contain anything unusual’ and that they were ‘consistent with what
prudent management rights purchaser would expect to
nonetheless noted that they could be changed at any time by a special resolution
at a general meeting or by way of a
court order. The Report said at page 16
that the draft by-law 28.1 confirms that the tertiary lots may only be used
for residential
accommodation ‘which includes letting for permanent or
short-term and serviced apartments, which is consistent with your intended
operations in Low Rise and
High-Rise’.
page 16, the Report drew specific attention to five by-laws in particular
and added that RPM should be aware that, under s 37(2)
of the CT Act, the
corporation could resolve to put in place a by-law ‘restricting letting
operations of less than two months
by way of special resolution’ as a
result of which RPM was to be cautious of any proposed amendment to the by-laws
ready to counter any such motion put forward at a general
Report at pages 17 and 18 also gave advice about existing rental guarantee
agreements associated with property management appointments.
It was noted
It is a term
of the rent guarantee that the lot owner must enter into an agreement with the
developer’s chosen agent. We understand
this will not be your entity to
begin with. Rather the developer will approach lot owners to appoint your
entity at some time in
the future when it is expected you will take on the
liability for the rent guarantee.
a result, it was suggested that when lot owners were approached, they should be
given a hybrid proposal which included a facility
for both permanent letting and
short-term letting. It was said that the solicitors were ‘comfortable
with you looking to take
on the liability of the arrangement when you are
confident that trading conditions will allow you to generate returns in excess
the rental guarantee
Report also noted that the sample property management agreement of Imagine made
no mention of short-term letting but did make
provision for the owner to enter
into a long-term tenancy agreement and for the lessee then to have the right to
sub-let out the
apartment for short-term or permanent stays.
its part, the second respondent places emphasis upon the following aspects of
the Due Diligence Report. Some, but not all, have
already been outlined
was noted to be a ‘genuine risk here that a lot owner could try and
mobilise support amongst other owners for setting
aside the arrangement,’
and that relatedly, ‘an application can be made under section 142 if there
is a concern the developer
has contravened their legislative requirements under
section 142B to act in the best interests of the community corporation in
in place the caretaking and letting agreement arrangements.’
was recommended that RPM protects its investment by obtaining freehold ownership
over real estate in the scheme to the areas which
would otherwise be common
holder investors had been entering into Property Management Agreements, which
only permitted long term letting and that there
would be a need to convert them
into short term letting appointments.
by-laws are capable of amendment to restrict or eliminate short-term
15 April 2020, Mr Song discussed the Due Diligence Report with
Pevy Lawyers. Pevy Lawyers prepared the following file note of
telephone discussion with
to Michael and we raised our concerns arising from the legal due diligence in
relation to the legislation under
sections 75
Titles Act 1996
(SA) allowing the Community Corporations to terminate the
caretaking and letting agreements for the four schemes by pursuing an
application
section 142
or passing an ordinary resolution and that the
protection mechanisms in SA are not as good as Victoria and definitely not as
as those in QLD.
Given Michael is not purchasing any real estate, we consider it would be
prudent for Michael to own a lot in the Community Corporations
or to own a
retail lot in the complex to shore up and protect his operation of his letting
business if the agreements were terminated
in the future. Michael understands
the risks associated with the termination of the agreements and will consider
looking into obtaining
a retail lot, although it doesn’t appear it is
likely the developer will sell a retail lot to him for his use.
Michael still wishes to proceed with the purchase irrespective of the risks
raised in the legal due diligence report and also raised
with him by phone.
said about the Due Diligence Report that the advice that mattered to him was
that Pevy Lawyers had identified no issues or
defects in title which it
believed would cause him to reconsider the proposed
this document I browsed through, I didn't read line by line. I read -
particularly I remember I read the 'Summary of Findings',
especially the third
paragraph. After that I basically - where is the 'Summary of Findings'? Yeah, I
read - if you go to... 'Summary
of Findings', I read the first two paragraph,
'Subject to the qualification set out in this report, our report has identified
issue or defect in title which we believe would cause you to reconsider your
proposed purchase'. This, I remember this sentence
are you reading from.
is [the Summary of Findings at page 4 of the due diligence report].
and which -
of Findings'. I normally just go to 'Summary of Findings'.
What were you reading out then.
reading out 'Subject to the qualifications set out in this report, our report
has identified no issue or defects in title which
we believe would cause you to
reconsider your proposed purchase'.
in the witness box just selecting those words because you think it's helpful to
your case. I want to suggest to you that you
read the report and also that Mr
Pevy took you through the report. What do you say to that.
do this every single deal.
want to suggest to you that you are deliberately understating the extent to
which you read this due diligence report.
said I browsed through but I'm not understating, that I don't go line by line.
Yes, I may have read - this is about four, five
years ago, but basically in my
mind I knew, after that, you know, I know all the lawyers as well, all lawyers
want to protect themself
as well. So, but after I read that particular
sentence, I'll be relaxed and that's in my mind.
the content of the file note dated 15 April 2020, I find that
Pevy Lawyers discussed with Mr Song the key aspects of the following
part of the
(c) there are legislative protections for community corporations to set aside
some contract arrangements either because that contract
arose via a developer
doing so during the developer control period or because the contract amounts to
a delegation of the community
corporation’s powers to administer common
property and the like. There is also an overarching right for community
corporations
to reverse resolutions under
Community Titles
Accordingly, there is a genuine risk here that a lot owner could try and
mobilise support amongst other owners for setting aside the
arrangement. In
most instances, this would require an ordinary resolution at general meeting.
This is a risk for most South Australian
management rights arrangements,
especially those acquired ‘off the plan’ from a developer, and
highlights the importance
in having owners onside and supportive of the services
provided by you and the value they offer.
As discussed
, the right for a
community corporation to set aside long term contracts such as these places a
significant concern on the value of
the agreements given the uncertainty of
their term. This could mean value on resale could be significantly less than
especially when compared to what can be achieved for equivalent
agreements in say the Queensland or Victorian jurisdictions. This
given strong consideration by you before proceeding.
Another factor to consider in contemplating the above is that your rights to
common property all extend from the caretaking and letting
agreements. The best
protection for your investment would be by way of freehold ownership over real
estate in the scheme. This
would enable you to continue to operate your letting
business even if the caretaking and/or letting agreements with the community
corporation were terminated.
(emphasis added)
gave the following evidence:
discussed the right for a community corporation to set aside a long-term
contract such as these places a significant concern on
the value of the
agreements given the uncertainty of their term’. First of all, did you
read that particular passage from
the due diligence report, Mr Song.
don't have any recollection of reading that.
paragraph refers to a discussion and I want to suggest that that was a matter
that was discussed prior to you being provided with
a copy of the due diligence
report; do you agree with me.
can't remember, I don't have any recollection.
again, we've got Pevy Lawyers who are the experts in this area, would you not
remember a discussion which you had about a concern
which they had concerning
the length of the agreement.
not their concern, yeah, given I said to you in the first paragraph of the
summary of the finding and after I read that I don't
think there is any
Duggan wasn't asking you whether you read those words. He was directing your
attention to the reference 'As discussed', and suggesting
that those words
reflect there had been a discussion about the topic.
may have been, but it's that long I can't - I really can't remember what's been
given the consequences of the letting agreement and caretaking agreement being
set aside, the effect of that would be to bring
an end to your business; do you
agree with that.
end to your letting pool business. If they were set aside then that is
something that would bring an end to your business.
think what he mean is more like on the commercial side, yeah. So, if you're
just reading that sentence, yes.
that would be of real concern; in other words, that that was a major issue for
you if there was a risk that they could be set
aside; do you agree with
said earlier, any business there is a risk and then there's a lot of - I pay
more attention, I pay attention on the commercial
risk. Anybody can do - if any
- any company I know that we will perform our duty in a good standard, yeah,
hence why that I don't
- yeah, I only consider in the commercial side of the
risk, yeah.
effect of your evidence is simply that you don't recall this discussion and what
I'm suggesting is that given the nature of the
matter that it's the type of
thing that you would remember given the consequence it would have on your
I said, I don't, I don't remember there was a discussion, yeah,
para.9, in the last sentence you say 'As noted in my third affidavit, as a
result of my experience with these agreements, I consider
that the transactions
entered into in relation to the Realm building were lawful and appropriate and
nothing was brought to my attention
during my dealings with the Realm apartments
that led me to doubt this position'. I want to suggest to you that, in fact,
Pevy Lawyers
did bring to your attention the fact that they were concerned about
the length of the letting and caretaking agreements and that
there might be
valid grounds to terminate those agreements, do you agree with that.
Commercially
if I don't do a good job, yeah, there's a risk. But, no, I don't
Mr Song was aware of a risk of
the agreements being set aside
find that Mr Song was aware in April 2020 that there was a risk of the
agreements being set aside due to their length and/or due
to the passing of a
valid resolution by a community corporation.
the extent that Mr Song suggested that the only risk contemplated was the
risk of termination because of the quality of the work
performed, I cannot
accept that evidence. First, given the reference to ‘As discussed’
within the Report and extracted
above, I find that, before being provided with
the Due Diligence Report, Pevy Lawyers had raised with Mr Song that a
community corporation
might be able to set aside contracts of this type.
Second, the advice provided in the Report was comprehensive. Given that
Mr Pattinson
had emailed Mr Pevy in the terms he did on
10 April 2020, it is more likely than not that Mr Pevy raised the
effect of that email
with Mr Song. Indeed, it is likely that email
prompted the discussion referred to in the Report. Third, although in the
of the by-laws, the email of Mr Pevy to Ms Huebner on
11 April 2020 is demonstrative of Mr Pevy being mindful that
Mr Song might
take a risk which was imprudent. In such circumstances, it
is more likely than not that Mr Pevy would have taken steps to ensure
Mr Song could not say he had not been told of the risk of agreements being
able to be terminated due to their length, and/or
as the result of a valid
resolution.
Nevertheless,
I am not able to reject the evidence of Mr Song that he believed that the
Caretaking Agreements and Letting Agreements
were lawful. There was nothing in
the Due Diligence Report to suggest the contrary. What was raised with him were
that there were
risks that included the by-laws being amended by a community
corporation and of contracts entered during the developer control period
set aside. For Mr Song to be appraised of risks of those types is
materially different to him being told that the agreements
were unlawful or that
they might involve Eklipse breaching a fiduciary or statutory duty. That does
not appear in the Report, any
email or file note. I do not find that
Mr Song was told any such thing. There is a material difference between
Mr Song being told
of the risks identified in the Report and Mr Song
contemplating that anything was unlawful or otherwise improper. I cannot infer
that Mr Song contemplated anything beyond the risks which I have
identified. Relevant in this context is that he was being given
legal advice
and the evidence of the terms of that legal advice.
Communications about the provision
of only indicative by-laws to purchasers
the negotiations between RPM and Eklipse, there is no dispute that Pevy Lawyers
became aware that purchasers may not be told
that the indicative by-laws were to
be amended.
17 April 2020, Ms Huebner emailed Mr Smith,
Mr Pattinson and Lynch Meyer requesting copies of ‘the latest
pro-forma lot
contract and disclosure issued to prospective
purchasers’.
day, Lynch Meyer emailed Mr Pevy and Ms Huebner a hyperlink to
download documents that had been provided to prospective
purchasers. Those
documents included the indicative Tertiary Strata by-laws and the indicative
Scheme Description.
identified the indicative by-laws were different to those after the suggested
amendments were implemented during the negotiations
with Imagine. Having
identified that, Ms Huebner was interested in ascertaining ‘when the
marked-up by-laws were disclosed
to lot owners (noting the by-laws accompanying
the lot disclosure are different to the marked-up by‑laws) ...’ and
Mr Pattinson, Mr Song and others about
22 April 2020, Lynch Meyer responded on behalf of Eklipse stating
that there was no obligation of disclosure to lot owners. Lynch
Contract documentation with a purchaser
included the
draft indicative Primary and Tertiary Scheme Documentation (including bylaws)
provides for the
vendor/developer to make such changes as it elects to the Scheme Documentation
Description(s) had always included use as a serviced apartment
There is no statutory requirement to provide (varied) bylaws to a
purchaser and the obligation is to provide a copy of the scheme
description,
bylaws, and development contract filed by the Registrar General with the
deposited plan at the First Statutory General
Meeting (together with other
documentation as set out in the Act).
the first applicant submits, Lynch Meyer’s summary of the statutory
requirements was accurate. There is no obligation in
the CT Act to provide
varied by-laws to a purchaser who has received indicative by-laws.
effect of the evidence of Mr Song was that he could not recall Mr Pevy
going through the Lynch Meyer email with
Nevertheless, I find that
the email dated 22 April 2020 was discussed with Mr Song. On the
same day, Mr Pevy responded to Lynch
Meyer that ‘our client is
comfortable with the by-law matter based on your email
The inference I
draw is that Mr Pevy communicated that to Lynch Meyer because it reflected
his instructions. That email was copied
to Mr Song but whether he read it
is not crucial as I am satisfied Pevy Lawyers obtained Mr Song’s
instructions. As mentioned
above, Mr Pevy was concerned that the by-laws
be closely considered and that his firm ‘covered [its] backside’ in
event Mr Song entered into the agreements.
Mr Song was aware that the indicative by-laws differed to what became the
existing by-laws and that the later by-laws had not
been provided to purchasers
must be put in context of what else I am satisfied Mr Song knew. I infer
from the response of Mr Pevy
to Lynch Meyer that Mr Song was told of
the position of Lynch Meyer. I also infer that Mr Pevy did not seriously
question that position
when giving Mr Song advice. Had Mr Pevy done
so, it is more likely than not he would have made a record. There is no
evidence of
such a record. Again, this is significant. Mr Song was acting
on legal advice and I do not infer that Mr Pevy advised Mr Song that
there might have been reasons to doubt what Lynch Meyer had said. The
email of Lynch Meyer dated 22 April 2020 did not suggest that
there was any impropriety in the indicative by-laws being amended; any
obligation to provide amended by-laws to purchasers; nor impropriety
The initial Procurement
17 April 2020, RPM and Eklipse executed the initial Procurement
initial Procurement Agreement defined ‘Letting Appointment’
a valid letting
appointment between an Owner and the Manager whereby the Owner appoints the
Manager as its agent to let out the Owner’s
Lot on terms no less
favourable to the Manager than those set out in the agreement documenting the
Rental Guarantees
with what must have been discussed on 9 April 2020, there was no
explicit reference to short‑term letting.
respect to why consideration would be paid by RPM, and in my view importantly,
the initial Procurement Agreement set
The Developer
has agreed that in consideration of the Manager paying to the Developer the
amount shown in ITEM 6 of the Items Schedule
Procurement Sum
original and sole proprietor of all of the Lots, the Developer will cause the
Corporations at their first general meetings
to resolve to enter into with the
Manager and execute the relevant Caretaking Agreement and Letting Agreement.
Advice about planning
Due Diligence Report received by Mr Song on 15 April 2020 set out
that Pevy Lawyers had not made any investigations or comments
with respect
to planning permits for the Building or the classification of areas within it.
Report also noted that RPM was obtaining separate advice from planning experts.
That was, at least in part, a reference to
Mr Pevy having suggested on
11 April 2020 that Mr Song pass on planning documents which had
been provided by Mr Pattinson to Ms Gemma
Greenhalgh and seek her
advice ‘on the ability to run a short‑term letting operation so far
as town planning is
concerned’.
Greenhalgh emailed Mr Matthew Glossop of Glossop Town Planning
) the same day. On 11 April 2020, Ms Zhang of GTP
referred to having spoken with Mr Song and having advised him that if
engaged, advice could be provided by the next day. However, later the
same day, Ms Zhang emailed Mr Song and advised that he should
‘the proposed change of use with the previous planning consultant on this
identified that person as Mr Damian Dawson and provided his contact details.
said that he could not recall speaking to Ms Zhang. Mr Song denied
that he needed to consider a change of use so that he
could use the premises for
short‑term letting. Mr Song accepted that Ms Zhang must have
meant a change of use to short‑term
am satisfied that Mr Song had contact with Mr Dawson after
11 April 2020 and before 21 April 2020 as, on
21 April 2021, Mr Dawson
emailed Mr Song and referred to a
call with Mr Song ‘last week’ in relation to a change of use
from residential serviced
apartments to serviced/short-term stay apartments
within the RPM development.
email went on:
discussed the planning system in South Australia differentiates residential
apartments as being a different use than serviced apartments
or those that are
let out for short term stays (the use of private apartments for Air BnB is still
a grey area in Adelaide). In your
case you will need approval to change the use
over. As discussed going from residential to serviced is more straightforward.
of the apartments in the Realm development would meet the minimum size
requirements for serviced apartments so I am confident that
there will not be
any issues in what you propose. To lodge the application I would need to know
the apartment numbers that you propose
to use as serviced apartments so that
they can be identified on the plans. If you are to use an area on the ground
floor as a reception,
manager’s office or for housekeeping I would need to
know where this space is to be located. We will also need to provide a
outline of the anticipated management and operation of the hotel in terms of
guest booking, check in, check out, cleaning/servicing
and hours of operation. I
would collating this information on your behalf and present it to Council as a
complete application package.
gave the following evidence about his contact with
says [in his email to Mr Song] 'Hello Michael, I hope you are well. Thank
you for your call last week in relation to a change
in use from residential
apartments to serviced short-term stay apartments within the Realm development'.
Do you see that.
is - yeah, you've taken the second one, yeah. Yep.
an accurate statement of the telephone discussion which you had with Damien
Dawson, isn't it, namely, that you said to him
that you wanted to discuss with
him a change in use from residential apartments to serviced short-stay
apartments.
wouldn't be 100% in that context but I do ask him, want to make sure that, yeah,
Realm can do short-term from a planning perspective,
is a little bit different though, not just that you're checking, but that you're
ringing him up about a change in use from residential
apartments to serviced
short-term stay apartments. Do you see how that's different, because he's
attributing you to a telephone
conversation in which you discussed a change in
use, do you see that.
in use. I do see that.
you said that to him, didn't you.
don't. I don't have a recollection if I said that particular word to him.
you have said that you wanted to have a discussion with him about changing the
use from residential apartments to serviced short-term
stay apartments.
would not say change. I would say that I want to make sure they can do that,
see the term 'residential apartments' that's used there.
understand that residential apartments don't involve short-term stays.
first applicant submits that the above evidence about planning is irrelevant;
this not being a case about planning approval of
a permitted use but about title
and what was permitted by the documents accepted for registration by the
Registrar‑General.
The first applicant further submits that there was
nothing in the planning advice from Mr Dawson which suggested that anything
was proposing was unlawful or improper, or which suggested any dishonest
intent or awareness of any impropriety.
second respondent submits that the evidence of Mr Song about his
communications was ‘evasive’ and that his evidence
communications should be rejected.
am not satisfied that Mr Song was evasive. Mr Song was giving
evidence about communications which occurred about four years prior
giving of evidence. The evidence of Mr Song was consistent with him
wanting to be sure that there would be no obstacle to
the letting business being
conducted. There was nothing in the advice of Mr Dawson to the effect that
he would not be able to do
what he planned.
Other events before 1 July
24 April 2020, there was more than one communication variously between
Mr Song, Pevy Lawyers, Lynch Meyer and Eklipse with respect
to more than
one issue, including the finalisation of the Caretaking Agreements, Letting
Agreements and the next version of the Procurement
Agreement (i.e. – the
final Procurement Agreement). In an email dated 24 April 2020,
Mr Pevy advised Lynch Meyer of the view
of RPM being that it was important
that office/licence areas (i.e. – the reception and storage areas to be
used by RPM) be
put on title as it would protect RPM ‘especially in
relation to its letting
operations’.
April, there were several emails, including emails sent to Mr Song,
attached to which were draft motions for the meeting
that ultimately took place
on 1 July 2020. Those draft motions made no reference to the
Procurement Agreement nor payment of the
procurement sum.
an email dated 15 April 2020, Mr Pevy told Ms Huebner, in
what must have been a reference to the draft motions, that ‘the
does not want to refer to the Procurement Agreement. Otherwise, the motions are
second applicant submits that Mr Song and RPM knew that the Procurement
Agreement, and the consideration referred to therein,
would not be disclosed to
the lot holders. The evidence of Mr Song to which the second respondent
refers is the evidence given by
Mr Song in the context of the email dated
15 April 2020 which he did not receive as it was between his
solicitors. Mr Song
the first paragraph [Mr Pevy] says to [Ms Huebner], who's amended the minutes of
the motion, to take out a reference to the procurement
agreement and [Mr Pevy]
says 'The developer doesn't want to refer to the procurement agreement', do you
see that sentence.
you aware that the developer did not want to refer to the procurement agreement
in the minutes of the first meeting.
that now, does that surprise you.
don't know, that's my solicitor's job, so, yeah, I don't know that means to
Mr Pevy speaking directly to the developer at that stage.
had emails, yeah.
I'm just wondering if you might have passed that on to [Mr Pevy] through your
discussions with [Mr] Pattinson.
don't even know what's this about.
you agree with me that it's important that the procurement agreement be
disclosed in the first meeting.
Procurement
the procurement, that it was important to -
don't agree with me.
it's a commercial arrangement between me and a developer.
it's not something that you consider needs to be disclosed to the lot holders,
is that right.
the time it's not their business, the business belonged to the developer.
so I think the answer to my question is you agree with me that because it's not
their business there's no need to disclose it
to them, in your mind.
than the legal terms I don't - yeah, in my mind, yeah.
want to suggest to you that it was important that the lot holders know that you
were paying $1.7 million to the developer to procure
the Community Corporation
to enter into the letting and caretaker agreement. What do you say to
it's not. All my other 20 said they don't know about it, whether it's one
million, whether it's 20 million, they don't know about
am not satisfied that the above evidence amounts to an acceptance by
Mr Song that, during negotiations with respect to the agreements,
specifically turned his mind to the existence of the Procurement Agreement and
the consideration payable not being disclosed to
the owners of lots. I am
unable to discount that, at the time of the entry into the agreements, he did
not turn his mind to whether
that would happen. In my view, the evidence of
Mr Song was that he was not surprised that there was no intention to
disclose those
matters to lot owners. Mr Song regarded the absence of
disclosure as consistent with his experience of such procurement agreements.
my view, in his evidence, Mr Song did not go so far as to accept that he
had specifically turned his mind to that issue at any
relevant time in 2020. In
my view, the effect of the evidence of Mr Song was that, looking back, he
was not surprised there had
not been disclosure as he regarded it as a matter
between RPM and Eklipse.
meeting on 1 July 2020
set out above, on 1 July 2020, meetings were held of the four
community corporations, including the HRC. As also outlined above,
Mr Smith and Mr Pattinson attended for Eklipse as the owners of all
lots; and Mr Pattinson and Mr Smith were appointed to the positions
Presiding Officer and Secretary, respectively, for each corporation.
Mr Smith was appointed Treasurer.
addition, the motions with respect to the Letting and Caretaking Agreements were
carried. I have set out those motions above.
As earlier mentioned, there was
no declaration of a conflict of interest and there was no reference to any
Procurement Agreement
or the consideration to be paid pursuant to such an
The duration of the
Caretaking and Letting Agreements
the Letting Agreement with the HRC and the Caretaking Agreement with the HRC, as
with the other such agreements, were entered
into for a period of five years,
with four automatic rights of renewal, each for an additional five years.
nature of the right to extend the Caretaking Agreement is illustrated by
cl 3.3 with respect to the first extension of that agreement
clauses with respect to extensions being of the same
Unless the Caretaker provides written notice by no later than 6 months prior
to the expiry of the Term stating that they do not wish
to exercise their
option, then where there is no outstanding breach of this Agreement by the
Caretaker entitling the Corporation
to terminate it, then this Agreement will be
automatically extended for the First Extension, otherwise upon the same
conditions as
are contained in this Agreement with the exception of this clause
3.3 and except that the Remuneration for the first year and each
subsequent year
of this First Extension will be calculated in accordance with clause 4 of this
right to extend the Letting Agreement is in the same terms.
Other key terms of the Letting
the Letting Agreement, ‘Letting Business’ is defined. I will set
out that definition in more detail later, but
(a) a letting agency business, acting as agent for those Owners who wish to
appoint the Letting Agent as their letting agent;
(b) the letting of Lots for permanent, short term and/or holiday lettings, as
may be permitted by the By-Laws applicable to the Corporation;
provides that RPM has the exclusive right to operate a letting business from
within the Realm Building but does not compel
lot holders to use RPM. Clause
3.8 provides:
Exclusivity for Letting Agent
(a) During the subsistence of this Agreement, the Corporation must not itself
nor authorise another person to operate a business
the same or similar to the
Letting Business from the complex.
(b) To the extent it can, the Corporation will co-operate with the Letting Agent
in taking all action reasonably and practically
necessary to stop any person or
entity from conducting form the Complex a business the same or similar to the
Letting Business.
(c) The Letting Agent acknowledges that the Owners may utilise the service of
other agents or let their Lots themselves, and the
Letting Agent must not
unreasonably interfere with these rights.
9.6 provides:
Further Assurances
Each party agrees at its own expense, on the request of the other party, to
do everything reasonably necessary to give effect to this
Agreement and the
transactions contemplated by it, including the execution of documents.
Other key terms in the Caretaking Agreement
the Caretaking Agreement, ‘By-laws’ is defined to mean ‘the
By-laws from time to time for the
2 July 2020 – 21 August
final Procurement Agreement was not entered into until 21 August 2020.
Nevertheless, the initial Procurement Agreement and the
final Procurement
Agreement included several identical terms. The terms, which were identical,
included the obligations of Eklipse,
the developer. Clause 3.1 of both
provided (emphasis added):
3 Developer’s obligations
3.1 The developer must:
(a) give the Manager written notice of Depositing as soon as practical after
that has occurred;
(b) cause each Corporation to hold an extraordinary general meeting
(‘EGM’) immediately following Depositing and in any
event prior to
the Date for Completion;
(c) ensure that upon Depositing the by-laws of the Corporations are
substantially in accordance with those disclosed in the Disclosure
Material and
such other changes as the Manager and the Developer agreed upon;
(d) cause each Corporation to resolve at the EGM to, subject to Completion,
enter into with the Manager and execute under common
seal the relevant
Caretaking Agreement and Letting Agreement;
cause each Corporation to execute under common seal prior to the Date for
Completion the relevant Caretaking Agreement and Letting
(f) within a reasonable time before Completion, deliver to the Manager or the
Manager’s Solicitors for execution by the Manager,
the original and at
least one duplicate copy of the relevant Caretaking Agreement and the Letting
Agreement, duly executed under
common seal by each Corporation;
(g) cause each Corporation to resolve at the EGM to, subject to Completion,
enter into with the Manager’s financier and execute
under common seal such
deed of consent to security, right of entry or like document as that financier
reasonably requires; and
(h) cause each Corporation to execute under common seal prior to the Date for
Completion such deed of consent to security, right
of entry or like document as
the Manager’s financier reasonably requires and at Completion, deliver to
the Manager or the Manager’s
Solicitors the original and at least one
duplicate copy of it.
the final agreement, the following was set out with respect to the Procurement
6 Procurement Sum
6.1 The Procurement Sum is the adjusted amount equal to the number of Letting
Appointments held by the Manager on the Adjustment Date
multiplied by $20,000.00
plus GST provided always that the Procurement Sum shall not be less than the
Minimum Sum. For example,
if on the Final Adjustment Date, the Manager holds
less than 68 Letting Appointments, the final Procurement Sum will be equal to
the Minimum Sum.
6.2 On the Date for Completion, each Adjustment Date, and the Final
Adjustment Date, the Manager must pay to the Developer by way
of bank cheque the
updated Procurement Sum less any amounts (including the Deposit) made by the
Manager to the Developer up to the
prior Adjustment Date. For example, if on
the first Adjustment Date the Manager holds 100 Letting Appointments, and paid
Letting Appointments on the Date for Completion, the updated Procurement
Sum will be calculated as follows:
Amount Payable to Developer = (100 x $2,000,000.00 plus GST) less (75 x
$20,000 plus GST = $1,500,000.00 plus GST) = $500,000.00 plus
6.3 The parties agree and acknowledge that the Manager is not required to
make payment for a Letting Appointment where the Manager
has previously made
payment for a Letting Appointment relating to the same Owner’s Lot.
is no dispute that pursuant to the final Procurement Agreement, RPM paid Eklipse
no monies were ever received by the
HRC or any other community corporation.
with the final Procurement Agreement not being executed until
21 August 2020, between 1 July 2020 and
21 August 2020 due
diligence continued. There were extensions to the
due diligence period. Clause 18 within the final Procurement Agreement
provided as
18 Legal Due Diligence
18.1 This Agreement is subject to and conditional upon the Manager and the
Manager’s Solicitors perusing and satisfying themselves
in all respects
with the terms and conditions of the Caretaking Agreements, the Letting
Agreements, the proposed by‑laws, the
Disclosure Material and all aspects
discretion by no later
5:00pm on 20 August 2020
Diligence Date
). If the Manager and the Manager’s Solicitors are not
so satisfied, the Manager may at its sole discretion and by written
the Developer terminate this Agreement and the Deposit must be refunded in full
to the manager.
18.2 If the Manger does not give notice of fulfilment or waiver of the
condition in clause 18.1 by the Legal Due Diligence Date, the
Developer may,
prior to receiving any late notice from the Manager of fulfilment or waiver of
the condition clause 18.1, by written
notice to the Manager terminate this
Agreement and the Deposit must be refunded in full to the Manager.
18.3 The Developer must not make any amendment to the Caretaking Agreements,
Letting Agreements or by-laws without the written approval
of the Manager and
such amendments being provided for the Manager’s consideration.
due diligence period was extended as, at least in part, there were negotiations
in relation to RPM acquiring Lot 1911 (an apartment
and lot subsidiary areas in
the foyer and on level 5); the lease of Lot 806 for storage and
staging; and for the purpose of the Procurement
Agreement being settled in its
final form.
part of the negotiations for the purchase of Lot 1911 by RPM, on
6 July 2020, Mr George sent an email to, among others,
and Pevy Lawyers attaching the contract of sale for that
The tertiary by-laws
attached to that contract contained by-law 28 in the following terms (i.e.
– in the terms of the indicative
by-laws provided with sales contracts to
other prospective purchasers of lots)
Use of Lots
28.1. Subject to the provisions of these By-Laws, the Scheme Description and
the Development Plan for the Corporation of the City
of Adelaide and any other
relevant statutory enactments:
28.1.1. the Tertiary Lots will only be used for residential
accommodation.
other than the use specified in By-Law 28.1, an Owner or Occupier is
prohibited from leasing or granting rights of occupation in respect
of a Lot for
valuable consideration for a period of less than 2 months.
28.2. This By-Law 28 does not preclude an Owner entering into a lease,
licence or management agreement on normal commercial terms
for use of that Lot
in accordance with a use authorised by a relevant development authority.
7 July 2020, Ms Huebner sent an email to Lynch Meyer, copied to
Mr Song, directing attention to the above by-law. Ms Huebner
that by-law:
suggests short term letting (less than two months occupation) is not permitted.
We note that the by‑laws provided to us
during the legal due diligence had
removed this restriction. Can you please provide the by‑laws registered
with the Titles
office and confirm that lot purchasers were provided with the
correct by‑laws and not the by‑laws supplied to us with
19.11 contract?
Meyer replied to Ms Huebner and Mr Pevy (but not to Mr Song) the
same day. That email attached the by-laws which were lodged,
being the existing
by-laws as settled during negotiations with respect to the Letting and
Caretaking Agreements.
email of Lynch Meyer
Contracts in South Australia include “sample bylaws”. Pursuant to
the subject contract the developer is entitled
to alter or amend any of the
sample Scheme Documents as it reasonably determines to ensure they are
appropriate for the safe efficient
and harmonious administration management and
control of the common property, and regulation and use of the common property
regard to the nature of the Development.
The By-laws come into existence on deposit of the plan of division, and
"correct" bylaws are not provided to a purchaser or required
to be under our
legislation. They are of course public documents and available to
purchasers.
7 July 2020, Ms Heubner emailed Mr Song attaching
Lynch Meyer’s email of the same date. As for the by-laws which had
provided with the sale contract for Lot 1911. She advised
When providing the draft Lot 1911 Contract it would have been
preferable for the Developer’s lawyer to have confirmed the by‑laws
were the earlier “draft” by‑laws. We are comfortable with the
terms and conditions in the registered by‑laws
is not suggested by any party that there was any further correspondence about
the by‑laws.
21 August 2020,
Pevy Lawyers returned the signed Caretaking and Letting Agreements to Lynch
Meyer; the parties exchanged (a) a final unconditional
Procurement Agreement;
(b) the sales contract for Lot 1911; (c) the lease for apartment Lot 805; and
(d) a Side Deed. The sum of
$500,000 paid by RPM was released by the deposit
holder to Eklipse as part payment for the letting appointments obtained pursuant
to the Procurement Agreement. Further payments were made on 19 October 2021 for
$1,000,000, on 20 January 2021 for $160,000 and
on 7 April 2021 for $100,000
pursuant to adjustment mechanisms in the Procurement
Did Eklipse breach its
fiduciary duty?
Eklipse was in a fiduciary relationship
with the HRC
is no dispute, and I find, that Eklipse was in a fiduciary relationship with the
HRC at the time of the entry into the Letting
Agreements and the Caretaking
Agreements.
test for the existence of a fiduciary relationship is objective.
UK Supreme Court recently stated in
Johnson v FirstRand Bank Limited (London
Branch) t/a MotoNovo Finance in Hopcraft & Anor v Close Brothers Limited
must be the assumption of responsibility by the fiduciary to act exclusively on
behalf of the other in the conduct of the other’s
affairs. This can arise
where the fiduciary has expressly undertaken to exclude his or her own interest
and those of third parties
when so acting. That is what loyalty means and
requires in this context. It can also arise where the objectively assessed
circumstances
enable equity to identify such an undertaking in the acts of the
Fiduciary duties can arise in the context of commercial relations in many
different circumstances. One must consider with care the
terms of any contract
between the parties or unilateral undertaking, the wider transaction, and the
commercial context of the relationship
between the parties in order to ascertain
whether and to what extent a person is to be taken to have undertaken such
obligations.
New Zealand Netherlands Society “Oranje” Inc
[1973] 1 WLR 1126 Lord Wilberforce spoke of the need to mould the
precise scope of a fiduciary duty such as the no profit rule according
nature of the relationship between the principal and its alleged fiduciary. In
discussing the position of an employee of an
incorporated non-profit society he
stated (p 1130): “A person in his position may be in a fiduciary position
quoad a part of
his activities and not quoad other parts: each transaction, or
group of transactions, must be looked at.” He quoted as a principle
general application the dicta of Dixon J in an appeal concerning partnership,
Birtchnell v Equity Trustees, Executors and Agency Co Ltd
[1929] HCA 24
(1929) 42 CLR
“The subject matter over which the fiduciary obligations extend is
determined by the character of the venture or undertaking
for which the
partnership exists, and this is to be ascertained, not merely from the express
agreement of the parties ... but also
from the course of dealing actually
pursued by the firm.”
It is important not to distort the commercial bargain between the parties to
a contract by too readily implying fiduciary obligations
into the commercial
relationship. As Sales J stated in
“The touchstone is to ask what obligations of a fiduciary character may
reasonably be expected to apply in the particular context,
where the contract
between the parties will usually provide the major part of the contextual
framework in which that question arises.”
Similarly, in
Hospital Products
, at p 97, in a statement which the
Privy Council adopted in
[1993] AC 205
, 215, Mason
J stated that where a contractual relationship provides the foundation for the
erection of a fiduciary relationship:
“The fiduciary relationship, if it is to exist at all, must accommodate
itself to the terms of the contract so that it is consistent
with, and conforms
to, them. The fiduciary relationship cannot be superimposed upon the contract in
such a way as to alter the operation
which the contract was intended to have
according to its true construction.”
respect to the Letting Agreement and Caretaking Agreement to which the HRC was a
party, Eklipse was the agent of the HRC. Eklipse
owed a duty of single-minded
loyalty to the HRC. Eklipse could not exercise any power in relation to matters
covered by its fiduciary
duty to benefit
fiduciary duties are proscriptive (i.e. – prohibitive). The HRC relied
upon two duties: the ‘no conflict rule/duty’
and the ‘no
profit rule/duty’. Eklipse was not to put itself in a position where
interest and duty conflicted or, if
conflict was unavoidable, it had a duty to
resolve that conflict in favour of duty (
the no conflict rule
). The duty
upon Eklipse was to not put itself in a position where its duty would or might
In addition, or
perhaps in consequence, except by special arrangement, Eklipse was not to make a
profit out of its position as a
fiduciary (
the no profit
The two duties
can intersect. For example, the breach of the no profit rule may reflect
yielding to a conflict.
is important to recognise that a person may be a fiduciary with respect to part
of their activities and not others.
Section 142B – the statutory
addition, as the Letting Agreements and Caretaking Agreements were contracts for
services, Eklipse owed the statutory duty in
s 142B(2) of the CT Act. As
set out above, s 142B provides:
142B—Developer
stands in fiduciary relationship with community corporation
(1) For the avoidance
(a) the developer stands in a fiduciary relationship with the community
corporation and, before the community corporation is established,
proposed community corporation; and
(b) the duties owed by the developer under this Act are in addition to, and do
not derogate from, the duties arising out of that
fiduciary relationship.
(2) Without derogating
subsection (1)
where the community corporation intends, during the developer control period, to
delegate functions or powers to a body corporate
manager or to enter into a
contract for services, the developer must exercise reasonable skill, care and
diligence and act in the
best interests of the community corporation (as it will
be constituted after the developer control period ends).
Explanatory Note—
An application may be made under
section 142
if the developer contravenes this subsection.
(3) In this section—
developer control period
means a period during which—
(a) the community corporation is constituted solely by the developer; or
(b) the developer owns the majority of lots in the community scheme or in any
other way controls the voting of the corporation.
The submissions about breach of the no profit
and no conflict rules
Eklipse did not appear at trial, the case against it must still be proven. The
second respondent submits that Eklipse breached
its fiduciary duty in one or
more of the following ways:
a benefit of more than $1.3 million via the Procurement Agreement in exchange
for causing the HRC to enter into the Letting
and Caretaking
Agreements;
the indicative by-laws previously provided to purchasers to permit short-term
the HRC to enter the Letting Agreement and Caretaking Agreement which was
contrary to the interests of the HRC as a
is necessary to set out some further aspects of the submissions of the HRC with
respect to (2) and (3) above.
to (2) above, the HRC submits that Eklipse was not acting in the interests of
the HRC when the indicative by-laws were amended.
HRC submits that it was done
to make it possible to permit RPM to conduct a short-term letting business and
as Eklipse wanted to
obtain the procurement sum.
to (3) above, the HRC particularly relies upon Eklipse allowing the terms of the
agreement to be, in effect, 25 years, and what
it submits was a failure to
negotiate the length of those terms downwards. The HRC directs attention to the
evidence of Mr Breda,
a body corporate manager for Whittles and the body
corporate manager for the Realm Building. As mentioned, Mr Breda was
purportedly
appointed to that later position at the meeting on
1 July 2020.
evidence of Mr Breda includes that in his experience as a body corporate
manager (at the time of his evidence, a period of about
five years), he has
not seen nor dealt with a letting or caretaking agreement of 25 years. In
his experience, a caretaking agreement
would typically run for up to
three years. Given what Mr Breda said was the ‘extraordinarily
long time of 25 years allowed
for under the Caretaking and Letting
Agreements’ he sent two emails to Mr
The first was on
1 April 2020 within which he raised his concern about the Caretaking
Agreements locking in the community corporations
for four further
five‑year terms. In that email, Mr Breda stated that it would be
appropriate that a clause be included in
those agreements to allow the community
corporations to terminate the agreements. There is no evidence of a response to
from Mr Pattinson. However, given that Mr Pattinson
sought advice from Lynch Meyer about the 25‑year terms, I find that
concerns of Mr Breda were not overlooked by Mr Pattinson.
16 April 2020, Mr Breda repeated that it would be appropriate
that the clauses that he suggested be included and said that he
would leave it
for Eklipse to discuss with Lynch Meyer. If that occurred as a direct result of
that email, there is no evidence
of what advice was given about the inclusion of
clauses which would allow the agreements to be terminated by the community
corporations.
This is not to overlook that on 10 April 2020, Mr
Pattinson had received the advice earlier mentioned about the 25-year terms.
can be inferred that, whether because of the email from Mr Breda dated
1 April 2020 or for some other reason, Mr Pattinson was
that legal advice was prudent with respect to the length of the Caretaking
Agreements – and – that Lynch Meyer
had given advice with respect to
what view Eklipse may have to have in order to resist the contention that it
would be in breach
of s 142B of the CT Act by entering into agreements for
emphasised that whether Eklipse had breached its fiduciary duty and/or statutory
duty was strictly a matter between Eklipse and
the HRC. Nevertheless, RPM made
submissions about whether there had been a breach.
submits that the actual scope of the fiduciary’s obligations, and whether
they have been breached, is determined by reference
to the facts of each case.
In a submission that can be accepted, RPM submits that the nature and terms of
the relationship are critical,
and the wider commercial context must be borne in
RPM submits that the
no conflict rule must be applied realistically and with common sense to a
situation which discloses a real
conflict of duty and interest and not to some
theoretical conflict. RPM submits that the doctrine cannot be inexorably
applied without
regard to the circumstances of the
relationship.
submits that the first alleged breach mischaracterises the benefit obtained by
Eklipse and submits that it does not amount to
a breach of fiduciary duty. RPM
characterises the breach as theoretical rather than real. It is submitted that
the payment of the
procurement sum was calculated based on letting appointments
which had been obtained by Eklipse (or its agent UA) and that the value
appointments to RPM was a function of the terms of those appointments. RPM
submits that the HRC was not a party to those
appointments; Eklipse was entitled
to sell them without reference to the interests of the HRC; and Eklipse was
entitled to sell them
to the same party which was prepared to undertake the
rental guarantee and other obligations involved.
Consideration
The first alleged breach
reject the submissions of RPM about the first alleged breach. I find the
acceptance of the Procurement Sum amounted to a breach
of the fiduciary duty
that Eklipse owed to the HRC. I find that it was a breach of the no profit and
no conflict rules.
may be accepted that the letting appointments did not belong to the HRC; that
Eklipse was entitled to sell them; and that the
procurement sum was calculated
based upon the number of letting appointments obtained by Eklipse or its agent.
Nevertheless, I find
that to view the procurement sum as no more than a payment
for letting appointments involves an unrealistic approach to the purpose
payment given the whole of the evidence, particularly as all the agreements were
negotiated at the same time. To view the
procurement sum solely as a payment
for letting appointments owned by Eklipse (or its agent) would be to divorce the
payment of that
sum from the terms of the initial Procurement Agreement (the
only such agreement in contemplation when the agreements were entered
the HRC on 1 July 2020); the negotiations that occurred which resulted
in the existing by-laws being in terms materially
different to the indicative
by-laws; and the Letting and Caretaking Agreements being entered into on
1 July 2020.
must be accepted that the final Procurement Agreement ultimately executed on
21 August 2020 identified the consideration as being
solely related to
the letting appointments in which the HRC had no interest. In its submissions,
RPM refers to that recitation of
the consideration as one which ‘most
accurately reflected the economic and commercial substance of the
satisfied that the payment of the procurement sum for letting appointments is
the case to some extent. On the evidence, letting
appointments are of value,
and particularly when short-term, that value can be substantial. However, when
the transaction is viewed
as a whole, I find that the consideration was paid for
more than just the letting appointments which were the property of Eklipse
its agent. The final Procurement Agreement executed on 21 August 2020
must be viewed in the context of the state of negotiations
at the time of the
execution of the Letting Agreements and Caretaking Agreements on
1 July 2020. At that time, the only Procurement
Agreement that
existed was the one executed by Mr Song and Mr Smith on
17 April 2020. As mentioned, and importantly in my view,
that initial
Procurement Agreement recited why consideration was to be paid in the following
Developer has agreed that in consideration of the Manager paying to the
Developer the amount shown in ITEM 6 of the Items Schedule
(Procurement Sum)
that as original and sole proprietor of all of the Lots, the Developer will
cause the Corporations at their first
general meetings to resolve to enter into
with the Manager and execute the relevant Caretaking Agreement and Letting
is, as of 1 July 2020, I find that negotiations were being conducted
on the basis that RPM wanted to ensure that Eklipse would
enter the Letting and
Caretaking Agreements in the terms negotiated. In my view, there was a clear
connection between the payment
of the procurement sum and Eklipse ensuring that
the various agreements were entered into by the community corporations. I find
that Eklipse knew that the procurement sum was not only being paid for letting
appointments. I find that Eklipse knew that consideration
in the form of the
procurement sum was to be paid, at least in part, for the Letting and Caretaking
Agreements to be entered into
at the meetings on 1 July 2020.
regard that conclusion as unsurprising. The terms of the initial Procurement
Agreement are clear. Further, the agreements were
all entered at the same time
and all were of value to RPM. Among other things, the Letting Agreements, while
not compelling lot
holders to use RPM, gave RPM an exclusive presence in the
Realm Building. The Caretaking Agreements gave RPM, among other things,
to payments on duties being performed. As a matter of common sense, the value
of letting appointments was increased by the
existence of the Letting Agreements
including with the HRC. It increased the likelihood of such appointments being
renewed and efficiencies
being able to be achieved if additional lot holders
were drawn to use RPM because of its unique position as the only letting agent
with a physical presence in the building. As a matter of common sense, and it
is the evidence, the entry into both the Letting and
Caretaking Agreements was
advantageous to RPM as, at the very least, it delivered efficiencies. Both sets
of agreements conferred
the opportunity of substantial benefits to RPM over a
long period. As at 1 July 2020, the terms of the initial Procurement
were such that the calculation of the consideration was a product of
the number of letting appointments held on the adjustment
However, I find that
the method by which that sum was calculated should not be used to deny that more
than one agreement was being
negotiated at the same time; should not obscure the
reality of what Eklipse agreed to ensure happened on 1 July 2020; nor
the recitation of why consideration was to be paid as set out in the
initial Procurement Agreement.
of 1 July 2020, the procurement sum was being paid to it, at least in
part to ensure the Caretaking and Letting Agreements were
entered. In the
circumstances, I find that it was in the interests of Eklipse to ensure that the
terms of the agreements were such
that RPM would be prepared to enter into those
agreements. Eklipse had an interest in RPM entering the agreements upon terms
to RPM because once that occurred, Eklipse could secure the
procurement sum.
made a profit by ensuring that the HRC entered the relevant Letting Agreement
and relevant Caretaking Agreement by conferring
upon RPM an exclusive right to
have a presence in the Building for an effective period of 25 years, both
as the letting agent and
caretaker. Eklipse gave those rights away, at least to
some extent, in return for the payment of the procurement sum. In doing
find that Eklipse placed itself in a position of conflict between its interests
and the interests of the HRC. I find that
Eklipse breached its fiduciary duty.
That having been found, it is perhaps not necessary to go further.
Nevertheless, it is helpful
to consider the other two alleged breaches.
The second alleged breach
for the second alleged breach, RPM submits that there is insufficient logical
connection between the fiduciary duty and the breach
alleged. RPM submits that
any submission that the by-laws were amended to make it possible for RPM to
conduct a short-term letting
business should be rejected as the amended by-laws
had been arrived at during negotiations with Imagine and so before the
involvement
can be accepted that the indicative by-laws had been marked up in the form that
became the existing by-laws before RPM became
involved in negotiations with
respect to the Realm
I have earlier set
out that the marked-up version had come into existence during negotiation with
Imagine. It can be accepted that
this is relevant to what findings may be made
of the by-laws during the negotiations before 1 July 2020 is
relevant in evaluating whether Eklipse breached its fiduciary duty.
my view, it is relevant when viewed in the context of what Eklipse knew at that
time. Eklipse knew that the Building had been
marketed by at least its agent,
UA, to prospective purchasers as a building which would not permit short-term
important aspect of the relationship between Eklipse and the future lot holders
within the HRC was that Eklipse had reserved for
itself the ability to amend the
indicative by-laws. As a result, I would not find that, viewed in isolation,
the amendment of the
indicative by-laws was a breach of fiduciary duty.
Nevertheless, why Eklipse did that remains relevant. I find that Eklipse did
that to accommodate Imagine (and then RPM) who wanted to conduct short-term
letting within the Building. Eklipse was entitled to
do that as it had reserved
for itself the right to amend the indicative by-laws. However, as mentioned, I
find that it was motivated
to do so in order to, at least in part, secure the
procurement sum for itself. Put another way, at least in part, for its
benefit, Eklipse exercised the discretion that it had reserved for
itself to amend.
in the context of the way that Eklipse knew the Building had been marketed and
in the context of my finding that the first
alleged breach has been established,
I find that the amendment of the indicative by-laws was a breach of the
fiduciary duty of Eklipse.
This is not to find that it was also a breach
distinct from the first breach. The amendment of the indicative by-laws
as part of what can be viewed as a continuing set of conduct of
Eklipse. That is, an aspect of its conduct directed to ensuring
that it was
paid the procurement sum. As earlier found, that sum was not paid solely for
the letting appointments which Eklipse
as mentioned, even if I was wrong in my approach to this second alleged breach,
for the reasons given, I have found that
Eklipse breached its fiduciary duty in
the first way alleged.
alleged breach
for the third alleged breach, RPM also submitted that there was insufficient
logical connection between the fiduciary duty and
the breach alleged. RPM
submitted that the contention advanced by the HRC that the 25‑year terms
were because Eklipse wanted
to make the business more attractive to RPM in order
for them to enter into the Caretaking Agreements and maximise the procurement
sum to be paid to it should be rejected as the evidence shows that the length of
the agreement had already been arrived at before
RPM became involved.
the effective term of 25‑years had been negotiated before RPM became
involved must be accepted, but the current issue
is not whether RPM participated
in that breach. The current issue is whether there was a breach by Eklipse.
acknowledge that Caretaking Agreements were necessary. As to the length of the
Agreements, the evidence is that of Mr Breda, Mr
Song and what may be
inferred from the advice in the Due Diligence Report.
has not encountered agreements in South Australia of an effective length of the
Caretaking Agreements. The evidence of
Mr Breda is that caretaking
agreements ‘typically run for up to three years’ and that the period
of 25 years for both
agreements is an ‘extraordinarily long
The evidence of
Mr Breda was, in effect, that what was in the best interests of the
community corporations was a means to terminate
the agreements.
evidence of Mr Song was that 25-year terms was the standard in the
Notwithstanding
the evidence of Mr Breda, I cannot reject the evidence of Mr Song about that.
His evidence finds support in the
Due Diligence Report. In the Due Diligence
Report, reference is made to the terms being an original term of five years with
automatic options of five years. The report goes on to say, ‘This is
the maximum term we typically see for management rights
agreements of this
important. I infer that, consistent with the evidence of Mr Song,
Caretaking Agreements of an effective term of 25 years
are not unique.
I infer that a term of 25 years is not unique, albeit the maximum term
typically seen, I do not find the third alleged breach
is established. That is
so even when the third alleged breach is viewed in the context of the earlier
alleged breaches and the payment
of the procurement sum.
Summary of findings about breach of
fiduciary duty
is no dispute that Eklipse did not disclose the payment of the procurement sum
to the HRC. For the reasons given, I find that
RPM breached its fiduciary duty
when it entered the relevant Letting Agreement and relevant Caretaking Agreement
to which the HRC
is a party.
Eklipse also breach the statutory duty?
statutory duty in s 142B(2) is set out above. Also set out above are the
ways in which Eklipse breached its fiduciary duty.
Whether those breaches
amount to a breach of s 142B(2) must be separately considered.
find that Eklipse did not exercise reasonable skill, care and diligence and did
not act in the best interests of the HRC. Eklipse
allowed the agreements to be
for terms of effectively 25 years in the context of there being no evidence
that Eklipse sought to negotiate
Mr Breda had suggested that it was in the best interests of the community
corporations to be given a means to terminate
the agreements, Eklipse did not
allow the HRC any realistic opportunity to exercise a right to not extend either
agreement (for example,
as the obligations contracted for were no longer
appropriate or might be performed by a different party for a different sum).
also agreed to accept the procurement sum. For reasons given elsewhere,
that sum was agreed to be paid, at least in part, to ensure
that the agreements
between RPM and the HRC were entered into on 1 July 2020 and not only in return
for letting appointments which
belonged to Eklipse.
The remedies for the breach of
fiduciary duty and of s 142B(2) by Eklipse
is convenient at this point to say something about the remedies that may be
available against Eklipse because of the findings
made about the breaches by
Eklipse of its fiduciary and statutory duties, and because of my finding that
through Messrs Pattinson
and Smith, Eklipse breached s 95 of the CT
Act. However, as earlier mentioned, even if I am wrong in finding that s 95 of
Act was breached, that error is not material to the remedies which exist.
It remains the case that the remedies provided in s 142
are available as a
result of the breach of s 142B. Further, it is also the case that the potential
remedies for a breach of fiduciary
duty are not limited to those in s 142 of the
Breaches of fiduciary
duty – general law
upon the breach of fiduciary duty alone, the HRC seeks that the benefit received
by Eklipse under the Procurement Agreement,
including the procurement sum, be
paid to the HRC.
unauthorised benefit is that of the HRC. In equity, Eklipse is ‘liable to
account to [the HRC] for that profit and any
loss caused to it by the breach of
the duty consisting of it having been made and
There is no
claim of loss. The HRC seeks the procurement sum.
at the sum appropriate is attended by some difficulties. Subject to at least
further submissions, I cannot find the HRC
is entitled to the whole of the
procurement sum.
set out above, the payment for the procurement sum was not only for entry into
the relevant Letting and Caretaking Agreements
with the second respondent. It
is consistent with what I have found to also find that sum was paid, at least in
part, for the entry
into other agreements which were not with the second
respondent. I make that finding. In addition, I also find that sum was also
paid, at least in part, for letting appointments in which the HRC had no
interest nor entitlement.
agreements which were not with the second respondent, and the letting
appointments obtained by RPM from Eklipse or its agent
(UA), were a material
aspect of the value of what was acquired by RPM and for which payment was made
to Eklipse. On the evidence,
the letting appointments generate profit for RPM.
As mentioned, insofar as an aspect of the procurement sum was for letting
appointments,
none of those letting appointments belonged to the HRC. Eklipse
was entitled to sell them to RPM. There is no expert evidence of
the value of
the letting appointments acquired divorced from the agreements entered into; the
value of the rights conferred under
the agreements between RPM and the HRC; or
conjunction with, the agreements to which the HRC is a party. While the
HRC has obtained information about what might be charged
under another
Caretaking Agreement(s), even if accepted, that evidence says nothing about the
profit secured by Eklipse beyond what
it might have been entitled to be paid.
will return to this
Breaches of s
found that Eklipse breached the statutory duty in s 142B of the CT Act
and/or breached s 95 of the CT Act, an issue arises
as to whether the
second respondent is entitled, pursuant to s 142 of the CT Act, to the
relief of recission of the Letting Agreement
and Caretaking Agreement bearing in
mind those agreements are between the second respondent and a third party (i.e.
For the reasons which follow, that relief is not available
pursuant to s 142 of the CT
Section 142 of the CT
Section 142
of the CT Act relevantly
142—Resolution
of disputes etc
(1) An application may be made under this section—
(a) if the applicant claims that a breach of this Act or of the by-laws of the
community scheme has occurred; or
(7) A court, in hearing and determining an application under this section,
should act according to equity, good conscience and the
substantial merits of
the case, without regard to technicalities and legal forms, and is not bound by
the rules of evidence but may
inform itself on any matter in such manner as it
thinks fit.
(8) A court may, in respect of an application under this section—
(d) order that a party refrain from further any further action of a kind
specified in the order; or
(e) by order—
(i) alter the by-laws of the community scheme (and make any necessary
consequential changes to the scheme description and development
contracts);
(ii) vary or reverse any decision of the corporation, or of the management
committee of the corporation or of a delegate of the corporation;
(ea) vary, avoid or terminate a contract entered into (whether before or after
the commencement of this paragraph) between a community
corporation and any of
the following:
(i) the developer;
(ii) an associate of the developer;
(iii) the body corporate manager;
(iv) an associate of the body corporate manager;
(9a) A court should not make an order to vary, avoid or terminate a contract
entered into between a community corporation and another
party unless the court
is satisfied that the contract involves a breach of fiduciary duties or other
duties under this Act.
(18) This section does not limit or derogate from any civil remedy at law or
The submissions
second respondent submitted that s 142 provided the power to set aside the
relevant contracts. The second respondent relied
upon sub-sections (7),
(8)(d), (8)(e) and (9)(a).
first applicant submitted that the power provided by s 142(8)(ea) to
‘vary, avoid or terminate’ was limited to the
circumstances set out
within the sub‑section. That is, that the power provided in s 142
did not extend to a contract between
a community corporation and a party not
specified within s 142(8)(ea) (i.e. – a third party, such as
Consideration
is convenient to begin with the power in s 142(9a). I reject that
sub-section provides a power to vary, avoid or terminate a
contract between a
community corporation and RPM. The nature of the party to a contract, other
than the community corporation, referred
to within sub-section (9a) must be
construed in the context of the whole of s 142 and, more specifically, in
the context of s 142(8)(ea).
The natural reading of those two sub-sections
is that both are dealing with the same type of contract. That is, a contract
the parties identified in s 142(8)(ea). That construction is
reinforced when s 142(18) is considered. That is, s 142 is not
the circumstances in which a contract between parties other than those
identified in sub-s (8)(ea) might be the subject of an order
relief. However, when relief is sought based on a breach of the CT Act, the
power to ‘vary, avoid or terminate’
a contract, which is provided
for by s 142, is limited to a contract between the parties described in
s 142(8)(ea). I find that
the power in sub-section (8)(ea) relates only to
a contract between a community corporation and those parties identified within
sub-section
(8)(ea). RPM is not one of the parties identified within
sub-section (8)(ea).
for s 142(7), I do not construe that sub-section as providing the power to
set aside the relevant contracts. Section 142(7) does
not provide a power
beyond that provided in other parts of s 142. It is merely facultative; a
statutory direction as to the way
the powers provided elsewhere in the section
are to be exercised.
for ss 142(8)(d) and 142(e)(ii), I also reject that either sub-section can
be construed as providing a power to rescind the relevant
contracts when a
specific power to ‘vary, avoid, or terminate a contract’ is provided
for within s 142(8)(ea).
follows that the second respondent is not entitled to an order pursuant to s 142
of the CT Act that the relevant contracts be
rescinded because of breaches of
s 95 and/or s 142B. If the second respondent is entitled to recission
of the relevant contracts,
the power to make that order must be found outside of
s 142 of the CT Act. As set out in s 142(18), that section does not
or derogate from any civil remedy at law or in equity.
Recission of the Caretaking and
Letting Agreements without payment of a secret commission; without knowing
assistance in a dishonest
and fraudulent design; or without inducing or
procuring a breach of fiduciary duty
HRC has described its primary claim against RPM as being based upon it having
paid a secret commission. However, at this point,
I will turn to some other
aspects of the contentions of the HRC.
is not a party to the Letting Agreements or Caretaking Agreements.
Nevertheless, in what it described as ‘very much
an alternative
to its claim
that RPM paid a secret commission, the second respondent contends that it has a
right of rescission with respect to
both agreements if RPM merely had knowledge
(i.e. – had actual knowledge; wilfully shut its eyes to the obvious;
wilfully and
recklessly failed to make such enquiries as an honest and
reasonable person would make; or had knowledge of circumstances which would
indicate the facts to an honest and reasonable
of breaches of
fiduciary duty by
reasons to be given, I reject the alternative claim outlined above. I will
the claim of the second
respondent.
Fraudulent and dishonest design
aspect of the claim of the second respondent is that RPM knowingly assisted in a
fraudulent and dishonest design. This demands
that the breaches by Eklipse of
its fiduciary duties must be fraudulent and
The breaches by
Eklipse are set out above. The onus is upon the second respondent.
second respondent contends that fraud and dishonesty are established by several
matters which can be grouped in the following
Eklipse had obtained Development Approval and proposed the scheme documents on
the basis that short-term tenancies would not
be permitted (
Eklipse, or its agent, held out to potential purchasers that they were
purchasing apartments in a building within which short-term
tenancies would not
be permitted (
Eklipse knew of the ‘serious, extensive... and adverse effect’ which
permitting a short-term letting business would
have on the living conditions and
standards of lot holders and the harmonious relations of lot holders, guests and
Eklipse altered the indicative by-laws during negotiations with respect to the
Letting Agreement and the Caretaking Agreement
and did that knowing how the
Building had been marketed (i.e. – in a way inconsistent with the
indicative by-laws provided
to potential purchasers) (
entering the Letting Agreement and Caretaking Agreement for periods of
five years with four rights of renewal for five years, those
being at the right of RPM – and – for services not adequate or
appropriate for the needs of HRC (
Letting Agreement and Caretaking Agreement are not being discharged in a manner
appropriate to the needs of the HRC (
cost of the Caretaking Agreement (
the seventh
Eklipse obtained the benefit of the Procurement Sum but did not disclose the
existence of that sum (
The first matter
evaluating this matter, it is helpful to repeat some matters.
Development Contract dated 30 June 2020 provided at cl 4.2 that the
relevant lots were ‘intended for residential
Pursuant to
s 30(1)(c) of the CT Act, the Scheme Description had to describe the
purpose(s) for which the lots may be used. The
relevant Scheme Description
dated 30 June 2020 provided that the relevant ‘lots may only be
used for residential purposes (including
residential serviced
apartments)’.
meaning of ‘residential purposes’ in the Development Contract and in
the Scheme Description must be construed bearing
in mind the definition of
‘residential purposes’ within s 3 of the CT Act. Nevertheless,
for reasons already given,
I am not satisfied that the words ‘residential
purposes’ in the Development Contract or Scheme Description should be
construed as only referring to occupancy of at least two months.
follows that the Development Contract and Scheme Description do not aid in proof
of a fraudulent and dishonest design.
The second matter
am satisfied that the Realm Building was marketed by Eklipse and/or UA as a
building which would not permit short-term letting
and that, at all relevant
times, Eklipse knew that. It is only necessary to give some examples of the
evidence which has caused
me to make those findings.
starting point is that I am satisfied that, as the developers of the Building,
Messrs Pattinson and Smith were aware of publicity
Further, as mentioned, on 15 June 2016, UA was appointed by Eklipse as
its marketing and sales agent. That
agreement provided UA would obey
Eklipse’s reasonable directions and instructions as to the conduct of sale
and marketing activities.
19 June 2017, there was a media release by Eklipse which provided that
the Building would ‘uphold a no Airbnb
19 July 2017, Mr Ben Small, sales director for the Building,
was quoted in the Adelaide Advertiser as having said the Building
‘... no short-stay accommodation and no Airbnb
6 August 2017, Mr Small held out to a real estate agent that the
Building would not have ‘short stay
accommodation’.
21 November 2017, Mr Small held out to a prospective purchaser
that there were no ‘short term rentals’ in the Realm
relevant to what Eklipse knew is the indicative by-laws. Although attended by
some ambiguity, the terms of the indicative by-laws
can be read in a way
consistent with the marketing to purchasers As mentioned above, the indicative
by-laws which were provided
with the sales contracts set out that an owner or
occupier was prohibited from leasing or granting rights of occupation in respect
of a lot for valuable consideration for a period of less than
two months.
same contract provided that the sample by-laws may be varied in the absolute
discretion of Eklipse,
satisfied that does not deprive the indicative by-laws of relevance in
consideration of whether Eklipse was involved in a fraudulent
and dishonest
The third matter
am not satisfied the third matter has been established. On the evidence, I am
unable to conclude that Eklipse knew of the ‘serious,
extensive ... and
adverse effect’ for which the second respondent contends. It may be
accepted that some lot holders believe
there have been effects of that nature,
but the views of lot holders after the entry into the agreements cannot be used
what Eklipse knew.
fourth matter
what occurred during negotiations with respect to the Caretaking Agreements (set
out in detail above), there is no doubt that
Eklipse took steps to amend the
indicative by-laws into the form which became the existing by-laws. On the
evidence, that was done
in the context of accommodating a short-term letting
business. For example, as mentioned, on 25 March 2020, Lynch Meyer
a marked-up copy of the indicative by-laws to the solicitors for
Imagine suggesting that the marked-up copy (i.e. – what became
existing by-laws) reflected the proposed operations of Imagine. On
10 April 2020, Mr Pattinson emailed Pevy Lawyers attaching
what became the existing by-laws. I am satisfied that Eklipse knew that the
indicative by-laws were being amended in a substantial
way; that Eklipse knew
that was being done notwithstanding the way in which the Building had been
marketed; and that Eklipse knew
that was being done to accommodate a party
(initially Imagine and later RPM) which was interested in entering into
caretaking and
letting agreements, and prepared to pay a procurement sum,
provided that short-term letting could be conducted in the Realm Building.
is not to overlook that Eklipse had reserved the right to amend the indicative
by-laws. However, in my view, the circumstances
in which that right was
exercised remains relevant to whether the breaches by Eklipse of its fiduciary
duties was fraudulent and
email of 10 April 2020 was sent the day after an online meeting which
took place because of issues Mr Pevy raised with Mr Pattinson
the terms of the initial Procurement Agreement. An aspect of an email of
Mr Pattinson before the meeting on 9 April 2020 was
that he wanted to
remove the reference to ‘short‑term letting’ from the
Procurement Agreement.
obvious inference, and one which I draw in the context of the whole of the
evidence, is that Mr Pattinson wanted to ensure that
there was no reference
within the Procurement Agreement to short-term letting. A further inference is
that there was a preparedness
to amend the indicative by-laws to secure entry
into the agreements ultimately executed on 1 July 2020 and the payment
of the procurement
Eklipse, at least through Mr Pattinson, knew that the amended by-laws would
be materially different to the indicative by-laws
is further confirmed by
Lynch Meyer providing a copy of its email advice about that issue to
Mr Pattinson on 23 April 2020. While
the advice was that there
was no statutory obligation to advise a purchaser of the amendment of the
indicative by-laws, in the context
of whether Eklipse was involved in a
fraudulent and dishonest design, any belief about the absence of a statutory
obligation does
not remove completely the significance of my finding that
Eklipse knew that the amended by-laws would be materially different to
indicative by-laws nor the significance of what Eklipse knew about how the
Building had been marketed to purchasers. Again,
this is not to overlook that
Eklipse had, within the sales contract, provided for the indicative by-laws to
be varied in its absolute
discretion. But I am not satisfied that, on the whole
of the evidence, deprives the foregoing of all relevance.
The fifth matter
are two parts to the fifth matter. First, the duration of the agreements, with
the duration needing to be viewed in the context
of the rights of renewal
resting, in effect, with RPM. Second, that the two relevant agreements are for
services not adequate or
appropriate for the needs of the HRC.
mentioned, Mr Breda is the body corporate manager of the Realm Building,
having been appointed at the meeting on 1 July 2020.
It is helpful to
repeat and expand upon some matters earlier mentioned.
affidavit of Mr Breda is dated 23 November 2022. At the time of
his affidavit, Mr Breda had about four and a half years’
as a body corporate manager. His affidavit does not otherwise detail his
experience. This includes not setting out whether
the extent of his experience,
if any, is in buildings the size of the Realm Building. Mr Breda opines
that in his experience as
a body corporate manager he has not previously seen or
dealt with a caretaking or letting agreement which is set for a period of
25 years; in his experience, ‘a caretaking agreement would typically
run for up to three years’; and he has ‘not
encountered a letting
agreement in South
Australia’.
Mr Breda says that, by no later than 1 April 2020, he formed the
view that the period of 25 years within the Letting and Caretaking
Agreements was an ‘extraordinarily long
a result of his view that 25 years was an ‘extraordinarily long
time’, Mr Breda communicated with Mr Pattison by email
1 April and 16 April 2020.
1 April 2020, Mr Breda raised with Mr Pattinson the duration
of the agreements. More specifically, Mr Breda raised the corporation
being ‘locked in’ for four five-year terms as being the ‘key
Mr Breda suggested that a clause be included enabling the community
corporations within the Realm Building to terminate the Caretaking
Agreements.
On 16 April 2020, Mr Breda again emailed Mr Pattinson and
repeated his view that it would be appropriate for a clause
to be inserted into
the Caretaking Agreements which allowed the community corporations to terminate
the Caretaking Agreements and
stated that he would leave Eklipse to discuss that
issue with Lynch Meyer.
there was further correspondence on that issue, it is not the subject of
evidence. But, obviously enough, a clause such as that
raised by Mr Breda
did not find voice in the Caretaking Agreements and the terms with respect to
renewal were not altered in response
to the concern raised on
1 April 2020.
the opinions of Mr Breda, there is no evidence of the extent to which
agreements of this type might ordinarily include an
effective right of renewal
like that ultimately granted to RPM without the other party having a more
meaningful ability to choose
not to extend the agreement. This is not to
overlook the evidence of Mr Song nor what is set out in the Due Diligence
Report about
the 25-year term, but that evidence does not expressly address the
ability of a party such as the HRC not to extend. This is also
not to overlook
that the draft agreements prepared by the solicitors of Imagine, and before the
involvement of RPM and its solicitors,
were in the same terms.
the evidence of Mr Breda, I cannot dismiss as irrelevant this feature of
the Caretaking Agreement to contribute to the contention
of a fraudulent and
dishonest design by Eklipse. However, I consider that it has very limited
relevance given my earlier finding
that agreements with 25-year terms are not
for the second aspect of this fifth matter, it is necessary to distinguish
between the two agreements. In so far as it is submitted
that the Letting
Agreement is for services not appropriate for the needs of the HRC, as I
understand it, that submission is inextricably
linked to the submission that
short-term letting should not be permitted within the Building. Put another
way, the force of the
submission depends upon my finding about whether
short-term letting is permitted and/or my findings about the conduct of Eklipse
in amending the indicative by-laws, particularly against the background of the
marketing of the Building. I have found that short-term
letting is permitted
under the existing by-laws. I have also found that indicative by-laws were
amended to be the existing by-laws
to meet the way that first Imagine, and later
RPM, conducted its business (i.e. – short-term letting) and, in part, to
it more likely that the procurement sum would be paid.
as any submission about the Caretaking Agreements not being appropriate for the
needs of the HRC has been made, it may be
accepted that some lot holders have
complained about aspects of the services provided, but, on the evidence, I am
not satisfied that
is because the obligations contracted for are not
appropriate.
The sixth matter
am not satisfied this matter can contribute to the contention of a fraudulent
and dishonest design by Eklipse. On its terms, the
pleading of the second
respondent directs attention to what may have occurred after the entry into the
relevant agreements. That
is, the discharge by RPM of its obligations. That
relates to events to which Eklipse is not a party.
The seventh matter
cost of the Caretaking Agreements for each of the four community corporations at
the date of entry into those agreements on 1
July 2020 was $484,000
per annum inclusive of GST. On 5 July 2021, Property Maintenance Plus
) provided a quote to the HRC for cleaning and caretaking services.
Based on a three-year contract, the total annual cost of the
quote was $363,000,
inclusive of GST. Attached was an ‘example of a full [statement of
work]’ to be performed.
is a lot owner within the HRC. Sent to Mr Whiting on
15 October 2021 was a further quote proposed by PMP dated
8 September
It appears that quote is $398,155.62 per annum inclusive of GST and that it is
based upon PMP performing the same tasks as
the quotes provided by PMP can be treated as final, the quote dated 8
September 2021 is approximately 82 per cent of that
for on 1 July 2020 (i.e. – 18 per cent less
expensive). That appears a significant difference. Nevertheless, on
evidence, I am not satisfied the difference is such that it contributes to
establishing that Eklipse participated in a fraudulent
and dishonest design.
Mr Breda has experience with caretaking agreements and was prepared to
express his views to Mr Pattinson about
the length of the agreements.
Notwithstanding, he did not opine on the cost of the Caretaking Agreements.
There is no evidence
of the market for caretaking services in July 2020,
other than as may be inferred from what was contracted for and the quotes
by PMP. As to the latter, the first of those quotes was about
12 months after the Caretaking Agreements were entered into.
importantly, beyond what appears in the Caretaking Agreements and the quotes of
PMP, there is no other evidence of the degree
to which reasonable quotes might
differ with respect to caretaking agreements. Further, and far less
significantly, there is no
independent evidence of the reputations of RPM and
PMP in the performance of caretaking agreements, an issue which might shed light
on whether the difference between the agreements and the quotes of PMP is as
significant as it might appear.
the circumstances, although the difference between the price contracted for
under the Caretaking Agreements and that quoted by
PMP appears significant, I am
not able to conclude that difference can contribute to the establishment of a
fraudulent and dishonest
The eighth matter
am satisfied that Eklipse failing to disclose the procurement sum weighs in
favour of the existence of a fraudulent and dishonest
design, but only in a
limited way. The evidence of Mr Song, which I cannot reject, is that such
sums are between the developer and
the caretaker and are not disclosed.
Nevertheless, it remains of some weight as it is so closely linked to Eklipse
having breached
the no conflict and no profit rules.
have found that Eklipse breached its fiduciary duty to the HRC by breaching the
no conflict rule and the no profit rule. I have
found that breach occurred in
the context of Eklipse amending the sample indicative by-laws, at least in part,
to help secure payment
of the procurement sum and in the knowledge of how the
Building had been marketed, but also in the context of Eklipse having reserved
for itself a discretion to amend the by-laws. I find that the breach also
occurred in the context of at least Mr Pattinson not wishing
to include in the
final Procurement Agreement reference to short-term letting. Although that was
an agreement to which the HRC was
not a party, on the evidence, and particularly
given the description of why consideration was to be paid under the initial
Procurement
Agreement, it is difficult to discern why Mr Pattinson cared
limit the likelihood of the link between the approach taken to short-term
letting through the amendment of the indicative by-laws
and the payment of the
procurement sum being discerned. On the evidence, no obvious alternative
explanation presents itself.
have found that the 25-year term of the agreements and the limited ability of
the HRC to resist renewal are relevant and that RPM
did not seek to negotiate
that term to one which was lesser. However, I have also found that 25-year
terms are not unique and, beyond
the opinions of Mr Breda about the
relevant agreements, there is no evidence about the approach taken to rights of
renewal in the
industry. I have found that Eklipse knew about the indicative
by-laws and how the building had been marketed. I also find that
Eklipse had
legal advisers and there is nothing in the evidence to suggest that legal advice
was received which might have suggested
Eklipse was acting in a fraudulent or
dishonest way.
the circumstances, whether the second respondent has proven that Eklipse was
involved in a fraudulent and dishonest design is
relatively finely balanced.
However, on the balance of probabilities, I find that, on 1 July 2020,
Eklipse knew that the breaches
of its duties were both fraudulent and dishonest.
I make that finding as it knew how the Building had been marketed and with that
knowledge, it negotiated and accepted the procurement sum, at least in part, in
return for exercising the discretion to amend the
indicative by-laws and to
ensure that the HRC entered the relevant agreements.
considering whether the second respondent has proven that RPM knowingly assisted
in that fraudulent and dishonest design,
it is convenient to consider what the
second respondent described as its primary case. That is, that the procurement
be characterised as the payment of a ‘secret commission’.
Bribery/secret commission –
the common law – no accessorial liability
primary case of the HRC is that the payment of the procurement sum was a bribe
or secret commission and, if so, there is no need
to establish that RPM intended
to procure or induce a breach of fiduciary duty nor any need to prove that RPM
assisted in a dishonest
and fraudulent design. The primary case of the HRC is
that under the common law, if RPM paid a bribe or secret commission, it is
primary wrongdoer. The HRC relies in this context on the common law tort of
first applicant submits that, the dealings of RPM with Eklipse being when
Eklipse held all the lots in the Building and/or when
there was disclosure to
the office holders appointed at the meeting on 1 July 2020, it is not
appropriate to construe the payment
of the procurement sum as a bribe or secret
commission. In those circumstances, the applicant submits that there is no
secrecy with
respect to the payment of the procurement sum.
Bribes and secret
commissions
principles surrounding bribes and secret commissions (the terms are
indistinguishable)
accepted subset of the general principles relating to conflict of duty and
interest and misuse of fiduciary
generally accepted definition of a bribe is that stated by Slade J in
Industries & General Mortgage Co Ltd v
the purposes of the civil law a bribe means the payment of a secret commission,
which only means (i) that the person making the
payment makes it to the agent of
the other person with whom he is dealing; (ii) that he makes it to that person
knowing that that
person is acting as the agent of the other person with whom he
is dealing; and (iii) that he fails to disclose to the other person
with whom he
is dealing that he has made that payment to the person whom he knows to be the
other person's agent.
negate secrecy, what is required is disclosure of all material
law takes a strict and deterrent approach to
aspect of the policy underpinning the law with respect to secret commissions was
summarised by Ward CJ in Eq in
Broadway Plaza Investments Pty Ltd v Broadway
Plaza Pty Ltd
the following way:
I accept - indeed, I think it beyond argument - that a policy
undergirding this area of the law is a need to deter the payment of
other such corrupting behaviours. As Lord Templeman said for the Privy Council
Attorney General v Reid
(at 330-331):
“Bribery is an evil practice which threatens the foundations of any
civilised society ... Where bribes are accepted by a trustee,
servant, agent or
other fiduciary, loss and damage are caused to the beneficiaries, master or
principal whose interests have been
Similarly, there is the rationale of protection of principals and the need
for the principal to have the disinterested advice, and
assistance, of his, her
or its agent - the principal being entitled, by policy of the law, to be
confident the agent will act wholly
in the principal's interests. In this
regard, I accept that allowing a third party dealing with the principal to
confer benefits
on an agent may be productive of a corrupting influence.
Indeed, such a policy and normative concern underpins a conception of the
substantive legal rule as not requiring it to be proven
that the alleged payer
did in fact seek to influence, by paying the alleged bribe, the payee.
Likewise, such a policy and normative
concern also underpins a conception that
it not be necessary to prove that the alleged payer did, in fact, have a corrupt
in so paying. Similarly, such a concern coheres with the operation of
presumptions - including irrebuttable presumptions - as to
the fact of the payee
having been influenced by the alleged bribe.
Grimaldi v Chameleon Mining (No 2)
in remarks which are obiter but which I do not understand to be open to
doubt, it was said by the Full Court of the Federal
secret commissions often are given with the corrupt purpose of influencing, such
is not a necessary characteristic of them in
civil proceedings. As Lawrence
Collins J observed in
Daraydan Holdings Ltd v Solland International Ltd
[2005] Ch 119 at [53]:
“In proceedings against the payer of the bribe there is no need for the
principal to prove (a) that the payer of the bribe acted
with a corrupt motive;
(b) that the agent's mind was actually affected by the bribe; (c) that the payer
knew or suspected that the
agent would conceal the payment from the principal;
(d) that the principal suffered any loss or that the transaction was in some
unfair; the law is intended to operate as a deterrent against the giving of
Finally, as both of the above quotations make plain, the payer of a secret
commission to a person known to be acting in the matter
on behalf of another, is
taken to have assumed the risk of the payee having not obtained his or her
principal's informed consent
to receipt of the payment:
Grant v Gold
Exploration and Development Syndicate
[1899] UKLawRpKQB 220
[1900] 1 QB 233
at 249. Knowing that
the payee is acting on another's behalf is sufficient of itself to attract
liability, unless full disclosure
is made by the payer or “agent”
and consent is given by the principal to the payment. Importantly, the payer's
does not turn on his or her knowing or suspecting that the agent has
not received the principal's informed consent to the payment:
Bartram & Sons Ltd
(1904) 90 LT 357
...where the third party deals with a known agent (or fiduciary) in a
projected transaction with the agent's principal (or beneficiary)
course of so dealing offers and has accepted, or agrees to the agent's
solicitation of, a commission, introduction fee
or other collateral benefit
without the informed consent of the principal. In such a case the third party's
liability is founded
on the assumption of the risk that the agent has not
obtained the informed consent of the principal to the receipt of such a benefit
and hence is acting in breach of fiduciary duty: see
Grant v Gold Exploration
and Development Syndicate
Daraydan Holdings
, at [53]; and,
above, “Bribes and Secret Commissions”.
What the above appears to illustrate is that participatory liability as it
evolved in equity in cases prior and subsequent to
Barnes v Addy
based on inflexible formulae. Given the variety of circumstances in which, and
bases on which, a third party could be characterised
as a wrongdoer in equity -
and we have not here referred as well to third party participation, for example,
in a breach of confidence
or the abuse of a relationship of influence: see eg
Bank of New South Wales v Rogers
[1941] HCA 9
(1941) 65 CLR 42
- varying importance
has been given to three matters: (i) the nature of the actual fiduciary or
trustee wrongdoing in which the third
party was a participant; (ii) the nature
of the third party's role and participation, eg as alter ago, inducer or
procurer, dealer
at arm's length, etc; and (iii) the extent of the participant's
knowledge or, assumption of the risk of, or indifference to, actual,
apprehended
or suspected wrongdoing by the fiduciary.
with the foregoing, there is no need to prove any dishonesty or corrupt motive
on behalf of a third party who pays a bribe
to a fiduciary and no need to prove
that the third party knew or suspected that the payment would be kept secret.
The Court will
not inquire into the motive of the donor. There is an
irrebuttable presumption in favour of the principal and against the fiduciary
that the fiduciary was influenced by the
The elements of a secret commission
summarise, to establish payment of a bribe or secret commission only the
following need be established:
must be a gift to the fiduciary (i.e. – Eklipse);
gift must be intended by the donor (i.e. – RPM) and done to be an
inducement to the donee (i.e. – Eklipse);
donor (i.e. – RPM) must know the donee (i.e. – Eklipse) is the agent
or fiduciary of the principal (i.e. – the
HRC) with whom the donor is
dealing; and
gift is secret, not disclosed to the principal (i.e. – HRC) (i.e.
– the donor fails to disclose to the principal
that the payment was made
to the agent or fiduciary of the
principal).
submissions
primary case of the HRC is set out above. The HRC submits that if that case is
made good, it is entitled to rescission of the
Letting Agreement and the
Caretaking Agreement.
its part, RPM submits that a claim based upon a secret commission is subsumed as
a sub-category of the claim that RPM induced
or procured the breach of fiduciary
duty. On that basis, RPM submits that the HRC must establish that RPM knowingly
induced or immediately
procured the breach of fiduciary duty by Eklipse. RPM
submits that approach is consistent with obiter in
submits that, in that case,
the Court appears to have assimilated bribery
and secret commission cases with procurement
I cannot accept that
submission. The principles in the case of procurement and in the case of the
common law tort are distinct
and lead to different
In equity, the
briber is only made liable as a dishonest accessory. Under the common law, the
briber is a primary wrongdoer
and there is no requirement to prove dishonesty on the part of either
also submits that, even if a case of bribery was permissible standing alone
(i.e. – outside any obligation to establish
an intention to procure or
induce a breach of fiduciary duty or to establish knowing assistance in a
fraudulent and dishonest design),
it is essential to prove that the payment was
secret. RPM submitted that a payment cannot be secret if the fiduciary (i.e.
Eklipse) and the principal (i.e. – HRC) were not separate and
Was the procurement
sum a secret commission?
four elements of a bribe or secret commission are set out above. If the
principles with respect to secret commissions apply
to the facts of this case,
there is no need to prove that RPM acted with a corrupt motive; that the mind of
Eklipse was affected
by the ‘bribe’; that RPM knew or suspected that
the agent would conceal the payment from the principal; or that loss
suffered or the transaction was in some way
this case, I find that RPM knew that the procurement sum was a
‘gift’ to the fiduciary and that it was intended as
an inducement to
the fiduciary to enter into the Letting Agreement and Caretaking Agreements.
For the reasons set out earlier, I
have found that an aspect of the payment of
that sum was beyond just for the letting appointments obtained by Eklipse.
the context of the initial Procurement Agreement executed on
17 April 2020, and what was set out in that agreement as to why the
procurement sum was to be paid, I find that at least an aspect of that sum was
for the entry into the relevant Letting and Caretaking
Agreements with the
second respondent. There also cannot be any doubt that RPM knew that Eklipse
was the fiduciary of the HRC.
Mr Song said he understood that ‘the
developer stood in a fiduciary relationship with the
is not to find that RPM knew that the payment of the procurement sum was
dishonest, but I am satisfied that it was paid in the
knowledge that Eklipse was
a fiduciary and to influence it to enter into the two relevant agreements with
the extent that it may be relevant to whether a secret commission was paid or to
whether RPM is liable in some other way, I find
that it is unlikely that
Mr Song had any intention or belief that the procurement sum would be
brought to the attention of the HRC.
I have earlier set out the evidence of
Mr Song about that. This is not to suggest that I am satisfied that
Mr Song in any way actively
encouraged that the procurement sum not be
brought to the attention of the HRC. It is more likely that he did not turn his
to the issue as he never expected there would be disclosure. His
experience was that disclosure beyond Eklipse would not
is helpful to return to some of the other evidence about the state of mind of Mr
Song about the issue of disclosure to RPM.
an email between Mr Song’s lawyers on 15 April 2020,
Mr Pevy noted that Eklipse did not wish to refer to the Procurement
Agreement in the meeting on 1 July 2020. The HRC accepted that Mr
Song was not a party to that email. Mr Song gave evidence that
told that the existence of the Procurement Agreement was not to be referred to
in the Minutes of the meeting on 1 July
2020. Mr Song also gave
evidence that he did not think that it was important that it be disclosed in the
Minutes of that meeting
as it was a ‘commercial arrangement between me and
a developer’.
that ‘[a]t the time it’s not [the lot holder’s] business, the
business belonged to the
developer’.
Mr Song said that it was not important that the lot holders knew about the
procurement sum and drew upon his experience of other
arrangements.
accept the evidence of Mr Song that he was not told that the existence of
the Procurement Agreement was not to be disclosed in
the Minutes of the first
meeting. There is no evidence that the position set out in the email dated
15 April 2020 was later conveyed
to Mr Song, including by those
acting for him. It was also not a matter raised in the Due Diligence Report
provided later that same
for the balance of the evidence of Mr Song regarding his expectations about
disclosure which I have summarised earlier, as mentioned,
I am not satisfied
that evidence should be viewed as Mr Song having specifically turned his
mind to it at the time of the execution
of the specific agreements relevant in
this case, let alone that he specifically considered that they should be
disclosed but nevertheless
contributed in some way to that not taking place.
That was not the evidence of Mr Song, nor do I draw those inferences given
I cannot reject his evidence about his experience of other like
arrangements.
important aspect of the evidence given by Mr Song regarding his thinking
of him being asked
1 July 2020 when the first meeting occurred; or on or about
21 August 2020 when the final Procurement Agreement was executed. The
evidence of Mr Song was in the context of him being asked
to give his view about
whether it was important that there be disclosure to the lot holders in the
Minutes or in some other way.
In essence, Mr Song was being asked to give
his opinion. The evidence of Mr Song was that it was not important as, in
the sum was for the business of the developer and to have disclosed it
would not have been consistent with what had occurred in other
arrangements. I am not satisfied that his evidence should be viewed as him
having accepted that he had turned his mind to the
issue at the time. I am also
not satisfied that it is evidence that founds an inference that he had a
conscious role in an absence
of disclosure. The most obvious inference from the
evidence of Mr Song, and the inference which I draw, is that he gave no
to the issue as he did not regard the payment as a matter that needed to
be disclosed beyond Eklipse.
payment was secret
disclosure of the procurement sum to Eklipse deprives that payment of
characterisation as secret (either on the basis that
it held all the lots in the
HRC and/or on the basis that by 1 July 2020 its representatives held
the positions of Presiding Officer,
Secretary and Treasurer and so controlled
the management of the HRC) there can be no doubt that the payment of the
procurement sum
was secret.
may be asked, can the payment of the procurement sum be characterised as secret
if the principal and the agent are indistinguishable
and/or if the payment was
disclosed to the office holders just mentioned? The first applicant submits
that for one, or both, of
those reasons, the procurement sum was not a secret
commission. This case can be distinguished from those authorities which provide
the principal with a remedy against a third party with which it has contracted
through its agent if the third party makes a payment
to the agent which is not
disclosed to the principal when the principal is in existence. In the
circumstances of this case, is it
open to be satisfied that the payment of the
procurement sum was a secret commission which entitles the principal to rescind
contract with the third party that makes the payment?
contention of the HRC within this aspect of the proceedings is, in effect, at
least in part, that RPM was obliged to disclose
to the HRC a payment which RPM
made to Eklipse at a time when RPM could only deal with Eklipse as it held all
my view, it is appropriate to ask: given that RPM was dealing with Eklipse which
was not only the fiduciary of the proposed community
corporation, but held all
the lots and so was the entirety of the community corporation and given that the
representatives of Eklipse
were the office holders earlier mentioned, at the
time of agreeing to pay the procurement sum, to whom was RPM to make disclosure
of that sum in order that it not be characterised as secret?
it is not necessary to be comprehensive as to what might be appropriate methods
of disclosure, if the contention of the
HRC is correct, perhaps disclosure might
have been made in the Minutes of the meeting on 1 July 2020 and/or at the first
meeting held pursuant to s 79 of the CT Act? Certainly, there is no
dispute that neither occurred.
must be accepted that there is nothing in the principles with respect to secret
commissions to suggest that a third party must
know that the payment it makes is
to be kept secret. To recapitulate, in
, it was held that it was
not necessary to prove that the payer of a bribe had knowledge of any type that
the payment would not be
, the Full Court referred with approval to authorities which had
held that the payer assumes the risk of the payee not having obtained
informed consent of the principal and that liability of the third party did not
turn on that third party knowing or suspecting
that informed consent had not
been obtained.
attention to the authorities upon which
relies for its statement
of the relevant principles, authorities each also referred to in
, reveals that the circumstances dealt with in those authorities
are not analogous in every respect to this case. In each
it may be said that the
party making the payment (in this case, RPM) made that payment to an agent of
the principal (in this case,
Eklipse) at a time when the principal existed as an
entity separate and distinct from its agent (in this case, the HRC). As a
there was the capacity for the payer to ensure that it was disclosed to
the principal. In such a case, it is meaningful to take
into account the payer
assuming the risk that the agent will not make disclosure to its principal. In
this case, as mentioned, the
principal did not exist as an entity separate to
the agent at the time it was agreed that consideration would be paid as the
held all the lots and the payment was not secret from the officer holders
appointed on 1 July 2020.
while I was referred by the HRC to authorities involving breaches of fiduciary
duty by developers and/or promoters in the
setting of, or akin to, a developer
control period, the issue in those authorities was not whether there could be a
finding of the
payment of a secret commission by a third party when the
principal and the fiduciary were, at the relevant time, one and the
can see how it is appropriate that there be a remedy against a third party when
that party makes a payment to the fiduciary;
and the third party could have
ascertained the identity of the principal and made disclosure but did not do so.
In such a case, it
is more clearly appropriate to characterise the payment as
secret and find that the third party assumed a risk the fiduciary would
disclose it. However, it might be more difficult to see how it is appropriate
that there be remedies available against the third
party when the principal is,
at the time of entry into the contracts, and at the time it is agreed the
payment will be made, wholly
constituted by the fiduciary with whom the third
party is dealing and/or when there is disclosure to the office holders of the
of that said, it is also not appropriate to proceed on the basis that the future
HRC did not exist. To proceed in that way would
be to conclude on the one hand,
that Eklipse owed a fiduciary duty to the future HRC but on the other hand and
at the same time,
proceed on the basis that no secret commission was paid
because the future HRC did not exist as a separate body. To approach the
in that way would be to find that the future HRC existed as Eklipse had a
fiduciary duty to the HRC but to find, at the same
time, the HRC was not a body
separate to Eklipse. At 1 July 2020, the future HRC is either separate from
Eklipse, or it is not.
The future HRC either exists, or it does not.
that reason alone, I find that Eklipse owning all the lots on
1 July 2020 cannot stand in the way of a finding that a secret
commission was paid. Although not necessary to decide, it may be observed that
a different approach would enable a party such as
RPM to avoid the principles
surrounding secret commissions simply because of the timing of an agreement even
when it knew the agent
was a fiduciary. It might be difficult to reconcile that
approach with the existence of the fiduciary relationship between Eklipse
the HRC and the importance of the deterrence of behaviour which may be
destructive of commercial relations. I find that the
payment was secret
notwithstanding that it was known to Eklipse at a time at which it held all the
lots. Further, I also find that
the payment was secret notwithstanding that it
was known to the office holders appointed on 1 July 2020. While those
persons were
office holders, they were also representatives of Eklipse and not
independent.
find that the procurement sum paid by RPM was a secret commission. It was a
gift by RPM intended, at least in part, to enter into
the relevant agreements
between the HRC and RPM. RPM knew that Eklipse was in a fiduciary relationship
with the future HRC.
gift was secret as it was not disclosed to the future HRC. I find that
disclosure to the representatives of Eklipse, even once
they were officeholders
as appointed on 1 July 2020, was not sufficient to deprive the agreement to pay
the procurement sum of being
secret when Eklipse was the agent of the HRC and no
disclosure was made to the HRC by any person or entity who might be properly
characterised as independent of Eklipse or its representatives. Consistent with
reasons already given, this is not to find that
the whole of the procurement sum
was a secret commission, nor to find that the second respondent is entitled to
obtain the whole
of that sum.
will later consider the remedies available to the HRC, but before doing so, I
turn to some other matters.
Other contentions with respect to
proof of a remedy of recission – equity
addition to the HRC’s claim for recission of the Letting Agreement and
Caretaking Agreement to which it is a party based
on the payment of a secret
commission, the HRC makes three alternative contentions, each of which it says
also entitles it to recission
of the relevant agreements.
Each is based upon RPM knowing
that Eklipse owed a fiduciary duty to the HRC. First, that RPM knowingly
induced or procured a breach/es
of a fiduciary duty by
Second, that RPM
knowingly participated in a dishonest and fraudulent design by
Third, that RPM
knew that Eklipse was breaching its fiduciary
The first and second contentions
– accessorial liability
Selborne LC in
identified two limbs
of accessorial liability (i.e. – knowing receipt and knowing assistance).
Lord Selborne LC
create a trust clothe the trustee with a legal power and control over the trust
property, imposing on him a corresponding
responsibility. That responsibility
may no doubt be extended in equity to others who are not properly trustees, if
they are found
either making themselves trustees de son tort, or actually
participating in any fraudulent conduct of the trustee to the injury of
cestui que trust. But, on the other hand, strangers are not to be made
constructive trustees merely because they act as the
agents of trustees in
transactions within their legal powers, transactions, perhaps of which a Court
of Equity may disapprove, unless
those agents receive and become chargeable with
some part of the trust property, or unless they assist with knowledge in a
and fraudulent design on the part of the trustees.
held by the High Court in
Farah Constructions Pty Ltd & Ors v Say-Dee Pty
Constructions
form of accessorial liability referred to as ‘knowing assistance’
(or the second limb of
Barnes v Addy
) makes a third party (i.e. –
RPM) liable if that party assists a fiduciary (i.e. – Eklipse) with
knowledge of a dishonest
and fraudulent design on the part of the
Nevertheless, the
High Court also held:
...there is a distinction between rendering liable a defendant
participating with knowledge in a dishonest and fraudulent design,
and rendering
liable a defendant who dishonestly procures or assists in a breach of trust or
fiduciary obligation where the trustee
or fiduciary need not have engaged in a
dishonest or fraudulent design ... Australian courts should continue to observe
the distinction
mentioned above and apply the formulation in the second limb of
Barnes v Addy
(citations omitted)
knowing assistance requires the third party to have knowledge of the dishonest
and fraudulent design. The knowledge necessary
being actual knowledge; wilfully
shutting one’s eyes; wilfully and recklessly failing to make such
inquiries as an honest and
reasonable person would make; and knowledge of
circumstances which would indicate the facts to an honest and reasonable
succeed in a claim of knowingly procuring or assisting in a breach of fiduciary
duty, it is not necessary to show any fraudulent
or dishonest design, but it is
necessary to show that the third party (i.e. – RPM) dishonestly procured
or assisted in a breach
of fiduciary
The knowledge
necessary is the same as that above.
The submissions of the second
second respondent identified nine matters which it submitted, viewed in
combination, establish that RPM was either a knowing
participant in a fraudulent
and dishonest design or dishonestly procured or induced a breach of fiduciary
and Mr Song knew Eklipse had obtained Development Approval on the basis that the
land use was only for ‘residential purposes’;
and Mr Song were provided with the Scheme Descriptions, the High-Rise Scheme and
Development Contract and therefore knew that
the Realm Building was for
‘residential purposes’ and that running a hotel business or offering
short stay accommodation
for reward was not permitted;
and Mr Song knew that Eklipse had initially provided lot holders with by-laws
which precluded the offering of short stay accommodation,
that those by-laws had
been amended with the intent of reversing that position and that those amended
by-laws had not been disclosed
to lot holders;
and Mr Song knew that the majority of property management appointments which
were held by Eklipse, or its agent were for investor
lot holders to enter into
long term tenancies and that there would be a need to convert them to short term
and Mr Song knew that Eklipse was not engaging in bona fide negotiations with
respect to the Caretaking Agreement when Mr Pattinson
sent to Mr Song
an email letter of 10 April 2020, which, referring to the length of the term
stated, ‘this is one of the reasons
we must act carefully’ and
highlighting sections of s.142B(1);
and Mr Song knew that Eklipse was not engaging in bona fide negotiations with
respect to the Caretaking Agreement by reason that
a request for a quote was
never made and instead a schedule of intended charges was provided by Eklipse to
knew that the consequence of Eklipse acting in breach of its fiduciary
obligations was that there would be serious, extensive
(there are 160 lot
holders in High Rise) and adverse effects which permitting RPM to run its hotel
business in the Realm Building
would have on the living conditions and standards
of lot holders and the harmonious relations of lot holders, guests and staff,
the Realm Building;
knew that Eklipse did not intend to seek the informed consent of lot holders or
the High-Rise Corporation to the amendment of
the by‑laws or to the
receipt of the procurement payment;
intended or alternatively knew, that the entry into the Procurement Agreements
and the payment of the amounts due under them would
influence Eklipse to amend
the By-Laws provided to purchasers within the High-Rise Corporation to a form of
by-laws which permitted
RPM’s operations to occur.
turn to each of the above.
Knowledge of Development Approval
– ‘residential purposes’ only
Scheme Descriptions were provided to Mr Song’s solicitors on
10 April 2020.
Relevant documents, including a Development Approval, were perused by those
solicitors and advice was provided to Mr Song. It may
be accepted that the
Development Approval within the draft Scheme Description referred to the nature
of the development as being
for ‘residential purposes’.
Nevertheless, I am not satisfied this assists the second respondent.
the submission assumes that the reference to residential purposes is something
that only denotes occupancy that is not short-term.
For reasons given, I do not
accept that assumption.
whether this is a matter of significance must also be considered bearing in mind
that there cannot be any doubt that Mr Song
was anxious to ascertain
whether the only letting business that was of any real commercial interest to
him (i.e. – short‑term
letting) would be permissible. So much is
obvious from Mr Song seeking legal advice and from the fact that he was
prepared to pay
a much more substantial sum ($22,000) for each short‑term
letting appointment compared to what he was prepared to pay for a
appointment ($6,000). I am satisfied that Mr Song would not have agreed to
pay that greater fee if he considered there
was a prohibition based upon
Development Approval.
as just mentioned, Mr Song took legal advice. Insofar as the development
approval is concerned, Mr Song sought legal advice
from a person other than
a solicitor within Pevy Lawyers.
the final piece of correspondence from Mr Dawson stated that the planning
system in South Australia ‘differentiates residential
apartments as being
different to serviced apartments or those that are let out for short term
stays’; that ‘the use of
private apartments for Airbnb is still a
grey area’; and that approval to change the use would be needed;
Mr Dawson also advised
that ‘going from residential to serviced is
more straight forward’.
Further, and putting the foregoing aside, there is nothing in the advice
received about planning which suggested that what Mr Song
was contemplating
was unlawful, or otherwise inappropriate.
Scheme Descriptions and development
submission assumes that the effect of the documents identified was that
short-term letting was not permitted. I have rejected
that assumption.
The indicative by-laws
am satisfied that Mr Song had reason to know that the issue of short-term
letting was an issue about which Eklipse was concerned.
Specifically,
Mr Song had reason to know that Eklipse did not want short-term letting
referred to in the Procurement Agreement.
While I accept that Mr Song may not
have read carefully the emails of Mr Pattinson on or about
9 April 2020 in which Mr Pattinson
expressly raised not referring
to short-term letting in the Procurement Agreement, and the presence of
Mr Song in the Zoom teleconference
on 9 April 2020 is not
pleaded, attention can be given to what occurred after that meeting
The purpose of that
conference was to resolve outstanding issues about the Procurement Agreement,
one being whether reference to
short-term letting would appear. After the
meeting, Mr Pevy emailed Mr Song to advise that, because of the
meeting, he would further
amend the draft Procurement Agreement to remove
references to short-term
I am satisfied that
Mr Song would have paid attention to the communications after the Zoom
teleconference as short-term letting
was the only business in which he had any
real interest. That said, I am not satisfied this weighs in favour of the case
second respondent as Mr Song received legal advice throughout. At
least once the matter had been discussed at the Zoom teleconference,
advice to Mr Song did not suggest that the approach of Eklipse to short-term
letting and reference to it being excluded
from the initial Procurement
Agreement should be of concern to RPM. For example, Mr Pevy did not raise any
such concern in his email
to Mr Song immediately after that
must be accepted that the indicative by-laws provided to lot holders were
materially different to those the subject of the amendments.
It must also be
accepted that what became the existing by-laws had not been given to lot holders
was a matter brought to Mr Song’s
attention. Regardless of whether
Mr Song read the email of Ms Huebner to Mr Pattinson on
21 April 2020, I find the issue was discussed
with him. That is the
obvious inference from the email on 22 April 2020 from
Pevy Lawyers to the effect that Mr Song was comfortable
advice provided by Lynch Meyer on
22 April 2020.
That advice being that there was no obligation to provide the amended by-laws to
purchasers who had received the indicative by-laws.
find that Mr Song was told, on 21 or 22 April 2020, that the
existing by‑laws were different to those provided to lot holders.
said, I also find that Pevy Lawyers did not tell Mr Song that Eklipse
was under an obligation to provide the existing by-laws
to purchasers who had
received the indicative by-laws. That was not the advice of Lynch Meyer
conveyed to Pevy Lawyers. Given the
email from Pevy Lawyers to
Lynch Meyer on 22 April 2020, I find that Pevy Lawyers
discussed the position of Lynch Meyer with Mr Song.
It is unlikely
that Pevy Lawyers gave Mr Song advice different to that provided by
Lynch Meyer. Lynch Meyer was a local solicitor
commenting upon a
state Act. That advice was correct. Putting that aside, for reasons given, a
particular concern of Pevy Lawyers
was the issue of the by-laws. Had
Mr Song been told by Pevy Lawyers that there was such an obligation, I
would expect them to have
made a record of the giving of that advice. There is
no such evidence.
earlier set out, that Eklipse was aware that the indicative by-laws were
different to what became the existing by-laws is an aspect
of my finding that
Eklipse was involved in a fraudulent and dishonest design. Nevertheless, while
not irrelevant, that Mr Song had
the same awareness does not have the same
significance in the case of RPM for two reasons.
unlike in the case of Eklipse, given that Mr Song did not become involved in
negotiations until about 26 March 2020, I am
not able to find that RPM
had knowledge of how the Building had been promoted. That alone materially
distinguishes the position
of Mr Song from the position of Eklipse. Second, RPM
sought legal advice. As set out above, it can be inferred that on 21 or
April 2020 Mr Song was told, by his own solicitors, of the
advice of Lynch Meyer that there was no statutory obligation to disclose
change of indicative by-laws to lot holders. As mentioned, in the absence of
contrary evidence, of which there is none, I infer
that Pevy Lawyers did not
suggest to Mr Song that the advice of Lynch Meyer was incorrect. In the
Due Diligence Report, Pevy Lawyers
had given substantial advice which touched
upon the by-laws and Mr Pevy had told Ms Huebner to check the by-laws
carefully. In such
circumstances, it is more likely than not that Pevy Lawyers
gave thought to the advice of Lynch Meyer; were comfortable with the
of Lynch Meyer; and communicated that to Mr Song. True it is that the same
advice was brought to the attention of Mr Pattinson,
but again, in the case
of Eklipse and its representatives, the significance of the advice it received
must be considered in the context
of what it knew about how the Realm Building
had been promoted.
as touched upon, that Mr Song was on notice of the indicative by‑laws
having been in a different form and that not
being conveyed to the lot holders
cannot be viewed as divorced from the Due Diligence Report. That Report
expressly referred to
what became the existing by-laws being appropriate for the
agreements contemplated. It may be accepted immediately that is not the
advice to the effect that there was no difficulty with amending the indicative
by-laws in a material way. Nevertheless,
it remains that nothing appeared in
that Report which conflicted with what it is likely Mr Song was later told
by Pevy Lawyers on
or about 22 April 2020.
Property management appointments
may be accepted that Mr Song knew UA would be responsible for lettings in
the first 12 months and considered that UA did not have
the ability to do
short‑term letting.
may also be accepted that Mr Song was sent letting documents that were not
consistent with short-term
However, it must
also be accepted that the first approach to Mr Song was on about
26 March 2020 and involved Mr Song being told
having withdrawn from
negotiations.
I accept the
evidence of Mr Song that Imagine was a business like that of RPM (i.e.
– with a particular focus on short‑term
and that he was told
Imagine had withdrawn from negotiations because of
reject that Mr Song had good reason to believe what he was told given the
travel restrictions announced at around the same
time as he was approached about
the Realm Building. Viewed objectively, the pandemic was more likely to
adversely impact short-term
letting. In my view, that Mr Song knew that
Imagine had been involved in negotiations and that he was given a cogent
explanation
for Imagine having ceased negotiations is relevant to whether
Mr Song had knowledge of a fraudulent and dishonest design. It weighs
against that conclusion as there was a reason for Imagine withdrawing from
negotiations for reasons other than Imagine having a concern
of short-term letting in the Realm Building.
as early as 1 April 2020, Mr Song exchanged emails with UA with
respect to paying for letting appointments. I do not interpret
that exchange as
putting Mr Song on notice that short-term letting might not be permitted.
To the contrary, from the beginning,
UA was holding out the possibility of a
substantial number of such appointments without raising that there was some
impediment to
that occurring. UA might be criticised for having done so in the
context of having been involved in the promotion of the Realm Building,
not satisfied that any criticism of UA weighs in favour of RPM having the
relevant knowledge.
submits that I should reject that Mr Song only learned that it had
long‑term letting around
August 2020.
some uncertainty about whether I should accept that evidence. I have been
unable to reach a view.
I am satisfied of two matters. First, even if it was assumed that evidence
should not be accepted, I would not find it
was a lie. It might be that it was
considered by Mr Song to be in his interest to give that evidence. It
might be equally the case
that his memory was faulty. This was not the only
business occupying Mr Song’s time in 2020. Mr Song was running
a short-term
letting business in more than one state during the COVID‑19
Knowledge that Eklipse
was not engaged in bona fide negotiations because of Mr Pattinson’s
email on 10 April 2020
set out again the email dated 10 April
This is one the reasons we a (sic) must act carefully in particular stating
upfront 25 year term (even though it essentially is but
eh (sic) manger can be
terminated prior to the full 25 year term. The current Motions already email
(sic) to you have not be (sic)
vetted as yet and are subject to change.
To overcome this position our legal advice is noted in the last 2 items.
COMMUNITY TITLES ACT 1996
142B—Developer stands in fiduciary relationship with community
corporation
(1) For the avoidance of doubt—
(a) the developer stands in a fiduciary relationship with the community
corporation and, before the community corporation is established,
proposed community corporation; and
(b) the duties owed by the developer under this Act are in addition to, and do
not derogate from, the duties arising out of that
fiduciary relationship.
(2) Without derogating from subsection (1), where the community corporation
intends, during the developer control period, to delegate
functions or powers to
a body corporate manager or to enter into a contract for services, the developer
must exercise reasonable
skill, care and diligence and act in the best interests
of the community corporation (as it will be constituted after the developer
control period ends).
An application may be made under section 142 if the developer contravenes
this subsection.
(3) In this section—
"developer control period" means a period during which—
(a) the community corporation is constituted solely by the developer; or
(b) the developer owns the majority of lots in the community scheme or in any
other way controls the voting of the corporation.
You may have formed the view that in (sic) to maintain the high standards of
the development and expectations of purchasers
it is necessary
to enter into such Agreements with an experienced operator for the ongoing
benefit of the proposed Corporations, and
that the Corporations are otherwise
entitled to determine the Agreements if the Caretaker fails to remedy breaches
(as in Clause
9 you adverted to), and
as experienced
developers have exercised reasonable skill, care and diligence in your judgement
of entering the agreements.
am not satisfied that this email weighs in favour of RPM having any relevant
observations must be made. First, Mr Song did not receive this email. His
email address was misspelt. Second, while the
email obviously raised
s 142B of the CT Act and, in that context, a need to ‘act
carefully’ with respect to the 25-year
terms, assuming that was conveyed
to Mr Song by Pevy Lawyers, whether that is significant must be viewed
given the Due Diligence
Report which postdates this email. The length of the
agreements was specifically raised in the Due Diligence Report. While that
Report raised the potential for long-term agreements to be set aside, it did not
suggest that there was something unlawful or otherwise
improper about such
agreements.
acknowledge that I have earlier rejected that Mr Song was not told of the
risk of the agreements being set aside due to the length
and/or following a
valid resolution of a community corporation. While that rejection is relevant
to the evaluation of the credibility
and reliability of other aspects of the
evidence of Mr Song, it cannot change the advice given in the Due Diligence
Report. In my
view, that advice is the most significant consideration. As
mentioned, while that advice was that there existed a risk of the agreements
being set aside, that advice was not to the effect that the agreements were a
breach of fiduciary duty; that Eklipse might have been
acting dishonestly; or
that RPM might otherwise be acting unlawfully or improperly.
as earlier set out, I cannot reject the evidence of Mr Song to the effect
that 25-year arrangements were not
Negotiations
not bona fide – no quote and the duration of the agreements
the case of RPM, I am not satisfied that this weighs in support of the requisite
the evidence of Mr Song was that it was not always the case that there was
a tender process for agreements of these
While I have rejected
some aspects of the evidence of Mr Song, I am unable to reject that aspect
of his evidence. There is no evidence
which contradicts that evidence. Second,
putting that aside, in my view, it is relevant that the negotiations with
respect to the
agreements occurred after earlier negotiations with Imagine had
advanced to the point of drafting agreements. In that limited sense,
not a case of Eklipse going to the market for the first time when it commenced
negotiations with RPM. Further, and although
of very limited significance, I
cannot reject the evidence of Mr Song that terms were negotiated which were
less favourable to him
materially so.
for the length of the agreements, two observations can be made – both of
which weigh against this contributing to RPM having
the requisite knowledge.
First, the length of the agreements, as executed, already appeared in the drafts
provided to RPM after
Imagine had withdrawn. Second, as mentioned more than
once, I cannot reject the evidence of Mr Song that it was common practice
for agreements like those in this case to have 25-year
evidence tends to support that what appeared in the drafts provided following
the cessation of negotiations with Imagine was
not something which should be
seen as contributing to RPM having acted dishonestly. I recognise that, to some
extent, the evidence
of Mr Breda weighs against the evidence of
Mr Song about 25-year terms. Nevertheless, the evidence of Mr Breda
appears limited to
South Australia, which limits its significance in undermining
the evidence of Mr Song. Further, there is no evidence that the views
Mr Breda were shared with Mr Song. In addition, as earlier mentioned,
while the Due Diligence Report raised the risk given the
length of the
agreements, an aspect of the same Report was that terms of 25 years did
occur in the case of caretaking
agreements.
I also recognise
that the length of the agreements contributed to my finding that Eklipse
breached s 142B of the CT Act. However,
Eklipse was aware of the position
of Mr Breda not just about the length of the agreements but also his
position about a clause being
added which might have provided a greater
opportunity to the HRC not to extend the agreements.
for the payment of the procurement sum, it is not in dispute that Mr Song
is a very experienced operator of caretaking and short-term
letting businesses.
I cannot reject the evidence of Mr Song that it was common in his
experience that a procurement sum would be
paid to the developer. After all, an
aspect of what was being purchased was letting appointments which had been
acquired by the
developer. In evidence that I do not reject, Mr Song said
that he had caused the payment to be
because I considered that consistent with the position in Queensland and
Victoria, transactions involving the entry into agreements
providing for the
grant by the developers of apartment complexes of rights to managers or agents
to undertake caretaking of apartment
complexes and make rental agreements on
behalf of owners was lawful and appropriate in South Australia, and nothing was
my attention during my dealings in relation to the Realm apartments
that led me to doubt this position.
Knowledge of impact on lot holders
Respectfully,
this is no more than an assertion. Assuming that it is an assertion with any
weight, it could only really have significance
if Mr Song had the requisite
knowledge that a substantial number of lot holders had contracted with Eklipse
in a way inconsistent
with what was contemplated. As set out above,
Mr Song was not involved in the Realm Building during its promotion.
Mr Song did
not become involved until about 26 March 2020 and I
have not found that he had knowledge of how the Building had been promoted.
Even if Mr Song had reason to consider that the short-term letting business
might disappoint some residents, I would not be satisfied
that can contribute in
any substantial way to Mr Song’s requisite knowledge in the absence
of reason to consider that lot holders
had been deceived by Eklipse. I am not
satisfied that Mr Song had any requisite knowledge that lot holders might have
been deceived
by Eklipse during the marketing of the Building or through sales
Knowledge that RPM did not
intend to seek informed consent about the Procurement Sum
have earlier set out my views regarding the state of mind of Mr Song about
what the lot holders or the HRC would be told about
the procurement sum. I
doubt that he turned his mind to that issue. Even if he did, I am not satisfied
that weighs in favour of
Mr Song having the requisite knowledge. I cannot
reject his evidence that he did not consider it anything other than a matter
himself and Eklipse. I am not satisfied that he should have regarded an
absence of disclosure of that as an issue. Pevy Lawyers
were aware that it
would not appear in the Minutes of the meetings on 1 July 2020. There
is no evidence which suggests that those
solicitors raised any concern about
aspect of the submissions of the HRC was that something about the state of mind
of RPM may be inferred from the absence of evidence
that Mr Song sought and
received advice about the propriety of the initial and/or final Procurement
Agreements. Attention was directed
to the absence of such advice in the Due
Diligence Report. I cannot accept that submission. First, the absence of
evidence that
advice was sought about the terms of those agreements might
contribute to establishing dishonesty on behalf of the first applicant
matter which was pleaded. Second, and separately, it was not a matter put to
Mr Song in cross-examination. In the circumstances,
I am not satisfied
that it would be appropriate to draw an inference adverse to him on the basis
suggested by the second respondent.
for the by-laws, I have dealt with that above.
Intention to influence
with earlier aspects of this judgment, I find that the procurement sum was paid,
in part, to secure entry into the Caretaking
and Letting Agreements with the
HRC. Further, under both the initial Procurement Agreement and the final
Procurement Agreement,
the obligations of Eklipse included that it would ensure
the by-laws deposited would be what became the existing
I am not satisfied that this aids in proof that RPM had the requisite knowledge.
As set out above, Mr Song was given legal
advice about the by-laws and the
Caretaking and Letting Agreements. There was nothing in that advice which
suggested that amending
the indicative by-laws or those agreements were unlawful
or improper. The evidence is to the contrary. To the extent that the legal
advice given to Mr Song alerted him to risks in the context of s 142B of the CT
Act and/or the risk of valid motions being passed
by the community corporations,
that was also not advice that amending the indicative by-laws was unlawful or
improper, nor was it
advice that Eklipse might have been acting in breach of its
fiduciary duty. Having been advised by his solicitors, I am satisfied
Mr Song was entitled to leave the issue there.
Dishonesty – conclusion
with respect to RPM
recognise that the matters relied upon by HRC, and which I have identified as
being relevant to RPM having the requisite knowledge
of a fraudulent or
dishonest design or the requisite knowledge of dishonestly having procured or
induced a breach of fiduciary duty,
must be viewed in combination.
matters which I have identified are that Mr Song had reason to know that
there was sensitivity on behalf of Eklipse about reference
to short-term letting
appearing in the Procurement Agreement and that Mr Song was aware that lot
holders had been provided with indicative
by-laws which were different in
material respects to what became the existing by-laws.
for the issue with respect to the by-laws, as mentioned, what was known about
the existence of the indicative by-laws and that
they were to be amended must be
viewed in the context of Mr Song having received legal advice. As
mentioned, the issue of the indicative
by-laws was known to Pevy Lawyers
and there was no advice that there was anything untoward about that.
for short-term letting not appearing in the Procurement Agreement, I am unable
to conclude that this contributes to Mr Song having
any requisite knowledge.
That it contributes to relevant knowledge on behalf of Mr Song is difficult to
reconcile with letting of
that type being referred to in the Letting Agreement
with the HRC. Further, even were that put aside, once the Letting Agreement
been entered into, the conduct of a short-term letting business was always going
to be revealed by the conduct of that business.
Further, if this has any
relevance, it would be on the basis that Mr Song considered that the payment of
the procurement sum would
not be disclosed to the lot holders. Assuming that,
it would have some significance as, for reasons given, that sum was not only
being paid for letting appointments. An aspect of the consideration was for
other rights conferred under all the Letting Agreements;
the rights conferred
under the Caretaking Agreements; and the depositing of what became the existing
Nevertheless,
I have not found that the second respondent has met its burden of establishing
on the balance of probabilities that
Mr Song had the requisite knowledge or was
dishonest. Mr Pevy participated in the meeting on 9 April 2020
and, following that meeting,
advised Mr Song that he would amend the
Procurement Agreement to remove reference to short-term letting. Whatever was
communicated
before the meeting on 9 April 2020, there is no evidence that after
that meeting Mr Pevy communicated to Mr Song reservations about
mentioned, Mr Pevy was anxious to ensure that his firm protected itself given
the risk that he believed Mr Song might be
prepared to take. Notwithstanding
that concern, after the meeting on 9 April 2020, Mr Pevy expressed no concern
of the reference to short-term letting. This weighs against a
conclusion that Mr Song should have thought there might be a concern
that occurring.
the circumstances, I am not satisfied that Mr Song had, at least, knowledge of
facts which would indicate the existence of a dishonest
and fraudulent design to
an honest and reasonable person. In the circumstances, I am also not satisfied
that Mr Song had, at least,
knowledge of facts which would indicate to an
honest and reasonable person that he was dishonestly procuring or inducing a
of fiduciary duty by Eklipse.
Recission if RPM merely knew that
Eklipse was in breach of its fiduciary duty.
earlier set out, the second respondent contends that an order for recission of
the relevant Letting and Caretaking Agreements
may be made even if it is not
found that RPM paid a secret commission; participated in a fraudulent and
dishonest design; or knowingly
induced a breach of fiduciary duty. It is
arguably not necessary to deal with this issue given my finding that RPM paid a
commission. Nevertheless, in case my approach to any relevant issue is
wrong, I will deal with it.
second respondent contends that merely establishing that RPM had knowledge (i.e.
– had actual knowledge; wilfully shut
its eyes to the obvious; wilfully
and recklessly failed to make such enquires as an honest and reasonable person
would make; or had
knowledge of circumstances which would indicate the facts to
an honest and reasonable
that Eklipse was
breaching its fiduciary duty is sufficient. The second respondent contends that
RPM had the requisite knowledge
as RPM knew that Eklipse was acting for, and on
behalf of, the HRC during the developer control period; knew that Eklipse owed a
fiduciary duty to the community corporation; intended that the entry into the
Procurement Agreements and payment of consideration
would influence Eklipse to
enter into the Caretaking and Letting Agreements and did not disclose, or
adequately disclose, the Procurement
Agreement and was aware that Eklipse did
not intend to do so.
second respondent relied upon two authorities in support of this contention:
Vic Beef Holdings Pty Ltd v Chen
Great Investments Ltd v Warner (
Great Investments
first applicant contends that the authorities upon which the second respondent
relies to establish this relief do not support
its existence.
VicBeef and Great
Investments
second respondent submits that in
, M Osborne J held that where
all that is sought by a party to a contract is an order for recission and the
consequential re-vesting
of the benefit provided under the contract, the only
relevant question is whether the third party was a bona fide purchaser for value
without notice.
, Mr Chen was a director of the plaintiff companies: VicBeef
and Tabro Meat. Mr Chen caused those companies to enter into security
agreements over their assets (
the agreements
) to companies associated
with a defendant, Mr Cai. VicBeef and Tabro Meat sought rescission of the
agreements on the basis that
Mr Chen breached his obligations to the
plaintiff companies. M Osborne J held that Mr Chen had breached
his duties under
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) and also the no conflict rule under the general law. Mr Chen did
not seek to establish that his actions were
was held that VicBeef and Tabro Meat were entitled to an order rescinding the
agreements. That occurred in the context of Mr
Cai having had knowledge,
principally by way of the knowledge of his lawyers, of the breaches of a
fiduciary nature. However, an
aspect of the evidence contributing to that
finding was knowledge that the agreements were ‘not legal’ and in
the knowledge
that the debt created pursuant to the agreements was not a debt of
VicBeef and Tabro Meat.
is, Mr Cai had knowledge which, at least, could establish that the entry
into the agreements was dishonest.
second respondent relies upon the fact that what M Osborne J said in
had been held in
Great Investments
M Osborne J stated that
Great Investments
supports the
proposition set out in [387] above.
Nevertheless,
as the first applicant submitted,
Great Investments
was not a case
involving the recission of a contract.
Investments
concerned a claim by the liquidator of a company (Bellpac) to
recover $6,000,000 of bonds transferred from Bellpac to Great Investments
Bellpac was insolvent. The bonds were transferred by Mr Wong, a director
of Bellpac, as payment of his own personal debts.
Those personal debts included
$2,000,000 to his brother-in-law and $1,000,000 to a man who knew Mr Wong
was dishonest.
conceded that if the transfers were made without authority, then questions of
knowing receipt would not arise and the issue
would be whether Great Investments
could maintain a defence of being a bona fide purchaser for the value without
notice. It was
held that concession was
so holding, the Court reasoned that if benefits were transferred pursuant to a
contract, then unless the contract was first rescinded,
the contract provided
the reason the company could retain the benefit such that, unless the contract
was rescinded, there was no
question of knowing receipt. If the contract was
rescinded and the claim limited to restitution of the benefit, there was no work
for knowing receipt as there was no contract, and that the issue in the case was
whether Great Investments could resist a claim for
restitution, including on the
basis that it was a bona fide purchaser for value without notice or could point
to a relevant change
Investments
did not hold that rescission of a contract might be available as
there was no contract to rescind.
am not satisfied that recission of a contract is an available remedy without the
second respondent establishing that Mr Song knowingly
participated in a
fraudulent and dishonest design; without establishing that Mr Song dishonestly
procured a breach of fiduciary duty;
or without establishing that RPM paid a
secret commission.
Farah Constructions
, the High Court identified two separate and distinct
forms of participatory or accessory liability. Neither attributes liability
a third party without either participation in a fraudulent or dishonest design
or without procuring or assisting in a breach of
the above reasons, I reject that the relevant Letting and Caretaking Agreements
might be rescinded on the basis that RPM induced
a breach of a fiduciary duty,
without more.
claim is limited to seeking injunctive relief to restrain HRC from giving effect
to by-law 28 as amended following the
resolution on
23 December 2022. RPM contends that restraint is appropriate as to
give effect to that resolution so would be to breach
express and/or implied
terms of the Letting Agreement with the HRC. RPM also contends that to give
effect to the amended by-law
would unlawfully interfere in the contracts entered
into by owners within the HRC who have appointed RPM as their letting agent with
authority to undertake the letting for terms of less than two months.
Breach of express and implied
3.1 of the Letting Agreement
3.1 Authority for Letting Agent
The Corporation authorises the Letting Agent a right to conduct the Letting
Business from that part of the Complex designated for
use by the Letting Agent
for that purpose during the Term and any Extensions. In consideration of the
Corporation granting to the
Letting Agent the right to carry on the Letting
Business, the Letting Agent will provide the Letting Services should it elect to
carry on the Letting Business.
the context of cl 3.1, in relation to an express term, RPM relies upon two
specific aspects of the terms of the Letting Agreement,
namely the definition of
‘Letting Business’ in cl 1 (specifically (b)) and
cl 1, the definition of ‘Letting Business’
Business Means:
(a) a letting agency business, acting as agent for those Owners who wish to
appoint the Letting Agent as their letting agent;
the letting of Lots for permanent, short term and/or holiday lettings, as
may be permitted by the By-Laws applicable to the Corporation
(c) the sale of Lots;
(d) the hiring of equipment or items the Letting Agent considers desirable and
that are not contrary to the interests of the Corporation
and the Owners and do
not contravene the By-Laws;
(e) the supply of PABX, internet, pay television and/or any other utility
services (if any) as is agreed from time to time between
any Owner and the
Letting Agent; and
(f) the provision of any other ancillary services or goods commonly provided in
connection with the letting of lots in a complex
of the nature of the Complex
and/or which the letting Agent wishes to provide.
(emphasis added)
party agrees, at its own expense, on request to the other party, to do
everything necessary to give effect to this Agreement
and the transactions
contemplated by it, including the execution of documents.
The submissions
contends that the express obligation that should prohibit the amended by-laws
being acted upon is cl 9.6.
so far as an implied term is relied upon, RPM submits that it is an implied term
that the parties will not act in a manner to
frustrate or defeat the purpose of
the Letting Agreement;
deprive each other of the benefit of the Letting
contends that if the amended by-law is acted upon, the HRC will be in breach of
contract and must accept the consequences of
that breach. RPM submits that it
contracted with the HRC on the basis that RPM would conduct short-term letting
from the lots in
the High-Rise Scheme. RPM submits that for the change to the
by-laws to be enforced would be to render those rights substantially
nugatory or
would at least seriously undermine them. RPM contends that damages will be an
inadequate remedy.
aside any contention already rejected that the existing by-laws should be
construed as already prohibiting short-term letting,
the HRC advances more than
one contention with respect to why it should not be prevented from giving effect
to the amended by-laws.
it submits that the existence and content of an express or an implied term
should not be found to exist in circumstances where
the definition of the
letting business is stated to be ‘as may be permitted by the
submits that those words should not be treated as static. The HRC submits that
if that were so, those words would have
no work to do. The HRC also submits
that the length of the Letting Agreement is such that it is more likely that the
words are to
be given an ambulatory meaning.
HRC also directs attention to s 12(1) of the CT Act in support of its
contention that a static approach would unreasonably fetter
the discretion of
the HRC to amend the by-laws. Section 12 provides:
(1) By-laws may be used to regulate—
(a) the use and enjoyment of the common property; and
(b) the purpose or purposes for which community lots may be used; and
(c) the design, construction and appearance of buildings on the common property
and the community lots and the landscaping of community
Express term
my view, whether cl 9.6 is to be construed as an express term which prohibits
effect being given to the amended by-law must depend
upon whether the relevant
words within cl 1(b) (i.e. – ‘as may be permitted by the
By-laws’) are given a static
or ambulatory meaning. If the meaning is
static, then it might be possible to read cl 9.6 as consistent with the HRC
being in breach
of contract if it gives effect to the amended by-laws. However,
if the meaning of those words is ambulatory, then it is difficult
to see that to
give effect to the amended by-laws could be a breach of an express term. I will
may be accepted that every contract includes an obligation, implied if not
express, that neither party should do anything to destroy
the efficacy of the
bargain made.
BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Ltd v President, Councillors and Ratepayers of
the Shire of Hastings
was stated:
Lordships venture to cite only three passages - albeit they are familiar to
every student of this branch of the law. In
The Moorcock
"I believe if one were to take all the cases, and they are many, of implied
warranties or covenants in law, it will be found that
in all of them the law is
raising an implication from the presumed intention of the parties with the
object of giving to the transaction
such efficacy as both parties must have
intended that at all events it should have. In business transactions such as
this, what the
law desires to effect by the implication is to give such business
efficacy to the transaction as must have been intended at all events
parties who are business men..."
It is because the implication of a term rests on the presumed intention of
the parties that the primary condition must be satisfied
that the term sought to
be implied must be reasonable and equitable. It is not to be imputed to a party
that he is assenting to an
unexpressed term which will operate unreasonably and
inequitably against himself.
Reigate v. Union Manufacturing Co
., Scrutton L.J. said:
"A term can only be implied if it is necessary in the business sense to give
efficacy to the contract i.e., if it is such a term that
it can confidently be
said that if at the time the contract was being negotiated someone had said to
the parties, 'What will happen
in such a case?', they would both have replied:
'Of course, so and so will happen; we did not trouble to say that; it is too
Shirlaw v. Southern Foundries
(1926) Ltd., MacKinnon LJ. said:
"Prima facie that which in any contract is left to be implied and need not be
expressed is something so obvious that it goes without
saying; so that, if,
while the parties were making their bargain, an officious bystander were to
suggest some express provision for
it in their agreement, they would testily
suppress him with a common, 'Oh, of course.'''
(footnotes omitted)
submits that the definition of letting business expressly allows for
‘short term and/or holiday letting’. That is,
even if the words
‘may be permitted by the By-laws’ are construed as meaning the
by-laws from time to time, that cannot
override the primary meaning of
‘letting business’ in the Letting Agreement – that meaning
being ‘permanent,
short term and/or holiday
RPM submits
that to not imply that there is a prohibition on the amendment of the
by‑laws (or from giving effect to the amended
by-laws) would be to
undermine the foundational premise of the agreement.
reject the submissions of RPM.
the meaning of the relevant words in cl 1(b) is static, I am not satisfied that
what is sought to be implied is so obvious
that it goes without saying. While
it may be that there is an implication that the by-laws may not prohibit any
form of letting,
so long as the by-laws permitted a form of letting which can be
described as at least one of ‘permanent, short-term and/or
I would not find that the Letting Agreement is deprived of its efficacy or
efficiency. On the evidence, if short-term
letting is not permitted, RPM would
make substantially less profit from relevant letting appointments and, in an
indirect way, there
may be less benefit to RPM in being a party to one or more
caretaking agreement. However, I am not able to go so far as to say that
Letting Agreement would be deprived of efficacy or efficiency. While existing
short-term letting appointments within the HRC
(i.e. – on the evidence,
24, as at December 2023) would be substantially less profitable for
there would still be the
ability to conduct a form of letting (i.e. – a form that meets the
description of ‘permanent’)
and the ability to undertake the other
aspects of the letting business described in cl 1.
follows from the above that to determine whether, if given effect, the amended
by-law would interfere with the rights of RPM under
the Letting Agreement and
would put the HRC in a position of breach of contract, it is necessary to
determine whether the words ‘as
may be permitted by the By-laws’ is
to be given an ambulatory or static meaning.
Ambulatory or static
the context of the incorporation of standard terms and conditions, Finkelstein J
Ford Motor Company of Australia Ltd v Arrowcrest Group Pty
that, prima facie,
reference to such standard terms and conditions was a reference to those
conditions as current at the date of
the contract. Finkelstein J held that
be occasions when the incorporation includes amendments made from time to time.
Usually this will only occur when the amendments
are of a procedural, and not a
substantive, type.
(citations omitted)
submits that the context and purpose of the incorporation of the by‑laws
into the Letting Agreement dictate that it was
the by-laws as at the date of the
Letting Agreement that were incorporated (i.e. – the existing by-laws).
RPM submits that
interpretation provides certainty and is in keeping with
commercial good sense.
RPM and the HRC submit that I am entitled to have regard to the Caretaking
Agreement and Procurement Agreement in deciding whether
the relevant words
within the Letting Agreement are to be given a static or ambulatory meaning.
Caretaking Agreement defines ‘By-laws’ as ‘the by-laws from
time to time for the
Procurement Agreement does not define ‘By‑laws’ but obliged
Eklipse to ensure that the by-laws deposited
were ‘substantially in
accordance with those
– as agreed during the negotiations). The initial Procurement Agreement
also has an interpretation section which provides
that references to documents
include ‘all references to such document ... as amended, novated,
supplemented, varied or replaced
from time to
reference appears in the Letting Agreement. RPM says that when regard is had to
the drafting choice in the Caretaking Agreement
and in the Procurement
Agreement, the words ‘as may be permitted by the By-laws’ in the
Letting Agreement are to be construed
HRC makes a contrary submission. The HRC submits that the meaning given to the
by-laws in the Caretaking Agreement supports
that the same approach should be
taken to the Letting Agreement. The HRC contends that it would be most unusual
for the rights and
obligations in the two agreements not to be in lock step. As
mentioned, the HRC also submits that the duration of the agreement
favour of an ambulatory meaning.
my view, the approach in the interpretation section within the initial
Procurement Agreement does not assist in construction of
the relevant aspect of
the Letting Agreement. The only reference to by-laws is in cl 3.1(c) and
that is a reference to by-laws deposited.
The Procurement Agreement does not
contemplate by-laws beyond those deposited. That is not surprising, the nature
of that agreement
was not such that by-laws beyond those deposited might be
contrast, I find that the approach to the definition of ‘By-laws’
within the Caretaking Agreement is relevant to the
proper construction of the
Letting Agreement. In my view, the respective approaches in those two
agreements may weigh in favour
of a different drafting decision and may favour
the position of RPM. That said, the words ‘
are arguably
not suggestive of an intention to incorporate into the agreement by-laws fixed
at a single moment in time (i.e. –
at the time of the execution of the
agreement). For example, cl 1(b) in the Letting Agreement could have been
drafted in a way which
expressly incorporated the existing by-laws as first
deposited (e.g. – ‘as permitted by the first by-laws filed with
community plan by the
Registrar-General’).
Ultimately,
it is the words in the Letting Agreement that must be construed in the context
of the whole of that agreement and the
other agreements executed at the same
time. I must give weight, if possible, to every word used in the Letting
Hide & Skin Trading Pty Ltd v Oceanic Meat Traders
Kirby P stated
that the fundamental rule is that a court should give the words of a written
agreement their natural meaning. Subject
to that rule, in giving meaning to the
words of an agreement between commercial parties, courts will endeavour to avoid
a construction
which makes commercial nonsense or is shown to be commercially
inconvenient. Courts will infer that commercial parties would not
normally agree in such a way.
for the issue of commerciality, as earlier set out, it may be noted that RPM had
been advised of the risk of the by-laws being
amended. That included advice in
the specific context of s 37(2)(a) of the CT Act, which provides:
(2) A by-law may—
(a) prohibit or restrict the owner of a lot from leasing or granting rights of
occupation in respect of the lot for valuable consideration
for a period of less
than 2 months; or
(b) impose a monetary obligation on the owner of a lot in relation to the
payment of an insurance premium, where the by-laws authorise
or require the
community corporation to act as agent for the owner in arranging the policy of
the relevant words are to be given a static or ambulatory meaning is not without
some difficulty.
the one hand, a static meaning provides commercial certainty; is consistent with
the intent and importance of the negotiations
which resulted in the existing
by-laws; and affords significance to the different drafting decision in the
Caretaking Agreement.
the other hand, the agreement is, in effect, for 25 years. In that period, lot
holders will change. A static construction binds
lot holders to specific
purposes for which lots may be used over a long period. Section 12 of the
CT Act expressly provides both
that by-laws may be used to regulate the purpose
for which lots may be used and that the first by-laws lodged may be relevantly
by special resolution. An ambulatory construction gives the words
‘as may be permitted’ work to do. In my view, the
natural reading
of those words is that they contemplate change to the by-laws in the future. I
find that the natural reading is
ambulatory, not static.
there is force in the submissions of RPM, I find that the proper construction of
the words ‘as may be permitted by the
By-Laws’ is that they have an
ambulatory meaning. Subject to determination of the claim of RPM about unlawful
interference
in contractual relations and/or that the relevant agreements have
been affirmed, I decline to order that the HRC be restrained from
giving effect
to the amended by-laws on the ground that it would breach the Letting Agreement
between it and RPM.
inference with contractual relations
also claims that if the amended by-laws were acted upon, HRC would improperly
and unlawfully interfere with RPM’s contractual
relations with owners who
have retained RPM to manage their apartments, including by securing
short‑term rentals of less than
two months as contemplated by property
management agreements.
of 22 December 2023, RPM had letting agreements with 24 owners in
the High-Rise Scheme whereby it has either a licence to manage
letting or a lease permitting short-term
subletting.
HRC denies the allegation of unlawful interference.
Williams v Hursey
Fullagar J referred to
and the class of case
in which a cause of action may exist in tort. Fullagar J
class of case A procures B to break a contract between B and C. If C suffers
loss by reason of this breach of contract, he
has (in addition to his cause of
action in contract against B) a cause of action in tort against A. In such
cases it does not matter
whether the means by which A procured B to break his
contract with C were lawful or unlawful in themselves: A may have used violence
or given B a monetary consideration, or may have used mere persuasion or
argument. The bringing about of the breach of contract
as such is the wrongful
act which, damage being proved, constitutes the cause of action.
that the resolution to amend the by-laws was valid, I decline to find that to
give effect to the by-laws would amount to unlawful
interference with
RPM’s contractual obligations with relevant lot holders. The lot holders
who desire to conduct short-term
letting had the opportunity to vote on the
resolution to amend the existing by-laws. That resolution was passed.
Affirmation of the
alleges that the Caretaking and Letting Agreements have been affirmed by the
The offer to purchase the
early 2021, members of the HRC management committee (Mr Whiting,
Ms Leonello, Ms Butler and Mr Glover) communicated with each
other about the possibility of purchasing the Caretaking and Letting Agreements.
In March 2021, information was sought from Mr Breda
other buildings. In June 2021, information was sought with respect to
financing and on 11 June 2021 Strata Loans
provided a loan proposal in
writing. That proposal was addressed to the owners of Community Corporation
2 August 2021, Mr Whiting sent an email to Mr Song asking
Mr Song to contact him to discuss the Caretaking and Letting Agreements.
Mr Song said that he called Mr Whiting on 3 August 2021 and
that during that phone call the following exchange occurred. Mr Whiting
that a group of owners in the Building were interested in purchasing the Letting
and Caretaking Agreements from RPM for a price
of $1.25 million plus GST. Mr
Song said that he would not accept an offer at that price given it was less than
what he had paid.
Mr Whiting said words to the effect that his offer equated to
$1.375 million including GST and that, as Mr Song had paid the developer
million for the Agreements, his offer was a reasonable one. Mr Whiting asked at
what price Mr Song would consider selling
and Mr Song said that he would
think about it. Mr Whiting then asked when RPM would start short-term letting
in the Realm Building
and so start having more people employed and working
on-site (which Mr Song said was something he had discussed with Mr Whiting on
earlier occasion). Mr Song said short‑term letting would start as soon as
the COVID‑19 situation improved.
3 August 2021, Mr Whiting sent an email to Mr David Pender. That
email contained a draft email to Mr Song. I am satisfied that
Mr Whiting was seeking the advice of Mr Pender with respect to the
draft. It appears that Mr Whiting believed that Mr Pender had
experience in negotiations of this type. Mr Pender made some suggestions
and on 4 August 2021, Mr Whiting circulated his draft
Ms Leonello, Ms Butler and Mr Glover.
5 August 2021, Mr Whiting then sent the following email to
Thanks for your time on the phone earlier this week and for providing the
caretaking services over the last 12 months to the Realm
building residents.
A group of residents are considering making an offer to purchase the Realm
caretaking and letting agreements with the view of providing
these services in a
novel way. We plan to provide a range of no-fee services for residents that
would not be commercially viable
in a traditional caretaking/short-term letting
business model.
I know the last 12 months have been difficult especially with the short-term
letting business with many Realm investors now locked
into long term rentals due
to Covid. As residents we have realised that there are physical aspects of the
building that are not ideal
for running short term stays.
We are at the early stages of thinking this through and wanted to get your
thoughts on a possible sale before we go much further.
We have investment
committed for a deal that works. We know that an offer at around $1.25 million
would be easily justified by the
numbers. Of course, as the negotiated price
rises, those equations also change. So, we see something in excess of $1.25m if
interested in selling.
The group has locked in the cash commitment for the next 14 days only after
which time they will proceed with other investments they
have put on hold.
If we can agree on a figure, we would look to settle very quickly as no
finance would be involved.
I look forward to your reply.
replied on 5 August 2021. That reply was to the effect that the sum
mentioned in the email of Mr Whiting was less than Mr
Song had paid.
Mr Whiting replied on 7 August 2021 inviting Mr Song to
indicate a sum and stating that the expectation was that
Mr Song would
‘add a reasonable premium on top of what you paid and came back with a
counter offer’.
Mr Song did not respond, and communications went no further.
observations can be made about communications between Mr Whiting and
Mr Song. In the phone call on 3 August 2021, Mr Whiting
purported to be speaking on behalf of a group of owners (i.e. – not the
community corporation); and the email on 5 August 2021
referred to a
‘group of residents’ (i.e. – not the community corporation).
The position of RPM
submits that by the above conduct and by the HRC’s Management Committee
separately seeking to hold RPM to the terms of
the Caretaking Agreement by
complaining about deficient performance and insisting on further and better
compliance, the HRC has affirmed
either the Caretaking Agreement or the Letting
submits that the email dated
5 August 2021
Mr Whiting referred to ‘management rights’ and that the
reference to the possibility of an offer of about $1,200,000
means that it can
be inferred that Mr Whiting and those with whom he was involved from the
Management Committee had awareness of
at least the existence of a Procurement
further submits that the approach to Mr Song was made on behalf of the HRC.
RPM submits that Mr Whiting, Ms Leonello, Ms Butler
Mr Glover formed the majority of the HRC (the other members being
Mr Smith, Ms Cui and Dr Hill) and that supports the inference
that the offer was made on behalf of the HRC and that those supporting
Mr Whiting had the same knowledge which it should be inferred
that he had
of the existence of a Procurement Agreement.
Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd v Delor Vue
doctrine of election by affirmation of a contract has been recognised by
decisions, including in this Court, for almost a century.
The dominant
rationale is that the “the mere fact of intimating [a] choice” in
relation to these alternative rights
makes it “inevitable, or necessary in
the interests of justice, that the choice, when once made, should be
irrevocable”.
In other words, the choice between maintaining one right or
set of rights and extinguishing an alternative, immediately inconsistent
or set of rights is one that must be irrevocable “because [the sets of
rights] are inconsistent [so that] neither one
may be enjoyed without the
extinction of the other and that extinction confers upon the elector the benefit
of enjoying the other”.
The very nature of the states of legal existence
and non‑existence of a contract is that both states cannot subsist, like
Schrödinger's cat, at the same time.
(footnotes omitted)
reject that the HRC, or a majority of its Management Committee, affirmed either
decline to find that demands for obligations under a caretaking agreement to be
met amounts to affirmation or lends weight to such
a finding along with other
conduct. It may be accepted that members of the HRC made complaints and
demanded better performance of
certain obligations which existed under the
relevant Caretaking Agreement. However, I reject that those demands amount to,
or contribute
to, a finding of affirmation. To so find would be to conclude
that the HRC was obliged to suffer what it perceived to be poor performance
avoid a suggestion that it was affirming a contract.
also decline to find that the communications about an offer should be seen as
affirmation in circumstances in which there was no
meaningful right provided to
terminate either relevant agreement other than if there was a breach which was
not remedied within 14
It is significant that
neither Mr Whiting nor the ‘group of residents’ had any right
to terminate either agreement.
To the extent that right existed, it rested with
the community corporation.
In the circumstances, I am not satisfied that the exploration of whether the
agreements might be purchased makes it inevitable,
or necessary in the interests
of justice, that the choice to explore whether an offer might be accepted
amounts to an affirmation.
offer of $1.375m inclusive of GST is strongly suggestive of knowledge of the
procurement sum as at the date of the email from
Mr Whiting to Mr Song, as
is the reference to an expectation for Mr Song to have responded with an offer
that built in a premium.
It is likely that Mr Whiting had some knowledge
of what had been paid. However, even assuming that suggests knowledge of a
procurement
agreement, that is an agreement to which the HRC was not a party.
that aside, I reject the contention of affirmation as there was no offer by the
community corporation to purchase any agreement.
What was said to Mr Song
on 3 August 2021 and communicated in the email on
5 August 2021 was not expressed to be on behalf of the
corporation. The email dated 5 August 2021 was not an email on behalf
of the HRC or its Management Committee. The email
refers only to a ‘group
of residents’. While it may be assumed that the group were members of the
Management Committee,
and it may be assumed from Strata Loans addressing its
quote to the HRC that there was an intent held by the group to seek to have
Management Committee agree, those matters alone cannot make the correspondence
between Mr Whiting and Mr Song a communication
of behalf of the HRC and I am not
satisfied that it is sufficient to establish that the relevant agreements were
Remedy given payment of
the secret commission
the payment of the secret commission, the HRC seeks various orders.
that the relevant Letting and Caretaking Agreements with the HRC be rescinded.
Second, equitable compensation and/or an account
of profits for any benefit
derived by RPM in respect of the Caretaking and the Letting Agreements with the
Third, that if Eklipse
does not pay or is unable to pay what it received, that RPM should pay.
The remedies available to the
second respondent
remedies available to the second respondent depend upon whether they are in
equity or at common
equity, the payment amounts to an unauthorised profit obtained by Eklipse.
Eklipse is liable to account for and disgorge the
profits obtained in breach of
fiduciary duty, which includes the
In this case, all
that is sought against Eklipse is the amount of the bribe. As mentioned, I
cannot find that amount should be
the whole of the procurement sum. It may also
be that the recipient of a bribe is exposed to the loss-based remedy of
compensation for breach of fiduciary duty, provided it can be shown
that there is a causal connection between the payment of the
bribe and the loss
suffered by the principal (i.e. – the
This remedy cannot be
combined with the remedy of obtaining the profit from
However, in this
case, the second respondent does not seek to prove loss.
equity, if there is dishonest assistance or procurement, the payer of the bribe
(i.e. – RPM) is not liable jointly or at
all to account for the
unauthorised profit of the fiduciary (i.e. – Eklipse); it is not liable to
pay to the principal (i.e.
– the HRC) an amount equivalent to the bribe;
but it is jointly liable with the fiduciary for any loss occasioned by the
of fiduciary duty; and it is liable for his own unauthorised
equity, in the case of dishonest assistance or procurement, recission of the
contract is a discretionary form of relief available
at trial. In
, it was said that ‘the much more flexible and pragmatic
approach taken by equity for the need for
restitution in integrum
it more useful than its common law
the tort of bribery). In equity, recission may be ordered even if it is no
longer an available remedy at common
law – the tort of bribery
common law, the briber (i.e. – RPM) and the bribee (i.e. – Eklipse)
are jointly and severally liable in damages for
any loss suffered by the
principal (i.e. – the HRC) because of the payment of the bribe. As
mentioned, damages for loss are
not sought in this case. At common law, the
briber and the bribee are also jointly and severally liable for the value of the
sometimes described as an action for money ‘had and
law, there is right of recission of a contract but its usefulness as a remedy is
limited by the strict requirements as
to counter-restitution. Where recission
at law is not available, equitable recission may be ordered but is
discretionary.
of relevant remedies
the findings I have made, in equity, the second respondent is entitled to the
profit obtained by Eklipse when it received the
bribe but is not entitled to any
remedy against RPM as I have not found that it acted dishonestly in the relevant
the findings I have made, at common law, Eklipse and RPM are jointly and
severally liable to the second respondent for the
amount of the bribe and the
second respondent is entitled to an order rescinding the relevant Letting and
Caretaking Agreements if
counter-restitution is possible or, in equity,
recission may also be
Restitutio in integrum
– the submissions of RPM
submits that
restitutio in integrum
is not possible and that it would be
unfairly and unjustifiably prejudiced if denied the benefit of the agreements
with the HRC.
RPM pleads that it paid the procurement sum for letting
appointments and restraints on Eklipse and its agents obtaining their own
letting appointments; that it entered into a long lease of an apartment;
acquired an apartment to provide services pursuant to the
Caretaking Agreements,
financed by a mortgage for a 25 year term; has employed staff to perform
the Letting and Caretaking Agreements;
has performed the duties pursuant to the
Agreements, expending time, effort and expense; and entered into the Letting and
Agreements with the HRC as part of a package which induced other like
agreements providing economies of scale and the risk that the
agreements would not be viable if the Agreements with the HRC were set aside.
HRC submits that the Court need not have regard to the impossibility of an order
based in equity for
restitutio in integrum
as RPM was knowingly concerned
in the breach of fiduciary duty or a participant in a fraudulent and dishonest
design, making it unjust
for RPM to retain the benefit of the agreements; and
the Court only need determine ‘what is practically just between the
and by so doing restore them substantially to the
However, as
mentioned, I have not found that RPM was a participant in a fraudulent and
dishonest design, nor that it dishonestly
induced a breach of fiduciary duty.
respective Letting and Caretaking Agreements with the second respondent were
entered into as part of a single overall transaction
in which other like
agreements were entered into at the same time. For example, the Caretaking
Agreement with the second respondent
is one of several such agreements. It can
be accepted that RPM has expended considerable resources in ensuring that it
obligations pursuant to all agreements. This includes, but is not
limited to, the purchase of a lot in the building which is used
obligations under agreements other than with the second respondent. It can also
be accepted that if the two relevant agreements
with the second respondent are
rescinded, that will impact in a significant way on the balance of the
agreements. I have not rejected
the evidence of Mr Song that the efficiency of
the remaining agreements will be undermined in a material way.
the above, I find that
restitutio in integrum
is not possible. Given the
above, I also find that recission should not be ordered in equity. That relief
is discretionary. I
find that it would be an inappropriate order when RPM is
obliged to meets its obligations under other agreements within the building
entered at the same time.
in equity and at common law, the second respondent is entitled to the remedy of
payment of the secret commission. At common
law, RPM is jointly and severally
liable for that sum.
currently, the identification of appropriate orders is frustrated by at least
two matters. First, while recovery from Eklipse
might be unlikely, that is not
yet confirmed. Second, for reasons already given, the procurement sum was not
paid solely to ensure
the entry by the HRC into the Letting and Caretaking
Agreements to which it is a party. There were other agreements and the letting
appointments belonged to Eklipse. I cannot find that the second respondent is
entitled to the whole of the procurement sum and,
on at least the submissions to
date, the appropriate sum which is appropriate cannot be determined with any
precision on the balance
of probabilities.
the circumstances, if the parties cannot agree upon the sum, at the very least,
further submissions will be necessary before I
can make a finding as to the sum
to be paid by either the first or second applicant.
Summary of orders/decisions
summarise, I make the following orders:
the extent necessary, pursuant to s 39(2) of the CT Act, I order that the
second respondent may lodge the by-laws of the second
respondent as amended by
the special resolution on 23 December 2022.
application of the second respondent for a declaration that the existing by-laws
of the second respondent prohibit short-term
letting of less than
two months is refused.
application of the second respondent for a declaration that the existing by-laws
are invalid is refused.
application of the second respondent for an order that the Letting and
Caretaking Agreements between it and the first applicant
be varied, avoided or
terminated pursuant to s 142 of the CT Act is refused.
application of the second respondent that the Letting and Caretaking Agreements
between it and the first applicant be rescinded
is refused.
find that the first applicant paid a secret commission to the second applicant.
find that the second respondent is entitled to an order that the benefit
obtained by the second applicant because of the receipt
of the above secret
commission be accounted to the second respondent. I find that the first
applicant and the second applicant are
jointly and severally liable for that
secret commission. However, on the evidence and submissions to date, I am
unable to make a
finding about the sum to be paid by the first and/or the second
application of the first applicant for an order that the second applicant be
permanently restrained from acting upon the by-laws
of the second respondent as
amended by the special resolution on 23 December 2022 is refused. To
the extent necessary, I revoke
the existing orders which restrain the second
respondent acting upon those by-laws.
will hear the parties as to any further orders which may be appropriate.
[1992] HCA 66
(1992) 110 ALR 449.
Ibid, 449-450 [2].
Core Bundle (Court Version)
Core Bundle
), Exhibit A20, tab [4].
Ibid, tab [5].
Tender Book (Court Copy)
Tender Book
), tab [42].
Tender Book, tab [207].
Tender Book, tab [390].
See, for example, Core
Bundle, tab [1].
See, for example, Core
Bundle, tab [1].
See Affidavit of Kerrie
Woodards dated 21 November 2022 (Exhibit R24); Affidavit of John Richard Green
dated 22 November 2022 (Exhibit
R25); Affidavit of Margaret Beryl Clunies Ross
dated 22 November 2022 (Exhibit R26); Affidavit of Michael John Haynes dated 22
2022 (Exhibit R27); Affidavit of Patricia Buhagiar Nisbett dated 22
November 2022 (Exhibit R28); and Affidavit of Keryn Jane Hendrick
November 2022 (Exhibit R30).
Core Bundle, tab [5].
Ibid, tab [3].
Ibid, tab [4].
[2009] FCA 13.
Ibid, [36]-[38]. NB: This
judgment omits citations.
It may be noted that,
although not part of s 41(2) of the CT Act, the explanatory note
contemplates that ‘boarding house accommodation’
is a form of
residential use. In my view, a boarding house is accommodation that may be
short term.
[2003] NSWCA 91
(2003) 57 NSWLR 113.
Ibid, 143-144.
Macquarie Dictionary
(online at 29 April 2025) “hotel” (def 1); “motel” (def
1); “hostel” (def
Second Respondent’s
Defence – Revision 4 (FDN 197, filed 1 October 2024), [13.5].
Ibid, [13.6].
CT Act, s 141(1)(a).
Tender Book, tab [207].
CT Act, s 92(2).
Ibid, s 79(1).
Ibid, s 90(4).
Ibid, s 92(4).
Ibid, s 93.
T447; T530.
Email from Mr Song to Mr
Pevy dated 26 March 2020 (Exhibit R37).
Tender Book, tabs [56] and
Ibid, tab [56].
Tender Book, tab [78].
Ibid, tab [78], see
marked-up by-laws 45 and 46.
Closing Submissions of
First Applicant (FDN 221, filed 6 February 2025), [105.1]-[105.5] citing Tender
Book, tab [105].
Fourth Affidavit of Tianyi
(Michael) Song dated 3 December 2024 (Exhibit A35),[9].
T603.22-27.
Tender Book, tab [64]
(emphasis added).
Ibid, tab [65] (emphasis
Ibid, tab [65].
Ibid, tab [66].
Ibid, tab [72] (emphasis
Tender Book, tab [72]
(emphasis added).
Ibid, tab [74].
Ibid, tab [76].
T466.15-30.
Tender Book, tab [79].
Ibid, [82].
Tender Book, tab [90].
Ibid, tab [88].
Ibid, tab [104].
Closing Submissions of
First Applicant (FDN 221, filed 6 February 2025) at [215.1]-[215.5].
Ibid, [123.1]-[123.6],
referring to Tender Book, tab [104].
Ibid, [124].
Tender Book, tab [104].
T515.19-33.
See, for example,
T566.18-19.
Tender Book, tab [104].
Closing Submissions of
First Applicant (FDN 221, filed 6 February 2025), [226].
Second Respondent’s
Written Closing Submissions (FDN 220, filed 6 February 2025), [52.1]-[52.4].
Tender Book, tab [105].
T498-T499; T520; T522;
T498.32-T499.29.
Tender Book, tab [104].
T520.12-T521.28; T566.6-19.
Tender Book, tab [120].
Ibid, tab [130].
Ibid, tab [139].
Third Affidavit of Tianyi
(Michael) Song dated 1 February 2024 (Exhibit A34); T591.
Ibid, tab [144].
Core Bundle, tab [2].
Tender Book, tab [87].
Ibid, tab [98].
Tender Book, tab [136].
T545.30-T546.28.
Tender Book, tab [147].
Ibid, tab [99].
T533.23-T534.29.
Core Bundle, tab [7].
Ibid, tab [6].
Core Bundle, tab [6].
Ibid, tab [7].
Ibid, tabs [2] and
Core Bundle, tab
Core Bundle, tab
Tender Book, tab [237].
Tender Book, tab [237].
Ibid, tab [242].
Ibid, tab [242].
Tender Book, tab [243].
Closing Submissions of
First Applicant, (FDN 221, filed 6 February 2025) at [137.1]-[137.3].
[2025] UKSC 33
) at [100]-[103].
Chan v Zachariah
[1984] HCA 36
(1984) 154 CLR 178
Breen v Williams
[1995] HCA 63
(1995-1996) 186 CLR 71
G. E. Dal Pont,
Equity and Trusts in Australia
(Thomson Reuters, 8
2023), [4.15].
Closing Submissions of
First Applicant (FDN 221, filed 6 February 2025) at [337.1] - [337.3].
Defence – Revision
4 (FDN 197, filed 1 October 2024), [13.10].
Defence – Revision
4 (FDN 197, filed 1 October 2024), [13.10].
Ibid, [13.7].
Affidavit of Eric Breda
dated 23 November 2022 (Exhibit R29), [30].
Ultra Tune Australia
Pty Ltd v McCann
[1999] VSC 58
(1999) 30 ACSR 651
, 674 [80];
[100]-[104].
Pilmer & Ors v
Duke Group Ltd (in liq)
[2001] HCA 31
(2001) 207 CLR 165
, 198 - 199 [79];
Howard v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2014] HCA 21
(2014) 253 CLR 83
Reply Submissions of
First Applicant (FDN 223, filed 18 February 2025), [25].
Core Bundle, tab
Core Bundle, tab
See above at
[114]-[119].
Affidavit of Eric Breda
dated 23 November 2022 (Exhibit R29), [28]-[30].
T564; T602.
Tender Book, tab
The evidence of
Mr Song was that there was no attempt by Eklipse to negotiate anything
other than a 25-year term, see T602.
Cross Claim –
Revision 4 (FDN 196, filed 1 October 2024), [21].
It was not submitted
that RPM could be found to be ‘an associate of the developer’. I
find that RPM should not be characterised
in that way.
Griggs v Noris Group
of Companies (Including SA Helicopters Pty Ltd and Captured Pty Ltd)
[2006] SASC 23
94 SASR 126
Written Reply
Submissions of the Second Respondent (FDN 222, filed on 18 February 2025) at
Société Générale pour Favoriser le
Développement du Commerce et de l’Industrie en France
Cross Claim –
Revision 4 (FDN 196, filed 1 October 2024), [20B].
Constructions
[2012] FCAFC 6
(2012) 200 FCR 296
Cross Claim –
Revision 4 (FDN 196, filed 1 October 2024), [19A(b)].
Ibid, [17.4(ha)].
Cross Claim –
Revision 4 (FDN 196, filed 1 October 2024), [19A(f)].
Ibid, [17.4 (i)-(s)];
Ibid, [17.4(b)-(c)].
Ibid, [17.4(d)].
Ibid, [17.4(e)-(f)].
Ibid, [17.4(g)-(h)].
Core Bundle, tab [3].
Ibid, tab [4].
Tender Book, [tab
Ibid, tab [10].
Ibid, tab [13].
Ibid, tab [21].
See, for example, Core
Bundle, tab [21], page 337.
See, for example, ibid,
Tender Book, tab [73].
Affidavit of Eric Breda
dated 23 November 2022 (Exhibit R29), page 4.
Ibid, page 87.
Ibid, page 4.
Tender Book, tab [331].
Ibid, tab [339].
Ibid, tab [340].
Broadway Plaza
Investments Pty Ltd v Broadway Plaza Pty Ltd
Grimaldi v Chameleon
Mining NL (No 2)
(200) FCR 296 (
[1949] 2 All ER 573
,[225]-[226].
[2020] NSWSC 1778.
Ibid, [1986]-[1988].
[2012] FCAFC 6
(2012) 200 FCR 296.
Ibid, [190], 348
[192]-[193]; 357 [246]-[247].
Aequitas v AEFC
[2001] NSWSC 14
Attorney-General v Reid
[1994] 1 AC 324, [1131]-[1132];
Industries & General Mortgage Co Ltd v Lewis
[1949] 2 All ER 573.
See, for example, the
discussion in
, [73]-[77], [237]-[240].
Ibid, [147].
Ibid, [135].
T513.36-T514.5.
See, for example,
T534.11-12.
T534.15-16.
[2040]-[2042].
Industries &
General Mortgage Co Ltd v Lewis
[1949] All ER 573;
Grant v The Gold
Exploration and Development Syndicate Ltd
[1899] UKLawRpKQB 220
[1900] 1 QB 233
Holdings Ltd & Ors v Solland International Ltd & Ors
[2004] EWHC
See for example –
Community Association DP No. 270180 v Arrow Asset Management Pty Ltd
[2007] NSWSC 527
Meriton Apartments Pty Ltd v The Owners Strata Plan No.
[2015] NSWSC 202.
Cross Claim –
Revision 4 (FDN 196, filed 1 October 2024) at [22].
Ibid,[20C].
Ibid, [20D].
Ibid, [20B].
(1874) LR 9 Ch App 224
Ibid, 251-252.
(2007) 230 CLR 89
Farah Constructions
Ibid, 159 [160].
Ibid, 160 [163].
Ibid, 163-4 [174]-[177];
[1993] 1 WLR 509
, 575-576; 582.
Constructions
, 159 [161];
Elders Trustee v EG Reeves
[1987] FCA 332
(1987) 78 ALR
Respondent’s Written Closing Submissions (FDN 220, filed 6 February
2025),[215].
Tender Book, tab
Ibid, tab [136].
Tender Book, tab
Ibid, tab [76].
Ibid, tab [144].
T468; T475.
See [128]-[129] above.
Third Affidavit of
Tianyi (Michael) Song dated 1 February 2024 (Exhibit A34), [4]-[14].
Respondent’s Written Closing Submissions (FDN 220, filed 6 February 2025),
Tender Book, tab [82].
T564, T602.
Second Affidavit of
Tianyi (Michael) Song dated 12 December 2022 (Exhibit A33), [13]-[14].
T602.30-32.
T564; T602.
Tender Book, tab [104],
Third Affidavit of
Tianyi (Michael) Song dated 1 February 2024 (Exhibit A34), [29].
Clause 3.1 in both the
initial and final Procurement Agreement.
I.e. – the first
categories (see
575-576; 582).
[2021] VSC 546.
[2016] FCAFC 85
(2016) 243 FCR 516.
Ibid, [283]. Notice,
here, being any of the
categories 1 to 5.
Ibid, [249]-[250].
Ibid, [309]-[320].
Great Investments
at [1]-[2].
Ibid, [56]-[69].
Ibid, [60]-[69].
Constructions
, [161]-[163].
Core Bundle, tab [6], cl
Ibid, cl 3.
Ibid, cl 9.6.
Statement of Claim
– Revision 4 (FDN 217, filed 20 December 2024), [15].
Ibid, [30.1.2].
Core Bundle, tab [6], cl
[1910] HCA 40
(1910) 11 CLR 171
(1977) 180 CLR 266.
Ibid, 283-284.
Core Bundle, tab
In the context of its
Claim, RPM led evidence of damages and the complexity of their calculation. RPM
specifically relied upon
the evidence of Ms Anna Shaw, the Chief Operating
Officer of the holding company of RPM and Mr Song. The evidence of Ms Shaw was
that RPM’s profits from apartments it manages on a long-term letting basis
are calculated based on the monthly management fee
it charges formulated at an
average of 6.6 per cent of the monthly rent revenue received for the relevant
apartment. In contrast,
RPM’s profits from apartments it manages on a
short-term letting basis are calculated at approximately 15 per cent of total
revenue received from the relevant apartments. Ms Shaw explained that while the
profit calculation was an estimate, she was confident
that it was a fair and
accurate one. Ms Shaw calculated RPM’s average monthly short-term profits
per apartment or room type
(i.e. – one bedroom, two bedroom or three
bedroom) over the 12-month period between December 2022 and November 2023 for
apartments managed by RPM on a short-term basis. Ms Shaw also calculated
RPM’s average monthly long-term profits per apartment
or room type (i.e.
– one bedroom, two bedroom or three bedroom) over the 12-month period
between January 2023 and December
2023 for the apartments managed by RPM on a
long-term basis. The calculations demonstrated that RPM’s average profit
per apartment for the relevant periods was substantially greater for
short-term rentals than for long-term rentals. Based on those
average profit
figures, Ms Shaw then calculated RPM’s profits for a 12-month period from
short-term letting in the HRC based
on the 24 apartments in the HRC managed by
RPM pursuant to short-term appointments as at 22 December 2023 (
‘status quo’ scenario
); and based on the scenario where all 24
of the apartments in HRC managed by RPM pursuant to short-term appointments as
at 22 December
2023 were converted to long-term appointments (
short-term letting in HRC’ scenario
). The results of Ms Shaw’s
calculations indicated that the ‘no short-term letting in HRC’
scenario would result
in a reduction in profits of $204,440 from the
‘status quo’ scenario across a given 12-month period. RPM also
attention to the Letting Agreement being for an effective term of 25
years, commencing 1 July 2020. In the result, RPM contended
that there is a
realistic prospect of it being granted extensions of existing letting
appointments and obtaining new ones.
[2002] FCA 1156.
Core Bundle, tab [7], cl
Core Bundle, tab [2], cl
Ibid, cl 2.1(i).
Emphasis added.
For example, adopting
the words of s 34(1) of the CT Act.
Cartwright v
MacCormack Trafalgar Insurance Co Ltd
[1963] 1 WLR 18
(1990) 20 NSWLR 310.
Second Affidavit of Anna
Shaw dated 22 December 2023 (Exhibit A16).
[1959] HCA 51
(1959) 103 CLR 30.
[1853] EngR 15
(1853) 118 ER 749.
Williams v Hursey
[1959] HCA 51
(1959) 103 CLR 30
Tender Book, tab [334].
First Applicant’s
Documents for Tender – Cross Claim (Exhibit A38), document 1.
Tender Book, tab
[2022] HCA 38
(2022) 277 CLR 445.
Ibid, 475-6 [51].
Tender Book, tab [6],
cls 3 and 5.1; tab [7], cls 3 and 9.1
Cross Claim –
Revision 4 (FDN 196, filed 1 October 2024), [23].
Regal (Hastings) Ltd
[1967] 2 AC 137
Boardman v Phipps
[1966] UKHL 2
[1967] 2 AC 46
Murad v Al-Saraj
[2005] EWCA Civ 959
Equity Obligations
(Federation Press, 2016), [510]-[511].
Swindle v Harrison
[1997] EWCA Civ 1339
[1997] 4 All ER 705
Gwembe Valley Development Co Ltd v Koshy (No 3)
[2003] EWCA Civ 1048.
Tang Man Sit
(Deceased) v Capacious Investments Ltd
[1995] UKPC 54
[1996] AC 514.
Ibid, [77].
Ibid, [238].
Mahesan S/O Thambiah
v Malaysia Government Officers’ Cooperative Housing Society
[237]-[239].
Taheri v Vitek
[2014] NSWCA 209
(2014) 87 NSWLR 403
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.33 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter