URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRComm/2016/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Samakovlis v Chief Executive, Department of the Premier and Cabinet (Department for Correctional Services) [2016] SAIRComm 6 (4 July 2016)
Samakovlis v Chief Executive, Department of the Premier and Cabinet
(Department for Correctional Services)
] SAIRComm 6
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION (SA)
SAMAKOVLIS, John
CHIEF EXECUTIVE, DEPARTMENT OF THE PREMIER AND CABINET (DEPARTMENT FOR
CORRECTIONAL SERVICES)
Application for Directions
3024 of 2012, 5947 of 2013
HEARING DATE:
30 June 2016
JUDGMENT OF:
President Judge PD Hannon
DELIVERED ON:
4 July 2016
CATCHWORDS:
Application by former employee for removal or anonymisation of decisions
published by the Commission in relation to proceedings relating
to suspension
and dismissal from employment – Held not appropriate to make the orders
sought in the circumstances given the
public interest in open justice –
Section 150 Fair work Act 1994
A.B. and Others v Employers Mutual Limited
[2009] SAWCT
Soulemezis v Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 NSWLR
John Fairfax Group v Local Court of NSW
(1991) 26 NSWLR
Applicant Y v Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: In person
Respondent: Mr J
Solicitors:
Applicant: N/A
Respondent: Crown Solicitor’s
Samakovlis (“the applicant”) was employed as a correctional officer
with the Department for Correctional Services on
26 March 2012 when an incident
occurred which led to his suspension from employment, and ultimately, to his
dismissal from employment
on the basis of serious and wilful misconduct with
effect from 31 October 2013.
applicant issued two sets of proceedings in the Industrial Relations Commission
of South Australia (“the Commission”)
in relation to these events,
one challenging a decision to suspend him without remuneration pending
completion of an investigation,
and the other seeking an order that the decision
to dismiss him was harsh, unjust or unreasonable.
the latter decision, the Commission found that the termination of the
applicant’s employment was harsh due to procedural
flaws and delays in the
investigation process, but that the decision to terminate was not unjust or
unreasonable. The Commission
found that the Department had reasonable grounds
for believing that the applicant had committed the alleged misconduct. Further,
the Commission found that an order for re-employment was not an appropriate
remedy having regard to the nature of that misconduct.
accordance with the usual practice of the Commission, the reasons for decision
were published on the Commission and Austlii websites
and remain on those
websites. The applicant has lodged an application for an order that the
decisions be removed those websites or
alternatively for an order that his name
be removed, that is, that the decisions be anonymised.
support of the application, the applicant filed an affidavit deposing to his
difficulties in gaining employment since January 2015
despite his extensive
professional qualifications in finance and banking. He has applied for a number
of advertised job roles in
that industry, and in many other areas of the public
and private sector. The applicant stated that he has applied unsuccessfully
over 200 jobs in the past 18 months, and that in 20 or more cases, after
attending job interviews which have appeared to be quite
promising up to the
final stage before completion of background checks, he has not received any
offers of employment. Whilst in some
cases an explanation has been given by
reference to the superior merits of other candidates, the applicant’s
belief is that,
after the prospective employer has conducted a background check,
including an Internet search, the content of the published decisions
revealed and that his applications have been rejected for that reason.
applicant contended that removal of the decisions from the websites, or
alternatively the amendment of those decisions so that
he is not identifiable by
reference to the decisions, was appropriate to prevent undue prejudice to him
with regard to his future
employment prospects. He accepted that on any job
application, when asked as to whether or not he has been previously terminated
from employment, he was obliged to respond truthfully, and asserted that he has
done so in the past and would do so in future, whether
or not the two decisions
continue to be accessible on the Internet or not.
respondent opposed the orders sought. It submitted that to grant the application
would be contrary to the obligation of the Commission
to conduct its proceedings
in accordance with the principles of open justice, and that the applicant had
not presented any cogent
reasons as to why the hardship he allegedly had
suffered exceeded that which any litigant must accept as a possible consequence
involvement in proceedings conducted in an open system of justice.
respondent also submitted that the grant of the applications would be contrary
to the public interest, as in effect the applicant
was asking the Commission to
facilitate the removal of information otherwise available to prospective
employers about the applicant’s
termination of employment and the findings
made against him. This was submitted that prospective employers had a reasonable
and legitimate
interest in having access to such information.
relevant statutory provision is s 150 of the
Fair Work Act 1994
(“the FWA Act”), which requires that proceedings of the Commission
be open to the public subject to the power of the
Commission to direct that
proceedings be conducted in private. The respondent referred to a decision of
the Workers Compensation
Tribunal, with respect to a similar provision in the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
, which held that the
Tribunal had power in appropriate circumstances to limit the publication of its
reasons for decision or anonymise
the names of the parties:
A.B. and Others v
Employers Mutual
was had to the principle that the obligation to hold hearings in public was to
be balanced against what was necessary to secure
the proper administration of
justice in proceedings in a particular case, it being accepted that there were
cases where it may be
considered appropriate to suppress publication totally or
respondent expressed some reservations as to the scope of the power under s
150(2), the equivalent of which was relied upon in
. decision, and
also as to the scope of a suggested alternative source of power under s 69A of
Evidence Act 1929
, having regard to the fact that under that
provision, in the circumstances of this case, the Commission could have regard
any prejudice to the proper administration of justice, and not to
hardship to a party. Given the decision to which I have come in
this matter, I
need not dwell on the source of any power I have to make the orders sought, as I
do not consider that on any view
as to the scope of those powers, a case for
their exercise has been made out by the applicant.
Publication
of decisions which are accessible to the public in some form or another is part
of the obligation to conduct proceedings
in accordance with the principles of
open justice:
Soulemezis v Dudley (Holdings) Pty
The problems
faced by the applicant were less common when decisions of the Commission and
other courts and tribunals were provided
in paper form to the parties and not
published otherwise other than in authorised volumes of bound reports. Such
reports were unlikely
to readily come to the attention of persons not connected
with or interested in the proceedings in some way, putting aside cases
generated wide publicity. That has changed over the last two decades given the
instant and widespread availability to the general
public of information posted
on the Internet, and the fact that the only form in which the Commission now
publishes its decisions
in order to continue to comply with the principle of
open justice, beyond provision of paper or electronic copies to the parties,
by way of posting the decisions on the Internet sites referred to above.
my view an applicant for an order in the nature now sought must establish that
there are reasons which make it desirable that there
be a departure from the
principle of open
applicant has not demonstrated objective evidence of prejudice as a result of
the publication of the decisions, but I accept for
the purposes of this
application, that it is highly likely that some of the prospective employers to
which he has applied for positions,
as part of their background checks, have
become aware of the decisions, and as a result have chosen not to offer
employment to him
that might otherwise have been offered. That is unfortunate
for the applicant and I accept that he has suffered damage as a result
his inability to secure employment and the consequential difficulties in
re-establishing his employment career.
I note that it has long been held that even though embarrassing and damaging
facts may come to light as a consequence of
the open administration of justice,
with adverse consequences to the persons involved, individual interests must be
sacrificed to
the greater public interest of adhering to an open system of
John Fairfax Group v Local Court of
the other hand, regard must be had to the extent of the derogation from the
principal of open justice that might be involved in
making the orders sought.
That degree of derogation may be great, or very small, and it is an important
matter to be considered in
balancing the principle against possible prejudice to
the administration of justice:
Applicant Y v Australian Prudential Regulation
applicant is to be taken to have known, or to be a person who should have known,
that a possible outcome of his initiation of
the proceedings was that findings
would be made as to contested factual matters, which might be adverse to one or
both of the parties,
and that they would be published and available to the
public. An unsuccessful applicant is usually likely to suffer some degree of
damage in such circumstances, but it is a hardship which must generally be
accepted as a necessary incident of the open administration
of justice.
regard to these matters, I do not consider that there is any proper basis for an
order for removal of the decisions from the
relevant websites.
to the alternative remedy of anonymising the decisions, the applicant submitted
that, as the full details of the misconduct findings
had been in the public
domain for over 18 months, with the consequential adverse effects as described,
the continuation of the prejudice
experienced to date was not warranted given
the allegedly low level of misconduct in the circumstances. Further, that the
of his name from the published decisions from now on would be a minor
derogation from the principle of open justice.
cannot accept that submission. If that outcome was appropriate for the applicant
in his circumstances, there would be no basis for
doing other than anonymising
all Commission decisions that result in adverse findings against an applicant.
Further, if the Commission
accepted the proposition that, having published a
decision in full, it was appropriate at some later stage to entertain an
application
for removal or anonymisation by a consideration of whether the party
seeking the order had begun to suffer a degree of prejudice
which had become
disproportionate over time, it would be encourage further litigation after the
original proceedings had come to
an end, which would require consideration on a
case by case basis of the relative seriousness of the conduct found to have
and of the extent of the damage alleged to have been suffered over
time by publication of the decision. To have the Commission engage
exercise would be contrary to the public interest and would involve an
inappropriate use of its time and resources of the
Commission and those of the
responding parties. Nor would it be consistent with the principles of open
justice for the reasons stated
John Fairfax Group
further consideration is that the primary reason for the application now under
consideration is not for the purpose of an order
which prevents the public at
large, or people with no direct interest, in having access to the decisions, or
which prevents the publication
of incidental facts which are disproportionately
embarrassing or distressing, and which are not necessary for a proper
understanding
of the decision. The central issue in the case was whether or not
the applicant had engaged in serious and wilful misconduct. Prospective
employers clearly have an interest in having access to information of this
nature might affect their consideration of the suitability
of an employment
candidate and which normally could be expected to be publicly available as a
result of the proceedings.
consideration is that the granting of the application would not necessarily give
the applicant the result he seeks. The most
recent of the decisions published in
January 2015 had a note at the foot of the reasons alerting parties to the
practice of the Commission
to publish its reasons in full on the Internet. A
party who wished to contend that the reasons should not be so published was
to make an application in that regard within seven days of delivery. The
decision was published in the absence of such an application.
Whilst it may be
assumed that a request made by the Commission to Austlii that a decision be
removed or altered would be acceded
to, it may well be the case that, even if
that occurs, the original version of the reasons will remain available on the
notwithstanding removal or anonymisation of the officially published
reasons, such that any order might be futile.
may be exceptional cases where orders of the nature sought are appropriate
either at the time of delivery of reasons or at a
later stage. This is not such
a case. I am not satisfied that the applicant has established that it is
desirable that there be a
departure from the principle of open justice so as to
either remove the decisions from the Internet or to anonymise them.
[2009] SAWCT
(1987) 10 NSWLR
A.B. at [36].
(1991) 26 NSWLR
[2005] FCAFC 222
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (90.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter