URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACAT/2025/70.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:53:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Conlon v Cornerstone Housing Ltd [2025] SACAT 70 (15 August 2025)
Biancajean Conlon
Cornerstone Housing Ltd
NEUTRAL CITATION
Conlon v Cornerstone Housing Ltd
[2025] SACAT 70
Senior Member Ward
15 August 2025
HEARING DATES
14 August 2025
SACAT FILE NO.
2025/SCHR000018
ON REVIEW FROM
Cornerstone Housing Ltd
This matter involved an application for review of a decision by the
respondent landlord to terminate the fixed term tenancy of the
applicant tenant.
This application was made pursuant to
South Australian
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(SACAT Act).
The respondent issued the notice of termination in March 2025 on the basis
that the tenant was in breach of her tenancy agreement
by using the property for
an illegal purpose, being in possession of an illicit substance (cannabis or
methamphetamine) and trafficking
in an illegal drug. The events forming the
basis of the notice occurred in November 2022, when the tenancy was the subject
earlier periodic tenancy agreement.
The applicant submitted that since 2022 her circumstances had significantly
changed and that she had taken steps to improve her life
and maintain a stable
lifestyle. She gave evidence that she had been sober since 2023 and attends
SMART sessions, as well as regular
appointments with her psychologist.
The respondent submitted that the decision to terminate the
applicant’s tenancy should be upheld as the correct and preferable
decision. The landlord told the Tribunal that the only basis for termination of
the tenancy agreement was the applicant’s convictions
for the 2022
Held, setting aside and substituting the decision under review:
The Tribunal is
satisfied that the decision to terminate the tenant’s tenancy and to serve
a notice of termination on the tenant
is reviewable by the Tribunal pursuant to
clause 2(1)(a)(vi) of Schedule 2 of the National Law as it is a decision which
her occupation or use of the premises;
The Tribunal is
satisfied that the tenant breached clauses 17 and 7.1(a) of a 2019 tenancy
agreement, and also
Residential Tenancies Act 1995
, by reason
of the existence of methamphetamine and cannabis at the premises and in that she
permitted the premises to be used for
an illegal purpose, namely the trafficking
in cannabis;
There is no
evidence that the tenant has at any time been in breach of a subsequent 2024
tenancy agreement;
The Tribunal
considers the decision under review was procedurally unfair to the tenant
because the respondent did not give her an
opportunity to comment or make
submissions on the respondent’s proposal to terminate her tenancy before
it served the notice
of termination on her;
The respondent
did not take into account and properly weigh up the tenant’s positive
personal circumstances against the adverse
information in making the decision
under review;
reasonable to terminate a tenancy and render a vulnerable tenant homeless on the
basis of an offence that occurred nearly
two and a half years previously with no
evidence of any other offending in the meantime;
serious argument that the notice of termination was invalid and not lawfully
authorised because the grounds on which it
was based did not arise during the
term of the 2024 tenancy agreement;
The correct and
preferable decision is not to terminate the tenancy agreement or serve a notice
of termination on the tenant.
Administrative review -
Community Housing Providers (National Law)
(South Australia) Act 2013
– Review of a decision of a community
housing provider – Termination and vacant possession
LEGISLATION CONSIDERED
Residential Tenancies Act 1985
ss 71, 80, 80A, 83A
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
REPRESENTATION
The applicant with Ms Sproull, RentRight SA, attended in person
Ms Bednarsky with Ms Caputo appeared for the respondent, in person
REASONS FOR DECISION
Set aside and substitute decision
Made under the
South Australian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
s 37(1)(c)(i)
Findings of the Tribunal
Conlon made an application to the Tribunal on 4 April 2025 seeking a review of
the decision of her landlord (
the respondent
) on 31 March 2025 to
terminate Ms Conlon’s tenancy in Strathalbyn and to serve on her a Form 9
Residential Tenancies Act 1995
requiring her to vacate the premises by 7 August 2025.
refer to the decision to terminate the tenancy agreement and to serve the Form 9
decision under review
. This is fundamentally a single decision
with two parts.
Conlon’s application is made under
South Australian
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
). Section 34 of
the SACAT Act provides for the Tribunal to conduct a review of certain
34 of the SACAT Act requires that, on a review, the Tribunal must make the
correct or preferable decision having regard to
and giving appropriate weight to
the decision of the original decision-maker. The Tribunal must examine the
decision under review
by way of re-hearing and must take into account the
evidence available to the original decision-maker and any further evidence
during the review process (which is relevant and appropriate to take
into account).
Conlon moved into the Strathalbyn premises in 2019 under a fixed term tenancy
for 12 months, from 26 November 2019 to 24 November
the 2019 tenancy
Thereafter,
until August 2024, Ms Conlon was a periodic tenant at the premises. As a
periodic tenant, she was bound by the same terms
and conditions as the 2019
fixed term tenancy. I say more about those terms later in these reasons.
14 November 2022, Ms Conlon was arrested for drug offences after a search
warrant was executed at the premises by police. Her partner
at the time, Mr Adam
Iuliano, was also at the premises and was also subject to charges after the same
of this offending in the Evidence section
Conlon and the respondent entered into a 12-month fixed term tenancy that
commenced on 8 August 2024 until 7 August 2025 (
the 2024 tenancy
). After some discussion at the hearing, during which Ms Conlon
stated that she could not remember entering into this agreement, she
conceded that she had done so.
19 March 2025, Ms Conlon was convicted and sentenced in the District Court for
possession of methamphetamine arising from the search
conducted on 14 November
2022. Mr Iuliano was convicted and sentenced for trafficking in cannabis and for
possession of methamphetamine,
both arising from the same search on 14 November
2022. Both had pleaded guilty.
notified the respondent of these matters on 27 March 2025, although I am aware
from perusing the Tribunal’s records that
the respondent had known of the
events of 14 November 2022 since at least 25 November 2022. On that date, the
respondent commenced
proceedings in the Tribunal under s 90 of the RT Act
to evict Ms Conlon by reason of the offending uncovered on 14 November
These proceedings were dealt
with at a directions hearing on 5 December 2022 but were automatically dismissed
by the Tribunal on
hearing of its application.
31 March 2025, the respondent served two notices of termination on Ms
a. a Form 5 which was purportedly served under s 80A
of the RT Act; and
b. a Form 9 which was purportedly served under s 83A of the RT Act.
notices required Ms Conlon to vacate the premises on 7 August 2025, which was
the end of the term in the 2024 tenancy agreement.
Form 9 has a number of boxes which are intended to be ticked to indicate the
statutory grounds a landlord relies on to serve the
notice. In this case, the
respondent ticked the box that said “you have used the premises, or caused
the premises to be used,
for an illegal purpose (including drug related
conduct)”. The respondent included the following explanatory text in the
You have breached the lease agreement by using the premises for illegal
activities related to drugs, including possession (cannabis
and methamphetamine)
and distribution to a minor. These actions violate the terms of the lease and
are considered a serious violation.
respondent’s officer Ms Bednarsky said at the hearing that she was part of
the team that jointly determined to terminate
Ms Conlon’s tenancy and
serve the Form 9 on 31 March 2025. Ms Bednarsky repeated a number of times
during the hearing that
the only reason for terminating the tenancy and serving
the Form 9 was the information received from SAPOL on 27 March 2025 as to
Conlon and Mr Iuliano’s convictions and sentencing earlier that month for
the November 2022 offending. She said that there
was no other reason for serving
the Form 9. She referred to Ms Conlon also having breached s 71 of the RT
Act and the respondent’s
Anti-Social Behaviour Policy (
by this conduct.
Bednarsky indicated, and Ms Conlon agreed, that Ms Conlon was not given an
opportunity to make submissions or comment on the prospect
that her tenancy
might be terminated on account of her November 2022 offending.
a statement of reasons filed in the Tribunal for these proceedings, the
respondent said that the grounds for it making the decision
under review were
that (emphasis in original):
... the tenant has used the premises, or caused the premises to be used, for an
illegal purpose
, specifically
drug-related conduct
, in violation
of the Lease Agreement and the Anti-Social Behaviour Policy.
The decision to terminate the tenancy is supported by
official documentation
provided by the South Australia Police
, which confirms that the tenant
engaged in illegal activities, including:
Possession of
illicit substances: cannabis and methamphetamine
Distribution
of illegal substances to a minor - child in school uniform ...
These actions constitute a
serious breach
of the Lease Agreement and the
Anti-Social Behaviour Policy and pose a risk to the safety and well-being of the
property and the surrounding
community, including minors. Given the severity of
the violations, Cornerstone Housing has exercised the legal right to terminate
the tenancy under
, ensuring compliance with the relevant tenancy
seems that Ms Conlon sought an internal appeal by the respondent of the decision
under review sometime after she made this application
to the Tribunal but it is
not clear to me whether the respondent took any action on that internal appeal.
I certainly do not know
the result of any such appeal.
Evidence of the parties
set out below the evidence provided by the respondent and the oral evidence
given in response by Ms Conlon. I indicate in this section
whether I have
accepted the evidence and, if so, the weight I have given to it.
SAPOL Information Exchange document
respondent provided to the Tribunal a document supplied to it by SAPOL on 27
June 2025 as to Ms Conlon and Mr Iuliano.
document alleges that on 14 November 2022, a child in school uniform attended at
Ms Conlon’s premises and bought cannabis.
There is a notation in the
document that a certain police officer could provide more information to the
Tribunal about this in person.
That police officer was apparently not available
to give evidence to the Tribunal about this specific allegation.
is no other information from police about this particular allegation. There is
no affidavit evidence. It was not referred to
in the District Court’s
Sentencing Remarks (see below). It is entirely hearsay evidence.
is a serious allegation clearly. It has been relied on in part to support the
decision to terminate the tenancy and serve the
notice of termination on Ms
is clear to me by the evidence and submissions made by the respondent at the
hearing that the respondent took this allegation at
face value and assumed,
without testing it, that it was the truth. I emphasise that an allegation that
something occurred, even an
allegation by police, is not proof that it occurred.
The respondent seriously erred in blindly accepting the truth of this allegation
in making the decision under review.
am unable to be satisfied on the evidence before me that Ms Conlon or anyone at
the premises distributed an illegal substance to
a child. I disregard that
allegation and give it no weight.
balance of the information in the SAPOL document is taken from the Sentencing
Remarks, which I turn to next.
District Court’s Sentencing Remarks
other document supplied by the respondent was the remarks made by the District
Court when sentencing Ms Conlon and Mr Iuliano
for the offending uncovered by
the execution of the search warrant on 14 November 2022.
s 39 of the SACAT Act, I am entitled to adopt, in my discretion as I
consider appropriate, any findings, decision or judgment
of a court or another
to s 39, I adopt the below findings in the Sentencing Remarks. I consider
that it would have been quite reasonable and appropriate
for the respondent to
accept what is contained in the Sentencing Remarks as the truth of the
the Sentencing Remarks, her Honour Judge Kudelka said (my underlining):
The circumstances surrounding [the] offending are that on 14 November 2022, the
police attended the house where you were both living.
They located 175 g of
cannabis on the kitchen bench. That cannabis was contained in a black plastic
bag, inside which were eight
plastic resealable bags, each holding an amount of
cannabis which ranged from .9 g through to 27.8 g. In a drawer of the coffee
of the loungeroom, they located two small plastic resealable bags. One
contained 4.91 g of methamphetamine, and the other contained
methamphetamine, making the total just over 5 g of methamphetamine. There were
other items seized by the police which included
$4,950 in cash, which was in a
safe in a bedroom, and a tick list.
Ms Conlon, I am told that you have struggled with drug use in the past, but
you have been clean since November last year
. You completed a DASSA
detoxification, and have also been involved in the SMART relapse prevention,
which is great news. If this
matter had not been joined with a trafficking
charge for you (that charge was discontinued, and this plea was accepted in
satisfaction
of another trafficking charge), then the penalty in the Magistrates
Court would have been diversion with counselling.
In all the circumstances then, in relation to your penalty, I convict you for
this offending, which is simple possession of methylamphetamine,
with no further
the hearing, I asked Ms Conlon to explain the underlined portion of the above
extract which indicates that Ms Conlon did not
get “clean” until
November 2024. She said that this is an error as she has been clean since
November 2023.
Honour sentenced Mr Iuliano for methamphetamine possession without further
penalty. Her Honour noted that Mr Iuliano had told
police that the cannabis was
his: “the whole lot of it” was his. Her Honour sentenced Mr Iuliano
to a little over 14
months imprisonment for trafficking in the 175 g of
cannabis, which her Honour described as a “relatively small amount”.
This sentence was suspended.
Bednarsky indicated that, as part of the decision-making team, she was aware of
her Honour’s positive reflections about Ms
Conlon but considered that this
did not outweigh Ms Conlon’s offending.
Evidence of Brevet Sergeant Walsh
respondent called two witnesses to give evidence, including a police officer who
provided information from SAPOL records.
pause to note that Ms Bednarsky told me she did not know what evidence either of
the witnesses would give the Tribunal, suggesting
that the witnesses would say
what they wanted to say. This is a risky exercise and could potentially waste
the Tribunal’s time
if the witness does not give relevant evidence. Also,
to some extent, it abrogates the respondent’s responsibility to argue
their own case. It is not for a party’s witnesses to argue the
party’s case for it.
serious question arose whether the Tribunal should receive the evidence of the
Brevet Sergeant. The Brevet Sergeant indicated she
would give evidence from
police records about Ms Conlon and events at the premises other than the 2022
offending. After some consideration,
Ms Bednarsky told me that the respondent
intended that the Tribunal take this information into account in making the
though I may take new information into account under s 34 of the SACAT Act,
the matter of the Brevet Sergeant’s proposed
evidence concerned me. Ms
Bednarsky had already told the Tribunal a number of times that the respondent
had made its decision solely
on the basis of the November 2022 offending and
that the respondent was not aware of any other offending or alleged offending by
Ms Conlon. Secondly, at no time in these proceedings had the respondent raised
any other offending other than the November 2022 offending
and to raise it at
the hearing for the first time would not be procedurally fair to Ms Conlon. Ms
Sproull also expressed her concerns
I decided to hear the police officer’s evidence
Brevet Sergeant said that SAPOL records indicated the following
referred to Ms Conlon’s responses to this information in italics within
square brackets and note that none of these
responses were denied or rebutted by
the respondent]
11 November 2021, in execution of a search warrant, police located cannabis and
related equipment at the premises. An expiation
notice was served on Ms Conlon
for that offence. On that day, a garbage bag was located in the ceiling space of
the premises which
contained a small black locked money box, scales and empty
resealable bags. Ms Conlon provided the key to the money box and inside
found two bags of methamphetamine, a plastic jar with 40 tablets of
dexamphetamine, one tablet of diazepam and five glass methamphetamine
Conlon was arrested for trafficking in those drugs but this charge was later
downgraded to simple drug possession.
[The officer did not know what the
outcome of that charge or charges was. Ms Conlon agreed with this account and
said that she was
convicted of possession of the Valium (diazepam) tablet but
that another person had come forward to take responsibility for the other
18 January 2022, a person leaving the premises was stopped and searched by
police and found with empty plastic “deal”
bags that he said he had
obtained from Ms Conlon.
[Ms Conlon said that the plastic bags were coin bags
obtained by her from Bank SA so that this person could place coins in
14 May 2022, police received an allegation from a member of the public that
between 10 and 15 cars had attended at the premises,
and stayed for just a
minute. No action was taken by police on this allegation.
[Ms Conlon said
that the informant was a person who was trying to make trouble for
June 2022, the police stopped a vehicle in which Ms Conlon was a passenger. In a
hair brush was found a quantity of less than
two grams of methamphetamine. Ms
Conlon was reported for that offence.
[The Brevet Sergeant did not know the
outcome of that offence. Ms Conlon said she did not know who the methamphetamine
belonged to
but pleaded guilty to the offence and was fined.]
26 June 2022, police stopped a vehicle in which Ms Conlon was a passenger. She
was found to be in possession of a methamphetamine
pipe and was reported for
that offence.
[The Brevet Sergeant did not know the outcome of that offence.
Ms Conlon said she pleaded guilty and was fined.]
19 May 2023, the premises were searched under warrant and a small
non-trafficable quantity of methamphetamine and cannabis was
found together with
drug paraphernalia. Police could not establish that this belonged to Ms Conlon
so she was not charged. A male
at the premises was given an expiation notice in
relation to the cannabis.
found the police officer to be a truthful and credible witness and I have no
reason to doubt the information contained in police
records, most of which was
conceded by Ms Conlon. However, the police officer’s evidence does not
assist me significantly in
making my decision as there is no real dispute that,
at least up to November 2022, there was drug trafficking occurring at the
and that Ms Conlon knew about it and may have been involved in it. The
police officer’s evidence is also consistent with Ms
Conlon’s own
evidence that she has been clean only since November 2023. In other words, the
police officer’s evidence
is adverse to Ms Conlon but the adverse nature
of it is not any greater than that from the other evidence adverse to Ms Conlon
available to me.
note also that Ms Conlon was able to provide ready answers to the information in
the police officer’s evidence. I consider
that any procedural unfairness
in admitting this evidence is not material as it has not altered my final
Mr Dunning’s evidence
respondent also called Mr Greg Dunning, a former neighbour of Ms Conlon, to give
Dunning said that he used to live in the same street for thirteen years until he
moved out in October 2024 for family reasons.
gave evidence that people, including children, would collect and buy drugs from
Ms Conlon and that on certain days of the week
there would be people coming and
going until the early hours of the morning. He said that this started soon after
Ms Conlon moved
in about four years ago and that it would happen every day.
However, he said in response to a question from me that he did not actually
any person buying drugs or purchasing anything from Ms Conlon.
said that he had observed Ms Conlon, another woman and a male on bicycles
delivering drugs in Strathalbyn about three or four times
a week. However, in
response to a question from me, he said that he did not actually see them
delivering drugs.
Dunning said that a motorbike rider from Murray Bridge would come weekly to
deliver drugs to Ms Conlon. He said that he knew the
person was from Murray
Bridge because he followed him there. However, he said that he did not actually
see what this person and Ms
Conlon did when they met.
said that the street is well known as a drug street and that police are there
quite a bit and that he has been told at the local
hotel and at the football
park that if he wants drugs, he is to go to Ms Conlon’s property.
answer to this evidence, Ms Conlon denied that there are people coming and going
to buy drugs from her. She said that she has tried
to stop visitors coming to
her home and generally denied that she is dealing in drugs. She said that she
rides a bike everywhere
as that is her only form of transport and that sometimes
she is accompanied by her friends. She said the motorbike rider is a close
friend of hers from Murray Bridge who visited her. She said that Mr Dunning is
known to her and that she believes he is “making
allegations because of his concerns about her association with his son, who is a
known drug user. She said Mr Dunning’s
son is her gardener but that he
does not buy drugs from her.
found Mr Dunning to be a truthful witness in that he did not set out to give
false evidence to the Tribunal. However, I find that
I cannot rely on his
evidence as he has not lived in the street since October last year and cannot
give direct evidence about occurrences
in the street in that time. Also, I find
that Mr Dunning’s evidence is largely based on speculation, extrapolation
and suspicion.
accept Ms Conlon’s evidence and account of events over that of Mr
Ms Bednarsky’s evidence of anonymous complaints
Bednarsky gave evidence that the respondent has received a number of anonymous
allegations from neighbours as to cars coming and
going at all hours of the day
and night from Ms Conlon’s premises, which the complainants believe is for
the purposes of drug
trafficking. The respondent is not aware of the identities
of some of the complainants.
Bednarsky said that one of these complaints was received in July 2022, two were
received in June 2023, one was received in August
2024 and one was received this
indicated, and Ms Conlon agreed, that Ms Conlon had not been contacted for
comments about these allegations.
Bednarsky said that these complaints played no part in the making of the
decision under review.
have determined to give no weight to these anonymous allegations. I note the
allegations are poorly detailed. There is no information
these alleged occurrences were observed. There is no further information about
how the complainants came
to their conclusion about the purposes of the vehicle
traffic. This evidence is entirely unsubstantiated hearsay. None of the
complainants
gave evidence to the Tribunal. There was no other evidence to
substantiate the allegations contained in these complaints. There are
statements, no photographs, or any recordings. It was entirely correct and
reasonable for the respondent to have no regard
to these untested and
unsubstantiated allegations in making the decision under review.
Ms Conlon’s written statement
Conlon provided a written statement to the Tribunal and gave oral evidence
during the hearing. I set out below relevant aspects
of her written statement
and refer elsewhere in these reasons to Ms Conlon’s oral evidence.
Conlon said in her statement that since the time of the 2022 offending, her
circumstances have changed significantly. She said
that she has taken consistent
steps to improve her life and maintain a stable lifestyle. She said that she is
no longer in a relationship
with Mr Iuliano and that he no longer comes to the
property. She said that she has worked hard to rebuild her life and has been
and sober and goes to SMART Recovery sessions every second Monday. She
said that every day is a struggle and she continues to try
her best and that
having a roof over her head plays a big part of that. She said that she
understood the seriousness of what happened
and deeply regrets that
said that the threat of eviction has had a severe impact on her mental health
causing her to feel depressed and even at times
wanting to give up on
everything. She said that she has no other housing options available to her and
if evicted she would have nowhere
to go and would face homelessness. She said
that losing her home would undo the progress that she has made and put her
at serious risk.
Consideration of the Tribunal
approach is to consider the application by dealing with each of the following
a) Is the respondent’s decision to serve a Form 9 on Ms Conlon (
decision under review
) a reviewable decision under s 34 of the SACAT
b) What is the relevant law which applies to the decision under review?
c) Has the respondent complied with any relevant policy which applies to the
decision under review?
d) Has the respondent otherwise been fair in its dealings with Ms Conlon in
relation to the decision under review?
Question 1: Is this a reviewable decision under s 34 of the
s 34(1) of the SACAT Act, if legislation which confers jurisdiction on the
Tribunal “... expressly or necessarily involves
a review of a decision ...
[then] the matter comes within the Tribunal’s review
2 of Schedule 2 of the
Community Housing Providers (National Law) (South
Australia) Act 2013
National Law
) gives the Tribunal its
respondent. Clause 2 states:
(1) Subject to subclause (2), an application for relief under this Schedule may
be made by—
(a) a tenant occupying community housing owned or managed by a registered
community housing provider in relation to any of the following
decisions of the
community housing provider:
(i) a decision that relates to an assessment of the financial or other
circumstances of the tenant (including as to any question
of eligibility or to
terminate a benefit or concession);
(ii) a decision that relates to the allocation (or reallocation) of any
premises (including in relation to the transfer (or potential
transfer) of the
tenant to other premises);
(iii) a decision that relates to the state, condition, modification or
improvement of premises;
(iv) a decision that relates to the calculation or imposition of any rent,
levy, charge or subsidy (other than where the rent, levy,
charge or subsidy
arises under a tenancy agreement);
(v) a decision to terminate the tenant's membership of the community housing
provider (if the community housing provider has members
who are tenants);
(vi) any other decision that affects the person's occupation or use of
premises; and
(b) a person who has applied for membership of a registered community housing
provider (if the community housing provider has members
who are tenants) in
relation to a decision of the community housing provider to reject the
application if—
(i) the person is occupying community housing owned by the community housing
provider; and
(ii) the decision has a direct impact on an existing tenancy or other existing
right of occupation;
(c) a tenant, resident or other person in prescribed circumstances.
(2) An application under this Schedule may not relate to a matter—
(a) that may be the subject of proceedings under, or is otherwise regulated by,
the Residential Tenancies Act 1995 (whether or not
proceedings have been brought
under that Act); or
(b) that does not relate to the occupation (or potential occupation) of
community housing; or
(c) that is within a class of matters excluded from the operation of this
clause by the regulations.
(3) In addition—
(a) the Appeal Tribunal may—
(ii) decline to proceed (or further proceed) with an application under this
Schedule if proceedings related to the subject matter
of the application have
been commenced in a court or tribunal constituted by law; and
(b) the Appeal Tribunal may decline to hear a matter, or may suspend any
hearing or consideration of a matter, under this Schedule
if the Appeal Tribunal
considers or is satisfied—
(i) that the applicant should have sought to resolve the matter through a
mediation or conciliation process; or
(ii) that the applicant in the proceedings has failed to take a step relevant
to the conduct or subject matter of the proceedings
within a reasonable time;
(iii) that the matter is not suitable for consideration, or further
consideration, by the Appeal Tribunal for some other reason.
am satisfied that the decision to terminate Ms Conlon’s tenancy and to
serve a Form 9 on Ms Conlon is reviewable by the Tribunal
pursuant to clause
2(1)(a)(vi) of Schedule 2 of the National Law as it is a decision that affects
her occupation or use of the premises.
Question 2: What is the relevant law which applies to the
decision under review?
considering what law applies to a dispute between a landlord and a tenant, the
starting point is the tenancy agreement itself.
A tenancy agreement is simply a
special form of contract. The parties have agreed to the terms and conditions of
the tenancy as they
are contained in that document.
would be artificial to determine this matter without regard to the tenancy
agreement. This matter fundamentally concerns an administrative
decision that is
underlaid by the contractual relationship between the parties.
this matter, in particular, I find that the following provisions in the 2019
tenancy agreement are relevant to the decision under
7.1(a) – the tenant(s) must not use, or cause or permit the premises to be
used, for any illegal or unauthorised purpose;
15.1 - Either the TENANT(S) or LANDLORD may terminate the tenancy by notice of
termination to the other for breach of any
term of this AGREEMENT. The notice to
remedy breach and terminate tenancy shall be given on the prescribed form of The
Act, specifying
the breach and informing the other party that if the breach is
not remedied within a specified time period (a minimum of 7 clear
days), then a
tenancy is terminated by force of the notice;
17 - No firearms or illicit drugs of any sort are to be on the premises. Illicit
drugs include but are not limited to: Methamphetamines,
cannabis, heroin,
cocaine, or the same drugs known by any other names, or any of their
derivatives.
I noted earlier, these same provisions applied during the periodic tenancy.
2024 tenancy agreement contains the same, or essentially the same, provisions as
clauses 7.1(a) and 17 of the 2019 tenancy agreement,
and contains termination
provisions that reflect the changes to the RT Act introduced on 1 July
relevant laws are those in the RT Act that relate to the landlord and tenant
relationship. Most relevantly, this includes provisions
in ss 80 and 83A as to
the service of notices of termination on a tenant and in s 71. Section 71
relevantly states that it is a term
of a residential tenancy agreement that the
tenant must not use the premises, or cause or permit the premises to be used,
illegal purpose.
am satisfied from the information contained in the District Court’s
Sentencing Remarks that, on 14 November 2022, Ms Conlon:
the periodic tenancy because she breached clause 17 of the 2019 tenancy
agreement by reason of the existence of methamphetamine
and cannabis at the
premises; and
the periodic tenancy because she breached clause 7.1(a) of the 2019 tenancy
agreement, and also breached s 71 of the RT
Act, in that she permitted the
premises to be used for an illegal purpose, namely the trafficking in cannabis
by Mr Iuliano.
there is no evidence that Ms Conlon has at any time been in breach of the 2024
tenancy agreement.
Question 3: Has the respondent complied with any relevant
policy which applies to the decision under review?
noted in the respondent’s statement of reasons, the respondent relies on
its ASB Policy in supporting the making of the decision
particular, that policy states that using the property to manufacture, sell,
cultivate, or supply any prohibited drug is considered
a serious instance of
anti-social behaviour. The policy states that the respondent does not
investigate complaints of anti-social
behaviour unless there is an alleged
breach of the tenant’s lease agreement. It states that tenants have the
right to know
indicates that, if the respondent substantiates serious anti-social
immediate action may be taken to terminate a tenancy without issuing a formal
warning. In these circumstances, the tenant
could be excluded from being housed
by the respondent for a period of 12 months.
word “concern” is defined in the policy to mean a formal written
statement of concern not being a decision made by
the respondent, a court, or
suggests that the information provided to the respondent by SAPOL in March 2025
“complaint” and that
the ASB Policy therefore did not apply. If it did not apply, it cannot be relied
upon by the respondent
to support the decision to terminate her tenancy and
serve on her a Form 9.
I consider that whether or not the ASB Policy strictly applied is an unnecessary
distraction. Clearly, information was received
by the respondent in March 2025
that the respondent took to mean that Ms Conlon had breached her tenancy
agreement and had engaged
in serious anti-social behaviour. In considering
whether to terminate her tenancy, the respondent should have given her the same
opportunity to respond to the matter that she would have been given if a
“complaint” had been made against her under
the ASB Policy. They did
not do so. This was unfair. I deal with the general question of the
respondent’s unfair treatment
of Ms Conlon next.
Question 4: Has the respondent otherwise been fair with the
have taken into account that officers of the respondent may not be experienced
administrative decisionmakers who are well acquainted
and experienced in the
legal principles of sound administrative decision-making. Nevertheless, a
decision of the respondent must
be lawful and reasonable, must be procedurally
fair, must not rigidly apply policy without due regard to the individual
circumstances
of a particular case and must take into account only relevant
considerations.
decision under review falls short in many respects, as I will explain shortly.
For that reason, I have not placed weight on the
decision under review, as I
would otherwise ordinarily be required to do under s 34 of the SACAT Act.
Instead, I have made the decision
I consider that the decision under review was procedurally unfair to Ms Conlon
because the respondent did not give her an opportunity
to comment or make
submissions on the respondent’s proposal to terminate her tenancy in March
2025 before it served the Form
seen and heard Ms Conlon give oral evidence, I accept that she is genuine in her
commitment to turn her life around. She told
me, and I accept her evidence, that
she realises that she was previously in bad company but that she will no longer
hang around with
those people. She has stopped them coming to see her. She
terminated her relationship with Mr Iuliano in 2023. She has plans to do
business course at TAFE and is continuing with her fortnightly SMART Recovery
programme. She has had ten consultations with a psychologist
and plans to have a
further ten sessions with him. The psychologist has assisted her with strategies
that she is employing to deal
with the problems in her life, including her drug
use. Until November 2023, she had continued to use methamphetamine on and off.
Her decision to get clean was partly due to the urging of her 21 year old son.
She said that since that time she has had only a single
puff of a joint.
reiterated that she would be homeless if her tenancy ended as she cannot stay
with family and, being on JobSeeker income, she
could not afford a rental in the
private market.
the respondent had given Ms Conlon the opportunity to make submissions, Ms
Conlon would likely have given the respondent the information
she gave at the
hearing about her efforts to turn her life around and the positive steps she had
taken in that regard, and that she
had been clean since November 2023. She would
have been able to tell them also what the consequences on her would be if she
rendered homeless. The respondent would then have been able to weigh up
this information; the positive comments in the Sentencing
Remarks and the
relatively light outcome of her conviction; together with the nature of the
November 2022 offending to make an informed
and balanced decision on whether or
not it should terminate her tenancy and serve the Form 9 on her. However,
because it did not
give her that opportunity, the respondent did not place
itself in a position where it could make a fully informed and balanced decision.
I consider that a reasonable decision-maker in possession of all the above
information and weighting it appropriately would not have
made a decision to
terminate Ms Conlon’s tenancy and serve the Form 9 on her.
is, in fact, the principal reason why I have found for Ms Conlon in this
decision, that is because the respondent did not take
into account and properly
weigh up Ms Conlon’s positive personal circumstances against the adverse
information in making the
decision under review.
I consider that the decision under review can be criticised as being
unreasonable in all the circumstances and should be
set aside and reconsidered
on that basis alone. Part of the decision relied on untested and unsubstantiated
allegations of drug dealing
to children. Also, at the time that the decision was
made in March 2025 almost two and a half years had passed since the November
2022 offending which was the sole basis for the making of the decision. On Ms
Bednarsky’s own evidence, the respondent had
no other information about
any other offending or alleged offending committed by Ms Conlon. It is not
reasonable to terminate a tenancy
and render a vulnerable tenant homeless on the
basis of an offence that occurred nearly two and a half years previously with no
of any other offending in the meantime. It should also be noted that,
during that period, the respondent had given Ms Conlon a new
fixed term tenancy
when it already knew of the adverse information against her.
assuming the ASB Policy did apply, the respondent did not comply with that
policy in making the decision under review to
terminate the 2024 tenancy
agreement. There was no evidence before the respondent that Ms Conlon had
breached the 2024 tenancy agreement
by reason of the November 2022 offending or
any other offending. All of the information before the Tribunal, including the
new information
from the police officer and Ms Conlon’s concession that
she used methamphetamine up to November 2023, is that Ms Conlon breached
terms of the 2019 tenancy agreement that were carried over to the periodic
tenancy, not the 2024 tenancy agreement. Also, the
respondent did not comply
with the provisions of the policy that required it to consult with the tenant
before taking any action
in response to complaints.
I consider also that there is a serious argument that the Form 9 was invalid and
not lawfully authorised because the grounds
on which it was based (i.e. that
“the tenant has used the premises, or has caused the premises to be used,
for an illegal purpose
(including drug related
did not arise
during the term of the 2024 tenancy agreement. This is an important question
because it is this fixed term tenancy
that was purportedly terminated by the
respondent, not the 2019 fixed term tenancy nor the periodic tenancy that
existed between
2020 and 2024. However, I do not wish to make a definitive
finding on this question as it is not necessary to rely on this fourth
make my decision in this matter. The question of whether a Form 9 on the grounds
of illegal purposes can reach back to conduct
prior to the tenancy agreement in
question can be left for an instance when it arises on the facts of a case and
is critical to the
concluding these reasons, I make the following observations about the Form
noted above, the respondent served a Form 5 on Ms Conlon pursuant to s 80A
of the RT Act (or at least the Form 5 for s 80A purposes
was used). Section
80A states that:
A landlord may, by notice of termination given to the tenant, terminate a
residential tenancy if—
(a) the landlord is aware that the tenant has engaged in, or allowed another
person to engage in, drug related conduct on the premises
or ancillary property;
(b) testing for contamination conducted in accordance with section 67B
indicates that the premises or ancillary property are contaminated
as a result
of that drug related conduct.
is no evidence of drug contamination as required by s 80A so the Form 5 is
invalid to the extent it relied on s 80A.
the actual terms of the Form 5 indicate that the respondent was relying on
simple breach of the tenancy agreement pursuant
to s 80, namely:
breaching the lease agreement by using the premises for illegal purposes
activities relating to drugs: possession (cannabis and methamphetamine)
distribution (minor person). Such actions are prohibited under the terms of the
lease and constitute a serious violation of the
other words, the respondent may have used the wrong form.
the Form 5 is invalid and/or ineffectual under s 80 for two reasons. First,
as noted above, Ms Conlon was not in breach of
the 2024 tenancy agreement. Any
breach was of the periodic tenancy that arose after the end of the 2019 tenancy
agreement. Secondly,
the purpose of a Form 5 under s 80 is to give a tenant
an opportunity to remedy the alleged breach of the tenancy agreement and only
they fail to do so within a specified period are they required to vacate the
premises. The respondent did not give Ms Conlon an
opportunity to remedy a
breach in the Form 5, but simply directed her to vacate the premises on 7 August
these reasons, I have given the Form 5 no weight in my decision.
find for the above reasons that the decision made on 31 March 2025 should be set
s 37 of the SACAT Act, after setting aside a decision, I may
the decision back to the respondent for reconsideration in accordance with any
directions or recommendations I consider appropriate;
the decision with a fresh decision I make myself.
have decided that, after having heard all the evidence, I am in as good or
better position as the respondent, to make the fresh
decision myself.
taking proper account and giving due weight to the evidence that Ms Conlon has
taken steps to turn her life around and has refrained
from drug-related activity
for an extended period, I consider that the correct and preferable decision in
all the circumstances is
not to terminate the tenancy agreement or serve a Form
9 on Ms Conlon. Accordingly, on setting aside the decision under review, I
substitute the decision set out in Order 2 below.
explained to the respondent at the hearing that, if my final decision was to set
aside the decision under review, this would essentially
mean that the Form 9 is
taken not to have had the effect of terminating the tenancy on 7 August 2025. I
said that, logically, in
those circumstances, Ms Conlon would have a periodic
tenancy. I asked Ms Bednarsky whether, if I set aside the decision, the
would intend to offer Ms Conlon a fixed term tenancy. If she had
indicated to me that the respondent would be prepared to do so,
I would have
made reference to that in the below orders. However, Ms Bednarsky did not
address this question directly but indicated
that she understood that Ms Conlon
would then be a periodic tenant unless she was offered and accepted a fixed term
Accordingly,
the practical and legal effect of my decision is that Ms Conlon holds a periodic
tenancy from 7 August 2025. It is for
the parties now to determine whether it
should remain a periodic tenancy or be replaced by a fixed term
Orders of the Tribunal
Tribunal sets aside the respondent’s decision to terminate the
applicant’s tenancy and to serve a Form 9 on the applicant
and strikes out
the Form 9 served on 31 March 2025.
Tribunal substitutes a decision that the tenancy agreement is not liable to
termination under s 83A of the
Residential Tenancies Act
2022/SH007561.
This expression means evidence
that is admitted on a provisional basis, without determining its admissibility.
This is usually done
either to ensure relevant evidence is not lost or
overlooked, or for the purpose of later assessing its relevance, value or
admissibility,
usually with submissions from the parties.
The version provided to the
Tribunal is version 1.01 of 21 October 2022.
Regulation 16
Residential
Tenancies Regulations 2010
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.3 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter