URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWPRP/2015/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:11:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cooke Precast v RTWSA [2015] SAWPRP 6 (23 December 2015)
[2015] SAWPRP 6
PREMIUM REVIEW PANEL
COOKE PRECAST CONCRETE PTY LTD
No. E14316410)
(File No. 202175833)
(Applicant)
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
Member P.G. Eblen
Member R. Donnelly
Member D. Quirk
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED 23 DECEMBER
Application for review — statutory payments — employer
considering assessments unreasonable — impact of claims history
premiums — employer alleging mismanagement by the claims agent of a
particular worker’s claim — examination
of facts of claim —
procedural fairness — delay in determining acceptance of claim —
claim not accepted until after
surgery had taken place — provisional
acceptance not giving rise to right for employer to lodge dispute —
whether employer’s
rights deliberately defeated thereby — copies of
medical reports requested by employer not sent in a timely way — questions
degenerative changes and two doctors having same surname
— sections 28A,
32, 32A, 46, 50I, 53, 58B, 58C, 72M, 90A, 97, 107, 107A, 108, 113,
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
section 4(1)
Corporation of South Australia Act 1994
sections 18
, 31, 113, 157,
178, 179, 181,
— clause 4, Return to Work
(Transitional Arrangements) (Administration) Regulations.
Cases referred to:
Solo Waste v WorkCover
[2003] SAWLRP 2
Tolega v. WorkCover (No.3)
[2009] SAWLRP 11
Quality Staff v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP 3
Valley View Nursing Home v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP 2
Kioa v. West
(1985) 159 CLR 550
[1985] HCA 81
Chiropractors Association & Perry v. WorkCover Corporation
[1999] SASC 470
; (1999) 75 SASR 470
Kelvinator v. Harrison
(1990) 2 WCATR 186
; WCAT Print
Mansell v Local Government Association
[1990] SAWCRP
Stanley v SA Health Commission
[1990] SAWCRP 228
Metro Meat v. Banjanovic
(1989) 52 SASR 102
[1989] SASC 1868
Appearances:
Mr S. Cooke, General Manager, for the applicant employer.
Mr G.D. Coppola of counsel, accompanied by Ms A. Rennie and Mr S. Makai, for the
respondent RTWSA.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
is the determination of an application for review lodged by the applicant
employer on 28 August 2014, seeking a review pursuant
to section 72M of the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
(“the Act”)
of a decision made by the WorkCover Corporation of South Australia (“the
Corporation”) dated 14
August 2014 assessing the employer’s initial
premium for the 2014-2015 financial year. The employer, in a nutshell, disputes
the claims history on which the assessment was made.
that time, the name of the Corporation has changed to the Return to Work
Corporation of South Australia (also “the Corporation”
“RTWSA”): see
, Schedule 9 of which
amended the former
WorkCover Corporation Act 1994
to that effect (clause
11) and changed the name of the 1994 Act to the
South Australia Act 1994
(clause 9 of the same Schedule). These provisions
commenced operation on 2 February 2015: see
(Commencement)
Proclamation 2014
, 4 December 2014, p.6610), clause
Corporation has the option of continuing to act under the old name or adopting
the new name in any proceedings: see
Arrangements) (Administration) Regulations 2015
regulation 4.
Corporation has made it known it prefers henceforth to be known as the Return to
Work Corporation of South Australia for all
purposes, and, although these
applications relate to a period before 2 February 2015, it seems appropriate to
reflect the change
in the title of these proceedings.
the same time, and through the same proclamation (clause 2(3)(za) thereof),
section 157 of the 2014 Act has been brought into operation,
providing for
reviews of premium decisions in almost identical terms to section 72M of the
1986 Act. The two provisions, of course,
apply to the review of decisions made
under the respective legislative régimes and are in no way in conflict
with one another.
The application of the 1986 Act to these proceedings is so
clear it requires no exposition.
application relates to the assessment of a statutory payment charged under the
1986 Act, and was lodged in pursuance of section
72M of that Act, which reads:
(1) If an employer considers that a decision of the Corporation as
(a) the estimate of remuneration that is to be used for the calculation of a
statutory payment; or
(b) the fixing or assessment of a statutory payment; or
(c) the imposition of penalty interest or a fine; or
(d) the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead to the
remission or imposition of a supplementary payment,
is unreasonable, the board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a
statutory payment, penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined
by the board, by the board itself, or by a committee or
person to whom the board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the board has an
absolute discretion as to whether
it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the board may—
(a) alter an estimate of remuneration;
(b) alter a statutory payment or an assessment;
(c) quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
(d) direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
(e) quash or vary a condition imposed by the Corporation.
(5) An application under this section for review of a decision of the
Corporation—
(a) must, if the decision relates to a class of employers, be made within 4
months after notice of the decision was given; or
(b) must, if the decision relates to an individual employer, be made within
2 months after the employer was given notice of the decision,
unless the board (or its delegate) allows an extension of time for making the
application.
Panel is the Board’s delegate for the purpose of hearing these
applications: see
WorkCover Premium Review Panel Determination 2014
, 10 July 2014, p.3200). The 2014 Determination has itself now
been revoked (see
, 2 July 2015, p.3369), but clause 40 of the 2015 Determination
directs that applications lodged before 1 July 2015 are to be dealt
the 2014 Determination. The effect of the 2015 Determination on this matter is
therefore confined to the change of name
of the Panel.
The application for review
application for review indicated, in the area provided for a response to
“Why does the employer consider the decision to
unreasonable?”:
“The 2014/2015 premium increases by 87%
to [$ amount] which we cannot afford and will put us out of business.”
the following space, under “What information or evidence has the employer
previously provided to the decision maker?”,
the employer has
“(1) Forecast remuneration summary for 2014/2015 which
needs to be revised significantly due to severe downturn in trading conditions.
(2) Previous Section 72M forms which have not been acted upon.”
Panel wishes immediately to point out that no other outstanding applications by
the employer have been brought to our attention,
nor has Mr Cooke mentioned them
at any of the hearings on this application. It may be that, subsequent to the
lodging of this application,
any previous applications were resolved through
conciliation without needing to come to the notice of the Panel itself. If any
outstanding
applications exist, however, we will be pleased to give them early
it may be that, unknown to us, the complaint about forecast remuneration being
revised downwards to reflect trading conditions
has been addressed before the
application reached us. There is certainly room in the provisions of Part 5 of
the Act for such revisions
to take place in the circumstances alleged in the
application. By the time the application reached us, the sole focus, and the
matter argued at the hearing before us, was an assertion by the employer
that the premium was unreasonably inflated by having regard
to a particular
claim that the employer says was mismanaged on a variety of levels.
the employer says that the claims agent took too long to determine whether it
would accept the claim, having first “provisionally”
accepted it and
informing Mr Cooke that provisional acceptance did not provide an opportunity
for an employer to dispute a claim.
the employer says that the claims agent failed to accept its advice on how to
deal with the claim, approving, during the
provisional acceptance period,
surgical intervention that Mr Cooke did not consider warranted.
the employer complains of poor communication by the claims agent, including the
failure to provide the employer with promised
medical reports when requested.
This, Mr Cooke said, hampered him in dealing with the worker and the claims
agent in advising what
should be done.
Cooke gave sworn evidence as to his own involvement — which was extensive
— in these matters. It appears he was the
main, perhaps sole, interface
between the employer and the claims agent as well as the principal officer of
the employer dealing
with the worker and his claim.
The claim and its management
worker was born in 1957 and commenced duties with the employer on 25 July 2012
(according to the employer report form). On 9 November
2012 he completed a
Notice of Work-Related Injury and Claim for Compensation alleging an injury to
his left shoulder and upper arm
had arisen on 22 October 2012, when he tripped
while carrying equipment and he fell against a steel beam about 2 pm. The
report form gives the time of occurrence as 23 October 2012 at 1.45 pm,
and indicates that the worker first informed the employer
(presumably orally) at
7.30 am the next morning, presumably at the start of his next shift. We would
normally be slow to attribute
any significance to a one-day discrepancy in the
date of injury; likewise, it would be usual to assume that a worker who reported
an incident at the beginning of the next shift had waited to see if the problem
would resolve overnight.
notice and claim were, properly, forwarded to the claims agent under cover of
the employer report form, which was itself dated
8 November 2012, one day
earlier than the notice and claim. The package of forms appears to have been
received by the claims agent
on 12 November 2012, judging by the stamp on the
53 of the Act, as at stood at the time, placed on the Corporation (and through
it, on the claims agent) an obligation to make
such investigations and enquiries
as it thought necessary to determine the claim (subsection (1)) and to determine
the claim as expeditiously
as reasonably practicable and, where practicable,
within ten business days (subsection (4)).
Division 7A of Part 4 of the Act (sections 50A to 50I), which commenced
operation in 2009 and operated in amended form from
1 July 2012, provided an
alternative, namely the commencement of “provisional” weekly
payments of income maintenance
pending the determination of the claim. Section
32A provided a corresponding alternative by way of payment of medical expenses
the ambit of section 32 prior to determination of the claim, subject to a
cap of $5 000 (indexed), and subject also to the worker
application for such payment in the designated manner and form.
is no immediately obvious evidence before us of the worker having made any
application under section 32A(1). Be that as it may,
the claims agent wrote to
the employer — and, presumably, the worker — on 16 November 2012
advising that “provisional
payments for reasonable medical expenses
related to [the worker’s] injury have been approved.” The letter was
as to whether payments of income maintenance on a provisional basis had
been approved at the same time.
25 January 2013, the claims agent wrote again to the employer advising that the
worker’s claim had been accepted for both
weekly payments of income
maintenance and medical and other expenses provided for under section 32. A near
identical letter followed
on 31 January 2013, the purpose of which is opaque to
us. Presumably, corresponding letters went to the worker on the same dates.
other things had happened in the meantime.
claim lodged by the worker had been accompanied by a prescribed medical
certificate of Dr D. Mah, which was dated 24 October 2012,
although it certified
an examination that had taken place on 31 October 2012 at 11.30 am. It also
certified incapacity for work on
24 October 2012 and fitness for modified duties
from 25 to 31 October 2012. It also says that the worker will be re-assessed on
October 2012. It is a somewhat confusing certificate, but we do accept that
Dr Mah saw the worker on 24 October, because the worker
evidently attended the
Lyell McEwin Hospital Medical Imaging Department on his referral that day for
x-rays of his left shoulder,
which resulted in a report of that date by a Dr M.
Gun. Dr Mah’s certificate of 24 October was an old-style hand-filled
certificate,
the form of which Dr Mah may not have been familiar with: his
subsequent certificates are all of the printed variety. He may have
confused the
date and time of the current examination with the appointment time for the next
one. The next (printed) certificate
is unambiguously dated 31 October 2012,
certifies that an examination has taken place on that date (at 8.41 am) and
certifies fitness
for duties (“continue modifications as
previously”) from 31 October 2012 to 7 November 2012, and indicates a
re-assessment will take place on the latter date. The imprint of the
rubber stamp on this certificate is less clear than that on
the certificate
dated 24 October, but we infer that this certificate was also part of the
package of documents received by the claims
agent on 12 November. We think it
likely that the next certificate, dated 7 November 2012 and issued by Dr B. Pek
of the same medical
practice, was also part of that initial lodgment. That
certificate certifies fitness for broadly the same modified duties (“avoid
lifting >5kg with L arm, avoid working above shoulder height/ outside
shoulder width”) from 7 to 21 November 2012 and indicates
re-assessment on the latter date. The worker’s claim form lists both Dr
Mah and Dr Pek as certifying doctors.
medical imaging report we have referred to above (dated 24 October 2012) is
brief, and it is helpful to set it out in
“Struck shoulder on steel girder. ? fracture.
“Shoulder joint is normally articulated. The clavicle is intact. The AC
joint and CA ligament appear intact. There is minor
sclerosis of the articular
surfaces but not evidence of a fracture.”
further radiology report, dated 2 November 2012 following an ultrasound
examination the same day, also on referral by Dr Mah,
“Contusion to left shoulder. Assess tendon. ? Bursitis.
“The left biceps tendon appears thin but intact.
“There is a small partial articular surface tear at the anterior fibres
of the supraspinatus. There is flattening of the contour
and thinning of fibres
at the mid portion in keeping with a full thickness tear. A small calcification
seen within the posterior
fibres measuring 2.6mm.
“There is a thin layer of fluid in the subacromial bursa consistent
with bursitis. Bursal and tendon impingement is seen with
abduction. The
infraspinatus and teres minor tendons are intact.
“There is bulging of the capsule of the left AC joint in keeping with
degenerative changes.
Calcific tendinosis of the supraspinatus with a full thickness tear
in the mid fibres and articular surface tear at the anterior fibres.
subacromial bursitis with bursal and tendon impingement on
16 November 2012 — the same date as the advice of provisional approval for
medical expenses — the claims agent wrote
to Dr Pek seeking a report, with
particular reference to the following questions:
“1. A history
of the injury, including the cause as stated by [the worker] and the findings of
your examination relevant to
his injury.
“2. What are the results of any investigations carried out? (eg,
x-rays, ultrasounds etc). Please provide copies of the medical
imaging reports
if possible.
“3. Your current diagnosis, including affected body systems or parts,
of [the worker’s] injury(s).
“4. Is [the worker’s] condition consistent with the stated cause
and did his employment cause or contribute to the injury?
If not, please explain
“5. Are there any previous or current factors other than the work
related cause stated by [the worker] contributing to his current
condition? If
so, what are they and how have they contributed?
“6. What is your current treatment plan for [the worker’s]
injury? Please include:
of treatment you have/are providing, including medication
“7. Is surgery planned or suggested as an
appropriate form of treatment? If so, who/will you refer the worker
The response appears to have been faxed to the claims agent on 21 November
“1. 55 year old concreter at Cooke Precast who was
carrying a bag of cement when he tripped and hit his left shoulder on a girdle
on 23/10/12. He had immediate and persistent left shoulder pain, weakness and
dysfunction. By the time I first saw him on 7/11/12,
his previous doctor, Dr
David Mah had already ordered modified duties and an ultrasound that showed a
complete tear of the left supraspinatus,
accompanying subacromial bursitis and
impingement. Notably, he has severe gastric ulceration with aspirin that makes
it risky to
use antiinflammatories.
On examination he has a strongly positive supraspinatus loading test, and
pain abduction between 60 degrees and 135 degrees. There
is no visible muscular
wasting, neurological deficit or deformity.
“2. See 1. Note that ACJ degeneration is not correlated clinically and
likely to be incidental.
“3. Left supraspinatus tear, subacromial bursitis (with
impingement)
“4. Yes, and yes.
“5. None that I am aware of.
“6. Surgical review with Dr Edward Mah (upper limb surgeon) for
consideration of repair in a high functioning individual with
an acute injury.
Hand therapy (SC&A) for rotator cuff conditioning whether or not he requires
surgery. Panadol osteo for daytime
pain relief, panadeine forte for night-time
pain or severe pain. Time – for inflammation to settle down.
“7. See 6.”
19 December 2012, the claims agent sent an “urgent fax” to Mr E.T.
Mah, an orthopædic surgeon, seeking a medical
report, with particular
reference to the possibility of surgery. This may well have been prompted by an
incoming fax that morning
from Calvary Hospital, seeking the claims
agent’s “approval” (presumably in the financial sense) for a
shoulder arthroscopy and mini-open acromioplasty” to be
performed on 23 January 2013 — although Mr Mah’s office
similarly for “approval” on 13 December 2012. Mr Mah responded with
a report of the same date (19 December),
which included:
worker] is a 55 year old right hand dominant labourer who has worked at Cooke
Precast Concrete for about five months.
On the 22nd October 2012 he was carrying
tools in his hands, tripped on some cement, fell forward and hit the left
shoulder against
a steel girder. He complained of some pain and stiffness in the
left shoulder, worse the next day and hence saw his local doctor
had an x-ray and physiotherapy and was put on modified duties. At the time of
the initial consultation [the worker]
complained of some weakness in the left
arm with pain on movement and has impingement symptoms.
“His general health is good; he is allergic to Morphine and Aspirin
aggravates his ulcer. He is a non-smoker with no thyroid
dysfunction or diabetes
and no past history of injury to the left shoulder.
Clinical assessment
“On initial clinical examination [the worker] showed active shoulder
abduction to 170° on the right 90° on the left,
internal rotation to
L3/4 on the right sacrum on the left, with a positive impingement sign in the
left shoulder and weakness of
rotator cuff strength. X-rays and ultrasound scan
of the left shoulder was done; copies of the reports are enclosed as [sic]
“Left shoulder impingement and rotator cuff tear
Treatment & Progress
“I last saw [the worker] on the 13th December. He reported the
condition in the left shoulder has remained unchanged despite
physiotherapy and
modified duties. [He] has requested surgery to the left shoulder and I have
scheduled the surgery for 23-1-2013.
“... The aim of the surgery is to try to improve the worker’s
current dysfunction
“... Surgery is the last treatment as the worker has failed
non-surgical treatment to date
“... Prognosis is moderate ...”
the case manager had attempted to contact the employer as early as 14 November
2012 without success: the claims agent’s
record is that the phone was
engaged with no voice mail availability for the leaving of a message. The case
manager tried again on
16 November, and Ms Woolley (the signatory of the
employer report form) confirmed to the case manager that the date of injury was
“23/10/12, notified E [employer] 24/10/12, W [worker] tripped and fell on
his left shoulder when he was carrying a mould.”
It was recorded that the
worker was undertaking modified duties “with no issues” and
“PL [which appears to signify
provisional liability
medical expenses only
] until u/s [which appears to us to signify
] and further information obtained in regards to recovery and
if surgery is required”. Oddly, the case manager recorded emailing
employer a “claim form for the w to complete and return”, although
the claims agent clearly had this four days before
this conversation and had,
indeed, allocated a claim number to it which is at the top of each sheet
recording the phone calls. Receipt
of the documents from the employer on 12
November 2012 was surely the reason for the case manager contacting the employer
time, we would have thought. The note continued, however, that
“once received CM [case manager] to determine PL [provisional
and request medical report from GP and surgeon (if referred)”. And it was
at this time that the worker indeed completed
and signed a second claim form
dated 19 November 2012, which seems to have been faxed from the employer to the
claims agent on 20
November 2012.
next contact with the employer recorded by the claims agent was an email on 28
December 2012 in which the case manager advised
that the worker was “due
to have surgery on 23/1/12 [sic]” and sought payroll details because
“we need to determine
for time lost” before his admission.
Presumably, if the worker had been working up to this time, this could have been
time weekly payments of income maintenance had been payable, at least
by the Corporation, and therefore the first time the claims
agent needed to
calculate them. (But see further below.)
that, it seems that a phone call not noted by the claims agent was made by Mr
Cooke on 15 January 2013, because he followed
up with the following email on the
“Thank you for taking my call and listening to my complaint. As I
informed, I was in the process of writing to Laura Patriarca
[the initial case
manager] to complain about the absolute lack of consultation with us about [the
worker’s] case and now learn
that Laura is no longer with Employers Mutual
[the claims agent].
“To fill you in:
worker] claimed his injury occurred on 23rd October. Our incident report
recorded it as minor. The initial doctor’s consultation
regarded it as
minor. There were no witnesses to the incident. We suspect that [the
worker’s] ailment does not relate to the
reported incident and have
expressed this view numerous times.
worker] has attended work on a restricted capacity basis continuously since the
claimed incident.
only correspondence to date from Employers Mutual to us was the letter dated
16th November advising of approval of provisional
payments for [him].
learnt from [the worker] late November that surgery was being contemplated. The
proposed surgery was discussed with [the worker]
over the next few weeks as we
enquired with him about the condition of his shoulder and as various medical
certificates were presented
in December [the worker] advised that surgery was booked for 23rd January this
express our considerable concern about the way that
the case was progressing and
discussed specifically:
was the case going to surgery?
considerations were being given to alternative therapies?
a second medical opinion be sought?
wasn’t Cooke Precast being kept informed of the case progression?
were the doctor’s reports?
concerns about this being a false claim and the injury relating to and [sic] old
sporting injury and/or degeneration of the shoulder
joint due to age were
I specifically asked for her help with this
gave me her commitment to contact the doctor’s, get their reports and
of today I have not heard from anyone from Employers Mutual except our
conversation.
I have spoken with [the worker] and he has further confirmed that surgery is
still arranged for next Wednesday and he has his
admission advice from Calvary
Hospital, with Dr Mah to perform the surgery.
“The sequence of
events is entirely unacceptable.
“I ask that you urgently review what is happening here. It is not in
the best interests of [the worker] to have this surgery
so quickly when other
avenues of recovery have not been explored. It is not in our interest, nor that
of the State, or of the taxpayer
to bear the cost of surgery and recovery that
ultimately provides an inferior solution.
“I look forward to hearing from you soon.
“Yours sincerely,
“Simon Cooke”
further phone contact was recorded by the claims agent on 17 January 2013, when
the case manager wrote that Mr Cooke had telephoned
to say that lack of work for
the company meant two or three employees had to be retrenched and as the
worker’s skills were
not transferable and he worked in one of the areas
where reductions had to be made, he was being given 28 days’ notice of
termination
from 17 January. The case manager requested a copy of that notice,
reiterating the employer’s obligations under section 58B
and 58C, which
the case manager recorded Mr Cooke as saying he understood. The case manager has
also recorded Mr Cooke as expressing
“concern with compensability”
and a possible intention to “dispute if accepted”. She noted herself
“PL at this stage” (PL presumably denoting provisional
liability), and undertaking to assess the medical information
on file and to
discuss the matter with an unnamed rehabilitation specialist.
days later, on 21 January 2013, the case manager has recorded herself in a file
note as making a phone call to Mr Cooke to acknowledge
receipt of a copy of the
notice of termination and advise that it appeared to meet section 58C
requirements but that section 58B
issues may arise. She noted Mr Cooke’s
concerns about the claim:
“cm [case manager] discussed
E’s concerns with the claim – Simon said no investigations were
carried out and w suddenly
needed surgery, E questioned if dr tried other forms
of tx [treatment], E said w is a cricketer, he may have pre existing condition
– degenerative and other non work related. E stated there were no
witnesses to the incident where w claimed to have tripped
into a column and
bumped his shoulder. E then said ‘its uusual’ [sic: probably
‘it’s unusual’] but
said its ‘his shoulder’.
“E then said the shoulder gradually got worse after the original
incident. cm said we do take E’s concerns on board, reviewing
based on medical evidence, it does confirm that w had an incident at work after
which he cought [sic: presumably ‘sought’]
medical attention, had
scans, confirmed tear, dr tried conservative tx, surgery was best option –
we can go by surgeon’s/Dr’s
recommendations and decision is medical
evidence based. E understood. cm advised based on evidence, w has suffered an
injury or an
aggravation to an injury which makes it compensable.”
the same call, the case manager evidently also spoke to Ms Woolley about the
provision of information about the worker’s
wage records and advised that
after receipt of that information she expected to determine the claim, accept
ongoing liability and
refer the worker for rehabilitation “so there are
obligations”. Following this, she emailed Mr Cooke in the following
“Many thanks for your time on the phone today.
“As discussed, could you please provide me with the following
information:
Full extent of
structure of the organisation
All positions in
the organisation
employees (both total and a break-down of full time, part-time, casual,
contractors, etc
Information of
all sites/ locations
injured workers in modified duties/ permanent modified duties
employer may have to expand
believe there are no suitable duties available
“Many thanks
for your help in this matter.”
we have indicated, the worker’s surgery took place as scheduled on 23
January 2013, and on 25 January the case manager telephoned
the employer and
spoke to Ms Woolley, noting the following:
“cm explaiend [sic]
to E we will be sending out letter accepting claim for income maintenance to
direct E to pay w. cm advised
have commenced thje [sic] process for directs
[i.e., direct payment to a worker, as opposed to the Corporation’s
practice of seeking an employer’s co-operation to pay weekly
payments to a worker with the Corporation reimbursing the employer
afterwards]
but it takes sometime so asked e to continue to pay w. e understood and
confirmed will pay w once gets letter from us.
cm advised will send letter by
this next week [sic]. E understood. E entitled to waiver.”
is not immediately clear to us what the waiver was to which the employer was
“entitled”. We understand the Corporation
often “waives”
the employer’s liability to pay the first two weeks’ income
maintenance under section 46(3)
of the Act when forms are lodged in a timely
way, and it is possible it is that practice to which the case manager referred.
event, the “waiver” does not seem germane to our
deliberations.
as we have seen, letters did indeed issue to the worker and the employer dated
25 January 2013 (and again on 31 January) accepting
the claim. Under section 90A
of the Act as it stood, the employer had one month from receipt of its letter to
lodge a notice of dispute
with the Workers Compensation Tribunal, if it wished
to dispute acceptance of the worker’s claim. It did not do so.
Cooke seems to have re-sent his email of 15 January (set out above) to the case
manager on 31 January, after receiving (presumably)
the letter of the same date,
which perhaps was sent to the employer by email.
case manager made another file note on 4 February 2013 indicating that she had
emailed the determination letter to Ms Woolley
on 31 January followed by a phone
call on the same day “directing” the employer to pay the worker, and
also recording
Centrelink “interest” received by fax on 1 February
2013 — presumably advice that the worker had applied for social
payments of some kind and that these were recoverable, under the Commonwealth
legislation, from any weekly payments benefits
received by the worker referable
to the same periods. A copy of the Centrelink fax was emailed to the employer,
and the case manager
called Centrelink to clarify the amount in question. We
might have thought this was a matter between Centrelink, the worker, and
claims agent, not involving the employer, but again, that is a matter outside
5 February 2013, the case manager has noted herself making a phone call to Mr
Cooke in which she sought further details in relation
to the worker’s
termination. Mr Cooke also discussed with her his concerns about the acceptance
of the claim, which the case
manager recorded in the following
“E’s concerns – e had emailed cm with his
concersn [sic]. cm explained based on medical evidence – report
surgeon, scan results post injury at work, it supports w sustaiend [sic] an
injury at workplace or has suffered an aggravation
if w has a pre-existing
condition. E expressed concern with the validity and believes ‘as per
medical journals, males of his
age develop asymptomatic supraspinatus tear due
to degeneration’. E reiterated ‘we have the right to review’.
stated at the time not enough medical info was obtained initially and
decisions were made based on insufficient medical information.
cm explained
medical reports from specialist, investigation result (scans) confirmed w has an
injury and that w reported injury and
sought medical attention after the alleged
incident in Oct 2012.
“E stated they were disputing the formal acceptance and the email sent
to cm was to state E were disputing the claim.
“cm explained the process with formal dispute as cm has already
explained the reasoning behind claim acceptance as it meets
sec 3 of the
“cm explained E’s rights for review and explained procedure. e
believes since w is 55 yrs old, w has degeneration.”
phone conversation was documented by the claims agent on 8 February 2013, which
the case manager’s note seems to indicate
was predominantly about the
state of work at the workplace, with an apparent focus on matters germane to the
employer’s position
under section 58B of the Act. Shortly afterwards on
that date Mr Cooke has emailed the case manager as
“Following our conversation today I can add that:
work situation has improved with the win of a contract ... resulting in some new
employment of steel fixers. The GRC [Glass Reinforced
Concrete] plant as
discussed previously remains closed. [The worker] does not have the skills to
work as a steel fixer. We remain
compliant with section 58 of the Workcover Act
[sic: obviously a reference to section 58B of the Act].
request a medical report from Dr Mah about [the worker’s] case. I believe
that one exists that was requested by Laura Patriarca
from mid-late December
worker’s] extraordinarily rapid path to surgery was unnecessary. The
miss-handling [sic] of this case has prevented us
from asserting our rights, as
given to us by the Workcover Act. We are of the firm opinion that [the
worker’s] shoulder problems
existed before the incident on 23rd October.
We request a second medical opinion that answers the question of the likelihood
[he] had a suspranitus [sic] tear previous to the incident. I add that [the
worker], as discussed, was already on lighter duties,
as managed by us, due to
his restrictions with his shoulders and inability to lift, before the incident.
Suspranitus [sic] problems
increase with age and [the worker’s] cricket
career are contributing factors to a pre-existing suspranitus [sic] problem that
was not investigated. The incident may have been secondary to what was already a
problem with his shoulders.
work continues to improve there may be room to re-hire [the worker], providing
he wants to work, and that his medical situation
allows him to. Alistair McGrath
is familiar with our workplace and would be a good intermediary to assess
whether there are suitable
duties for [the worker].
please arrange a meeting with yourself, Alistair and [the worker] present to
discuss a return to work plan for [the
worker] and a frank discussion about his
recovery from the surgery.
“Kind regards and have a good weekend,
12 February 2013, another telephone conversation may have taken place, although
the claims agent seems to have made no record of
it. However, it has recorded
receipt of an email from Mr Cooke on that day; the text, however, is identical
to that recorded on 8
February. The sign-off on the email, consisting of Mr
Cooke wishing the case manager a good weekend, suggests 8 February, which in
2013 was a Friday, is a more likely date for the email than 12 February, which
was a Tuesday.
on 8 February 2013, the case manager requested a further report from Mr Mah (the
request including information on the definition
of “secondary
injury”) and he responded with a report dated 15 February 2013 including
the following:
“[The worker] underwent surgery to his left
shoulder on 23-1-2013. Post surgery he was referred to have physiotherapy
with Mr S Suli.
“I last saw [the worker] on the 7th February, approximately two weeks
following surgery to the left shoulder. The wound has
healed and he has regained
a very good range of motion. [He] has not worked because there is no job
available to him but he could
start doing some job seeking now and perhaps a
period of rehab. I will see him again in April.
Answers to specific questions
As to whether the worker’s injury was the result of an
aggravation, exacerbation, acceleration, deterioration or recurrence
pre-existing or degenerative injury or condition
] The worker’s
condition is a primary work injury
As to whether the worker had a prior similar injury
] No, I am not
aware of any
As to whether Mr Mah had been consulted about such prior injury
[The worker] reported no previous injury to the shoulder
As to whether it can be established that the worker suffered a
worsening or recurrence of such prior injury
As to the history of such prior injury
20 February 2013, the case manager sent Mr Cooke a copy of Mr Mah’s report
dated 19 December 2012. It is not clear to us
whether the further report dated 8
February 2013 was available by then, but if it was it seems absurd that it was
not included, given
the points Mr Cooke had been making. The covering letter
contained appropriate admonishments about section 107A(3) of the Act (under
which an employer must not disclose the contents of such reports except as may
be necessary for the worker’s rehabilitation
and return to work, or for
the purpose of proceedings under the Act), as well as the Commonwealth
24 April 2013, the claims agent wrote to Dr Pek again, also seeking a response
to questions directed to the possibility that the
claim was for a secondary
injury. The questions appropriately included whether the current injury was the
result of an aggravation,
exacerbation, acceleration, deterioration or
recurrence of a pre-existing or degenerative injury or condition, whether the
had a prior injury similar in nature to the present one and, if so,
whether the worker had consulted Dr Pek for the prior injury.
The response,
dated 1 May 2013, was a succession of straight “No” or “Not
applicable” answers.
The employer’s case
Cooke was the sole representative of the applicant employer. As such, while most
of what he said can fairly be characterised as
submissions, he also made
assertions as to the facts that should be regarded as evidence. Anticipating
this, the Panel administered
the affirmation at the outset so that what he said
could be used to arrive at our findings of fact. As it turned out, there was
comparatively
little dispute as to what had transpired; the principal issue
between the parties was the conclusions to be drawn.
said that he was seeking to have the claims expenses reduced to the provisional
amount estimated at the start of the claims process,
because the sequence of
events had been unacceptable, unprofessional, resulted in a bad outcome, and
procedurally unfair. He said
that his company had not disputed the acceptance of
the claim, but the claims agent took 83 days and protests about the management
of the claim at that time went unresponded to. He pointed out that the claim had
been accepted two days after surgery had been undertaken.
Cooke said he (Mr Cooke) was 46 years of age and had been involved in
manufacturing for 28 years, including 12 years as an occupational
safety representative. He has been managing director of the applicant employer
for five years. He said he had worked for
a large national metal and building
materials manufacturer, the name of which is not relevant to these proceedings,
but which is
well recognised by us, and had been its divisional manager in
Darwin and “looked after” its factory in Sydney.
said he had extensive experience in dealing with injured workers and returning
them to work. He had dealt with “significant”
shoulder injuries
“five or six times” and had found that surgery is not necessarily
the best treatment, often resulting
in very poor outcomes. He said he had
experienced a shoulder injury himself (but not in compensable circumstances)
and, while he
had taken 18 months to recover, “I did get
Cooke said he had been told by his production manager that the worker had hurt
himself and went off to see the doctor with a sore
shoulder. He said the worker
came back to work “after a couple of days off”, but experienced
continuing problems and
went back to the doctor, at which time scans showed some
damage. He said about a week after the incident, he approached the worker
account of what had happened and was told the worker had been carrying a tray of
tools when he tripped on an “irregularity”
in the floor and hit his
shoulder on a steel column.
Cooke said the worker had told others he had been carrying a bag of cement and
still others that he had been carrying a mould.
Mr Cooke said that “alarm
bells” had rung about managing the case when WorkCover forms were
completed, given his own
experience of factors leading to poor outcomes and the
fact that there were no witnesses to the incident, despite there being a group
of four workers in a room he indicated was the size of the Panel’s hearing
room. He said the worker might have thought his
job was in danger; other warning
signs included the worker’s age and the fact that the circumstances of the
injury were “not
clear cut”.
Cooke related visits to the doctor by the worker, physiotherapy, then weeks
later he was booked for surgery. He complained that
there was “no
response” to his own contacts with WorkCover (by which we take him to mean
the claims agent). He spoke
to “the ombudsman” about the claim being
accepted. It is not clear whether Mr Cooke was referring at this stage to the
(then) WorkCover Ombudsman, who was appointed under the 1986 Act, or the
(general state) Ombudsman, appointed under the
Ombudsman Act 1972
said the advice he received was that he had no rights as employer until the
claim was accepted, which seems to reflect the
provisions of Division 7A of Part
4 of the Act, and in particular section 50I as in force at the time. (The
concept of “provisional
acceptance” seems to have been abandoned in
the 2014 Act, with new section 32 simply providing for interim payments to a
pending final determination of a claim, which
where the determination takes more than the target ten days.
“Payment” seems to include medical expenses under
new section 33.)
He said the case manager “knew” she was “shutting me
out” by not determining the claim.
He said the worker has never recovered
response to a question from the Panel, Mr Cooke acknowledged that he was
“not a medical person”, but said he had read
and how a bursa works. He said he had put to the case manager that there can be
a level of symptomatic injury
in the shoulders and if he had a scan it would
probably show an injury. He reiterated that he had asked for the medical reports
talked about the possibility of degeneration and previous injury, but did
not receive the reports until well after the surgery, when
he would have liked
to have seen them before the surgery. Asked whether he had sought any medical
opinion other than that formed
by his own experiences, he said “only what
I’ve read online about symptomatic shoulder injury” and his own
experiences
at his previous employer. He said what he had “found”
was that workers who took the surgical option did not return to
work. Over time,
he had discovered that shoulder injuries were “fixable without
surgery” and “we put fellows into
the store until they
recovered”. He said he was not saying that the particular worker had the
same injury or would have had
the same recovery, but the employer had not had
the opportunity to sit down and talk to anyone about what was possible. He said
felt “a bit frantic” when surgery was suggested, but he just
wasn’t getting any help.
relation to “procedural fairness”, Mr Cooke said the cases (we
presume he was referring to legal cases from review
authorities and the courts)
did not address the issue of a claim being accepted after surgery. He said he
had “looked through
the case management handbook” and confirmed that
a claim should be determined within ten days “unless it is a hearing
or director’s claim”. He said that no one had been able to explain
to him why it had taken 83 days rather than ten.
He said that procedural
fairness required a fair hearing and a lack of bias. He did not know if the two
doctors who shared a surname
(Dr Mah, the general practitioner, and Mr Mah, the
surgeon) were related.
response to questioning from Mr Coppola, Mr Cooke agreed he was satisfied the
incident described by the worker had taken place,
even though all three
potential witnesses were outside at the time: their response to Mr Cooke was
that they were working when the
worker came out and said he had injured his
Cooke agreed with Mr Coppola that the worker had been subjected to a
pre-employment medical examination only about three months
before the injury,
which had not shown any shoulder problems. He interpolated that the medical
reports he had now seen “vary”
on the history of the incident. In
response to a further question from Mr Coppola about the shoulder injuries he
had experience of
from his previous employment, Mr Cooke agreed that they were
typically injuries from over-use rather than impact injuries.
Cooke said he did not know the reason for the delay in determining the claim,
but if it had been accepted within the statutory
ten days, he would have put the
worker on rehabilitation and sat down with him (and, we presume he meant, the
rehabilitation provider)
and discussed a plan for proceeding. He said he was in
any case catching up with the worker on at least a weekly basis until he said
the doctor had told him he would have to have surgery. Mr Cooke said he told the
worker he did not “have to” have surgery
and could ask for a second
Coppola asked him whether he had requested WorkCover to authorise rehabilitation
within the provisional acceptance. He said he
was not familiar with the Act at
that time, but he did think the surgery was “a poor call”. He said
that once the claim
was eventually accepted — after the surgery — he
could not dispute the claim: “what grounds would I have had?”
said he could not dispute the claim in the Workers Compensation Tribunal on the
basis of WorkCover mismanagement: only if there
was a basis for thinking the
incident didn’t happen. He said the acceptance letter invited him to speak
to the case manager
or team leader, which he had already done and not got a
response. He said he had not received the first report — the
report (presumably Mr Mah’s report of 19 December 2012)
— until 24 April 2013. Whether this was the copy sent under cover
claims agent’s letter of 20 February 2013 we do not know.
Coppola asked him if there was any evidence that different treatment would have
made a difference to the cost of the claim. Mr
Cooke said the worker would have
remained at work. He said the worker had not been back to work post-surgery
before the lay-offs
became necessary, but he was later re-employed in the GRC
plant to spray fibre cement, when work became available again for a while.
Cooke speculated on the worker’s playing of cricket and other sports, his
sleeping posture, and said there was a whole series
of questions he was denied
the opportunity to ask. He said that the doctors who were asked about these
matters were all asked “after
the fact”, i.e., the surgery.
Cooke said there was great emphasis in the Act as to how all stakeholders need
to work together. In order for that to work, he
said, employers like him had to
have “a seat at the table”.
said that after the worker had been re-engaged around Christmas 2013, he was
subsequently injured again, with a crush injury to
a finger, requiring
amputation. He returned to work again following that, but work declined again
and he was laid off after less
than twelve months this time.
Consideration
employer’s assertion of mismanagement by the claims agent invokes a
subject to which the Panel has adverted on several occasions
over the years, as
far back as 2003, where in
Solo Waste v WorkCover
[2003] SAWLRP 2
at [5]-[9], the President said:
“I think it may be correctly
supposed that ‘mismanagement’ of a claim that has such an effect
[rendering the costs
of the claim, reflected in the levy assessed, considerably
greater than it might otherwise have been] may validly be made the ground
application to review a decision on the basis that ‘the fixing or
assessment of a levy ... is unreasonable’, within
the meaning of section
72. But I cannot think that this would be an easy ground to make out in
proceedings under section 72.
“The Panel of course has not heard detailed argument from the parties
at this stage, but I think it may help the parties, and
in particular the
employer, to consider the matters that must be addressed if I might make a few
observations.
“It seems to me that, just as a particular medical condition might be
treated in several equally valid ways (see, for example,
v. Harrison
2 WCATR 186
; A.47/1990), the management of a worker’s compensation
claim might also be approached in several ways that might be equally
might or might not be possible, with the benefit of hindsight, to say that one
or other would have been more effective
than another, but, in my respectful
opinion, it is unlikely to meet the test of ‘unreasonable’ unless it
can be shown
that the superiority of an alternative approach should have been
apparent with some clarity in the state of knowledge that existed
time the crucial management decisions were being taken.
“I do not seek to place obstacles in the way of an employer pursuing an
application it clearly considers justified, but it would
surprise me if the
Panel were able to reach a conclusion that the levy was unreasonable in such
circumstances on the basis of assertion
or argument alone. It seems to me that
the Panel would need to be convinced — on the balance of probabilities
— by appropriate
evidence that a different course of management would have
yielded superior results, that those concerned with the management of the
should have known better than to decide on the course that they did and,
finally, that the decisions made have led to a particular,
quantifiable, effect
on the levy charged to the employer. The evidence required would almost
certainly have to be expert, presumably
including evidence by medical, actuarial
and possibly other experts.
“I recognise that such a task could seem onerous, but I cannot imagine
that such an application could otherwise succeed. Perhaps
my imagination is
deficient: as I have indicated, these are tentative thoughts, set out to assist
the parties, and the Panel as a
whole would be prepared to hear contrary
argument at an appropriate stage.”
Tolega v. WorkCover (No.3)
[2009] SAWLRP 11
, at [34]-[35], the
Panel indicated that mismanagement of a claim would not be made out merely by
showing that an optimistic prediction
by a medical practitioner had not been
fulfilled or by a claims agent following the advice of a qualified
rehabilitation expert that
had not borne the expected
“Thirdly, Ms Whitelaw [for the employer] submitted that
claims costs had escalated due to the claims agent’s poor claims
management in ignoring or not acting on medical advice. In support of this
contention, she cited a rehabilitation report that quoted
Dr Nitchingham as
having originally predicted that the worker would be back to full working hours
by the end of December 2006 ...
She also quoted Dr Graham’s prediction
that the worker would ‘be left with no residual disability resulting from
injury sustained at work’ ... and she quoted extensively from Dr
Bauze’s report of 17 January 2007, which denied the
worker had ever
sustained a compensable disability in her employment. As numerous cases
36 of the Act show,
a report asserting
that a worker with an accepted claim never had a compensable
disability is very difficult to act on successfully from WorkCover’s
of view. Predictions by medical practitioners that are not borne out by
subsequent developments also are not a basis on which
any action can be taken,
and we struggle to see how the failure of an optimistic prediction to come true
could be described as ‘mismanagement’
on the part of the claims
“Ms Whitelaw’s fourth submission was based on a vocational
assessment that found the worker suitable for a number of vocations
while at the
same time making a number of comments that led the employer (and, it must be
said, us) to doubt the reality of the recommendations
as to the worker’s
suitability for those vocations. The submission is critical of the claims agent
for funding of TAFE courses
in line with the recommendations. However, while we
might share some of the employer’s scepticism about the likely
fruitfulness
of this action, we find it difficult to criticise the claims agent
for following the recommendations of an apparently appropriately
expert who was certainly better credentialed than we are or, we respectfully
think, the employer is, to make them.”
Quality Staff v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP 3
, at [29]-[31], the
Panel said:
“The Panel has acknowledged previously that there
may conceivably be instances where a claim is so badly mismanaged that it
be unreasonable to burden an employer’s claims history with the
consequential costs. The Panel has not previously found
it necessary to define
circumstances in which such a finding would be appropriate, and we do not think
it necessary to do so now.
Clearly, such a finding would be a matter depending
on the facts of a case. In general, however, we think more would have to be
established
than simply that the claims agent did not follow a course of action
requested by an employer. Claims management cannot be regarded
as an exact
science, and more than one course of action may be reasonably open in given
circumstances. To assert, especially in hindsight,
that one course may have been
more effective than another is not, in our view enough, particularly if the
material reasonably available
to the claims agent at the time of decision-making
supported the course of action actually taken. The fact that the same material
might also have supported a different course of action would rarely, in our
respectful view, be sufficient to evidence mismanagement.
(All of this, of
course, is subject to the right of any employer to lodge a notice of dispute
with the Workers Compensation Tribunal
in relation to particular reviewable
decisions made by the claims agent, a right of which the present employer did
avail itself.)
“In the present case, the drug test established no more than the fact
that the worker had traces of THC in his blood. It did
not go anywhere near
establishing, nor did it purport to, that the worker was working under the
influence of cannabis. As it happens,
the claims agent did consider the
employer’s suggestion that payments be discontinued for breach of
mutuality or serious and
wilful misconduct, and say they were legally advised
that those grounds would not be successful if challenged by the worker before
the Tribunal. This advice seems to have been obtained informally -- orally --
and the only written record of it before us appears
in an email from the claims
agent to the employer ... and a telephone note dated 28 February 2007 ...
Nevertheless, it is advice
with which it is difficult to disagree. Both the Act
and those documents of the employer to which our attention has been directed
refer to workers being penalised for being under the influence, not for having
evidence in the bloodstream of past consumption.
This is a distinction the
employer seems consistently to have failed to appreciate.
“Faced with that advice, and with uncontradicted medical (and
paramedical) evidence that the worker continued to be significantly
incapacitated by his disability, we do not think the claims agent is open to
criticism for taking the course of action it took.”
Valley View Nursing Home v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP 2
[30]-[51], the Panel dealt with a specific complaint of claims
mismanagement:
“The applicant firstly pointed out that the
claim had been managed through all of the above events without a formal decision
to accept or reject any claims except the right arm epicondylitis claim, which
was accepted, and the adjustment disorder with depressed
mood, which was
accepted for medical expenses only.
“It argued that the claims management had not come to grips with the
various alleged injuries and their role in relation to
the total disability.
Rather, all alleged injuries had been referred to the rehabilitation consultant
and generally dealt with on
a rolled-up basis.
“The thrust of its argument was that it would be unfair to take account
of all of the monetary amount paid out for this claim
in calculating the levy
amount, since the claim had not been well managed. It argued that better claims
management would have resulted
in a lower amount paid out by WorkCover.
“This is not the type of argument where we could say that the applicant
should have taken up the issues in the Workers Compensation
Tribunal, as was
referred to in
Wami Kata Old Folks Home Inc v WorkCover
at paras 25, 26 and 34. The complaints are that no decisions or
actions were taken rather than that decisions or actions that were
“We make this observation notwithstanding section 36(8) which provides
that an employer may request a review where it believes
that reasonable grounds
exist for a discontinuance or reduction of weekly payments. See also section
28B of the Act which provides
that an employer may request a review in relation
into a rehabilitation and return to work plan or the lack thereof, and section
107 of the Act, which provides that an employer may request progress reports
from the claims agent.
“WorkCover acknowledged that the various claims had been left
undetermined, but argued that this did not affect the result in
terms of the
management of the claim.
“Specifically, WorkCover argued that the bulk of the disability
appeared to relate primarily to the left shoulder, and the balance
of evidence
clearly showed that this injury was compensable, in that it occurred as a result
of using the left arm excessively to
compensate for the lack of use of the right
arm that was injured.
“We accept the argument of WorkCover on this point. We consider that
the various alleged injuries all appeared to be the result
of work activities.
The only possible exception was the reference by Dr Economos to the history
taken of the left shoulder injury
having been due to the worker’s
activities at home. This was inconsistent with the history taken by, and
opinion of, the treating
general practitioner, Dr Lim, very soon after the time.
There is no other evidence to support the contrary view.
“Whilst we can see that the failure to determine each of the various
claims for injuries has meant that the applicant/employer
was unable to
challenge any such decision in the Workers Compensation Tribunal, we do not see
that such a challenge would have given
rise to any reduction in the amount paid
for the claim.
“The applicant also argued that the claims agent should have generally
sorted out the medical issues more thoroughly. But in
our view it is hard to
see what difference this would have made. In our view, there was no obvious
point that was missed, which
might have lessened the payments. Assumptions were
made perhaps without detailed consideration, but these assumptions appear to
have been correct when we look at the evidence.
“The applicant argued that the worker had moved interstate for a
period, and no rehabilitation was undertaken during this period,
or later when
she returned to South Australia. This is a matter that can be argued both ways.
WorkCover argued that it is not uncommon
for the claims agent to decide that
rehabilitation is not cost-effective for a period of time. There certainly were
lengthy periods
of time when rehabilitation did not actively take place. We are
concerned that this was so, but acknowledge that decisions as to
rehabilitation
are essentially value judgments.
“We note that Dr Meegan has reported on 4 September 2006 at P 309,
“‘She has strong concerns about returning to the pre-injury
employer in relation to tensions there and the fact that three
attempts have failed there. Her anxiety has reached a phobic level with her
recently abandoning a case conference
due to the anxiety with associated panic
“Rehabilitation, if successful, certainly limits the expenditure on a
claim, but if unsuccessful, increases the costs and may
lead to antagonism if it
is seen as inappropriate.
“Whilst we might have expected rehabilitation to have occurred through
a rehabilitat-ion consultant at times when this did not
occur, we find that this
is not the type of mismanagement of the claim that would cause us to use our
discretionary powers to reduce
the levy. We say more about the use of these
discretionary powers later.
“The applicant argued that there had been no two year review pursuant
to section 39 of the Act. A two year review may be conducted
by the claims
agent based on section 39 with reference to section 35 of the Act, and more
recently, section 35A of the Act in relation
to the third entitlement period.
We note that the end of the two year period occurred in September 2007. There
may be some arguments
that other injuries meant that the period expired a few
months later, but this is not significant here. We are not aware of any
for there being no two year review. It is difficult for us to predict what
might have been the result of such a review.
“During the relevant time, the worker was generally certified as fit
for modified duties with the restriction of no lifting
over 5 kg, no overhead
work and no repetitive shoulder movement. Hours were limited for much of the
time. These are very restrictive
conditions. It would have been difficult to
have found real job opportunities with such restrictions.
“We note that the employer was given a section 58B exemption, so that
it is no longer required to provide suitable duties.
We further note that the
worker attempted to commit suicide in July 2006 (See report at P 257). This
indicates that the claims agent
should be cautious in any actions that it takes.
While we consider that on the material before us, a two year review should have
taken place, with a view to reducing the weekly payments that were being made,
we find in all the circumstances that failure to do
so was not an error that
could be classed as out of the ordinary.
“Our view is that claims management involves a very large number of
value judg-ments. Many factors must be weighed up. There
are often different
ways to approach a claim. Time and cost are also factors. One would not expect
that all decisions made would
be the best possible decisions when examined in
hindsight and in detail.
“Our reason for this approach is as follows. The determination setting
out the terms of the levy adjustment scheme as published
of 26 July 2007 at page 3191 includes clause 2.13(h) which allows a
general discretion in the imposition of the bonus/penalty scheme
“‘such further or other adjustment of the operation of the Levy
Adjustment Scheme as may in the opinion of the Delegate,
best give effect to the
objects of the [the Act]...’.
“The terms of section 67 of the Act contain numerous uses of the word
‘may’, which also implies a discretion.
“Discretion should be used in a way that is fair to all those who
contribute to the scheme, i.e., employers. It would be unfair
to employers
generally if some employers complained of claims management decisions that were
not the best decisions, but were within
the range of decisions that were
ordinarily made, and received a lower levy as a result. It would be fair to all
employers generally
if the levies were only adjusted on account of such
decisions where the decisions were clearly wrong, clearly out of the ordinary,
and had a significant impact on the levy calculation.
“To do otherwise would be to ignore the principles set out in
Benchmark Healthcare v WorkCover
[2009] SAWLRP 17
to the effect
that the scheme should be fair to all users, and that all employers should carry
the burden of the cost of the scheme
fairly as between themselves.”
have set out these observations in full to illustrate the difficulties we
perceive in the task the employer has embarked upon in
this case. These
difficulties are only compounded by a number of misunderstandings of the law on
Mr Cooke’s part.
the processing of a claim by the claims agent is not a judicial proceeding or
anything particularly like it and in earlier
times it could have been said
confidently that it did not attract the rules of procedural fairness. However,
in more “recent”
times (1985), the High Court has come to recognise,
in the words of Mason J (as he then was) in
Kioa v. West
159 CLR 550
[1985] HCA 81:
“The law has now developed to a
point where it may be accepted that there is a common law duty to act fairly, in
the sense of
according procedural fairness, in the making of administrative
decisions which affect rights, interests and legitimate expectations,
only to the clear manifestation of a contrary statutory intention. It seems that
as early as 1911 Lord Loreburn L.C. understood
that this was the law when he
spoke of the obligation to ‘fairly listen to both sides’ being
‘a duty lying upon
every one who decides anything’ (
Education v. Rice
[1911] UKLawRpAC 18
[1911] AC 179
, at p 182). But the duty does not
attach to every decision of an administrative character. Many such decisions do
not affect the
rights, interests and expectations of the individual citizen in a
direct and immediate way. Thus a decision to impose a rate or a
decision to
impose a general charge for services rendered to ratepayers, each of which
indirectly affects the rights, interests or
expectations of citizens generally
does not attract this duty to act fairly. This is because the act or decision
which attracts the
duty is an act or decision -
‘ ... which directly affects the person (or corporation) individually
and not simply as a member of the public or a class of
the public. An executive
or administrative decision of the latter kind is truly a “policy” or
“political”
decision and is not subject to judicial review.’
Salemi v. MacKellar (No. 2)
[1977] HCA 26
(1977) 137 CLR 396
p.452, per Jacobs J.).”
said that, it is far from clear-cut to what extent the applicant employer (who
was not the claimant for WorkCover benefits)
was owed procedural fairness by the
claims agent in the circumstances described. A useful summary of the relevant
factors is contained
in the judgment of Bleby J (with whom Duggan and Debelle JJ
Chiropractors Association & Perry v. WorkCover
Corporation
[1999] SASC 470
; (1999) 75 SASR 470 and in the five separate
judgments of
itself, as well as the many cases, both previous
and subsequent, referred to by Bleby J and the judges of the High Court. We do
consider we need to resolve that question because, on any view of the
breadth of its obligations, in our respectful opinion the claims
extend procedural fairness to the employer.
appreciate that Mr Cooke does not necessarily acknowledge that the records of
phone calls and emails placed before us by the Corporation
reveal the full
extent of his attempts to convey his views to the claims agent. However, the
records that are before us, the authenticity
of which was not questioned,
demonstrate that the claims agent was willing to, and did, entertain repeated
representations from Mr
Cooke as to his views on the appropriate handling of the
worker’s claim. The claims agent did so, as far as we can discern,
even patiently, and without bias — in fact, we think Mr Cooke’s
complaint of bias was principally concerned with
a perceived “bias”
on the part of the medical practitioners involved, or some of them, a subject to
which we will return.
does not show bias, or any denial of procedural fairness, on the part of the
claims agent that it did not accept or act on Mr Cooke’s
views as to the
appropriate treatment of the worker or his claim. The obligation of procedural
fairness, if it is applicable in relation
to an employer in a case of this sort,
does not go beyond the receipt and honest consideration of the employer’s
representations.
Again, we appreciate that Mr Cooke does not accept that his
representations were given honest consideration, but there is not the
evidence of
on the part of the claims agent, and the mere fact
that the representations were not accepted or acted upon does not provide that
does the fact that the medical reports Mr Cooke says he requested were provided
so late provide that evidence. The rights of an
employer in this connection are
set out in the Act in sections 107, 107A and 108 of the
107—Employer
may request progress report
(1) The employer of a
worker may at any time request the Corporation to provide a report on—
(a) the medical progress being made by the worker;
(b) the worker’s incapacity for work as assessed under this Act.
(2) A request under
subsection (1)
must be accompanied by the prescribed fee.
(3) The Corporation shall prepare a report requested under
subsection (1)
within a reasonable time of the request being made and shall send copies of the
report to the employer and the worker.
107A—Copies
of medical reports
(1) The Corporation
must, within 7 days after receiving a request from a worker’s employer,
provide the employer with copies
of reports in the Corporation’s
possession prepared by medical experts and relevant to the worker’s
medical condition,
the worker’s progress in rehabilitation, or the extent
of the worker’s incapacity for work.
(2) A request under
subsection (1)
must be accompanied by the prescribed fee.
(3) An employer must not disclose confidential information about a worker in
a report obtained under this section except as may be
(a) to assist the worker’s rehabilitation and return to work; or
(b) for the purposes of proceedings under this Act.
108—Medical
examination at request of employer
(1) Subject to
subsection (2)
the employer of a worker who has made a claim under this Act may require the
Corporation to have the worker submit to an examination
by a recognised medical
expert nominated by the Corporation.
(2) A worker shall not
be required to submit to examinations under this section more frequently than is
permitted by the regulations.
(3) The Corporation may, if it thinks fit, charge the cost of an examination
under this section to the employer.
(4) If it appears that there has been undue delay in having a worker
examined under this section, the Tribunal may, on application
by the employer,
give such directions to the Corporation as appear reasonable in the
circumstances to expedite the examination.
(5) The Corporation must comply, or take steps to secure compliance, with
such a direction.
note that sections 178, 179 and 181 of the 2014 Act are in similar terms, except
that the requirement to pay a “prescribed
fee” have disappeared from
sections 178 and 179.
first blush, the employer seems to have made a request within the meaning of
section 107A of the 1986 Act, which requires compliance
by the Corporation
within seven days. We do not know whether the request was “accompanied by
the prescribed fee”, but
we also do not know what the prescribed fee is.
Since section 107A was inserted into the Act in 1995, no fee seems ever to have
prescribed and certainly none is prescribed in the
Rehabilitation and Compensation Regulations 2010
. The failure to prescribe a
fee cannot, of course, defeat the intent of the section: it simply means that
the copies are free of
charge to the employer making a request. Paradoxically,
the lack of a prescribed fee results in the request for medical reports under
section 107A being attended with far less formality than it might otherwise be,
and perhaps makes it easier to overlook. If the request
is made by telephone,
there is little by way of a paper trail. In Mr Cooke’s case, it is
difficult to make a firm finding as
to when he first made his request, but the
email reproduced above (at [
15 January 2013, suggests it may have been on 12 December 2012. At any rate, the
email of 15 January 2013 must itself surely
be taken as such a request. Not to
provide the requested reports (and then, perhaps not a complete set) until 20
February 2013, as
deadline of seven days, virtually
guarantees a disgruntled, and justifiably so, employer.
the lack of formality entailed in the request process under section 107A (or
under section 179 of the 2014 Act), it is imperative
that any request, however
conveyed, be meticulously recorded forthwith by the claims agent, and complied
with in the legislated time
frame. Having said that, it is clear from the terms
of the section itself that only reports “relevant to the worker’s
medical condition, the worker’s progress in rehabilitation, or the extent
of the worker’s incapacity for work”
should be provided. A
worker’s privacy is not to be invaded beyond the extent mandated by
Parliament.
is indeed true, as Mr Cooke argues, that it is important for all
“stakeholders” to be encouraged to work together within
WorkCover, now Return To Work, scheme. As far as employers are concerned, it has
been the case for twenty years now that
a rehabilitation and return to work plan
may place binding obligations on the employer of an injured worker (section 28A,
the equivalent
of which in the 2014 Act is section 25), and there has been an
obligation since 1988 to provide suitable work for a partially incapacitated
worker in many circumstances (section 58B, the equivalent of which in the 2014
Act is section 18, which has been considerably strengthened,
now adding a
private right of enforcement by workers to the existing ability of the
Corporation to impose a supplement for non-compliance
in addition to the
employer’s ordinary premium).
this sense, it is correct to speak of the employer having “a seat at the
table”, but that should not be taken too literally.
There is no actual
“table” around which case manager, worker, employer and medical and
rehabilitation experts sit and
decide collectively what shall happen to the
worker. In particular, it needs to be said loudly and clearly, treatment
decisions for
injured workers remain in the hands of the injured worker as they
do for any other sick or injured person: see, for example,
Kelvinator v.
(1990) 2 WCATR 186
; WCAT Print A.47/1990 (McCusker DP). It is
not necessarily inappropriate for Mr Cooke, as he did, to discuss the
worker’s condition
with him, and even to suggest (as long as the
suggestion is not made in an overbearing way) that the worker could seek a
second opinion,
but none of this amounts to a right of veto on the part of an
employer, in these or any other circumstances, over the form of treatment
worker, on taking his own medical advice, chooses to have. While of course every
worker (or every patient) has the right to seek
a second opinion if they wish
to, they equally have the right not to seek it if they do not wish to. If the
first professional medical
advice they receive makes sense to them, they have
every right to accept it and follow it if they wish. Nothing in the 1986 Act or
the 2014 Act alters this fundamental position.
explanation has been offered by the Corporation as to why, after accepting
provisional liability on 16 November 2012, the claims
agent took until 25
January 2013 to determine to accept the worker’s claim. As Mr Cooke says,
the statutory target is ten business
days (section 53(4) of the 1986 Act;
section 31(4) of the 2014 Act). It is to be noted that neither the 1986 Act nor
the 2014 Act
makes any exception for hearing loss claims or directors’
claims, which simply sounds bizarre to us: the requirement is that
Corporation shall determine claims for compensation as expeditiously as
reasonably practicable and where the claim is
for compensation by way of income
maintenance [
income support
in the 2014 Act] shall, wherever practicable,
endeavour to determine the claim within 10 business days after the date of
of the claim.” There are all sorts of reasons why it may not be
practicable to decide a claim within ten business days, but
it seems strange to
single out hearing loss and directors’ claims as particular exceptions for
which neither Act provides,
when commonsense suggests many such claims could
easily be determined within the ten business days target. If there is actually a
case management handbook that says this, it should be re-examined and aligned
with the legislation.
the other hand, it needs to be kept in mind that both the worker and the
employer, if either was concerned about the delay in determining
the claim, had
the right to apply to the Workers Compensation Tribunal for intervention under
section 97 of the Act (section 113
of the 2014 Act is
equivalent):
(1) A worker
or employer
who believes there has been undue delay in
deciding a claim or other matter affecting the worker or employer may apply to
the Tribunal,
in the manner and form prescribed by regulation, for expedited
determination of the matter. ... [Our underlining.]
comment, in passing, that the jurisdiction conferred on the Tribunal by section
97 is possibly wide enough also to have accommodated
Mr Cooke’s complaint
where the Tribunal has
explored the breadth of “other matter affecting the
worker or employer”, probably because section 107A matters are rarely
dealt with by judicial members of the Tribunal, but it seems to us, with
respect, that it is at least arguable that a delay in compliance
with section
107A on the part of the Corporation is a “matter” amenable to an
application invoking the special jurisdiction.
the claims agent had determined the worker’s claim within the ten business
days envisaged by section 53(4), it would have
been determined by 26 November
2012, which was the tenth business day after the claim was received by the
claims agent on 12 November.
It is difficult to see, on the information before
us, that the employer would have been in any better position to avail itself of
any rights it may have had on 26 November 2012 than it was on 25 January 2013.
The only right it could have availed itself of that
it did not otherwise (yet)
have was the right to lodge a notice of dispute with the Tribunal to challenge
the decision to accept
the claim, something the employer did not do after 25
January 2013 because, as Mr Cooke candidly acknowledged at the hearing, he
not dispute it: “what grounds would I have had?” The worker, on the
hearing before the Tribunal of any such dispute,
would have had the burden of
establishing his claim on the balance of probabilities. The employer would have
had the opportunity
of cross-examining him on the matters that have caused
disquiet to Mr Cooke, such as the lack of witnesses to the accident, the
sleeping habits, his sporting activities, and any previous
degenerative changes. It is impossible to see that the surgical intervention
23 January 2013 would have changed the worker’s answers to any of these
questions, made it any more difficult for the employer
to ask them, or
“destroyed” any relevant evidence; in any event, there is no chance
at all that a notice of dispute lodged
with the Tribunal on or shortly after 26
November 2012 could have reached the stage of a trial before a judicial member
of the Tribunal
before 23 January 2013. We simply cannot accept that the
decision taken by the employer not to challenge the claim after it was accepted
in January 2013 could rationally have been any different if the claim had been
accepted by 26 November 2012.
said that, it is also difficult to see why formal determination of the
worker’s claim should have taken until late January
2013. From the claims
agent’s point of view, nothing in the claim or the employer report form
seemed to give grounds for querying
it, and the medical reports received from Dr
Pek on 21 November 2012 and Mr Mah on 19 December 2012, as well as the multiple
certificates and radiology reports, provided ample support. No further
investigation into the authenticity of the claim appeared
necessary to the
claims agent before finally accepting the claim on 25 January 2013, which was
before the outcome of the surgical
intervention was known to the claims agent.
We note that when the claim was
provisionally
accepted on 16 November
2012, it was confined to medical expenses, notwithstanding the fact that the
initial prescribed medical certificate
indicated the worker had already suffered
total incapacity, and therefore income loss, for one day. Presumably, that
single day’s
income maintenance was paid by the employer in accordance
with section 46(3) of the Act, subject to the possible “waiver”
referred to at [
]. However, it seems
there may have been no further call for income maintenance to be paid until the
worker was totally incapacitated
by reason of the surgery undertaken on 23
January 2013. This may partially explain, but cannot excuse, the prolonged
delay, which
we consider undesirable and unfortunate. The statutory directive to
determine each and every claim “as expeditiously as reasonably
practicable” is not to be ignored, even where delay seems to do no
should acknowledge that Mr Cooke seemed an impressive witness, and we have no
cause to doubt his sincerity in any regard, but his
memory seemed not to be
entirely reliable as to some facts that had been otherwise documented. He said,
for example, that the worker
had only returned to work after his injury after
“a couple of days”, when the doctor’s certificate seems to
only one day of incapacity, and other evidence (including Mr
Cooke’s own) seems to indicate the worker did not lose any time
until he went in for surgery on 23 January 2013. Against this doubt, Mr
Cooke’s evidence that the worker changed his
story about the incident has
to be weighed. It was nearly three years after the events that Mr Cooke gave his
evidence and it seems
that some of the stories to which Mr Cooke referred were
hearsay — that is, stories other workers told him they were told by
worker, not stories he heard first-hand. In his claim form dated 9 November
2012, the worker said he was “carrying equipment
this seems to have been the only history he has given under his own hand. (His
second claim form, dated
19 November 2012, does not specify what he was
carrying.) Mr Cooke says the worker told him he was carrying a “tray of
and the sequence of events seems to have been that this was a
conversation that took place shortly before the first claim form was
The first reference to it being a mould that was being carried appears in the
employer report form dated 8 November 2012
and completed by Ms Woolley as office
administrator.
wonder how significant the discrepancy is. Both a tray of tools and a mould
could fairly be described as “equipment”.
Could a mould be
considered a “tool”? Was it on a tray, perhaps with other tools? We
are not persuaded the two versions
are irreconcilable. The version featuring a
bag of cement seems to have come from Dr Pek’s report dated 21 November
is not clear whether Dr Pek took that history himself or whether he
adopted a note of Dr Mah, nor are the circumstances of the making
of that note
clear to us. Mr Cooke can hardly be criticised for that lack of clarity. We
wonder, however, how important it was to
a doctor to record what the worker was
carrying when he tripped and fell: on any version, it was of some weight, may
have partially
obscured the worker’s view, and the result was a fall with
an impact injury to the shoulder. Evaluating the authenticity of
a claim that
might have been disputed in the Workers Compensation Tribunal, but was not, is
no part of our jurisdiction, but if it
were otherwise, we would not be persuaded
by mere speculation based on variations in details of no real importance to the
record-makers
to whom they are said to have been provided.
even if one of the speculative matters adverted to by Mr Cooke could be
established, the accident suffered at work by the
worker on 22 or 23 October
2012 could not be ignored, although it might result in the establishment of a
secondary injury that would
not be included in the employer’s claims
history. As long ago as
Mansell v Local Government Association
[1990] SAWCRP 184
Stanley v SA Health Commission
SAWCRP 228)
, Review Officer Mason (as the President of this Panel then was)
pointed out that secondary injuries were not immune from the operation
section 113 (injuries that develop gradually). The final work incident that
results in incapacity fixes the point in time for
compensability. However, the
medical evidence in this case does not support Mr Cooke’s speculation, and
if it were otherwise,
the place to explore that matter would be the Workers
Compensation Tribunal, not this Panel.
speculation again attends Mr Cooke’s complaint about Dr David Mah and Mr
Edward Mah having the same surname. Mah seems
to be a fairly common name in the
Chinese-Australian community, but it is also not uncommon in Adelaide for
members of the same professional
occupation (or even different professions) to
be related. We do not know what significance Mr Cooke wished us to place on the
juxtaposition
of the Mahs’ names, but we are bound to reject any sinister
implication that Mr Cooke was unwilling to articulate.
Cooke’s generally grudging attitude towards the worker’s claim,
while continually denying that he accused the worker
of fabrication, led him, as
we have noted, to raise questions about the worker’s sporting activities,
his sleeping posture
and the possibility of prior degeneration. Those matters,
too, are pure speculation, but as Mr Coppola pointed out, the claims agent
tried to chase them down in the supplementary reports sought from the relevant
medical practitioners, who have both denied any
factors at work other than the
compensable incident. Mr Cooke said that these questions were asked “after
i.e., after the surgery on 23 January 2013. We do not accept
that the performance of surgical procedures such as that undergone by
“destroys evidence” in the way implied by Mr Cooke, but we note the
medical practitioners in question had
examined the worker
surgery. We cannot find that any “opportunity” for
“investigations” was compromised by the “authorisation”
of the surgery by the claims agent.
have placed the word “authorisation” in quotes each time we have
used it in relation to the claims agent “authorising”
the surgery
because, just as the employer has no power of veto over the treatment options of
an injured worker as we have previously
indicated, the Corporation also lacks a
power of veto, although it does have the proverbial “power of the
purse”, which
some might be tempted to think is the same thing. It is not.
The extent of the obligation of the Corporation to pay for, or reimburse,
“costs reasonably incurred” under section 32 was explained by the
Full Supreme Court in
Metro Meat v. Banjanovic
(1989) 52 SASR 102
[1989] SASC 1868
and has been further detailed by the Tribunal in a number of
cases. For the Corporation to establish that a claimed medical expense
relation to an established compensable injury was not “reasonably
incurred” because another form of treatment was
preferable would require a
persuasive weight of objective professional medical or scientific evidence, not
lay impressions based
on anecdotes from a different workplace many years earlier
where the injuries were of an over-use type rather than impact injuries,
when those lay impressions are supplemented by some reading on the internet
(which should not be regarded as infallible in this
Conclusions
our respectful opinion, the claims agent is open to legitimate criticism in its
failure to observe section 53(4) and section 107A
of the Act in as timely a
manner as it ought to have and as the Act itself contemplates. Whether those
failures amount to mismanagement
of the worker’s claim
matter. In our view, they are procedural matters that did not impact on the
substantive management of the claim at all.
do not accept the contention that those failures on the part of the claims agent
damaged the employer in respect of any of its
legitimate rights. At worst, the
claims agent’s inaction delayed the time when the employer might have
exercised certain rights,
but when the opportunity arrived, it did not do so.
The employer was given, and took, the opportunity to make representations to
claims agent to an extensive degree, and Mr Cooke’s real grievance, in our
view, is that his views were not acted upon.
The reason his views were not acted
upon was that Mr Cooke seems to have misconceived the employer, and/or the
claims agent, as having
a right of veto over the worker’s treatment
options, which neither did. The employer’s only relevant right in the
as far as we can discern, was that of lodging a notice of dispute in
the Workers Compensation Tribunal concerning the acceptance
worker’s claim. The potential exercise of that right was indeed retarded
by about two months but when the employer could
have exercised that right, as we
have already pointed out, it did not do so. We reject the contention that
evidence had been “destroyed”
in the meantime.
reject any contention that the costs of the worker’s claim have been
inflated by any failure on the part of the claims agent.
We find no evidence
that they were not what they inevitably were going to be.
these reasons, the application for review must be dismissed.
Determination
the reasons we have stated, we confirm the Corporation’s assessments of
the employer’s premium (except to the extent
that any adjustment has
already been made to reflect the employer’s trading conditions) and
dismiss the employer’s application
Bob Donnelly
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (254 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter