URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAHPT/2019/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia v Camm [2019] SAHPT 3 (24 January 2019)
Nursing & Midwifery Board of Australia v Camm
[2019] SAHPT
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL OF SOUTH
NURSING & MIDWIFERY BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
CAMM, Petra
Health Practitioners
2141 of 2018
HEARING DATE:
28 November
DECISION OF SA HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL:
constituted
by: President M Ardlie
Dr Karleen Thornton
Mrs Anne Milln
DELIVERED ON:
28 November 2018
REASONS FOR
DECISION PUBLISHED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Complainant alleges that the respondent
behaved in a way that constitutes professional misconduct – Between
November 2012 and
January 2013 the respondent committed six offences of
money-laundering contrary to
and (2) of the
Criminal Law Consolidation
(SA) (CLCA) – on 30 January 2013 the respondent was arrested
and charged with seven counts of money-laundering, contrary to
of the CLCA
and one count of participating in a criminal organisation contrary to
the CLCA – each offence carried a term of imprisonment of 12 months or
greater – respondent did not provide written
notice to the complainant
that she had been charged with seven counts of money laundering and one count of
participating in a criminal
organisation until 31 May 2013 – the
respondent therefore failed to provide written notice to the complainant within
days of a relevant event within the meaning of
s 130(3)(a)(i)
National Law, as required by
of the National Law – on around 12
April 2017, the respondent was convicted of or subject to a finding of guilt for
punishable by imprisonment on her pleas of guilty to 6 counts of money
laundering – the respondent did not provide written
notice to the
complainant that she had been convicted of or subject to a finding of guilt for
offences punishable by imprisonment
until 30 May 2017 – the respondent
therefore failed to provide written notice to the complainant within seven days
of a relevant
event – On 4 July 2017 the respondent was sentenced in the
District Court of South Australia to a term of imprisonment of 11
and 2 weeks for the six offences of money-laundering which sentence was
suspended upon the respondent entering into a bond
to be of good behaviour
– the respondent (who was self-represented) in a signed statement of
agreed facts admitted that she
behaved in a way that constitutes professional
misconduct –
the conduct set out in the
complaint constitutes professional misconduct – the respondent is
reprimanded – the respondent’s
registration as a nurse is suspended
for six months – the respondent is to pay the complainant’s costs of
and incidental
to these proceedings in the sum of $1000 – Schedule 2, ss
193, 195, 196 Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (South
Australia) Act
NMBA v Smith
[2016] SAHPT 4
NMBA v Curnow
[2018] SAHPT 1
Craig v Medical Board of South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
NMBA v Rogers
[2011] SAHPT
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant: Mr K
Respondent: In
Solicitors:
Complainant: AHPRA
Respondent: n/a
Introduction
complainant pursuant to the provisions of s 193 of Schedule 2 to the
Practitioner Regulation National Law (South Australia) Act 2010
Law) referred the matter concerning the respondent to the Tribunal on the basis
that it believed that the respondent had
behaved in a way that constitutes
professional misconduct.
respondent obtained her nursing qualification in the Czech Republic in 1996. She
moved to the United Kingdom in April 1998 and
obtained registration as a
registered nurse in July 2000. The respondent moved to Australia in December
2002 after she obtained registration
as a registered nurse in New South Wales in
August 2002. She returned to the Czech Republic in July 2004.
came back to Australia in 2006. At all material times the respondent practised
as a nurse in the coronary care unit of Ashford
Hospital until her dismissal
from employment in June 2017
30 May 2017, the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (AHPRA)
received a notification on behalf of the complainant
concerning the conduct of
the respondent.
the complaint dated 18 May 2018 the complainant alleges that the respondent
committed professional misconduct in that she:
serious criminal offences, namely 6 offences of money-laundering contrary to
and (2) of the
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) (CLCA),
whilst holding general registration as a nurse pursuant to the National Law;
to notify the complainant within seven days of being charged with offences
carrying maximum terms of imprisonment of 12 months
or more, contrary to
(3)(a)(i) of the National Law; and/or
to notify the complainant within seven days of being convicted of or subject to
findings of guilt for offences punishable by
imprisonment, contrary to
(3)(a)(ii) of the National Law.
or around 12 April 2017, the respondent was convicted of or subject to a finding
of guilt for offences punishable by imprisonment
on her pleas of guilty to six
counts of money-laundering.
4 July 2017, the respondent was sentenced in the District Court of South
Australia to a term of imprisonment of 11 months and 2
weeks for the six
offences of money laundering, which sentence was suspended upon the respondent
entering into a bond to be of good
Complainant’s Submissions
respondent’s professional misconduct consisted of three limbs. First,
between November 2012 and January 2013 the respondent
committed six offences of
money-laundering. Second, on 30 January 2013 the respondent was arrested and
charged with seven counts
of money-laundering and one count of participating in
a criminal organisation. The respondent did not provide written notice to the
Board that she had been charged with these offences until 31 May 2013. She had
an obligation under
s 130(3)(a)(i)
of the National Law to provide written
notice of such an event within seven days of the occurrence of the event. The
respondent provided
written notice four months after she was arrested and
charged. Third, on 12 April 2017 the respondent entered pleas of guilty to
charges. The entry and acceptance of the pleas of guilty triggered a further
obligation under
s 130(3)(a)(ii)
of the National Law requiring the
respondent to provide written notice within seven days of 12 April 2017. The
respondent did not
provide written notice until 30 May 2017, almost seven weeks
after the reportable event.
respondent commenced working at the Coronary Care Unit of Ashford Hospital in
September 2007. Throughout the period during which
the respondent was subject to
criminal proceedings in the District Court, she continued working at Ashford
Hospital until June 2017
when her employment was terminated following her pleas
of guilty to the six money-laundering offences.
provided a brief background to the respondent’s criminal offending. There
are two arms of money laundering, the ‘knowing’
money laundering and
the ‘reckless’ money laundering. The knowing money laundering
carries a maximum of 20 years imprisonment,
and the reckless money-laundering
carries a maximum term of four years imprisonment.
respondent pleaded guilty to three charges of the knowing money-laundering and
three charges of the reckless money laundering.
man by the name of Storm Strang (Mr Strang) devised and operated a cannabis
trafficking syndicate. As part of that operation, cash
from the sale of cannabis
would be sent to various post offices in Adelaide. Mr Strang would organise for
female associates to collect
the packages. The respondent was one of those
associates. Between November 2012 and January 2013, it was alleged that the
collected packages for Mr Strang on six different
respondent and her husband were friends with Mr Strang. He had shared
accommodation with the respondent for some time when she
lived in London between
1998 and 2002. She had an ongoing association with him after she moved to
was not suggested and the respondent was not sentenced on the basis that she was
aware that Mr Strang was involved in a cannabis
growing and selling syndicate
but rather she simply collected the packages effectively at his behest either
knowing they contained
money which was the product of unlawful activity or in
circumstances where she ought reasonably to have known that they contained
that was the proceeds of unlawful activity. The amounts of cash in each of the
packages was quite significant.
the sentencing judge remarked in the criminal proceedings, ‘your pleas
were entered on the basis that in relation to the
first three packages, you
ought reasonably to have known that the money in the package was tainted and
that you received the next
three packages knowing, or firmly believing, that the
monies in those packages were in fact tainted.’
respondent was sentenced on the basis that she received no financial reward for
collecting the packages for Mr Strang. Rather,
the sentencing judge found that
the respondent received furniture ‘and the like’ for her
assistance.
sentencing judge found that the respondent was at risk of deportation because of
her resident status. As the sentencing judge
observed, the imposition of a
sentence of imprisonment of greater than 12 months would have exposed the
respondent to mandatory deportation
unless she could persuade the Minister for
Immigration not to do so. The sentencing judge found that the respondent was
highly regarded
by those who knew her, in both a personal and professional
context. Some of the character references put before the sentencing judge
been included in the book of
of the National Law requires a practitioner to notify a National Board in
the event he or she is charged with certain offences and
in the event of a
‘conviction’ or ‘finding of guilt’ for an offence
punishable by imprisonment.
the respondent was arrested and charged by the police on
30 January 2013 she was obligated to report to the Board in writing
that she had been so charged within seven days of 30 January 2013. The
respondent accepts that she did not do so until seeking a
renewal of her
registration on 31 May 2013. It is to her credit that she did ultimately notify
the Board by her electronic registration
application but nonetheless the delay
was quite considerable.
is clear that the respondent did not notify the Board in writing of the findings
of guilt and/or convictions for money-laundering
on 12 April 2017
until 30 May 2017 when she sought renewal of her registration. The
respondent’s position was that she had
been informed by her lawyer that
even after guilty pleas were entered the proceedings were ongoing and not
finalised until sentencing.
contended that the respondent’s belief represented a serious mistake as to
the nature and extent of the duty that fell
upon her under
National Law. It is a non-delegable duty that she owes as a practitioner to the
Board. The legislation is very clear that
it is not just a conviction that
triggers the duty, but it includes findings of guilt. A practitioner, who sits
in court and pleads
guilty to criminal offences and listens to a judge returning
verdicts of guilty, could hardly say that they have misunderstood that
been the subject of findings of guilt.
respondent failed to notify the Board within seven days as required by the
legislation.
submitted that the commission of six serious criminal offences over a three
month period, constitutes conduct which is inconsistent
with the respondent
being a fit and proper person to hold registration in the profession, and
therefore professional misconduct.
That is so notwithstanding the high regard in
which others hold the respondent in her capacity as a nurse. It calls for a
of the respondent’s registration and for a reprimand to
regards the failure to notify on two occasions, in relation to the initial
failure, the respondent’s incarceration for eight
or so days and the fact
that she did ultimately provide written notice on the application for renewal
are matters that may be taken
into account as far as mitigation is concerned.
Likewise she did provide written notice of her conviction on the application for
renewal. Nevertheless there was a failure to notify as required by the National
referred to decisions that have dealt with failures to notify and involved
criminal conduct. He remarked that the authorities
reinforce how important
is to the operation of the National Law and when combined with underlying
criminal conduct certainly justifies a period of suspension
being imposed and a
firm reprimand.
Respondent’s Submissions
respondent agreed that she had signed the ‘Statement of Agreed
She by doing so
‘admits that she has behaved in a way that constitutes professional
misconduct’.
respondent made submissions to the Tribunal. She told the Tribunal she was 41
years of age, a registered nurse, who had been working
in the profession for
over 15 years in mainly cardiac coronary care, cardiothoracic and HDU
provided details of her career in nursing and said she has always wanted to be a
described the breakdown of her marriage shortly after her second child was born
in 2010. She referred to her husband’s long
lasting affair and his drug
use as reasons for the breakdown.
the breakdown she maintained her employment and was the sole family breadwinner
and carer. In July 2012 she moved from
the mortgaged family home due to her
husband’s unsuccessful battle with his drug use.
this difficult time friends and colleagues offered much support and help with
swapping shifts and volunteering to look after
the children and offering
second-hand furniture when she rented a house. One of her husband’s
friends was Mr Strang and his
partner. She said that when Mr Strang asked
if he could send some parcels to her post office box she did not think twice.
that she should have but did not.
said her reckless actions resulting in the criminal charges have caused a lot of
pain and suffering to many people around her
including not only her family and
friends but also her colleagues. She is deeply sorry for those actions. She was
ultimately dismissed
from her nursing position at the Ashford Hospital in 2017
upon the finding of guilt and consequent media reports.
said she could not provide any evidence in relation to a phone call made in
February 2013 regarding her arrest and charges at
the time. She said it was
never her intention to delay reporting and said she was not made aware that the
delay was a breach of registration
indicated that she understood that she needed to be disciplined for her actions.
She understood the seriousness of the breach
of the standard of conduct expected
of a nurse. She said she was sorry for breaking the trust and bringing the
reputation of the
profession into question.
Purpose of disciplinary proceedings
purpose of disciplinary proceedings is to protect the public, to maintain proper
professional standards and to assure the public
that proper standards are being
maintained in the profession and thereby to uphold public trust and confidence
in the profession.
Craig v Medical Board of South Australia
, Doyle CJ stated:
The purpose of disciplinary proceedings is to protect the public,
not to punish a practitioner in the sense in which punishment is
administered
pursuant to the criminal law. A disciplinary tribunal protects the public by
making orders which will secure the maintenance
of proper professional
standards. A disciplinary tribunal will also consider the protection of the
public, and of the relevant profession,
by making orders which will assure the
public that appropriate standards are being maintained within the relevant
profession.
Professional Misconduct – National Law Schedule 2,
Professional
misconduct, of a registered health practitioner, includes –
unprofessional
conduct by the practitioner that amounts to conduct that is substantially below
the standard reasonably expected of
a registered health practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience; and
than one instance of unprofessional conduct that, when considered together,
amounts to conduct that is substantially below the
standard reasonably expected
of a registered health practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
experience; and
of the practitioner, whether occurring in connection with the practice of the
health practitioner’s profession or not,
that is inconsistent with the
practitioner being a fit and proper person to hold registration in the
profession.
conduct of the respondent did not occur in relation to the practice of her
profession as a nurse. Given the nature of the conduct,
as has been outlined
above, it was clearly inconsistent with the practitioner being a fit and proper
person to hold registration
in the profession as defined above.
Discipline and order
is the unanimous view of the Tribunal that the conduct set out in the complaint
constitutes professional misconduct. The criminal
charges were serious in
themselves and coupled with the failures to report as required amounted to
serious departures from ‘the
standard reasonably expected of a registered
health practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
experience.’
Tribunal notes that the imposition of disciplinary action on the health
practitioner is to protect the public. As has been noted
in previous decisions,
the imposition of discipline may serve one or all of the following purposes:
practitioners who are unfit to practice from practising;
maintenance of professional standards;
assuring members
of the public and the profession that appropriate standards are being maintained
and that professional misconduct
(or unprofessional conduct) will not be
bringing home to
the practitioner the seriousness of their conduct;
deterring the
practitioner from any future departures from appropriate standards;
deterring other
members of the profession who might be minded to act in a similar way; and
restrictions on the practitioner’s right to practice so as to ensure that
the public is
Tribunal notes from the various character references that appear in the book of
documents that the respondent is highly regarded
in her profession. It is
unfortunate that she became embroiled in criminal activities. Perhaps her
position at the time, involving
as it did a breakdown of marriage and
vulnerability on her part, let her to undertake the actions that she did. This
is advanced
as a reason but certainly not an excuse on her part.
unanimous view of the Tribunal is that appropriate public protection and
discipline would be achieved by the terms of the order
set out below.
Tribunal makes the following orders (which were expressed to the parties at the
hearing on 28 November 2018 and confirmed by a
sealed order):
UPON our finding this day that the Respondent’s conduct as admitted in the
Statement of Agreed Facts is professional misconduct
within the meaning of
Schedule 2 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (South
Australia) Act 2010
(‘the Act’) in accordance with ss 195 and
196 of Schedule 2 of the Act, the South Australian Health Practitioners
orders that:
Respondent is reprimanded.
Respondent’s registration as a nurse is suspended for six (6) months
effective from the date of this Order.
Respondent is to pay the Complainant’s costs of and incidental to these
proceedings in the sum of $1,000.
or statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registrar of the Health Practitioners
Ex C1 pp 417-431.
NMBA v Smith
NMBA v Curnow
[2018] SAHPT 1.
Ex C1 pp 12-14.
[2001] SASC 169
(2001) 79 SASR 545
Craig v Medical Board of
South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
(2001) 79 SASR 545
NMBA v Rogers
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (167 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter