URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRComm/2015/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ambulance Employees Association of South Australia and Etherington v Chief Executive Department for Health and Ageing (SA Ambulance Service) [2015] SAIRComm 11 (9 December 2015)
Ambulance Employees Association of South Australia and Etherington v Chief
Executive Department for Health and Ageing (SA Ambulance
] SAIRComm 11
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION (SA)
AMBULANCE EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA and EDWIN JAMES
ETHERINGTON
CHIEF EXECUTIVE, DEPARTMENT FOR HEALTH AND AGEING (SA AMBULANCE SERVICE)
S 202 Reference of Question for Determination by the
5658 of 2015
HEARING DATE:
5 November 2015
JUDGMENT OF:
Deputy President KM Bartel
DELIVERED ON:
9 December 2015
CATCHWORDS:
Notification of dispute - Jurisdictional objection - Referral to
Commission for determination - Applicants for notification are AEA
individual member - Whether Commission has jurisdiction to hear that part of the
notification that relates to AEA member - Whether
notification of dispute is an
application by employee pursuant to s 194(1)(c) of the Act - Whether s 194(2)
applies to individual
member’s application - Whether notification is an
application pursuant to s 194(1)(d) of the Act by a registered association
one of its members - Nature of registered associations and status under the Act
considered -
: Section 194(1)(d) applies to the application - S
194(2) has no application to notification - Ss 3, 73, 77, 155, 194, 199, 200,
202 and Chapter 4 of the Fair Work Act 1994; S 62(8) of the Public Sector
Clavell & Newton v Central Northern Adelaide Health
[2011] SAIRC 12
Krasowski v Chief Executive, Department of
Trade and Economic Development
[2005] SAIRComm 44
Ebner v The Official
Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
King v Strickland and
[1991] SASC 2943
(1992) 56 SASR 225
R v The Assessment Committee of the
Metropolitan Borough of Shoreditch, ex parte Morgan
[1910] 2 KB
South Australian Institute of Teachers and the Minister of Education
and Children’s Services and the Commissioner for Public
Employment –
Referral of Question of Law Case
Print I.42/1992
JJ Richards and
Sons Pty Ltd v Transport Workers’ Union of Australia
[2010] FWAFB
Burwood Cinema Ltd v The Australian Theatrical and Amusement
Employees Association
[1925] HCA 7
(1925) 35 CLR 528
SA Ambulance Service
Enterprise Agreement 2011
SA Health (Health Care Act) Human Resources
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr P Heywood-Smith QC with Mr G Harbord
Respondent: Dr C Bleby with Ms C
Solicitors:
Applicant: Johnston Withers
Respondent: Crown
Solicitor’s Office
Introduction and background
decision concerns a jurisdictional objection raised by the Chief Executive,
Department for Health and Ageing (SA Ambulance Service)
(the respondent) in
relation to a dispute notification (the Notification) filed by the Ambulance
Employees Association of South Australia
(the AEA). The applicant for the
Notification is identified as the AEA and Edwin James Etherington.
subject matter of the dispute is described in the following terms:
“1. This dispute is made in accordance with clause 8 of the
SA Ambulance Service Enterprise Agreement 2011.
Edwin Etherington is a paramedic employee of SA Ambulance Service and is also a
member of the AEA.
letter dated 12 January 2015 the SA Ambulance Service wrote to
Mr Etherington, making certain allegations concerning an event with
patient and informing Mr Etherington that he had an opportunity to
letter dated Tuesday 10 March 2015, the AEA wrote to Mr Cameron on behalf
of Mr Etherington informing Mr Cameron that Mr Etherington
considers that
there is no evidence to sustain that such an alleged event occurred.
letter dated 30 March 2015 Mr Steve Cameron, Chief Operating Officer, SA
Ambulance Service confirmed that Mr Etherington should
be the subject of
disciplinary action and issued with a “Final warning”.
instructions from the AEA and Mr Etherington, Johnston Withers Lawyers wrote to
Mr Cameron on 28 April 2015 disputing that the
final warning was justified.
letter dated 28 May 2015 the SA Ambulance Service refused to withdraw the
[references
to attachments omitted]
assistance sought from the Commission identifies conciliation and arbitration.
It further describes the relief sought as:
“An agreement between the parties or in the alternative, Orders made by
the Commission that the Notice of Disciplinary Sanction
dated 30 March 2015
of the SA Ambulance Service be set aside and that all documents concerning the
subject matter of the allegations
be deleted from Mr Etherington’s
personnel file and from all other files held by the Department for Health and
voluntary conference was convened pursuant to s 200(1) of the
Fair Work Act
(the Act) on 13 July 2015. At that time the respondent foreshadowed the
no standing to bring a
dispute to the Industrial Relations Commission of South Australia (the
Commission) because an impartial grievance
resolution process was available to
him within the meaning of s 194(2)(b) of the Act.
194 provides that:
194 Applications to the Commission
(1) Proceedings before the Commission are commenced by an application made to
the Commission—
(a) if, in the Minister’s opinion, it is in the public
interest that the matter be dealt with by the Commission—by the
(b) by an employer, or group of employers; or
(c) by an employee, or group of employees; or
(d) by a registered association of employers; or
(e) by a registered association of employees; or
(f) by the United Trades and Labor Council.
(2) A natural person may bring an application as of right if the application is
authorised under some other provision of this Act
but otherwise must establish
to the satisfaction of the Commission—
(a) that the claim arises out of a genuine industrial
grievance; and
(b) that there is no other impartial grievance resolution process that is
(or has been) reasonably available to the person.”
Notification was amended on 4 August 2015 (the amended Notification). The
subject matter of the dispute was expanded by a further
two paragraphs:
“8. The SA Ambulance Service has failed to provide an
internal review and in the event Mr Etherington is entitled to an external
review pursuant to section 62(8) of the
Public Sector Act
“9. The AEA considers the treatment of Mr Etherington to be symptomatic
of improper and inappropriate procedures by the SA Ambulance
Service and refers
to its advice to members, number 20/2015.”
advice to members 20/2015 is headed “SAAS Disciplinary
Processes”.
present purposes it is sufficient to set out the opening paragraph of the
“For some time the AEA has been concerned about the way SAAS
go about dealing with discipline of staff, and we know there is
concern amongst members. Our concerns are:
The frequency of
people being stood down;
The unreasonable
duration of stand-downs;
The lack of
transparency;
The cone of
The denial of
natural justice (the assumption of guilt);
Over-authoritarian
dealings with witnesses;
The disciplinary
outcomes lacking supporting evidence (‘balance of probabilities’
relief sought in the Notification was amended by the addition of the following
“An agreement between the parties that saving cases of clear urgency and
propriety, the SA Ambulance Service will not stand
down members of the AEA
without notice to the AEA and without providing to the AEA the opportunity to
make submissions on behalf
of the member concerned and for all disciplinary
actions the SA Ambulance Service will apply the
standard to
determinations of guilt of conduct giving rising [sic] to an occasion for
discipline.”
4 August the Commission referred the dispute to a compulsory conference pursuant
to s 201 of the Act and referred the jurisdictional
objection for determination
by the Commission pursuant to s 202(1) of the Act.
Submissions on jurisdiction
the hearing, the respondent did not object to that part of the amended
Notification that deals with the asserted improper and inappropriate
of the SA Ambulance Service, of which Mr Etherington’s case is said to be
symptomatic, being referred for
conciliation.
such, the arguments before the Commission concerned that part of the amended
Notification pertaining to Mr Etherington. As will
become apparent, the
separation of the ‘collective’ dispute from the individual situation
of Mr Etherington was one of
convenience only as far as the applicant is
concerned. It maintains that there is no separate individual dispute involving
Mr Etherington.
Is the amended Notification a proceeding that attracts the operation of
s 194(2) of the Act?
first matter to be determined concerns the respondent’s argument that the
amended notification, in so far as it concerns
Mr Etherington, is a proceeding
which attracts the operation of s 194(2) of the Act.
Bleby, for the respondent, submitted that s 194(2) qualifies the right of an
employee to bring an application under s 194(1)(c)
Section 194(2) provides that a natural person may bring an application as of
right if authorised under some other provision of the
Act. If there is no other
provision of the Act then a natural person must establish to the satisfaction of
the Commission that the
claim arises out of a genuine industrial grievance and
there is no other impartial grievance resolution process that is or has been
reasonably available to the person. Mr Etherington is a natural person, and Part
SA Health (Health Care Act) Human Resources Manual
provides an impartial grievance resolution process that is, or has been
reasonably available to him.
Bleby referred to the following aspects of the grievance process in the HR
a three step
approach for the resolution of administrative decisions: local level
discussions; referral of the grievance to the Chief
Executive Officer or
delegate for a decision; referral of the matter to the Grievance and
Reclassification Appeal Panel (the Panel)
for determination;
consists of a Chair nominated by the Chief Executive of the Department of Health
and Ageing; a nominee from an area separate
from the area in which the aggrieved
employee is located; and a union or discipline representative nominated by the
aggrieved employee;
the Panel must
have regard to the relevant legislation, the HR Manual, the relevant
Award/Agreement and other employment conditions;
the Panel can
overturn decisions, substitute its own decision, including in respect of
disciplinary matters. Decisions are by majority
vote and minority decisions are
noted within the decision;
the Panel is
required to make its decisions fairly and act impartially and independent of the
interests of the employer or
was submitted by Dr Bleby that it is clear that the amended Notification, in so
far as it relates to Mr Etherington, seeks relief
specific to his circumstances.
Mr Etherington is an applicant for the proceedings in his own right and the
fact that the AEA puts
its name on the application cannot turn the matter into a
collective dispute and sidestep the operation of s 194(2) of the Act.
Heywood-Smith QC, for the AEA and Mr Etherington, submitted that the amended
notification raises a legitimate industrial dispute
which attracts the
AEA, of which Mr Etherington is
a member, and the SA Ambulance Service.
application by Mr Etherington is joined by the AEA and this is of significance
in the characterisation of the application because
of the status of registered
organisations and the recognition of their role under the Act. This is reflected
in s 194(1) of the Act
which gives registered organisations the right to bring a
matter before the Commission.
Heywood-Smith rejected the respondent’s submission that s 194(2) qualifies
the operation of s 194(1) of the Act. He contended
support the position outlined by the respondent and that Mr Krasowski simply
conceded that s 194(2) had application in the
circumstances of his particular
matter. It was the applicant’s position that the 2005 amendments to the
Act recognised the
increasing number of non-union members in the workforce by
expanding the dispute jurisdiction of the Commission to include individual
grievances. However access to the Commission by such individuals was restricted
and it is to this category of individuals to which
s 194(2) is directed.
Heywood-Smith submitted that the fact that the AEA is supporting
Mr Etherington is a significant matter and one which brings the
Notification within s 194(1)(d) of the Act. The AEA has concerns in relation to
disciplinary processes and procedures being
implemented by the SA Ambulance
Service. Mr Etherington’s situation is symptomatic of the generalised
concerns of the AEA’s
members. As the application before the Commission
is brought by a registered association and a member of the registered
organisation,
the Commission doesn’t need to consider s 194(2) because the
applicant is not a natural person. This distinguishes the present
matter from
where no registered association was
Does the HR Manual provide an impartial grievance resolution process that is or
was available to Mr Etherington?
Heywood-Smith argued, in the alternative, that the process established under the
HR Manual was not an impartial grievance resolution
process that is available to
Mr Etherington, within the meaning of s 194(2)(b) of the Act.
submitted that the process was not impartial because:
constituted under the HR Manual to hear grievances includes two representatives
nominated by the employer whose decision
was the subject of the grievance.
These nominees are therefore not divorced from the parties to the
proceeding;
there is no
protection for the fact that a Panel member nominated by the employer may, over
a period of time, obtain the confidence
of the employer by his or her
apprehends bias by the past decisions of the Panel; a majority decision of the
Panel can be made without reference to the
employee’s nominee; and the AEA
had no involvement in the establishment of the Panel.
addition, Mr Heywood-Smith submitted that the matter was brought before the
Commission in accordance with the dispute settling
provision in Clause 8 of the
SA Ambulance Service Enterprise Agreement 2011
(the Agreement). The terms
of that clause contemplate that individual grievances, which remain unresolved
after discussions have
taken place at the various stages set out within the
clause, can be referred to the Commission. Clause 8 does not confer any
namely the conciliation and arbitration of industrial disputes.
existence of the dispute settling procedure in the Agreement constitutes an
exception to the matters that can be dealt with by
the Panel. Part 3-1-3 of the
HR Manual sets out certain exceptions from the scope of the Panel including,
Where a right of appeal lies under the relevant Award or
”. This exception is further reinforced in Part 3-1-3 in the
section setting out the tests to be satisfied in order for the
undertake a review, which include, “
The Panel may only undertake a
review relating to a decision where no other appeal/review mechanism
Heywood-Smith submitted that the Panel is not sanctioned by statute and nor is
the Code of Conduct applying to members of the Panel.
The HR Manual can be
amended by the respondent at any time without the agreement of the AEA.
Bleby submitted that the applicant’s proposition that apprehensions of
bias can have a subjective element is not supported
by the common law. The test
for the Commission is whether there is a reasonable apprehension of bias.
size of the employer in this case is such that the employer nominees on the
Panel are remote from the decision under review. If
any of the employer nominees
had an association with the applicant in the context of the grievance brought
before the Panel then
this may give rise to a submission that the nominee should
withdraw from the Panel. In the case of Mr Etherington, the employer
would be drawn from the broader Department of Health and Ageing rather than the
SA Ambulance Service. The connection of
such nominees with the employer who
made the decision that is the subject of the review is so remote that there is
no reasonable
apprehension of bias.
addition, Dr Bleby argued that mere “association” or
“interest” does not create a reasonable apprehension
of bias. It is
necessary to establish that there is a connection between the association and/or
interest, such that a reasonable
person would consider that the person may be
diverted from deciding the case on its merits. (
Ebner v The Official Trustee
in Bankruptcy
Bleby also referred to
King v Strickland and
far closer association than that relied upon by the applicant in the present
case was held not to constitute a reasonable
apprehension of bias.
relation to the dispute settling clause of the Agreement, Dr Bleby argued that
the clause cannot confer a jurisdiction on the Commission
that doesn’t
otherwise exist. The Commission does not have the power to make an enterprise
agreement or award to expand its
R v The Assessment Committee
of the Metropolitan Borough of Shoreditch, ex parte
the alternative, if the Agreement does confer jurisdiction on the Commission, it
does so only in relation to matters arising out
of or relating to the Agreement.
The amended Notification does not arise out of the
The relief sought
Bleby submitted that the relief sought by the applicant, including the deletion
of all documents concerning the allegations from
Mr Etherington’s
personnel file, is in the nature of a mandatory injunction and is not within the
power of the Commission (
South Australian Institute of Teachers and the
Minister of Education and Children’s Services and the Commissioner for
Employment – Referral of Question of Law
reply to the applicant’s submission that the Commission is not limited to
the relief sought by the parties under s 155(1)
of the Act, Dr Bleby noted that
any such relief must nonetheless be authorised under the Act. In addition, s
155(3) provides that
any relief granted by the Commission must be consistent
with the provisions of the Act under which the granting of relief is authorised.
Dr Bleby submitted that, if s 194(2) of the Act ousts the Commission’s
s 155 cannot
recreate it.
Consideration
The rules of statutory construction
194(1) and (2) of the Act must be construed according to their ordinary meaning
having regard to their context and legislative
purpose. In
JJ Richards and
Sons Pty Ltd v Transport Workers’ Union of
after reciting various authorities on statutory construction, Lawler VP and
Bissett C observed:
“Drawing these principles together, the task of statutory interpretation
is concerned with ascertaining the intention of the
legislature as manifested by
the text of the legislation. Context (using that word in its widest sense to
include such things as
the existing state of the law and the mischief which, by
legitimate means, one may discern the statute was intended to remedy) and
purpose or object underlying the legislation must always be considered. These
must be considered in the first instance, not merely
at some later stage when
ambiguity might be thought to arise. The text of a provision, read in context
and having regard to the object
and purpose of the provision, is always the
34 The relevant Objects
of the Act include:
“3 – Objects of Act
(1) The objects of this Act are -
(d) to encourage enterprise agreements that are relevant, flexible and
appropriate; and
(f) to provide a framework for making enterprise agreements, awards and
determinations affecting industrial matters that is fair and
equitable to both
employers and employees;
(g) to encourage prevention and settlement of disputes by amicable
agreement, and to provide a means of conciliation for that purpose;
(h) to provide a means of settling industrial disputes that cannot be
resolved by amicable agreement as expeditiously as possible
and with a minimum
of legal formality and technicality; and
(i) to ensure compliance with agreements and awards made for the prevention
and settlement of industrial disputes, and to ensure compliance
obligations arising under this Act; and
(j) to provide employees with an avenue for expressing employment-related
grievances and having them considered and remedied including
provisions for a
right to the review of harsh, unjust or unreasonable dismissals—
(i) directed towards giving effect to the
Termination of Employment
(ii) ensuring industrial fair play; and
(k) to provide for absolute freedom of association and choice of industrial
representation; and
(l) to encourage the democratic control of representative associations of
employers or employees, and the full participation by members
in their affairs;
The role of associations under the Act
Associations
of employees and employers are regulated under Chapter 4 of the Act. Part 1 of
Chapter 4 sets out the freedom of association
provisions which,
, protect the right of employees to choose whether to be members of an
association or not. Part 2 and Part 3 of Chapter 4 concern
the registration
(and de-registration) of locally based and federally based associations,
respectively. The regulation of the affairs
of locally based associations
includes the registration of the rules, financial accounting and records
requirements. Part 4 sets
out provisions common to locally based and federally
based associations and provides immunity from prosecution under other laws in
particular circumstances and/or subject to meeting any statutory requirements,
in circumstances where industrial action occurs. Part
4 also confers a power of
entry and inspection on officials of employee associations.
Act accords rights and a particular status to registered associations. This
includes the right to initiate proceedings before
the Industrial Relations Court
and Commission; the right of representation; the right to be notified of certain
proceedings; and
the right to be a party to industrial instruments. The role of
associations in enterprise bargaining is specifically recognised in
the objects
of Part 2 of Chapter
Settlement of disputes under the act
Act specifies the powers of the Commission in relation to the disputes that are
brought before it and the importance of dispute
settling procedures in awards
and enterprise agreements is reflected in the Act. For example, the Commission
must, in determining
how it will approach a dispute, have regard to the dispute
settlement procedures contemplated by the parties and the extent to which
has been compliance with such
procedures.
further example is the requirement that an enterprise agreement must include a
dispute settling procedure before it can be
Section 194 of the Act
194 is found within Part 3 of Chapter 5 which sets out provisions of special
application to the Commission, and regulates
how proceedings before the
Commission are commenced. Section 194(1) of the Act enables the Minister; one or
more employers; an employee
or a group of employees; a registered association of
employees or employers; and the United Trades and Labor Council to make an
application
to the Commission.
194(2) of the Act establishes the right of “a natural person” to
bring an application before the Commission.
It is not an unfettered right.
Unless the natural person has a right to bring an application under some other
section of the Act,
the Commission must be satisfied that the claim by the
natural person arises out of a genuine industrial grievance and that there
other impartial grievance resolution process that is or has been reasonably
available to the person.
The Notification, amended Notification and s 194 of the Act
Notification concerned the particular circumstances of Mr Etherington. The
resolution of the circumstances complained of within
the Notification
(regardless of the specific relief sought) would not address any broader
concerns of the AEA and its members with
respect to the SA Ambulance Service
disciplinary processes and procedures.
fact that the AEA was an applicant for the Notification means that it was more
than Mr Etherington’s representative in the
pursuit of his application
before the Commission. I return to the effect of the AEA being an applicant for
the Notification shortly.
amended Notification added a further dimension to the dispute before the
Commission by including the particulars of the concerns
of the AEA and its
members in relation to the disciplinary procedures and processes adopted by the
SA Ambulance Service, and by seeking
additional relief by way of modifying these
processes and procedures.
Etherington’s circumstances remained, in the context of the amended
Notification, more than a specific example of the processes
and procedures
complained of more broadly by the AEA. The joining of the AEA’s broader
dispute with the particular circumstances
of Mr Etherington did not subsume
his dispute.
Etherington is a member of the AEA and therefore also part of the broader
dispute before the Commission. Both matters relate to
the disciplinary processes
and procedures of the SA Ambulance Service. One aspect of the amended
Notification seeks to remedy the
past conduct of the SA Ambulance Service in
respect to one employee who is a member of the AEA and the other aspect seeks to
the future operation of the SA Ambulance Service disciplinary procedures
and processes which, if granted, will potentially affect
all members of the AEA
and other employees covered by the Agreement.
first issue to be determined in the present proceedings is whether the amended
Notification is an application by an employee or,
as the applicant contends, an
application by a registered association and one of its members. If it is the
latter, then the operation
of s 194(2) does not arise.
AEA can pursue, in its own right, an industrial dispute before the Commission
involving one of its members. A registered association
which commences
proceedings to bring a dispute before the Commission brings with it the support
of members of the association. As
Starke J stated in the
Burwood Cinema
in a different statutory context, a registered organisation is not a mere agent
of its members: it stands in their stead;
acts on their behalf and is
representative of the class associated together in the organisation.
do not accept the respondent’s submission that the AEA’s status as
an applicant for the proceedings is a device to circumvent
the operation of
s 194(2) of the Act. The AEA’s involvement in Mr Etherington’s
grievance is not a recent event - it
has been representing Mr Etherington in the
workplace in the course of the investigation into the allegations against him.
to have revoked the warning that was issued to him. When this was
refused by the SA Ambulance Service, the Secretary of the AEA filed
Notification.
respondent’s submission also fails to recognise the role and status of
employee organisations under the Act. The inclusion
of the AEA as an applicant
in its own right, and not just as a representative of Mr Etherington, means
that the dispute between Mr
Etherington and the SA Ambulance Service has a
collective quality - Mr Etherington’s circumstances are a matter of
to AEA members generally. This is hardly surprising given the nature of
the broader dispute between the AEA and the SA Ambulance
inclusion of Mr Etherington as an applicant for the notification and the amended
Notification is of no practical effect or consequence
in circumstances where his
association is acting on his behalf and is an applicant for the dispute in its
own right. The same matters
could be agitated by the AEA on Mr
Etherington’s behalf and the same relief sought if the AEA was the sole
applicant for the
Notification and amended Notification. In my view this
underscores why the amended Notification should not be seen as an application
an employee under s 194(1)(c) of the Act.
consequence of the position advanced by the respondent is that
Mr Etherington’s dispute would have been referred to the
Panel while
the AEA could pursue the same dispute before the Commission. Two separate
processes would be enlivened in relation to
the same facts and potentially
deliver opposing outcomes.
separation of a union member’s grievance from the registered organisation
that is legitimately pursuing the claim on his
behalf cannot be the process that
Parliament had in mind when it introduced s 194(2) of the Act in the 2005
amendments.
from the public policy considerations, I have had regard to the objects of the
Act which include facilitating industrial efficiency
and settling disputes as
expeditiously as possible; to the scheme of the Act which accords a particular
status to registered organisations
in proceedings before the Commission; and to
the very nature of registered associations as a group of employees banding
for a common purpose.
amended Notification has the following features: Mr Etherington is part of the
registered association that is prosecuting his
case with the support of other
AEA members; the AEA is prosecuting a broader dispute on behalf of the AEA
members including Mr Etherington;
and that the subject matter of Mr
Etherington’s complaint and the broader AEA dispute are the same. The
inclusion of Mr Etherington
as an applicant in his own right is of no
consequence in this context and should not be allowed to subvert the true nature
application before the Commission.
my view, the categories of persons that can commence proceedings under s
194(1)(c) and (d) of the Act are employees and employers,
in the singular or
plural, where no registered association is involved in the application.
Accordingly,
by virtue of Mr Etherington’s membership of the AEA and its status an
applicant for the proceedings, the matter
falls within the scope of s 194(1)(d)
of the Act and s 194(2) of the Act does not apply.
circumstances of the present matter can, in any event, be distinguished from
, where there was no involvement of a registered association and
no argument that the application by Mr Krasowski was other than an
application by an employee under s 194(1)(c) of the Act.
my finding that the amended Notification is not an application by an employee,
it is unnecessary to consider the further issue
of whether the Panel is an
impartial grievance resolution process for the purposes of s 194(2)(b) of the
Act. I observe however that,
even if the Panel is an impartial grievance
resolution process, the scheme of the Act in relation to the settlement of
disputes and
the emphasis placed on dispute settling procedures is a matter that
remains to be explored in the context of s 194(2)(b) of the Act.
settling procedures in industrial instruments cannot create jurisdiction for the
Commission that doesn’t exist under
the Act. However, in relation to an
application by a “natural person”, the “other impartial
grievance resolution
process” under s 194(2)(b) of the Act must be, or
must have been, not just “available” but “reasonably
available”.
In circumstances where a dispute settling procedure in an
industrial instrument specifies that the subject matter of the complaint
referred to the Commission if it remains unresolved after local discussions, it
is arguable that the impartial grievance resolution
procedure is not reasonably
available. The exclusion from the scope of the Panel of matters where a right
of review/appeal otherwise
exists is also relevant to a consideration of the
status of dispute settling procedures in industrial instruments in the context
of s 194(2)(b) of the Act.
further observation is that s 194(2) uses the term “natural person”
while s 194(1)(c) refers to an “employee”.
For the purposes of this
decision, and to the extent necessary, I have approached the terms as one and
the same, consistent with
the decision in
. However in my
respectful view, there is some room for argument on this point - it would seem
to me that it if the legislature intended
s 194(2) to restrict the operation of
s 194(1)(c) as it applied to an individual employee, the same terminology would
have been used.
in relation to the relief sought in the amended Notification, the particular
matters raised by Dr Bleby are noted and in
my view have merit. For present
purposes there are two points to be made about the issue of the relief sought in
the amended Notification.
The first and primary point is that the conciliation
of the dispute has not concluded and until such time as this point is reached
is premature to consider the relief that may be sought from the Commission. The
process of conciliation may resolve the dispute
and even if it does not achieve
this result, dispute conferences have a tendency to expand or modify the
parties’ frame of
reference for both the issues in dispute and the
possibilities for resolution.
second point, which has been acknowledged by the parties, is the provision of s
155 of the Act which states
“155—Nature
(1) The Court or the Commission has a discretion to give any form of relief
authorised by this Act or any other Act irrespective of
the form of relief
sought by the parties.
(2) The Court or Commission may exercise its jurisdiction on terms and
conditions it considers appropriate.
(3) Any relief granted by the Court or the Commission must be consistent with
the provisions of the Act under which the granting of
the relief is
authorised.”
respondent’s jurisdictional objection is dismissed for the reasons
outlined above. The amended Notification, as it relates
to the broader AEA
dispute, is currently listed for a further voluntary conference on
13 January 2016. That part of the amended
Notification relating to
Mr Etherington’s circumstances can now be discussed at that time.
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
It is the practice of this Commission to publish its reasons for decision in
full on the Internet. If any party or person contends
that these reasons for
decision should not be published in full the party or person must make an
application within seven days of
the delivery of these reasons. The application
shall be by an Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should
addressed to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within
the time specified these reasons will be published
in accordance with the
Commission’s usual practice.
At Q.12 of the
Notification.
At Q.13 of the
Notification.
The case law
indicates that s 62(8) of the
Public Sector Act 2009
does not apply to
employees engaged under the
Health Care Act 2008:
Newton v Central Northern Adelaide Health Service
[2011] SAIRC 12
Statement of Phil Palmer, Secretary of the AEA.
Krasowski v
Chief Executive, Department of Trade and Economic Development
[2005] SAIRComm 44.
Exhibit R1 Annex
“EH1”, Statement of Elizabeth Hlipala, DHA Group Director,
Exhibit R1 Annex
Code of Conduct for Panel Members.
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR
[1991] SASC 2943
(1992) 56 SASR
[1910] 2 KB
I.42/1995, 23 February 1995, McCusker J.
[2010] FWAFB
Section 73(b)
of the Act.
Section 199 of
77(1)(c) of the Act.
Cinema Ltd v The Australian Theatrical and Amusement Employees Association
[1925] HCA 7
(1925) 35 CLR 528.
Covering email
to the application from Phil Palmer, Secretary of the AEA, dated 29 June 2015.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (196 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter