URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCA/2025/111.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HUTCHINS v THE KING [2025] SASCA 111 (2 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Court of Appeal: Criminal)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
HUTCHINS v THE KING
[2025] SASCA 111
Judgment of the Court of Appeal
(The Honourable Justice Bleby, the Honourable Justice David and
the Honourable Justice Hughes)
2 October 2025
CRIMINAL LAW - APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - VERDICT UNREASONABLE OR
INSUPPORTABLE HAVING REGARD TO EVIDENCE - APPEAL DISMISSED
CRIMINAL LAW - APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - PARTICULAR GROUNDS OF APPEAL -
INCONSISTENT VERDICTS
CRIMINAL LAW - PARTICULAR OFFENCES - OFFENCES AGAINST THE PERSON - SEXUAL
OFFENCES - INDECENT ASSAULT AND RELATED OFFENCES - INDECENT
CRIMINAL LAW - PARTICULAR OFFENCES - OFFENCES AGAINST THE PERSON - SEXUAL
OFFENCES - UNLAWFUL SEXUAL INTERCOURSE OR CARNAL KNOWLEDGE
This is an appeal against conviction.
The appellant was charged with one count of indecent assault, contrary to
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
CLCA’) and three counts of unlawful sexual intercourse with a person under
12 years old, contrary to
of the CLCA. He is the older cousin of the
complainant and was aged between 20 to 25 years at the time of the alleged
The appellant is alleged to have sexually abused the complainant on three
separate occasions. The first occasion occurred between
11 October 1992 and 18
December 1993, at Renmark, when the complainant was around seven years old. The
appellant allegedly caused
the complainant to touch his penis (Count 1). The
second occasion occurred between 30 January 1995 and 28 April 1998, at
when the complainant was 10 years old. The appellant allegedly caused
her to perform fellatio upon him (Count 2). The third occasion
occurred again
between 30 January 1995 and 28 April 1998, at Paralowie, when the
complainant was 10 years old. The appellant allegedly
performed an act of
cunnilingus upon her (Count 3) and digitally penetrated her (Count 4).
Following a trial by jury, the appellant was acquitted of the first count and
found guilty on the remaining counts. The central issue
at trial was whether the
prosecution had proved, beyond reasonable doubt, that the appellant committed
the relevant sexual act.
The trial took place in August 2024, about 31 years after the alleged sexual
incident the subject of the first count.
The appellant appeals his convictions on the sole ground that the verdicts of
guilty are unreasonable or cannot be supported by the
evidence. There are two
limbs to this appeal ground. First, the appellant contends that the acquittal on
the first count is explicable
only on the basis that the jury found the
complainant had no credibility as to that incident of sexual touching, and given
the remaining
counts relied on an acceptance of the complainant’s
credibility, the guilty verdicts on the remaining counts are factually
inconsistent and incapable of rational explanation on the evidence.
Secondly, and independently of the alleged factual inconsistency between the
verdicts, the appellant contends the guilty verdicts
on Counts 2, 3 and 4 are
unreasonable and cannot be supported by the evidence.
Held per the Court, granting permission to appeal but dismissing the appeal:
is a logical and reasonable explanation for the acquittal on the first count
which does not involve a wholesale rejection of
the complainant’s
credibility as to the alleged sexual incident. It was therefore open to the jury
to be satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that the appellant was guilty of the
latter counts. The verdicts are not otherwise unreasonable or not supported by
the evidence.
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Evidence Act 1929
, referred to.
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
Mackenzie v The Queen
[1996] HCA 35
190 CLR 348
MFA v The Queen
(2002) 213 CLR 606
, discussed.
[1968] 2 QB 433
R v Wilkinson
[1970] Crim LR
(1972) 56 Cr App R 758
R v Kirkman
(1987) 44 SASR
[2002] SASC 208
(2002) 84 SASR 54
[2008] SASC 274
(2008) 102 SASR 82
TK v The Queen
[2009] NSWCCA 151
(2009) 74 NSWLR 299
R v Gbojeuh
[2009] SASC 104
(2009) 103 SASR
R v Neocleous
(2017) 270 A Crim R 262
, considered.
HUTCHINS v THE KING
[2025] SASCA 111
Court of Appeal: – Criminal: Bleby and David JJA and Hughes AJA
The appellant was charged with one count of indecent assault,
contrary to
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(‘the CLCA’) and three counts of unlawful sexual intercourse with a
person under 12 years old, contrary to
of the CLCA. He is the older
cousin of the complainant and was aged between 20 to 25 years at the time of the
alleged offending.
The appellant is alleged to have sexually abused the complainant on three
separate occasions. The first occasion occurred between
11 October 1992 and
18 December 1993, at Renmark, when the complainant was around seven years
old. The appellant allegedly caused
the complainant to touch his penis (Count
1). The second occasion occurred between 30 January 1995 and 28 April 1998, at
when the complainant was 10 years old. The appellant allegedly
caused her to perform fellatio upon him (Count 2). The third occasion
occurred between 30 January 1995 and 28 April 1998, at Paralowie, when the
complainant was 10 years old. The appellant allegedly
performed an act of
cunnilingus upon her (Count 3) and digitally penetrated her (Count 4).
a trial by jury, the appellant was acquitted of the first count and found guilty
of the remaining counts. The central issue
at trial was whether the prosecution
had proved, beyond reasonable doubt, that the appellant committed the relevant
sexual act.
trial took place in August 2024, about 30 years after the first alleged sexual
appellant appeals his conviction on the sole ground that the verdicts of guilty
are unreasonable or cannot be supported by the
evidence. More particularly, the
appellant contends that the acquittal on the first count is inconsistent with
the guilty verdicts
on the other counts. The appellant submits that the
prosecution case, in respect of all charges, relied on the jury’s
of the complainant as a credible witness and thus, the verdicts are
factually inconsistent and incapable of rational explanation
on the evidence. In
addition, the appellant submits that independently of the alleged inconsistency
between verdicts, the guilty
verdicts on the latter counts are unreasonable and
cannot be supported by the evidence.
appeal ground requires a consideration of the principles applicable to
inconsistent verdicts.
the reasons which follow, we grant permission to appeal but dismiss the
The evidence at trial
In order to explain the basis upon which the appellant contends that the
verdicts on the latter counts were inconsistent with the
acquittal on the first
count, and are unreasonable, it is necessary to refer in more detail to the
evidence adduced during the course
of the trial.
relation to the first count, the complainant gave evidence that the first
occasion of sexual touching occurred at a sleepover
at her aunt’s house in
Renmark when she was about seven years old. The complainant said that this was
not the first time she
had stayed overnight at her aunt’s house. She could
not remember why she and her family were there that night, but thought
for a ‘normal get‑together’.
complainant said that she and her cousins were sleeping on the floor in the
lounge room in sleeping bags, and there were about
eight or 10 children in the
lounge room. She believed the appellant slept in his own bedroom that night and
the adults were in the
shed, which was a four to five minutes’ walk away
from the lounge area.
complainant gave evidence that she was sleeping between her older sister and the
internal doorway that led to the rest of the
house. She said that her youngest
sister had not been born at the time.
complainant said all the children in the lounge room were asleep by around
9:00pm that night. She woke up during the night because
she heard footsteps
coming down the hallway. When asked whether anyone else in the lounge room had
woken up, the complainant said
she looked around and everyone was still asleep.
She said that it was dark in the lounge room with some light coming in through
windows. From her position on the floor in the sleeping bag, the complainant
recalled looking towards the hallway and seeing a shadow
coming towards her. She
said that she knew it was the appellant because she saw his clear‑framed
glasses on his nose.
complainant gave evidence that after the appellant approached the
complainant’s sleeping bag, he placed one hand over her
mouth and used his
other hand to pull her out of her sleeping bag, pull his pants down and place
her hand on his penis. She said
that she did not make a noise and was
‘still half asleep’. She said she was forced to stroke the
appellant’s penis
with her hand for about five minutes.
complainant said that she did not disclose the offending to anyone at the time
as she felt confused.
was evidence that the other children and adults at the property were contacted
by police but only the complainant’s mother
and sister provided a
statement or gave evidence at the trial.
complainant’s mother gave evidence that they had only slept over at the
Renmark property once, being New Years Eve 1992,
and when the
complainant’s younger sister was a baby. Her evidence tended to undermine
the complainant as to the date and timing
of the sleepover, location of adults,
and the presence of a baby in the house.
complainant’s sister gave evidence that she had visited the house at
Renmark ‘at least a couple of times’ when
she was primary school
age. She said she knew she attended the house once for a party, but she could
not remember if she had stayed
over that night. She also could not remember who
attended the party or how many children were there.
respect to Count 2, the complainant gave evidence that a few years later, when
she was 10 years old, she stayed at her aunt’s
house in Paralowie. On this
occasion, she was there for a sleepover, as she wanted to spend time with her
aunt. She said that her
aunt lived in a three-bedroom home. Her aunt and uncle
slept in the main bedroom at the front of the house, the appellant slept in
bedroom at the rear of the house, and she slept in another bedroom. She was
asked whether there was an elderly and handicapped
female relative living at her
aunt’s home but she could not recall her being there on this occasion, or
indeed, at all.
complainant said that during her stay, the appellant asked her if she wanted to
come and play Nintendo in his bedroom, and she
agreed. The complainant said it
was daytime, and her aunt and uncle were both in the lounge room at the front of
the house. The complainant
sat down next to the appellant at the end of his bed
and played video games. Next, the appellant pulled down his pants exposing his
penis. He told her to lick his penis, and when she refused, he pushed her head
down and forced her to lick the top and sides of his
penis. She said his penis
went hard and ‘there was like stuff coming out’.
appellant told her that if she told anybody what had taken place that he would
strangle her and kill her.
relation to Counts 3 and 4, the complainant gave evidence that about a month
later she went back to stay at her aunt’s house.
On this occasion, the
complainant was playing in the dining area with toys when the appellant asked
her to come to his bedroom and
play video games. She said that it was daytime
and that her aunt and uncle were in the lounge room. The complainant gave
that she and the appellant were playing video games in his bedroom when
the appellant pushed her onto the bed and pulled her pants
down. She was lying
flat on her back on the bed when the appellant began licking her vagina and
placed his fingers inside her vagina.
She said this occurred for about 10
minutes. The appellant stopped when her aunt called out his name. Then, the
appellant got up,
opened his bedroom door, and she pulled her pants up.
complainant said that the appellant told her that he would strangle her if she
said anything. She described being worried about
what the appellant was going to
do to her if she disclosed the offending.
relation to the alleged offending at the Paralowie house, the
complainant’s mother gave evidence that the complainant stayed
there about
once a month when she was aged 10 years. There were also housing records
confirming the complainant’s aunt lived
at the home in Paralowie at the
relevant time. The complainant’s mother also agreed in evidence that she
believed an elderly
and handicapped female relative lived at the home during
this time, although she could not recall seeing her at the home. Nor could
recall the layout of the Paralowie home or the sleeping arrangements.
complainant first disclosed the offending to her mother by text message in
November 2019. A copy of the text message was tendered
at trial and reads as
something I need to say and it’s about what happened to me when I was
younger I can’t remember how old I was
but [the appellant] forced my hand
to touch him it’s always in the back of mind and I try to forget it but
just keeps coming
the floor telling me to lick it all I remember was a house with a
pool out the
back and it was empty and there was heaps of us sleeping in sleeping bags I
really don’t ever want to think about
but I hate that I have to live with
it for the rest of my life.
content of the text message was adduced as evidence of an initial
The complainant
explained that she was prompted to tell her mother about the offending, as she
had observed the appellant playing
cricket in the presence of her children. When
asked which occasion she was referring to in the text message, she said she was
and ‘was trying to get what everything happened to me in one
conversation’.
complainant reported the allegations to police in, or around, January 2020.
The appellant participated in a record of interview and denied the offending on
7 October 2021.
The appellant was arrested and charged with the four sexual offences in
September 2023.
mentioned earlier, the trial took place in August 2024, over 30 years after the
alleged offending.
The defence case
appellant did not give or call any evidence at trial.
counsel submitted that the complainant could not be accepted as a credible or
reliable witness. Defence counsel emphasised
inconsistencies between the
complainant’s evidence and her mother’s evidence, particularly in
relation to the first count.
As to the evidence of the initial complaint,
defence counsel submitted that the text message was inconsistent with her
evidence regarding
the allegations, particularly in relation to the first count
at Renmark.
counsel relied on the appellant’s denials in his record of interview and
stressed the significant forensic disadvantage
to the appellant caused by the
30-year delay in the allegations proceeding to trial.
was defence counsel’s ultimate submission that the jury could not be
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the alleged offending.
to this appeal, the trial Judge gave a ‘separate consideration
direction’ to the jury in the following terms:
Members of the
jury, I direct that you must consider each count separately. You may find the
accused guilty of all counts. You may
find him not guilty of all counts. You may
find him guilty of one or more and not guilty of one or more. I say that just to
my direction that you must consider each count separately.
If you find him guilty of one count you must not reason that it therefore
follows that he must be guilty [of] all counts. The occasions
must be considered
separately. I need to direct you that you must not use the evidence of one
occasion to reason simplistically that
merely because the accused may have
engaged in that conduct, on that occasion, that he is the sort of person who is
more likely to
commit a crime on any other occasion. In other words, you cannot
reason simply that because he may have committed one offence, that
is enough to
prove the other offences.
trial Judge also gave the jury directions, in orthodox terms, as to the burden
and onus of proof, and that it was open to accept
parts of a witness’s
evidence but reject other parts.
jury were also given a significant forensic disadvantage direction in the
following terms:
I now turn to what is described as a forensic
disadvantage. That relates to the period of time that has occurred between the
offending and the matter now proceeding to trial. As you know, the
period of time is now around 31 years. That delay has resulted
in a significant
disadvantage to the accused. By that I mean there are difficulties for the
accused in challenging the allegations
because of that passage of time. Due to
that passage of time witnesses do not have good memories of details which has
impeded the
ability of the defence to challenge witnesses on matters of detail
or expose where a witness has been inconsistent or wrong. For
example, the
passage of time results in a disadvantage to the accused in not being able to
fully explore with [the complainant] in
cross-examination the finer details of
the offending that she alleges.
Had earlier investigations into the allegations been made, forensic evidence
may have become available. Details of who was present
in the premises at the
relevant times may have been able to be established. Furthermore, the
accused’s mother, who [the complainant]
said was present at the
Renmark and Paralowie premises at the relevant times, has passed away, as had
[the elderly relative] who
[the complainant’s mother] said was living at
Paralowie around the time that [the complainant] was visiting the home.
We cannot know what evidence the accused might have been able to call and you
must not speculate about what this evidence would have
shown, but you must take
these disadvantages into account when you are scrutinising the evidence from the
prosecution witnesses.
Before the trial Court, and in this Court, the appellant made no complaint
any complaint concerning
the conduct of the trial. His sole ground of appeal is that the guilty verdicts
on Counts 2, 3 and 4 are
unreasonable and cannot be supported by the evidence.
Unreasonable verdicts – the applicable principles
are, in effect, two limbs to the appellant’s unreasonable verdict
complaint. First, the appellant contends that the acquittal
on the first count
is explicable only on the basis that the jury found the complainant had no
credibility as to that incident of
sexual touching, and given the remaining
counts relied on an acceptance of the complainant’s credibility as to the
alleged sexual acts, the guilty verdicts on the remaining counts are
factually inconsistent and incapable of rational explanation
on the evidence.
Secondly, and independently of the alleged factual inconsistency between the
verdicts, the appellant contends the
guilty verdicts on Counts 2, 3 and 4 are
unreasonable and cannot be supported by the evidence.
circumstances where it is argued that the verdict of a jury is unreasonable or
cannot be supported by the evidence, the test to
be applied is that stated by
Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson and Toohey JJ in their joint judgment in
M v The Queen.
Their Honours
notwithstanding that as a matter of law there is evidence to sustain a verdict,
a court of criminal appeal is asked to conclude
that the verdict is unsafe or
unsatisfactory, the question which the court must ask itself is whether it
thinks that upon the whole
of the evidence it was open to the jury to be
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty. But in answering
question the court must not disregard or discount either the consideration
that the jury is the body entrusted with the primary responsibility
determining guilt or innocence, or the consideration that the jury has had the
benefit of having seen and heard the witnesses.
On the contrary, the court must
pay full regard to those considerations.
(citations omitted)
the present case, where the main circumstance said to result in unreasonable
verdicts is the inconsistency between verdicts, the
issue becomes whether the
guilty verdicts were open to the jury having regard to the whole of the record
including the fact that
the jury acquitted the appellant on one or more of the
counts on the Information.
is not suggested that there is any legal or technical inconsistency between the
verdicts. Rather, the appellant asserts that there
is a factual inconsistency
between the verdicts; namely, the jury concluded that the complainant had no
credibility in respect of
her evidence on the first count and, given the
remaining counts relied entirely on her evidence, the guilty verdicts on those
give rise to a factual inconsistency.
Mackenzie v The Queen
MFA v The Queen
High Court considered the circumstances in which an appellate court will
intervene by reason of a factual inconsistency between
the High Court enunciated the applicable principles
to an unreasonable verdict ground when it is contended that the verdicts are
inconsistent.
, the whole court approved the approach articulated
Relevantly, this approach includes the following general
propositions. First, the obligation to establish inconsistency rests upon
person making the submission.
Secondly, where there is a suggestion of factual inconsistency between jury
verdicts upon different counts of the originating process
in a criminal trial,
the test is one of logic and
reasonableness.
Thirdly, given the
respect for the function which the law assigns to juries, the appellate courts
have shown a reluctance to accept
a submission that verdicts are inconsistent in
the relevant sense. Thus, if there is a proper way by which the appellate court
reconcile the verdicts, allowing it to conclude that the jury performed
their functions as required, that conclusion will generally
Fourthly, there are
various considerations that might provide a rational explanation for verdicts
which may appear inconsistent.
Those considerations may include matters such as
a jury’s adherence to the separate consideration direction and instruction
that the evidence of a witness may be accepted in whole, or in part, and the
high standard of proof in criminal
Fifthly, in trials
involving sexual offences, an acquittal in respect of one or more counts on an
information does not necessarily
mean that the jury has disbelieved the
complainant in relation to the relevant allegations but may simply reflect a
cautious approach
responsibility.
As Gleeson CJ,
Hayne and Callinan JJ explained in
the case of sexual offences, of which there may be no objective evidence, some,
or all, of the members of the jury may require
some supporting evidence before
they are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt on the word of the complainant. This
may not be unreasonable.
It does not necessarily involve a rejection of the
complainant’s evidence. A juror might consider it more probable than not
that a complainant is telling the truth but require something additional before
reaching a conclusion beyond reasonable doubt. The
criminal trial procedure is
designed to reinforce, in jurors, a sense of the seriousness of their task, and
of the heavy burden of
proof undertaken by the prosecution. A verdict of not
guilty does not necessarily imply that a complainant has been disbelieved,
want of confidence in the complainant. It may simply reflect a cautious approach
to the discharge of a heavy responsibility.
In addition to a want of supporting
evidence, other factors that might cause a jury to draw back from reaching a
conclusion beyond
reasonable doubt in relation to some aspects of a
complainant’s evidence might be that the complainant has shown some
uncertainty
as to matters of detail, or has been shown to have a faulty
recollection of some matters, or has been shown otherwise to be more
, Kourakis J (as he then was) considered the question of
inconsistent verdicts in circumstances where the charged offending was based
different occasions, and/or involved different forms of sexual offending. His
Honour stated:
is very difficult to establish that it was not open to the jury to rationally
reach different conclusions about the degree to
which they were persuaded of the
commission of the particular offending alleged, having regard to the context the
pre-existing relationship
between the accused and the complainant, the
circumstances of the particular occasion and the particular sexual conduct
differentiation in verdicts may also reflect an approach by the jury which has
ameliorated strict justice for considerations of
fairness. The High Court in
approved the remarks of King CJ in
In that case, King
mentioned earlier, however, that there was a qualification to the proposition
that if there were no other issue in this case
but consent, the verdicts would
necessarily be inconsistent with one another. The qualification I have in mind
is that juries cannot
always be expected to act in accordance with strictly
logical considerations and in accordance with the strict principles of the
which are explained to them, and courts, I think, must be very cautious about
setting aside verdicts which are adequately supported
by the evidence simply
because a judge might find it difficult to reconcile them with the verdicts
which had been reached by the
jury with respect to other charges. Sometimes
juries apply in favour of an accused might be described as their innate sense of
and justice in place of the strict principles of law. Sometimes it
appears to a jury that although a number of counts have been alleged
accused person, and have been technically proved, justice is sufficiently met by
convicting him of less than the full
number. This may not be logically
justifiable in the eyes of a judge, but I think it would be idle to close our
eyes to the fact
that it is part and parcel of the system of administration of
justice by juries. Appellate courts therefore should not be too ready
the conclusion that because a verdict of guilty cannot be reconciled as a matter
of strict logic with a verdict of not
guilty with respect to another count, the
jury acted unreasonably in arriving at the verdict of guilty. A jury may be
quite reasonable
in arriving at the verdict of guilty. That verdict may be amply
supported by the evidence. They may decide for reasons of their own,
to the strict logic of the situation, that they are unwilling to arrive at a
verdict of guilty on another count in the
information...
in mind those considerations, it is always necessary to be cautious before
setting aside a verdict which is adequately supported by the evidence simply
because it might be difficult to reconcile with other
verdicts reached by the
same jury with respect to other
Nevertheless, as the
High Court recognised in
there will remain cases where this
Court’s intervention is necessary to prevent a possible
dispositive question that remains is whether having regard to the whole of the
evidence and record (including the fact that the
jury acquitted the appellant on
one or other counts on the Information), it was open to the jury to be satisfied
that the appellant
was guilty of the offences.
Consideration
the present case, the appellant submits that the acquittal on the first count is
only explicable on the basis that the jury found
the complainant had no
credibility in relation to the sexual touching the subject of that count. That
being so, the appellant argues
that her credibility was undermined to such an
extent that the convictions on the other counts are factually inconsistent and
be sustained.
support of this contention the appellant emphasises the inconsistencies between
the complainant’s evidence and the evidence
of her mother. They are as
the complainant gave evidence that her family visited her aunt’s property
at Renmark and stayed overnight on numerous
occasions. She gave evidence that
the sexual touching the subject of the first count occurred on a
‘normal’ weekend and
specifically, that it was not Christmas or New
Year’s Eve or a birthday. By contrast, the complainant’s mother gave
that they visited and stayed over at the home of the
complainant’s aunt in Renmark on only one occasion, being New Year’s
the complainant gave evidence that her youngest sister had not been born at the
time of the alleged incident. However,
her mother gave evidence that on the one
occasion that they slept over on New Year’s Eve 1992, the
complainant’s youngest
sister was six to eight weeks old having been born
in November 1992.
the complainant gave evidence that the alleged offence at the Renmark property
occurred in the lounge room where she was
sleeping with approximately eight to
10 of her cousins and that all the children were in bed and asleep by 9:00pm.
Her mother gave
evidence that the children did not go to sleep until 1:00am.
the complainant gave evidence that the adults were in the shed, a four to five
minutes’ walk away from the lounge
area. However, her mother said that she
had never been in the shed and that a New Year’s Eve function was held in
room (that being the room where the complainant claimed that the
offending had occurred.)
appellant also relies on the fact there was no independent support for the
complainant’s evidence as well as the purported
inconsistency between her
evidence and the terms of her initial complaint as set out in the text message.
In addition, the appellant
emphasises the purported implausibility of her
account which he submits further undermines her credibility on the first count.
is to be accepted that there were material inconsistencies between the
complainant’s evidence and that of her mother in
relation to the first
count. They were the subject of counsels’ submissions at the trial, and
directions by the trial Judge.
It is also true that the initial complaint was to
some extent inconsistent with her evidence. However, we do not consider that the
verdict of not guilty on the first count necessarily means the jury found that
she was an untruthful witness or wholly rejected her
evidence as not credible.
There are a number of rational explanations for the differentiation in the
verdicts which are consistent
with the jury having found the complainant to be a
generally credible witness on all counts.
on the prosecution case, the sexual touching the subject of the first count
occurred when the complainant was very young,
aged only seven years old and in
the presence of others. It is conceivable that the jury found the complainant
was generally an honest
witness but given those circumstances, the jury may have
afforded the appellant the benefit of a doubt on this charge. The alleged
offending also occurred in a darkened room with limited lighting, and in those
circumstances, along with the young age of the complainant,
the jury may have
entertained a doubt as to the identity of the offender. Those issues concerning
the presence of other children
in the same room, and in relation to the identity
of the offender, did not arise in relation to the latter counts at the
house in Paralowie.
Secondly, the trial Judge explicitly instructed the jury that it was open to
them to reach different verdicts on different counts.
The acquittal on the first
count and the guilty verdicts on the remaining counts may be the result of the
jury simply following those
directions.
it is also conceivable that the jury did not necessarily accept the evidence of
the complainant’s mother as to the
events the subject of the first count.
Many years had elapsed between the alleged commission of the first count and the
trial. This
had the capacity to adversely affect her memory, particularly as
until about 2019, it appears the topic was not raised with her and
would have taken on little significance to her. For that reason, the jury may
well have rejected aspects of her evidence
where it conflicted with the
complainant’s evidence but nonetheless returned a not guilty verdict.
Bearing in mind the complainant’s
very young age at the time, and the
abovementioned issue of identity, as well as the high onus of proof (about which
they were directed),
the jury may well have accepted the complainant was
generally a truthful and credible witness but properly afforded the appellant
the benefit of the doubt on the first count.
the complainant’s evidence in respect of the latter counts on which the
jury returned guilty verdicts was appreciably
more cogent. The complainant was
older at the time of this offending. She gave a more detailed account of each
alleged sexual incident
which involved more serious sexual acts of fellatio,
digital penetration, and cunnilingus. She also recounted that the appellant
threatened to harm her should she disclose the offending. This provided some
explanation for her reluctance to complain to anyone
at the time. There was also
objective support for the complainant’s evidence that she stayed overnight
at her aunt’s
advantage of seeing the complainant give her evidence over several hours.
regard to all those matters, we consider there is a logical and reasonable
explanation for the acquittal on the first count
which does not involve a
wholesale rejection of the complainant’s credibility as to the alleged
sexual incident. Rather, it
is conceivable that the jury gave the appellant the
benefit of the doubt in relation to the first count because of features of the
evidence which were not present in relation to the latter counts. For those
reasons, we do not consider there is any factual inconsistency
between the
acquittal on the first count and the guilty verdicts on the latter counts.
As to the second limb of this ground of appeal, the appellant contends that
even accepting the verdicts were not factually inconsistent,
the guilty verdicts
on the latter counts were unreasonable and cannot be supported by the evidence.
The appellant relies on three
considerations which he submits, separately and in
combination, demonstrate that the guilty verdicts on Counts 2, 3 and 4 are
unreasonable
or cannot be supported, by the evidence.
the appellant emphasises the differences between the complainant’s
evidence and the evidence of her mother as to the
latter counts. They are as
follows. First, the complainant gave evidence that she stayed at the Paralowie
address with her aunt on
a regular basis. Yet, her mother gave evidence that it
only happened occasionally. Secondly, the complainant gave evidence that her
aunt and uncle lived in a three-bedroom house and when she stayed overnight, her
aunt and uncle slept in a bedroom at the front of
the house; she always slept in
a second bedroom; and the appellant slept in the bedroom at the rear of the
house. The complainant
denied that an elderly and handicapped relative lived at
the home on any of the occasions when the alleged offending occurred. However,
her mother gave evidence that throughout the relevant period, an elderly and
handicapped relative lived at the home. The appellant
submits that the only
available bedroom for the complainant to sleep in (according to her
mother’s evidence) was the bedroom
occupied by the relative.
the appellant submits that the complainant’s evidence is inherently
implausible because her aunt and uncle were present
in the house; and on the
second occasion, her aunt came into the room immediately after the sexual
offending occurred. The appellant
submits, as he did at trial, that this level
of brazenness is unlikely given the risk of detection.
the appellant relies on the significant forensic disadvantage he suffered by
reason of a delay of about 30 years between
the alleged offending and the trial.
More specifically, both the complainant’s aunt and the elderly relative
had died before
the commencement of the trial. There was also no independent
support for the complainant’s evidence of the latter counts.
to the appellant’s contentions and upon our independent review and
assessment of the whole of the evidence and record,
including the not guilty
verdict on the first count, we consider it was open to the jury to be satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt
that the appellant was guilty of the latter counts.
mentioned earlier, the complainant was aged only 10 years at the time of the
alleged offending the subject of the latter counts,
but she was a mature woman
by the time she gave evidence. She provided cogent evidence as to the
circumstances surrounding the latter
two occasions of sexual offending which was
compelling in its detail. She also spoke of the threats made by the appellant
her which, in combination with her age, may explain why she agreed to
play video games with the appellant in his bedroom on the second
(Counts 3 and 4). It also may explain her reluctance to disclose the offending
until she was older. Her evidence as to the
circumstances which prompted her to
make her initial complaint was also convincing.
addition, there was independent support from the complainant’s mother (and
records) of the fact that her aunt lived at the
relevant address in Paralowie,
and evidence from the complainant’s mother that she stayed overnight at
the home on more than
one occasion when she was aged 10 years old. Whether she
stayed there regularly, or only occasionally, is not a material or significant
inconsistency given the elapse of time.
to the presence of an elderly and handicapped relative living in the house at
the relevant time, the complainant said that she
had no recollection of seeing
her at the house. The complainant’s mother, while saying that she recalled
a relative living
there at the relevant time, never saw her at the house and
could not say in which bedroom the relative slept nor where the complainant
would sleep in the house. Moreover, the complainant alleged that the offending
occurred during the daytime in the appellant’s
bedroom. Bearing in mind
the vagueness of the evidence of the complainant’s mother on this topic,
and that close to 30 years
had elapsed since the alleged incidents took place,
it was open to the jury to accept that while an elderly relative may have lived
at the house around this time, she was not present or living there at the time
of the latter counts. This potential inconsistency
is not of great moment.
the alleged offending was certainly brazen and risky, we do not consider that
necessarily renders it implausible. It may well
be that the appellant became
emboldened to commit the latter offences because the complainant did not
disclose the earlier sexual
touching, and in relation to the last occasion
(Counts 3 and 4) by reason of his threats to her combined with her
young age. The
offending was also committed behind closed doors when it was
only the appellant and the complainant in his bedroom.
those reasons, we are satisfied upon an independent assessment of the whole of
the evidence and record that it was open to the
jury to find the appellant
guilty of the latter counts.
grant permission to appeal but dismiss the appeal.
Trial Exhibit P6.
Evidence Act 1929
Trial Exhibit P7.
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
(Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson and Toohey JJ).
TK v The Queen
[2009] NSWCCA 151
74 NSWLR 299
(Simpson J).
Mackenzie v The Queen
[1996] HCA 35
(1996) 190 CLR 348.
MFA v The Queen
213 CLR 606.
Mackenzie v The Queen
[1996] HCA 35
(1996) 190 CLR 348
at 368 (Gaudron, Gummow and Kirby JJ). See also
[1968] 2 QB 433
(1972) 56 Cr App R 758.
Mackenzie v The Queen
[1996] HCA 35
(1996) 190 CLR 348
at 366 (Gaudron, Gummow and Kirby JJ).
Mackenzie v The
[1996] HCA 35
(1996) 190 CLR 348
at 367 (Gaudron, Gummow and Kirby JJ). See also
R v Wilkinson
[1970] Crim LR 176.
Mackenzie v The
[1996] HCA 35
(1996) 190 CLR 348
at 367 (Gaudron, Gummow and Kirby JJ);
(2002) 213 CLR 606
at [34] (Gleeson CJ, Hayne and Callinan JJ).
MFA v The Queen
(2002) 213 CLR 606
at [34] (Gleeson CJ, Hayne and Callinan JJ).
MFA v The Queen
(2002) 213 CLR 606
at [34] (Gleeson CJ, Hayne and Callinan JJ).
[2008] SASC 274
(1987) 44 SASR 591.
R v Kirkman
44 SASR 591
at 593 (King CJ).
R v Gbojeuh
[2009] SASC 104
103 SASR 545
–[37] (Kourakis J);
[2002] SASC 208
(2002) 84 SASR
R v Neocleous
(2017) 270 A Crim R 262
[147]–[148] (Doyle J with whom Peek J agreed).
Mackenzie v The
[1996] HCA 35
(1996) 190 CLR 348
at 368 (Gaudron, Gummow and Kirby JJ).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (424 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter