URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACorC/2025/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:54:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'HALLORAN, Emma Louise ([2025] SACC 17) [2025] SACorC 17 (11 June 2025)
CORONERS COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
EMMA LOUISE
[2025] SACC 17
Inquest Findings of her Honour Deputy State Coroner
11 June 2025
CORONIAL INQUEST
Examination of the cause and circumstances of the death of a 48-year-old
woman who drove to a regional area and took a deliberate
overdose of medication.
She was located by police after a significant search effort and detained under
Mental Health Act
. Following a delay in ambulance
attendance she was taken to the Kapunda Hospital where she died. The Inquest
explored an issue
with the communications between SAPOL and the SA Ambulance
Service once she had been found which delayed the arrival of paramedics.
Louise O'Halloran, aged 48 years of Hackham, died at Kapunda Hospital on 20 May
2020 as a result of multiple drug toxicity consisting
of flecainide, lorazepam
and diazepam.
Circumstances
of death as set out in these findings.
No recommendations made.
This judgment contains discussion of suicide and may be
distressing to some people
There is always help available
If you need support, contact
Lifeline Australia
Call 13 11 14 or Text 0477 13 11 14
or chat online at www.lifeline.org.au/crisis-chat
Aboriginal & Torres Strait Islander Support
Call 13YARN (13 92 76)
Kids Helpline
Call 1800 55 1800
MensLine Australia
Call 1300 78 99 78
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
EMMA LOUISE
[2025] SACC 17
Introduction, cause of death and reason for Inquest
Louise O’Halloran died on 20 May 2020 at the Kapunda Hospital. She had
been brought to the hospital by SA Ambulance (SAAS)
from a remote area following
an overdose of prescription medication. She was 48 years old.
post-mortem examination was carried out by Dr Stephen Wills, a forensic
pathologist at Forensic Science SA. In his report, Dr Wills
gave the cause of
multiple drug toxicity, consisting of flecainide, lorazepam
and diazepam
Ms O’Halloran
was considered to be in custody at the time of her death. SAPOL officers who
were first on the scene considered
Ms O’Halloran to be detainable
section 57(1)(c)
Mental Health Act
, effectively
exercising that power of detention. Because of this,
Ms O’Halloran’s death was a death in custody within
the meaning
of that expression in the
Coroners Act
, and this Inquest was held as
required by
section 21(1)(a)
of that Act.
Ms O’Halloran
was born in Adelaide and adopted as an infant, before reconnecting with her
birth parents as an adult. She had
a rebellious childhood and moved out of home
in her teenage years. At 21 years of age Ms O’Halloran and her
partner had a
daughter, Alexandra. While in this relationship she began using
illicit substances,
and there was a
self-harm incident related to her substance use around this time.
her separation from Alexandra’s father, Ms O’Halloran commenced
a new relationship with Stephen Savenkoff.
They had three sons together, each
diagnosed with autism with varying degrees of impact, and other conditions.
Initially the family
lived in Murray Bridge before moving to a farm in Meningie.
Here they kept various animals, but largely used the farm for the agistment
cattle. Together, Ms O’Halloran and Mr Savenkoff managed the
daily challenges of the children and the farm. Ms O’Halloran
described by her birth mother, Ms Barbara Pedruco, as dedicated to her sons,
continually looking for new therapies and ensuring
they received opportunities
this was a stabilising time in Ms O’Halloran’s life. However,
there were signs in the years leading up to her
Ms O’Halloran’s mental health was fragile at times and her
relationship with Mr Savenkoff was acrimonious.
In September 2012,
Ms O’Halloran left the farm telling her family that she wanted to
’, and that she was not coming back. She was
reported missing, but returned later that
Ms O’Halloran reported to her doctor that her ‘
a knee replacement, Ms O’Halloran’s friend, Carol Catanzariti,
observed some behavioural and lifestyle
Ms O’Halloran
was spending more time away from the farm with her brother, and she had resumed
smoking and drinking.
Victoria Buckeridge was Ms O’Halloran’s biological sister. She
observed that the relationship between Ms O’Halloran
Mr Savenkoff had become progressively worse over time. They argued a lot
and, most significantly, there was a difference of
opinion about whether it was
appropriate to use medication for the three boys which limited their violent
late February or early March 2020, Ms O’Halloran moved in to live
with her adult daughter. This was around the time her
relationship with Mr
Savenkoff ended. She stayed with Alexandra for about six weeks. During this
time her daughter observed that
she lacked the energy to do things that she had
previously enjoyed,
although she
continued to speak to her sons on the phone each morning and
Ms O’Halloran
then moved from her daughter’s home to live with Ms Pedruco at
Gawler. COVID-19 restrictions then followed
which limited the amount of
in-person interaction Ms O’Halloran had with her daughter. They also
had a disagreement which
strained the
relationship.
longstanding friend of Ms O’Halloran, Donna Lewis, saw her on 18 May
2020. Ms O’Halloran told her she was anxious and
not feeling right
Ms Lewis discussed with Ms O’Halloran the option of going back on
antidepressants, but Ms O’Halloran refused. Ms O’Halloran
did in fact see her general practitioner that day and was prescribed lorazepam
and diazepam.
few days prior to her death, Ms O’Halloran returned to stay at the
farm. The situation deteriorated and reportedly ended
with Mr Savenkoff
throwing bricks at her car as she drove
the morning of 20 May 2020, Ms O’Halloran used her mobile phone to
conduct several searches on the internet. The
phrases that she searched
risperidone overdose
Risperidone
Carbon monoxide
Carbon monoxide
poisoning from car
What happens
with carbon monoxide from car
SAPOL later found the medication risperidone in
Ms O’Halloran’s bedroom at Ms Pedruco’s
It had been prescribed
to Ms O’Halloran’s son.
the information obtained from Ms O’Halloran’s mobile phone it
was apparent that she had been contemplating suicide.
She was dealing with
several personal issues. This manifested in a clear intention on the morning of
20 May 2020.
Ms O’Halloran’s relevant medical
Ms O’Halloran
had ongoing issues with her knees which led her to have gastric bypass surgery
in early 2019 as a preliminary
step to allow for knee surgeries to safely occur.
In her last 18 months of life, Ms O’Halloran lost approximately 80
of body weight. She had a total replacement of her left knee on 9
January 2020, followed by two minor surgeries in February and
March 2020.
Ms O’Halloran’s
general practitioner, Dr Deborah Kerrigan, had previously prescribed sertraline
and venlafaxine for depression,
but Ms O’Halloran found that neither
Dr Kerrigan prescribed
lorazepam to deal with Ms O’Halloran’s anxiety.
Dr Kerrigan said that she had offered referrals
to a psychologist and a
psychiatrist, but Ms O’Halloran had
She reported that she
had previously seen a psychiatrist once in 2018 and did not wish to visit again.
Kerrigan said that Ms O’Halloran had a recorded history of anxiety
and depression dating back to 2017. She reported symptoms
of self-worthlessness
and difficulty coping. Dr Kerrigan said that, at the time of her death,
Ms O’Halloran was suffering
ongoing depression associated with her
relationship and the care of her three
While she had recently
reported that she had moved out of her home and felt burnt out, she had never
indicated any intention to
Dr Kerrigan asked
Ms O’Halloran whether she wished to see a psychologist following her
departure from the family home and
Ms O’Halloran again refused.
Relevantly,
Ms O’Halloran was prescribed a medication named flecainide at the
dose of 50mg in 2020.
following a presentation to the Lyell McEwin Hospital for symptoms of dizziness
and a slow pulse. Following examination
she was discharged, but the following
morning she presented to the Ashford Hospital by ambulance and was assessed by
cardiologist,
Dr Fahd Chahadi. Dr Chahadi diagnosed Ms O’Halloran
with ventricular bigeminy, a common heart rhythm abnormality. She was
prescribed a beta blocker which was changed to
flecainide.
Following her
hospital admission, Ms O’Halloran saw Dr Chahadi for a follow-up
appointment on 15 May 2020. Ms O’Halloran
spoke of her relationship
breakdown and the compounding difficulties of children who had disabilities.
Notwithstanding the discussion
of these issues, Dr Chahadi did not consider her
to have any outward signs of depression and there were no indications of
I note here that
Ms O’Halloran was seeing Dr Chahadi for his specialist cardiology
services, not for a mental health assessment.
He provided
Ms O’Halloran with a further prescription for flecainide with
instructions to take a maximum of two per day.
circumstances leading to Ms O’Halloran’s death
20 May 2020, Ms Pedruco observed that Ms O’Halloran had woken up
with a depressed mood. Ms Pedruco travelled to Adelaide
to visit her son,
however contacted Ms O’Halloran upon arrival to check on her.
Ms O’Halloran told her that she had
just filled a prescription and
was going for a drive. CCTV footage and pharmacy records revealed that
Ms O’Halloran filled
prescriptions for 50 tablets of lorazepam, 50
tablets of diazepam and 60 tablets of flecainide at about
The footage showed her
interacting with pharmacy staff and
After leaving the
chemist she was seen heading in the direction of Bunnings. At around this time
Ms O’Halloran used her mobile
phone to search the internet with the
does carbon monoxide poisoning
Records showed
that she contacted and spoke to Mr Savenkoff.
Mr Savenkoff
called emergency services just after 1pm. He informed them that he had spoken
to Ms O’Halloran about 45 minutes
earlier, with her reporting that
she was intending to take pills and gas herself in her car. He had been unable
to contact her since
the call ended. He reported that he had told her that the
tubing would melt, and she had responded ‘
well that’s no good
‘event’ was created in SAPOL’s computer aided dispatch system
(SACAD); a digital system for managing the dispatching
of police officers to
incidents across the State. The event was initially managed by the Hills
Fleurieu and Barossa dispatcher,
Senior Constable Cathryn
SAPOL patrols were
dispatched over radio. A phone triangulation commenced in respect of
Ms O’Halloran’s phone, and
it returned a result that it was in
the vicinity of Black Springs, a town south of Burra and east of Clare. At
1:37pm, Ms O’Halloran
sent identical text messages to her mother,
brother and sister which said, ‘
I’m sorry and I love you
Sergeant Michael Fidock was on duty and heard the dispatch broadcast. He phoned
Ms O’Halloran’s mobile and spoke
to her. He was not able to
obtain information about her location. He spoke with other police officers and
then called her back
to ask her to use her phone to locate herself on a map.
She was not able to do so. She mentioned that she had had a
the meantime, Ms Pedruco received a call from Mr Savenkoff. He
informed her that Ms O’Halloran said she was down a country
alcohol and was going to take all her pills. Over the next couple of hours
Ms O’Halloran spoke to members of her
family over several calls. In
affidavits tendered to the Court, these family members described
Ms O’Halloran as incoherent,
slurring her words and
Mr Savenkoff that she had taken an entire bottle of
Ms O’Halloran’s daughter and Ms Buckeridge tried to assist
her to find her location on Google maps, but neither was
successful.
Mr Savenkoff contacted police six times with updates.
service areas. As a result, at 2:37pm, a second event was
created in SACAD and
linked to the first.
text remarks that had been entered into SACAD until that point were carried over
from the first event to the second. The
location of the new event was recorded
as the Barrier Highway at Black Springs. The event was assigned for management
by the Murray
Mallee, Limestone Coast and Yorke Mid North dispatcher, Senior
Constable Simon Steer.
Ms O’Halloran’s
brother, Vincent Pedruco, had possession of Ms O’Halloran’s
iPad, which was linked to her
phone. He was able to use that to track her
location and advise Mr Savenkoff who rang SAPOL at 2:58pm and provided the
Ms Pedruco also contacted police with the information. The
phone’s location was Prior Road at Marrabel, about 30 kilometres
Black Springs. At 2:59pm both SACAD events were updated with a text remark
noting that the location had been reported.
However, the formal location of the
events were not updated.
triangulation was repeated at 3:03pm and this time showed the location of
Marrabel. At about 3:18pm, police radio records revealed
the following
interaction:
‘Brevet Sergeant Fidock Given the fact that
she’s stated she’s had a
, I think we probably need to
get ambos rolling, even though we don’t have a location yet.
Operator No. That’s fine. Obviously they’re going to want to know
where to go, and I don’t know where to send them.
Brevet Sergeant Fidock If you send them to Marrabel at this stage I think.
Looks like we’ll be definitely in that area somewhere.
I think once we get
all three of us police there, we’ll be in a better position to start
Operator Roger. I’ll definitely let them know and get them rocking and
rolling. Thanks. Patrols - Just standby while I try
and get this
organised.’
3:21pm, Senior Constable Simon Steer created an InterCAD job. InterCAD is a
system which provides an interface between the digital
dispatch systems for
SAPOL, SAAS and the Metropolitan Fire Service. The result was that SAPOL
systems notified SAAS of the incident
at 3:21pm through InterCAD. The event
comments up to that point were then visible to SAAS, although only 4000
characters were shared.
Constable Steer shared the following remark with SAAS:
JUST MAKE YOU AWARE OF A CHECK WELFARE THAT MAY NOW HAVE TURNED ITO [sic] A
CRASH SOMEWHERE IN THE AREA OF MARRABEL –
WE HAVE 3 PATROLS LOOKING FOR
THE FEMALE – SHE STATES SHE HAS TAKEN A LOAD OF VALIUM AND ALSO BEEN
INVOLVED IN A MVC’
opened an event on their system but did not dispatch an ambulance as
Ms O’Halloran had not yet been
The records revealed
that SAAS acknowledged the InterCAD message and indicated they would wait to be
informed of the location.
Senior Constable Steer then announced on the
‘And those patrols on the Black Springs job. SAAS are
aware. Obviously, they’re just waiting for a proper location.
they’re aware.’
Senior Constable Steer then made enquiries about PolAir assisting in the
Constable Andrew Dredge was on duty at Freeling. He saw the location provided
by Ms O’Halloran’s brother and had
local knowledge of that area. He
drove to the location, arriving at about 3:40pm, finding
Ms O’Halloran in her car near the
intersection of Prior and Roehr
Roads. He advised SAPOL Communications. The first SACAD event was updated with
an entry that Ms
O’Halloran had been
Senior Constable Dredge
remained on the Hills Fleurieu and Barossa channel briefly. He spoke to Senior
Constable Fearn who confirmed
the location with Senior Constable Dredge, asked
for further observations and said, ‘
We’ll get SAAS rolling to
Constable Dredge was then referred to Senior Constable Steer’s channel.
Senior Constable Steer made an announcement
of the location to the other
officers searching. He said:
‘I’m just getting all the
details from that job and trying to link them altogether and then I’ll get
SAAS rolling
to that location.’
that point on police officers at the scene and in the vicinity believed that an
ambulance had been tasked to attend.
3:40pm Senior Constable Fearn updated the first event’s formal location to
Prior Road at Marrabel and transferred the event
to Senior Constable Steer. No
event comments from this event were shared with SAAS via
Senior Constable
Steer took over management of both SACAD events and closed the first, merging it
into the second.
This resulted
in the entire ‘event remarks’ of the first event being duplicated
into the second event,
creating an additional five pages of
being added to the event
all at once.
This overwhelmed
the system and resulted in a break in the InterCAD link for this event. There
was no warning or notification of
the failure of the link.
3:44 pm Senior Constable Steer updated the event entry for the now combined
event intending to notify SAAS that Ms O’Halloran
had been located,
FEMALE IS PRIOR RD-
He received
no response. At 3:46pm, he provided further updates intended for SAAS that
there had possibly been a crash and that
it was believed
Ms O’Halloran had taken medication. He provided a phone number for
Senior Constable Dredge. He received no
response. Senior Constable Steer
assumed that these messages would have been delivered through InterCAD and then
dealt with other
taskings, messages and outstanding issues regarding other
He stated that it was
not unusual to be dealing with the dispatch and coordination of over 120 patrols
on an afternoon shift.
covered by his station included the entirety of Murray Bridge, Port Pirie and
Mount Gambier as well as other smaller bases.
Subsequent analysis of the actual
workload at the time of this incident revealed that Senior Constable Steer was
managing more than
70 patrols and dealing with 40 events every five minutes
between 2pm and 7:30pm.
Inspector Scott Collins was the State Response Manager at the time, with
statewide management of SAPOL resources and the monitoring
of police-related
events at the time. He reviewed the Communication Centre’s activities for
20 May 2020. He explained that
country areas are serviced by a single dispatch
officer unless specific times of demand call for a dual dispatch arrangement.
there is an overflow dispatcher with whom at any point in time the
workload of a country dispatch officer can be
Chief Inspector Collins
stated that training on the Communication Centre Dispatch Standard Operating
Procedure (SOP) mandated a
phone call to other agencies if they had not
responded in a timely fashion to information provided through
He explained that the
SOP dictates, ‘
All dispatchers have
a responsibility to ensure InterCAD events are read as soon as
Senior Constable Dredge arrived at the accident scene he observed the front
bumper of Ms O’Halloran’s car to be detached
and on the opposite
side of the road to the car. The airbags had been
Ms O’Halloran had a small graze to her chin consistent with the
deployment of the airbags.
Ms O’Halloran was holding a can of premixed vodka in her left hand
and at least six small white round tablets in her right.
Senior Constable
Dredge knocked the tablets out of her hand and poured out the can of drink. He
observed Ms O’Halloran to
She asked whether she
was going to be arrested, and Senior Constable Dredge reassured her that she was
not. He told her, ‘
we’re just waiting for an ambulance to check
on you and make sure you’re
whether she would be taken to the ‘
Nutter Department at the Royal
Constable Dredge enquired about the graze on Ms O’Halloran’s
chin, and she indicated towards the
Senior Constable Dredge
mentioned the bumper bar to Ms O’Halloran, and she got out of the car
walking towards the bumper.
He observed her to be unsteady on her feet, almost
falling, but being caught by Senior Constable Dredge. He helped her up and led
her back to the car. He then collected the bumper bar and placed it in the back
seat of the car.
Constable Dredge removed the following from Ms O’Halloran’s
An empty bottle
of 50 tablets of 5mg diazepam, dispensed on 20 May 2020
An empty bottle
of 50 tablets of 1mg lorazepam, dispensed on 20 May 2020
Two boxes of 60
tablets of 50mg flecainide, one dispensed on 20 May 2020 with 27 remaining,
the other dispensed at an earlier date
examination of the car found 13 small white pills in the driver’s side
footwell, another on the driver’s seat and
four on the passenger
There were two cans of
premixed vodka (one unopened) in the car and two empty cans on the roadside.
after 4pm, Brevet Sergeants Fidock and Haines arrived at the scene. While
waiting for the ambulance Ms O’Halloran’s
car was moved off the road
for safety.
Ms O’Halloran then sat in the passenger seat and applied makeup from
cosmetics that were in the car and then packed them
Brevet Sergeant Fidock
described Ms O’Halloran as ‘
vague, like fatigued as if she
was on, you know, clearly on
something, but, but
point she opened the boot of the car and showed the officers that she had a
length of flexible ducting and duct tape, still
She remained
unsteady on her feet.
stated that she had planned to use it to redirect the exhaust gases into the car
to kill herself.
this time Ms O’Halloran spoke to Ms Pedruco on a police
officer’s phone, as her phone battery was flat. She told
that she had crashed her car, and they spoke about going to hospital.
Constable Dredge stated that they requested ambulance attendance on a
couple of occasions
’. When interviewed, he said that he
considered taking her to the hospital in the police vehicle, but did not think
appropriate and thought that the ambulance would arrive
At 4:24pm the officers
with Ms O’Halloran asked for an update on the arrival of an ambulance
by inputting text into SACAD
via the terminal in the police
As there had been no
ETA entered by SAAS onto the event in the dispatch system, Senior Constable Kurt
Edwards at the SAPOL Communications
Centre rang SAAS by phone. This marked the
first occasion on which SAAS became aware that Ms O’Halloran had been
4:33pm SAAS responded via InterCAD with ‘
CALL FROM SAPOL COMMS
@1632 UPDATING LOCATION
’. The SAAS event priority was changed to
P2 which required a ‘lights and siren’ response. Two minutes later
page was sent to the Kapunda crew. There was no acknowledgment, and a second
page was sent at 4:36pm. At 4:38pm, the SAAS Coordinator
phoned the Kapunda
Station and received no response. At 4:39pm, the SAAS Coordinator phoned one of
the crew members on their personal
phone number. He received an engaged tone.
At 4:43pm, the SAAS Coordinator used the radio network to contact the Kapunda
acknowledged the communication and were advised of the tasking. At
4:45pm, they acknowledged the event on their device. There was
therefore an
11-minute delay between the tasking and the acknowledgment. A SAAS dispatcher
recorded in the InterCAD comments at
MULTI PAGER FAILURES
Tracy Callanan was on duty at Kapunda. She expressed her surprise to hear that
there had been an emergency callout as her
pager had not gone off in accordance
with protocol.
She recalled
that this had also occurred earlier in the same shift.
before 5pm, police with Ms O’Halloran at Marrabel saw that she
appeared to lose consciousness and was unable to be roused.
She was observed to
be breathing but was struggling. Another request for an ambulance was made and
the SACAD event remarks were
updated. SAAS updated in response that they were
five minutes away. The officers kept Ms O’Halloran in the car given
cold temperatures outside. Bureau of Meteorology records from the nearest
weather station, Nuriootpa, recorded an air temperature
of 12.8°C at the
time with a 28 kilometre per hour
ambulance departed Kapunda station and travelled to the intersection of Prior
and Roehr Roads at Marrabel, arriving at 5:09pm.
Ms O’Halloran was
in the front passenger seat. She was blue, unconscious and had no radial pulse.
Her respiratory rate was
low, and she was breathing with poor effort. Given the
cold and windy conditions, and the amount of dust in the air, Ms Callanan
clinical decision to commence Ms O’Halloran’s treatment in the
Ms O’Halloran
was bagged and masked
removed from the car and placed onto a stretcher which was loaded into the
ambulance. Senior Constable Dredge drove the
ambulance towards the Kapunda
Hospital, which was 23 kilometres
This allowed both SAAS
members to focus on Ms O’Halloran. They had to stop during the trip
as Ms O’Halloran went into
ventricular tachycardia. A defibrillator
was used to deliver an electric shock at 5:28pm but was not effective. Brevet
Haines got into the back of the ambulance and assisted with CPR under
Ms Callanan’s direction.
Further shocks and CPR were continued as the ambulance resumed its route.
stopped a second time to onboard an experienced paramedic from another ambulance
to take over from Brevet Sergeant Haines. Fifteen
minutes later they again
stopped for another experienced officer to board the ambulance. The journey was
slow due to a combination
of weather conditions consisting of heavy rain and
wind, and the need to keep the ambulance stable for treatment to continue. They
arrived at Kapunda Hospital at 6:08pm. By this time there had been a total of
four shocks and 3mg of adrenaline administered.
the ambulance made its way to Kapunda, so too did MedSTAR officers, including
Associate Professor Hooper, a senior medical retrieval
consultant. Their
journey was by road due to the inclement weather, described by Associate
Professor Hooper as ‘
atrocious and
arrived at Kapunda Hospital at 6:11pm.
arrival at the hospital, Ms O’Halloran had a momentary return of
spontaneous circulation and a palpable radial pulse, however
sustained. She was occasionally attempting to breathe on her own. Doctors
administered medication to try to reverse
the effects of the flecainide.
Intermittent brief improvements in heart rhythm were observed. After more than
90 minutes of CPR,
and a further four shots of adrenalin and other medications,
Ms O’Halloran’s blood gas results indicated a worsening
condition. Alternative treatments were considered, but were not viable, and CPR
was ceased. Ms O’Halloran was pronounced
life extinct at 7:08pm.
Was Ms O’Halloran’s death preventable?
the opinion of Associate Professor Hooper, Ms O’Halloran’s
blood gases on admission to hospital were acceptable, which
was a sign that
effective CPR had been commenced in a timely
Associate Professor
Hooper opined that if it was not for the catastrophic cardiac toxicity from the
flecainide overdose, her condition
would have been potentially reversible. He
explained that he was shown Ms O’Halloran’s heart rate rhythm
strip at the
time of cardiac arrest by the intensive care paramedic. It
revealed a specific type of abnormal heart rhythm often associated with
toxicity, ‘Torsades de pointes’. Associate Professor Hooper
‘... from the information available to me, I was
able to ascertain the patient had consumed between 50-70, 50mg flecainide
In my opinion at the time, this amount is way beyond a lethal
Chahadi agreed with this opinion. He stated that while flecainide was one of
the safest anti-arrhythmic medications available
when taken in therapeutic
doses, 500mg taken at once would be a fatal overdose that no outpatient medical
intervention could prevent.
Given that there were thirty-three 50mg tablets missing from the quantity
dispensed on 20 May 2020, potentially minus the 18 found
in the car, it appeared
that Ms O’Halloran had ingested at least 750mg. However, she may
have consumed a greater quantity
from earlier prescription. Dr Chahadi
indicated that treatment for a potentially fatal dose of flecainide would
include aggressive
electrolyte replacement and an infusion of hypertonic sodium
bicarbonate. Ms O’Halloran received this treatment at the Kapunda
of a post-mortem blood sample returned a result for flecainide at 8.7mg/L, a
concentration within the range reported in previous
fatalities attributed to
that drug, albeit towards the lower end of that fatal range. The sedative drug
lorazepam was found at 0.3mg/L,
a concentration consistent with levels reported
in previous deaths. The sedative drug diazepam was detected at 0.56mg/L, a
therapeutic
level, with its metabolite also found. Other drugs consistent with
the medical intervention were identified. There was no alcohol
on the ingestion of a fatal level of flecainide, and in combination with an
overdose of other drugs, I find that Ms O’Halloran’s
not preventable. This was notwithstanding the delay experienced with the
arrival of SAAS.
Conclusions
interviewed, Senior Constable Dredge said that if Ms O’Halloran had
tried to leave, he would have detained her until her
physical and mental health
was assessed.
He said that he
had also formed the impression that she had probably been driving under the
influence, but that he was more concerned
Brevet Sergeant Fidock
said that while at the scene they had treated it as a ‘
depending on what SAAS were going to
When interviewed
he said that Ms O’Halloran was essentially detained as they would not
have let her go anywhere if she had
By the time police
arrived, Ms O’Halloran had presented ample circumstances of concern
a detention for the purposes of
assessment by medical officers.
Ms O’Halloran
was therefore in the lawful custody of police leading up to her death. The care
and concern shown by the officers
who responded to and remained with
Ms O’Halloran until SAAS arrived, was commendable.
SAAS delays
were two issues that require consideration relating to the response of
records revealed that there were no updates to SAAS between the initial event
creation at 3:21pm and 4:32pm, when SAAS received
the phone call from SAPOL
advising that Ms O’Halloran had been found and her location. That
was 48 minutes after she had been
located. Senior Sergeant Neil Anderson,
the SACAD Coordinator, stated that the comments entered into the event which
recorded Ms
O’Halloran’s location were not shared with SAAS
complexity and duplication of extensive event
remarks, the process that sends this information failed to
likely due to the 4000 character limit on the InterCAD system which was exceeded
when the first event was merged into the
second, duplicating all text up until
that point.
Senior Sergeant
Anderson said that the incident identified a:
‘...training gap
in relation to operators following up with other agencies when they provide them
with an update, particularly
where that updated [sic] is expected to be
actioned, such as an event location change or request for attendance.’
He explained that this has never been formally included in training
documentation.
Sergeant Tracey Brett, the Communications Group Training and Planning
Coordinator, provided an update to the Court. She advised
that on 4 August
2020 an email was sent to all Communications Centre staff advising of the issue
with duplicated text and advising
dispatchers to ensure a confirmation that
information sent through InterCAD had been
The email was sent by
Senior Sergeant Anderson. In addition, she provided an extract of the Standard
Operating Procedure which
refers to this requirement.
SAPOL investigating officer, Senior Constable Dredge, made a recommendation for
a review to be conducted in relation to the Communication
workload and processes. Chief Inspector Collins indicated that those reviews
were conducted.
second issue was the delay in SAAS dispatching an ambulance once they received
notification that Ms O’Halloran had been
SAAS Dispatch Team Leader caused a review to be conducted on 21 May 2020. A
technician sent to the Kapunda Station found that
the National Broadband Network
line had been disconnected from the modem. Once this was rectified, the phone
services to the station
It remains unknown
how this came to be disconnected. A sign has since been placed near the modem
warning that the cabling must
disconnected.
pager system used by paramedics is operated through the South Australian
Government Radio Network. The technician found that
the signal strength for the
radio network at the station was low outside and poor inside. Since this
incident, the pagers have been
replaced with newer versions which are more
sensitive to paging activity, with improvement
There has been a
protocol change which requires the on‑duty crew to take a handheld radio
from the ambulance into the station
with them and leave it turned on. They are
required to leave the garage door open with the alarm on the terminal inside the
turned to maximum volume. SAAS have actioned plans to install a
paging amplifier at the Kapunda Station. This will activate lights
within the station when a pager alert is received. SAAS have introduced a
text-to-mobile-phone procedure for Kapunda
that sends a text message to the
on-duty paramedic at their personal number when a pager alert is activated.
There is then a protocol
for a follow-up call if there is no response within
three to four minutes. Since the implementation of these measures, there have
been no reports of pager failure at the Kapunda
SAAS has made a
request to the SA Government Radio Network to add another tower at Wild Dog Hill
to increase the paging coverage
at Kapunda, as the local tower has no paging
ability and Kapunda relies on a tower further away for paging signals.
consider that the action taken by SAAS to address both issues above are
appropriate and sufficient.
was certainly undesirable that the breakdown in the InterCAD and paging systems
saw a cumulative delay in expert medical assistance
Ms O’Halloran. This did not however alter the tragic outcome for
Ms O’Halloran.
once again acknowledge the excellent police work involved in finding and
supporting Ms O’Halloran until the arrival of SAAS.
acknowledge the valiant efforts of both police and SAAS officers in retrieving
Ms O’Halloran to the Kapunda Hospital
in challenging weather
conditions. Once at the Kapunda Hospital, the treatment which Dr Chahadi
said was required to reverse the
toxic effect of flecainide was administered but
unable to prevent her death. Dr Chahadi stated that flecainide is absorbed
the bloodstream quickly and causes malignant arrhythmia, or total
cardiovascular collapse. As I have outlined above, it was unlikely
Ms O’Halloran’s death would have been prevented if the InterCAD
and SAAS systems (notification and dispatch) worked
as they should have. This
position is supported by the opinion of Associate Professor Hooper, who
expressed the view that Ms O’Halloran’s
situation might have
been reversable if it were not for her catastrophic cardiac toxicity from
flecainide.
Recommendations
make no recommendations in this matter.
Keywords: Death in Custody; Police; SAAS; Drug Overdose
Exhibit C5, paragraph
Exhibit C49b, page
Exhibit C49b, page
Exhibit C1a, paragraph
Exhibit C1a, paragraph 107;
Exhibit C18, paragraph 8
Exhibit C1a, paragraph 43
Exhibit C19
Exhibit C6,
paragraph 21
Exhibit C49b,
Exhibit C40
Exhibit C16, paragraph
Exhibit C16, paragraph
Exhibit C16, paragraph
Exhibit C17, paragraph
15; Exhibit C49R; Exhibit C49K
Flecainide works by blocking
sodium channels in the heart, slowing down the electrical signals that cause
Exhibit C17,
paragraphs 20-21
Exhibit C49a, paragraphs
Exhibit C49b,
paragraphs 45-46
Exhibit C45, paragraphs
Exhibit C49b, page
Exhibit C6, page
Exhibit C45, paragraph
Exhibit C45, paragraphs
38-39; paragraph 45
vehicle collision
Exhibit C28; Exhibit C36
Exhibit C45,
paragraphs 50, 55
C45, paragraph 54
Exhibit C45, paragraph
Exhibit C27, Attachment
Exhibit C28, page
Exhibit C45, paragraph 50
and Annexure A pages 7-8
Exhibit C45, paragraph 39
Exhibit C45, paragraph 60
When printed
Exhibit C45,
Exhibit C45,
Exhibit C28,
paragraph 27
Exhibit C28,
paragraph 6
Exhibit C45,
Annexure F; Exhibit C45a, paragraph
Exhibit C44, paragraph
Exhibit C44, paragraph
Exhibit C44, paragraph
Exhibit C23, pages
Exhibit C23, page 6
Exhibit C35, paragraph
Exhibit C49d, page 4;
Exhibit C35, Annexure A, pages 5 and
Exhibit C49d, page
Exhibit C35, page
Exhibit C23, page 4
Exhibit C33, page 5; Exhibit
C46, paragraph 15
Exhibit C36, page
Exhibit C35, page
Exhibit C36, page
Exhibit C33, page 6;
Exhibit C36, page 5
C3, page 14
Exhibit C35,
Annexure STO1A pages 15 and
Exhibit C45, paragraph
Exhibit C45, Annexure B,
Exhibit C7,
paragraph 8
Exhibit C49s,
pages 2 and 8
A process of
providing a high level of
Exhibit C49b, page
Exhibit C24, paragraph 20
Exhibit C12, paragraph
Exhibit C12, paragraph
Exhibit C12, paragraph
Exhibit C17, paragraph
Exhibit C35, Annexure
STO1A, page 19
Exhibit C35,
Annexure STO1A, page 23
Exhibit C36, page 6
C36, page 6
Exhibit C45,
paragraph 71
Exhibit C49b,
Exhibit C59,
paragraph 14
Exhibit C21,
paragraph 13
Exhibit C21a,
paragraph 5
Exhibit C21a,
paragraphs 6-7
Exhibit C21,
paragraph 9
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (393 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (304 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter