URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCA/2025/110.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
LUKAJ v THE KING [2025] SASCA 110 (2 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Court of Appeal: Criminal)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
LUKAJ v THE KING
[2025] SASCA 110
Judgment of the Court of Appeal
(The Honourable Justice S Doyle, the Honourable Justice Stanley
and the Honourable Auxiliary Justice Mullins)
2 October 2025
EVIDENCE - ADMISSIBILITY - TENDENCY, CO-INCIDENCE AND PROPENSITY
CRIMINAL LAW - EVIDENCE - IDENTIFICATION EVIDENCE - ADMISSIBILITY
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - NEW TRIAL - IN GENERAL AND PARTICULAR GROUNDS - IN
GENERAL - MISCARRIAGE OF JUSTICE - CIRCUMSTANCES INVOLVING
MISCARRIAGE
Appeal against conviction.
The appellant was convicted of nine counts of trafficking and cultivation in
relation to 523 cannabis plants and 37 kilograms of harvested
cannabis located
by police across seven rental properties.
The prosecution case was that the appellant was involved in sourcing the
rental properties in which the cannabis was located and in
financing the
cultivation operations. It was also alleged that the appellant was involved in
the sale of the harvested cannabis by
storing, preparing and drying it, or at
least by providing the properties at which it was stored and prepared.
The appellant appeals on two grounds: (i) that the judge’s directions
in relation to the permissible and impermissible uses
of the cross-admissible
evidence of discreditable conduct were inadequate, and (ii) that a miscarriage
of justice resulted from an
in-court identification of the appellant by a
Held, per the Court, granting permission to appeal, but dismissing the
judge’s directions on the discreditable conduct evidence were adequate to
ensure the jury understood the permissible and
impermissible uses that could be
made of that evidence and hence for compliance with
Evidence Act
risk of prejudice associated with the in-court identification of the appellant
was adequately addressed by the judge’s direction
to disregard this
Controlled Substances Act 1984
Evidence Act 1929
referred to.
Adamson v The King
[2024] SASCA 91
Alexander v The Queen
[1981] HCA 17
(1981) 145 CLR 395
Al-Hashimi v The Queen
[2004] WASCA 61
(2004) 181 FLR 383
Brawn v The King
[2025] HCA 20
Davies v The King
[1937] HCA 27
(1937) 57 CLR
Domican v The Queen
(1992) 173 CLR 555
Festa v The Queen
(2001) 208 CLR 593
Gilbert v The Queen
(2000) 201 CLR 414
v Pitkethly
[1992] FCA 451
(1992) 38 FCR 95
JGS v The Queen
[2020] SASCFC 48
Jokic v Hayes
(1990) 53 SASR 530
Lukaj v The King
[2022] SASCA
MDP v The King
[2025] HCA 24
Perera-Cathcart v The Queen
[2017] HCA 9
(2017) 260 CLR 595
Preston v The Queen
(2013) 116 SASR 522
Andrews (No 4)
[2005] SASC 300
R v Britten
(1988) 51 SASR 567
(1996) 91 A Crim R 46
R v Dickman
(2017) 261 CLR 601;
[2004] SASC 338
[1997] SASC 6218
(1997) 68 SASR 505
[2017] SASCFC 99
Sears v The Queen
(2020) 137 SASR 219
[2013] SASC 3
(2013) 115 SASR 90
, considered.
LUKAJ v THE KING
[2025] SASCA 110
Court of Appeal – Criminal: S Doyle JA, Stanley JA and Mullins
The appellant and his co-accused brother were charged with
cultivation and trafficking offences in relation to 523 cannabis plants
kilograms of harvested cannabis located by police across seven rental properties
in the northern and north-eastern suburbs
of Adelaide.
2021, the appellant and his brother were tried and convicted on all nine counts.
In 2022, they successfully appealed their convictions
and the matter was
remitted for re-trial before a different
the re-trial, the jury convicted the brother of some, but not all counts, and
the appellant was again convicted on all
nine counts. The appellant now seeks
permission to appeal these convictions.
prosecution case was that the appellant was responsible for sourcing and renting
all seven of the properties in which cannabis
was being cultivated, and that he
provided finance for the cultivation operations, including by acquiring
equipment and materials
used in the cultivation process. As to the trafficking
offences, the prosecution case was that the appellant took part in the sale
the harvested cannabis found at two of the premises by storing, preparing and
drying it, or by providing the premises at which
it was stored and prepared.
issue at trial was identity, and the prosecution case included identification
evidence from the landlords from whom the various
premises had been rented.
appellant seeks permission to appeal his conviction on two grounds. The first
challenges the adequacy of the judge’s directions
in relation to the
permissible and impermissible uses of the cross-admissible evidence of the
discreditable evidence relating to
the various cannabis operations. The second
asserts a miscarriage of justice by reason of an in-court identification of the
by one of the landlord witnesses, Mr Tran.
the reasons which follow, we grant permission to appeal, but dismiss the appeal.
2016, searches were conducted of seven properties across the northern and
north-eastern suburbs of Adelaide. Police found a large
number of cannabis
plants, and also found harvested cannabis at two of the properties. The
appellant and his brother were charged
with multiple cultivation and trafficking
offences under the
Controlled Substances Act 1984
(‘CSA’), as detailed below.
was no dispute at trial as to the nature or quantity of the cannabis plants and
material found at each of the properties (referred
to as ‘grow
houses’). There was also no dispute that the cannabis had been cultivated
for sale. The only issue in relation
to each of the nine counts alleged against
the appellant was identification; that is, whether the appellant was responsible
cultivating and trafficking. On the prosecution case, the appellant was
the person involved in renting the premises and financing
the cultivation
operations. His brother was said to have had a more ‘hands on’
following table sets out the detail relating to each of the seven grow
Cannabis found
Churchill Rd,
Khiem/Thi Tran
Diego Bonsolli
Cultivating CQ
Deakin Ave,
Hope Valley
Andrea Ziccone
Cultivating LCQ
Trafficking
Louis Cres,
Alexandra Manolakis
Andrea Macera
Cultivating LCQ
Lochiel Ave,
Campbelltown
Zenon Zaniewski
Marco Rizzo
Cultivating CQ
Trafficking
Campbelltown
Sharon Ling
Giuliano Piccini
Cultivating CQ
64 Eastern Pde,
Simone Rotani
Cultivating
66 Eastern Pde,
George/Barbara Papantoniou
Simone Dotani
Cultivating CQ
property was advertised for rent using the Gumtree website or similar, and was
privately managed by the landlord. Some landlords
gave evidence that they
conducted licence or reference checks prior to entering into the lease
agreements. However, it was the prosecution
case that, for the most part, these
landlords were unsuspecting. In each case, it was agreed that the rent was to
be paid directly
by the tenant to the landlord by cash deposit to an identified
bank account. There were never any issues with the payment of rent.
the prosecution case, the appellant entered into an agreement with each landlord
using a false identity, involving the provision
of not only false names, but
also false phone numbers, references and identification documents.
landlord gave evidence that they entered into an agreement to lease the property
with a male, who gave the names in the table
above. On each occasion, the male
was accompanied by a female, whose name was variously given as Katarzyna (grow
house 2), Kasia
(short for Katarzyna) (grow house 4), Katrina (grow house 5) and
Maria (grow houses 6 and 7).
was a common theme amongst the landlords’ descriptions of both the male
and female. The male gave an ‘Italian
sounding’ name and spoke in
‘broken’ English, and the female spoke in English but with a strong
accent, or a strong
European accent. Most of the landlords described the
man’s physical appearance in relatively consistent terms. Some described
him as having a European appearance, with olive skin, less than six foot in
height, and with a solid or medium build. Those who
described his hair said he
had brown hair, with some adding that his hair was thinning or that he was
slightly balding. Several
of the landlords described him as neatly dressed.
Three of the landlords gave evidence that the man told them he was employed as
painter. It was an agreed fact that the appellant’s occupation between
2014 and 2016 was as a painter.
of the landlords participated in a photographic identification procedure. Four
of them identified the appellant as the person
to whom they had leased their
Sergeant Rumsey gave evidence that he made numerous enquiries of police systems,
and State and national registers, in an effort
to identify the males using the
names provided to rent the properties. He was unable to identify any persons by
those names.
evidence suggested several similarities in the hydroponic set-up and equipment
used to grow cannabis in each of the grow houses.
The prosecution also relied
upon a body of forensic evidence consisting of DNA, fingerprint and handwriting
evidence. Based on
that evidence, it was the prosecution case that:
a DNA profile
consistent with the appellant’s profile was located on objects found
within grow houses 4 and 7;
fingerprints
matching the appellant’s fingerprints were located on a tenancy agreement
for grow house 1, a property inspection
sheet for grow house 2, a tenancy
agreement for grow house 3, and various documents for grow house 4;
applicant’s handwriting was located on various documents found at grow
houses 4 and 5.
prosecution also relied upon various agreed facts arising out of surveillance
evidence, the general effect of which was to suggest
that a person (who, on the
prosecution case was the appellant) visited a number of the grow houses, and
indeed travelled between
some of the grow houses.
the prosecution case, it was alleged that the appellant took part in the
cultivation and trafficking of the cannabis found at
the various houses. As to
his cultivation of the cannabis plants, it was alleged that he: sourced and
rented the properties used
as grow houses for the purpose of cultivating
cannabis that could be sold; paid the rent; and provided finance towards the
cultivation
operations, including by acquiring equipment and materials used in
the cultivation process. As to his trafficking of the cannabis
material, it was
alleged that he: prepared and grew the cannabis plants for the purpose of sale;
stored the cannabis material once
harvested; and provided the properties at
which the cannabis material was stored.
prosecution case on identity relied in part upon a form of coincidence or
improbability reasoning; namely, that the similarities
between the circumstances
relevant to each of the grow houses and cultivation operations were such that it
could be concluded that
the same person or people were responsible for each, and
that the possibility of the appellant’s innocent association with
those grow houses or operations could be excluded as so improbable as to be not
reasonably possible.
articulated in slightly differing terms at times, this aspect of the prosecution
case had three limbs.
first limb was that the similarities in the circumstances surrounding the rental
of the grow houses and the hydroponic set-ups
for each of the charged counts
were such that the only probable, or only reasonably possible, explanation was
that the same person
was responsible for each. The prosecution relied in this
respect upon the evidence summarised above as to the similarities in the
circumstances in which the properties were leased, and in the descriptions of
the man and woman with whom they dealt.
second limb was that, in relation to each grow house, the same man who organised
the lease continued to be responsible for the
rental of the property, and did so
for the purpose of growing and cultivating cannabis for sale.
third limb was that the man described in the first two limbs was the appellant.
The prosecution contended that this was an irresistible
inference to be drawn
from the combination of the fact that he fitted the description given of the man
who arranged the rentals (and
his wife Katrina fitted the description of the
woman accompanying that man), and the other evidence linking the appellant to
grow houses (including the forensic and surveillance evidence).
defence case at trial involved a challenge to the prosecution case on identity.
On the defence case, this was a case of mistaken
1: directions on discreditable conduct
1 involves a challenge to the adequacy of the trial judge’s directions in
relation to the evidence of the discreditable
conduct relating to the various
cannabis operations. It involves a complaint that the judge failed to comply
with her obligation
Evidence Act 1929
(SA) to identify
and explain the permissible and impermissible uses of that evidence. There are
two aspects to the appellant’s
challenge to the judge’s directions.
first aspect involves a complaint that the judge failed to identify, and to
direct the jury in relation to, the impermissible
use of some of the
discreditable conduct evidence led at trial. The appellant accepts that the
judge adequately directed the jury
against any impermissible use of the
appellant’s conduct in renting properties for the purpose of operating
grow houses. However,
he contends that the judge failed to identify, and direct
the jury against any impermissible use of, his deceptive conduct in arranging
the leases for the properties that were used as grow houses.
second aspect involves a complaint that the judge misdescribed the permissible
use of the discreditable conduct. In particular,
the appellant complains that
the judge described the three limbs of the prosecution case as to the
permissible use of this evidence
in a way that invited the jury to engage in
circular reasoning.
addressing these complaints, it is appropriate to commence by summarising the
judge’s directions in relation to the discreditable
conduct evidence.
judge addressed this evidence in two places in her summing up. Early in her
summing up, after emphasising the importance of
giving separate consideration to
the evidence relating to each of the two accused, and to the evidence relating
to each count, the
judge directed the jury against impermissible propensity
reasoning based upon any evidence or finding of the accused’s involvement
in one of the grow
[1] Also, it is
not enough for the prosecution to establish that [the appellant or his brother]
were in some way involved in any of
the cannabis cultivations the subject of the
counts. The prosecution must prove that each accused took part in the operation
the particular way or ways alleged, which are said to constitute the offence
of cultivating or trafficking, as the case may be.
[2] If you were satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that an accused cultivated
one crop at one house for the purpose of sale, you cannot
use that finding to
reason he must of cultivated a crop at another house because he is the sort of
person who is likely to have committed
the other offence, or because he has the
propensity or is in the business of cultivating cannabis. You cannot use a
finding of guilt
to reason that it – by virtue of that finding of guilt he
must be or likely to be guilty of one or both of the trafficking
because he is the sort of person likely to, or has the propensity to, traffic
[3] The same applies if you were satisfied, for example, that one accused
trafficked cannabis at, for example, the count 2 and 3 property.
You cannot use
that finding as a basis to reason ‘Well, he must have or is more likely to
have trafficked at the other property
because he is the sort of person who would
commit that offence, or he has got the propensity to do so.’ That sort of
is impermissible in this courtroom because it is what is called bad
person reasoning; he committed that offence therefore he is a
bad person, so he
has or is likely to have committed all the rest. And it is propensity
reasoning, and that is not permitted in
this courtroom. You cannot say
‘Oh look, he is growing cannabis, or cultivated cannabis, for sale. He
has got the propensity
to do so, therefore I will find him guilty of one or
other of the counts.’
in her summing up, the judge returned to the discreditable conduct evidence, and
addressed the permissible and impermissible
uses of that evidence at some
length. Her Honour introduced this topic by reminding the jury of her direction
that they consider
each count separately, before explaining that there were
circumstances in which the evidence of one count might be used in relation
another count:
[4] You will recall last week on Friday I summarised
the evidence on each count in quite significant detail. What I need to do now
is give you some important directions about how you can use evidence on other
counts in your evaluation of the evidence that is specific
to an individual
[5] You may recall that I have been at pains to explain to you the importance
and necessity of considering each count separately against
each accused with
reference to the evidence led on that count against that accused. ...
[6] What I now need to do is give you some important directions about how,
when you are considering the evidence on a particular count,
you can take into
account evidence relating to another count or counts.
judge said that, before explaining this permissible process of reasoning
involving evidence of other counts, she needed to remind
the jury of the
prosecution case against each of the accused. In relation to the case against
the appellant, the judge said:
[7] So, the prosecution case, put
shortly, is that the seven properties were all rented by the same person and the
cannabis crops
in those houses were set up by the same person and the cannabis
crops in those houses were set up by the same person or persons working
together. The prosecution case is that the tenant in each case who rented each
property is [the appellant].
[8] The prosecution case is that not only did he facilitate the rental of all
of those properties, he did so for the purpose of those
properties being used to
cultivate the cannabis, the subject of each count.
[9] In addition to doing that, the prosecution case is that he had some
further involvement of a different kind by providing finance
for the cultivation
operations relating to the cannabis, the subject of each count, including
acquiring equipment and materials used
in the cultivation of the cannabis, the
subject of each count.
[10] In relation to the two trafficking charges it is alleged that his role
was to provide the premises at which the cannabis, the
subject of the counts,
was stored by virtue of the fact that he was the tenant of those premises and
that he prepared and dried the
cannabis and then stored it at the premises once
describing the case against the appellant’s brother as involving an
allegation that he had a ‘hands-on’ role
in relation to the cannabis
cultivations, the judge explained the two levels (referred to as the tenancy
level and the finance level)
of the case against the
[11] So you can see that the prosecution case against
[the appellant] is pitched at two levels. The first I will call the tenancy
level, that involves rental, payment of rental and providing access to the
property and then there is the providing finance and acquiring
equipment and
materials level. So they are the two levels at which the prosecution case
pitched against [the appellant]. Compare
that with the prosecution case against
[the appellant’s brother], it is a hands-on level.
judge then addressed the use that might be made of the similarities in the
evidence relating to the rental of the various grow
houses (namely, in support
of a conclusion that it was improbable that each was rented by a different
[12] Now when you are going through the fact finding and
inference drawing process, the prosecution asks you to consider what it
the similarities between the circumstances of the rental of each property, the
similarities in the descriptions of the persons
who rented each property, the
similarities in the rental payments, the similarities in the hydroponic set-up
at each property, the
common feature of the presence of documentation and other
items with DNA, fingerprints and in some instances, handwriting and the
surveillance evidence connecting the properties.
[13] So those are the similarities that the prosecution asks you to consider
and then the prosecution invites you to accept the evidence
of each landlord and
find that in each case a male and female attended the open inspection. The male
spoke limited English. The
phone numbers provided were in the names of
subscribers other than the tenant’s name and in most cases were false
fake identity. That the rent was always paid on time and in cash and
that when police raided the seven properties, the hydroponic
set-up in each
property was very similar and finally, that surveillance evidence showed
particular people travelling to and between
some of those houses. So
that’s the evidence that the prosecution invites you to accept.
[14] The prosecution says that if you accept that evidence you should then
conclude that the similarities and the circumstances of
the rental in each case
and the hydroponic set-up and so on, are such that it is improbable that each
property was rented by a different
person. Those are all matters for you to
determine but you do not have to reach conclusions beyond reasonable doubt on
those matters.
judge next explained how this process of reasoning might be applied in
considering the individual counts against the
against that background, when you come to consider an individual count against
[the appellant], bearing in mind the prosecution
case is that he is the tenant
of all properties and his purpose in renting each property is to cultivate the
cannabis, the subject
of the charge, then you can consider the following things.
[16] One, the evidence which specifically relates to the property that is
said to implicate [the appellant] as a tenant. So in that
part of the process
you focus on the evidence for that count that is said to implicate him as being
the tenant.
[17] Then next, you look at the evidence which specifically relates to other
properties that is also said to implicate [the appellant]
as the tenant,
considered as a whole. But when you are doing that or undertaking that process,
depending on what view you take of
the improbability that some different person
may have been responsible for one or other of the houses, and I will call this
different tenant improbability’. ... So the ‘different
tenant improbability’ will be assessed by reference to
the following
[18] One, the connection or lack of connection between all of the multiple
properties, such as surveillance. So it is for you to
determine whether there
is a connection or lack of connection between all of the multiple
properties.
[19] You look at the similarities, or dissimilarities in the descriptions of
the tenants and the leasing arrangements and payments
for all or multiple
properties.
[20] You look at the similarities or dissimilarities in the set-up in all or
multiple properties and you look at the presence or absence
of forensic evidence
tending to show an association or link between [the appellant] and all or
multiple properties.
[21] So you are looking for similarities or dissimilarities in your
determination of the improbability that some different person
may have been
responsible for one or other of the properties and that is the ‘different
tenant improbability’. So you
look at the other evidence implicating [the
appellant] as a tenant and assess this ‘different tenant
improbability’.
[22] When you are determining whether [the appellant] is the tenant for a
particular count under consideration (as opposed to determining
whether he has
an association with the premises more generally), ... then your assessment of
the different tenant improbability will
be based on the consideration of all of
those categories of evidence I have mentioned, the similarities and
dissimilarities, and
your assessment of the improbability will determine the
weight that you give to the evidence that specifically relates to another
[23] So if you have assessed another house or houses as probably being
rented by other people, you might be able to see how that
can determine the
weight you will give to that evidence when you are looking at a particular
count. Let me try and illustrate.
At one end of the spectrum, if you
considered on the whole of the evidence that it is not at all unlikely that
there would be a different
tenant responsible for one or other rental ... any
finding that [the appellant] is likely to be, or is proven to be the tenant for
some other rental or rentals will be of no weight because you will have assessed
that there is that different tenant improbability.
There are dissimilarities,
so the properties are not connected in that way.
[24] You could not use that finding when you are considering an individual
count because what you would be doing is engaging in propensity
reasoning. You
would say ‘Look, he’s the tenant on another property which
I’ve considered to be dissimilar or
have dissimilarities in terms of some
or all of those suggested connections. Well, he’s the tenant for one
property, he must
[or] most likely be the tenant of the property I’m
considering’.
[25] So you would only place weight, and the weight is a matter for you, on a
finding that [the appellant] is the tenant of another
property if you assessed
it as improbable that there was no connection between the properties because of
those similarities.
this point in her summing up, the judge gave the jury some directions reminding
them that even if they were satisfied that the
appellant was a tenant for a
particular property, they were still required to go on and consider the elements
of the relevant cultivation
or trafficking charge before convicting the
appellant of the relevant count. That said, as the judge also explained, the
similarities
with the other properties may inform their consideration of whether
the appellant’s rental of a given property was for the
cultivating cannabis:
[26] For example, if you were satisfied that
four of the houses had the requisite degree of similarity, you could take into
the evidence relating to those houses together in determining whether it
is highly improbable that the purpose of the rental for
the count you are
considering was innocent or coincidental, and therefore whether the prosecution
has excluded all other rational
inferences consistent with innocence.
[27] So you can see how if you have gone through that process of reasoning,
you have arrived at a position where there are four houses
with the requisite
degree of similarity, you can take into account the evidence in relation to
those houses in your determination
of whether the purpose of the rental was
innocent or was coincidental, and therefore those things being a reasonable
explanation
consistent with innocence, whether they have been excluded beyond
reasonable doubt by the prosecution. That is the limited purpose
to which you
can put any evidence relating to the other properties.
reiterating some aspects of this permissible use of the evidence relating to the
other properties, the judge then returned
to its impermissible
[28] However, you could not use this evidence or finding to
reason that this shows he was the sort of person who was likely to have
out another property to grow the cannabis found at that property or he had the
propensity to rent houses to cultivate cannabis
for sale and is therefore guilty
of another cultivation count.
[29] That is impermissible reasoning, it is propensity, or bad person
reasoning – I mentioned this some time ago in my summing
you have to be very astute that you do not fall into that trap that you only use
the evidence for the limited purpose
I have mentioned.
judge also directed the jury that, even if they were not satisfied that the
appellant took part in the cultivation for sale by
renting the relevant
property, they would still need to consider whether he nevertheless took part by
providing finance or acquiring
equipment or materials (referring to this as the
second level of liability relied upon by the prosecution). This included a
description
of permissible parallel reasoning in that context by reference to
similarities with other properties. Her Honour explained the permissibility
using evidence of similarities in the activities relating to the financing and
acquisition of equipment for other properties in
an equivalent way to the
permissible improbability reasoning in relation to the rental of other
properties. The judge explained
that if, for example, the jury were not
satisfied that the appellant organised the lease for a particular property, they
might nevertheless
rely upon other evidence linking the appellant to the
financing or set-up for that property, together with similarities for other
properties, to find the count relating to that property made out. The judge
also warned the jury against slipping into propensity
reasoning in this context,
warning them against both reasoning from a propensity to cultivate cannabis at
other properties, and more
simplistic bad person reasoning.
appellant accepted that, generally speaking, the judge’s directions in
relation to the discreditable conduct evidence relating
to other grow houses
were thorough and appropriate. However, as mentioned, he challenged two aspects
of those directions.
The evidence of deception
first aspect of the appellant’s challenge involved a complaint that the
judge did not ever separately identify the evidence
of the deception involved in
renting the seven different properties as evidence of discreditable conduct, and
thus failed to identify
and explain the permissible and impermissible uses of
this evidence for the purposes of
Evidence Act
. In support
of the need for the judge to separately address this evidence, the appellant
relied upon the prosecutor’s reference
in submissions at trial to the
appropriateness of the judge doing so, and the judge’s apparent acceptance
of this submission.
may be accepted that the evidence suggesting the use of false names, and other
false forms of identification, was evidence of
deceptive conduct, and hence
evidence of discreditable conduct for the purposes of
It may also be
accepted that the judge did not give any separate, or stand alone, directions as
to the permissible and impermissible
uses of this evidence. The issue is
whether, in the circumstances of this case, separate directions were required,
or whether the
more general directions about the use of the evidence relating to
the rental of the other grow houses, as summarised above, were
adequate to
achieve compliance with the judge’s obligations under
the appellant argued, a propensity to engage in deceptive conduct is
conceptually distinct from a propensity to engage in the
criminal conduct
inherent in renting premises for the purposes of cultivating or trafficking
cannabis. In other words, a propensity
to engage in deceptive or dishonest
conduct is conceptually distinct from a propensity to engage in cannabis or drug
In some circumstances, this conceptual distinction will be
important. However, it is well recognised that what is required to comply
Evidence Act
will depend upon the circumstances of the
particular case.
Put another way,
the nature of the permissible and impermissible uses of the evidence of
discreditable conduct that must be identified
and explained, and indeed the
specificity with which they must be identified and explained, will depend to
some extent upon the charged
offences, the matters in issue, and the way in
which the parties conduct the case.
the present case, the deception involved in securing the leases for the
properties to be used as grow houses was closely related
to, if not part and
parcel of, the discreditable conduct involved in obtaining the rental premises
for use as grow houses. In these
circumstances, it was appropriate to address
all of this conduct as, in effect, a single head of discreditable conduct.
is noteworthy in this respect that, in commencing her directions in relation to
the permissible and impermissible uses of the
evidence of renting properties for
use as grow houses, the judge (in paragraph [13]) specifically mentioned the
evidence of the use
of ‘false names or fake identity’ in obtaining
the leases. The jury would have understood from this that all of this
(that is, all of the evidence relating to the rental of other premises,
including not only the deceptive means through which
the leases were obtained,
but also the criminal purpose for which those premises were to be used), was to
be treated in the same
way. Just as it was all available to be used for the
permissible improbability use explained by the judge, the jury would have
that none of it was to be used for any propensity style reasoning.
In circumstances where neither party suggested any separate use
of the evidence
of deception, we do not think that it needed to be separately addressed.
Circular reasoning
second aspect of the appellant’s challenge to the judge’s directions
in relation to the evidence of discreditable
conduct involved a complaint that
the judge departed from the prosecution’s three-limbed articulation of the
permissible use
of that evidence.
have set out the three limbs earlier in these reasons, noting that they were not
always identified in precisely the same way or
terms. Importantly for present
purposes, the first limb involved a reliance upon similarities in the
circumstances in which the
seven properties were rented with a view to
establishing that it was highly probable that each of the properties was rented
same man; and the third limb involved a reliance upon various items of
evidence linking the appellant to those properties, with a
view to establishing
that he was the man who had rented each of the properties. These limbs then
combined with the second limb (which
involved consideration of the purpose for
which the properties were rented) to make it highly improbable that the
appellant’s
connection with any of the properties was innocent or
coincidental.
was appropriate that the prosecution and judge identified these three limbs to
the prosecution case in explaining the permissible
use of the evidence of the
other grow houses when considering a particular count. This would have assisted
the jury to understand
the logic and probative force of the permissible use of
this evidence. However, we do not think that it was necessary to maintain
strict separation between these limbs. To the contrary, there was some natural
and appropriate overlap between the evidence
and considerations relevant to
each. In particular, there was a natural overlap in the jury’s
consideration of the similarities
between the man who rented the properties
(such as his physical description, the way he spoke and the description of the
accompanied him), and their consideration of whether the appellant
was that man.
appellant’s complaint focussed upon the directions in paragraphs [12],
[20] and [21] above, and in particular the judge’s
references in these
paragraphs to the forensic evidence linking the appellant to some of the rental
properties. The appellant contends
that by referring to this evidence (which
was directed to the third limb) in the context of her directions in relation to
limb, the judge risked confusing the jury, and inviting them to engage
in circular reasoning.
is some technical validity or force in the appellant’s complaint in the
sense that the forensic evidence linking the
appellant to some of the rental
properties was only directed to the third limb. It would have been preferable
had the judge not
referred to this evidence in these places. However, in our
view, this was an immaterial slip in the context of the summing up as
As is apparent from the summary of the relevant passages from the judge’s
summing up set out above, the judge gave
comprehensive directions in relation to
the permissible and impermissible uses of the evidence of discreditable conduct.
She commenced
(in paragraph [7]) by making clear the distinction between the
first and third limbs of the prosecution’s articulation of the
permissible
use, and proceeded generally to adhere to this distinction. Read as a whole,
the judge’s directions made clear
the permissible process of reasoning.
We do not think that the slips in referring to the forensic evidence in the
places mentioned
would have distracted the jury from applying the permissible
process of reasoning properly identified by the judge. The judge accurately
identified the permissible use several times, including in the paragraphs
immediately following the slips mentioned above.
we do not think there was any error in the judge at times addressing both the
first and third limbs in the same context.
Ultimately these two matters needed
to be considered in combination. In the case of each grow house, it was
necessary to consider
the evidence linking the appellant to that grow house, in
combination with the evidence as to the probability that they were all
and operated by the same person, and that the appellant was that person. We do
not think the judge’s directions gave
rise to any realistic prospect that
the jury would have reasoned in the circular manner the appellant suggests.
They would have
understood the need to consider what the judge referred to as
‘the different tenant improbability’ separately, before
considering it in combination with the evidence implicating the appellant as the
tenant of the relevant grow house when addressing
the individual counts.
summary, the appellant has not established any failure to comply with
, or any miscarriage of justice arising out of the judge’s
directions as to the permissible and impermissible uses of the evidence
discreditable conduct. The slips in the judge’s articulation of the
permissible use could not realistically have affected
the jury’s reasoning
towards their verdicts of
an in-court identification
2 involves a complaint that one of the landlord witnesses made an inadmissible
dock, or in-court, identification of the appellant.
The appellant argued that,
although the judge ultimately directed the jury to ignore this identification,
the delay in giving this
direction resulted in a miscarriage of justice. By the
time the appropriate direction was given, it was too late to address the
prejudice to the appellant.
outlined earlier in these reasons, the prosecution led evidence from the
landlords involved in renting each of the seven properties
used as grow houses.
Of the landlords who participated in photographic identification procedures,
four identified the appellant
as the man who had rented the properties from
prosecution did not set out to lead any additional or confirmatory evidence by
way of in-court identification of the appellant.
However, in the course of the
oral evidence of one of these landlords, Mr Khiem Tran (the landlord of grow
house 1, who rented his
property to a man identifying himself as
‘Diego’), he made what might be described as a non-verbal in-court
identification
of the appellant. This occurred during an exchange recorded in
transcript as follows:
you able to tell us the last time that you saw the man Diego. No, no, no sir,
just listen to my question if you would please.
is no dispute that, as the prosecutor was asking Mr Tran when he had last seen
‘Diego’, Mr Tran looked towards
the appellant, and nodded and
grinned. The jury plainly noticed what had occurred, because they laughed.
counsel made an application for a mistrial, which was refused. Although the
judge ultimately addressed what had occurred
in her summing up, and instructed
the jury to ignore Mr Tran’s in-court identification of the appellant,
this did not occur
until about five weeks after Mr Tran had given evidence.
appellant argued that Mr Tran’s in-court identification of the appellant
was inadmissible on the basis that its probative
value was outweighed by its
prejudicial effect.
addressing this submission, the starting point is that, in addition to the usual
limitations upon the probative value of identification
the circumstances of
an in-court identification will generally result in it having a very low
probative value.
When asked in
court to identify the offender, a witness may, in nominating the defendant, be
influenced by the circumstances that
the defendant is the only obvious candidate
present, and is plainly not only under suspicion by the authorities, but on
the offence.
also a risk of a displacement effect if the witness has participated in some
earlier identification process (such as an
in-person identification parade or
photographic identification). Having regard to the consequential risk that the
jury will attach
inappropriate weight to an in-court identification, evidence of
this nature will often be inadmissible on the basis its prejudicial
outweighs its probative
is to be acknowledged that there are some authorities that have suggested that
in-court identifications may nevertheless be admissible,
if accompanied by
appropriate directions to the jury. Generally, although not always, this
suggestion has been directed to circumstances
where the witness has previously
made an out-of-court
identification.
It has been
suggested that an in-court identification may be permitted in these
circumstances so as to give the witness an opportunity
to ‘confirm’
their earlier photographic identification or, indeed, to resile from that
identification.
accepting the line of authority which contemplates an in-court identification
for the purpose just described, there were two
additional difficulties in the
present case. The first was an exacerbated concern with the displacement effect
given that Mr Tran
had given evidence, and seen the appellant, in the context of
the first trial, and had presumably become aware that he was convicted.
was thus a risk of displacement both from the earlier photographic
identification, and from the earlier trial. Further, even
though Mr Tran had
made an earlier photographic identification of the appellant, he made his
in-court identification of the appellant
before giving any evidence about that
earlier out-of-court identification. It follows that his in-court
identification of the appellant
was not merely confirmatory of an earlier
identification in the sense contemplated by the authorities.
are inclined to think that the in-court identification of the appellant by
Mr Tran was inadmissible. However, because we have
ultimately reached a
conclusion that the judge’s directions adequately addressed the prejudice
to the appellant by directing
the jury to disregard this aspect of
Mr Tran’s evidence, we have not found it necessary to reach a
concluded view about this.
rejecting the defence application for a mistrial, the judge proceeded on the
basis that an in-court identification had been
made and that it was
inadmissible. In her summing up, the judge gave detailed directions in relation
to the need for caution before
accepting any form of identification
including the
photographic identifications relied upon by the prosecution. When addressing
the evidence of Mr Tran, the judge emphasised
the applicability of these
directions to his photographic identification of the appellant. However, in
addition to this, the judge
specifically directed the jury to disregard Mr
Tran’s in-court identification of the appellant. She said:
need to now give you some important directions about something Mr Tran said in
his evidence – and you may or may not recall
this. He was asked by [the
prosecutor] when was the last time that he saw Diego. And you might have
observed him smile and turn
to the dock and nod – I can see by your smiles
that it did not escape you. I need to give you a direction about that evidence.
You have to disregard it and place no weight upon it in evaluating the evidence
that he selected the photograph of [the appellant]
as the person who rented this
property. The reasons that this evidence is of no value to you, you must place
no weight on it and
disregard it are as follows.
Mr Tran selected a photograph that you know is [the appellant’s]
photograph from the photo pack. Mr Tran saw [the appellant]
at the last trial
and understood that [the appellant] was the person accused of renting his
premises and growing cannabis there.
In those circumstances, members of the
jury, as amusing as it might have been, it is hardly surprising that he would
the dock where the man he selected and saw at the last trial was
sitting. For those reasons, you cannot use this as an act of positive
identification of [the appellant] as Diego because all that was happening was Mr
Tran was recognising the person he picked out in
the photo pack procedure and
who he had seen at the last trial.
And this is probably a very stark example of the displacement effect. That
is the phenomenon well-known to the courts of being shown
a photograph or
understanding a person is said to be a particular person and the original memory
is displaced. So, that is what
has happened in that example. That is the
displacement effect. And it is for that very reason that you have to disregard
You must not use that evidence to conclude that that is a positive
identification of [the appellant] as Diego – absolutely
you must not,
consistent with my warnings and directions that I have given you.
is apparent from the judge’s passing reference to the jurors’ smiles
that they recalled Mr Tran’s in-court identification.
However, the
judge’s directions to the jury that they were to disregard this evidence
were clear and firm. With respect,
it was sensible for the judge to do as she
did, and explain to the jury the reason why they were being told to disregard
this aspect
of Mr Tran’s evidence. By explaining the displacement effect,
and the particular risk of it occurring in the present case,
the directions were
more likely to have been effective in ensuring that the jury did not attach any
weight to Mr Tran’s in-court
identification of the appellant.
appellant’s counsel did not make any criticism of the terms of the
directions given by the judge. He accepted that, in
another case, equivalent
directions may have been adequate to assuage the risk of prejudice associated
with an in-court identification.
However, the appellant’s counsel argued
that the difficulty in the present case was the timing of the directions. He
that, had the directions been given contemporaneously with, or soon
after, Mr Tran made his in-court identification of the appellant,
have adequately addressed the prejudice. However, because no directions were
given at that time, there was a risk that
Mr Tran’s in-court
identification inappropriately bolstered not only Mr Tran’s evidence
of his photographic identification,
but also the identification evidence given
by the other landlords. As the appellant’s counsel put it, the
prejudicial effect
of the in-court identification was too firmly braided into
the jury’s consideration of the other evidence in the case by the
the summing up for the judge’s directions to be effective. This concern
identification was said to be
exacerbated by the fact that approximately five weeks had passed by the time the
judge directed the
jury to disregard what had occurred.
certainly would have been preferable had the judge given the jury a direction
soon after Mr Tran’s in-court
identification.
It would have
been appropriate and convenient to do so after the unsuccessful application for
a mistrial. A direction at this point
in the trial would have provided greater
comfort that the jury would be able to disregard what had occurred. However, in
this was not necessary in order to avoid a miscarriage of
explained, the judge ultimately gave the jury a clear and firm direction to
disregard that aspect of Mr Tran’s evidence.
The judge’s
explanation of why it was to be disregarded would have assisted in ensuring it
was effective. And to the extent
that there might otherwise have been a risk of
this aspect of Mr Tran’s evidence affecting the identification
evidence given
by other landlords, it is significant that the judge had earlier
given clear directions to the effect that the identification evidence
witness needed to be considered separately and could not be used to bolster the
identification evidence given by other
Consistently
with the notion that juries are generally assumed to understand and follow the
directions they are given,
accepted that the inadvertent exposure of the jury to prejudicial or
inadmissible evidence may
(although not
) be cured through clear
direction to a jury. In the circumstances of the present case, we are satisfied
that the jury would have
understood and followed the judge’s direction to
disregard Mr Tran’s in-court identification, and that the direction
have been effective to address the prejudice that might otherwise have followed
from what occurred.
miscarriage of justice has been established, and Ground 2 has not been made out.
the reasons set out, we grant permission to appeal but dismiss the
Lukaj v The King
SASCA 135 (Livesey
P, Lovell and Bleby JJA).
Cultivating a commercial
quantity of controlled plants for sale, contrary to s 33B(2) of the CSA.
Cultivating a large
commercial quantity of controlled plants for sale, contrary to s 33B(1) of the
Trafficking in a large
commercial quantity of a controlled drug, contrary to s 32(1) of the CSA.
Trafficking in a commercial
quantity of a controlled drug, contrary to s 32(2) of the CSA.
Cultivating controlled
plants for sale, contrary to s 33B(3) of the CSA.
Paragraph numbering added for
ease of reference within these reasons.
Noting that the ellipses in
paragraphs [15], [17], [22] and [23] indicate the removal of some repetition by
way of emphasis for
Perera-Cathcart v The
[2017] HCA 9
(2017) 260 CLR 595
, [57]-[58] (Kiefel, Bell and Keane
[2017] SASCFC 99
(Doyle J), applied in
[2020] SASCFC 48
(Lovell J, Bampton and Peek JJ agreeing)
Adamson v The King
[2024] SASCA 91
(Lovell, Doyle and
Bleby JJA).
MDP v The King
[2025] HCA 24
(Gageler CJ), [99]-[103] (Gleeson, Jagot and Beech-Jones
JJ), [30]-[31] (Gordon and Steward JJ), [56] (Edelman J);
Brawn v The
[2025] HCA 20
, [10] (the Court).
Domican v The Queen
(1992) 173 CLR 555
at 561-562 (Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson, Toohey, Gaudron and
McHugh JJ).
Al-Hashimi v The
[2004] WASCA 61
(2004) 181 FLR 383
(Miller J, Wheeler and EM
Heenan JJ agreeing) (but noting that the evidence may have greater
probative value where the witness had
more than fleeting dealings with the
Alexander v The Queen
[1981] HCA 17
(1981) 145 CLR 395
(Gibbs CJ), 427 (Mason J);
Festa v The Queen
(2001) 208 CLR 593
[18] (Gleeson CJ);
Davies v The King
[1937] HCA 27
(1937) 57 CLR 170
at 181-182 (Latham
CJ, Rich, Dixon, Evatt and McTiernan JJ).
Strauss v Police
[2013] SASC 3
(2013) 115 SASR 90
See, for example,
Preston v The Queen
(2013) 116 SASR 522
at [34] (David J, Stanley and
Nicholson JJ agreeing).
R v Britten
51 SASR 567
at 572 (King CJ);
Jokic v Hayes
(1990) 53 SASR 530
(Mullighan J);
Grbic v Pitkethly
[1992] FCA 451
(1992) 38 FCR 95
at 104 (Sheppard
(1996) 91 A Crim R 46
at 52 (Cox J, Perry and Lander JJ
[2004] SASC 338
(Vanstone J).
R v Britten
51 SASR 567
at 572 (King CJ);
(1996) 91 A Crim R 46
J, Perry and Lander JJ agreeing);
[1997] SASC 6218
(1997) 68 SASR 505
(Duggan J, Lander and Bleby JJ agreeing).
Domican v The Queen
(1992) 173 CLR 555
at 561-562 (Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson, Toohey, Gaudron and
McHugh JJ);
Evidence Act 1929
As happened, for example,
R v Andrews (No 4)
[2005] SASC 300
(Debelle J).
Gilbert v The Queen
(2000) 201 CLR 414
at [13] (Gleeson CJ and Gummow J), [31] (McHugh J).
In the context of
identification evidence, see
R v Dickman
(2017) 261 CLR 601 at [56]-[57]
(the Court).
Sears v The Queen
(2020) 137 SASR 219
at [41] (Peek J).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (441 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter