URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASC/2025/183.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:05:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
POLICE v SMITH [2025] SASC 183 (6 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Magistrates Appeal: Criminal)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
POLICE v SMITH
[2025] SASC 183
Judgment of the Honourable
Justice McDonald
6 November 2025
MAGISTRATES - APPEAL AND REVIEW - SOUTH AUSTRALIA - APPEAL TO SUPREME
TRAFFIC LAW - OFFENCES - PARTICULAR OFFENCES - ALCOHOL AND DRUG RELATED
OFFENCES - SOUTH AUSTRALIA - DRIVING UNDER INFLUENCE OF INTOXICATING
LIQUOR OR A
CRIMINAL LAW - PROCEDURE - INFORMATION, INDICTMENT OR PRESENTMENT -
AMENDMENT - IMMATERIALITY OR ABSENCE OF PREJUDICE
CRIMINAL LAW - PROCEDURE - INFORMATION, INDICTMENT OR PRESENTMENT -
AMENDMENT - TIME FOR AMENDMENT
This is an appeal by the Commissioner of Police (‘the appellant’)
against a decision of a Magistrate to dismiss an Information
dated 13 October
2023. The Information charged the respondent with one count of driving a motor
vehicle with methamphetamine in his
fluid or blood, contrary to
s 47BA(l)(a)
Road Traffic Act 1961
The respondent had initially been issued with an expiation notice, and on 27
July 2023, the respondent elected to be prosecuted for
the offence. At a
pretrial conference on 14 August 2024, the Magistrate granted the application of
the respondent to dismiss the
Information.
The grounds of appeal are:
learned Magistrate erred in finding that the particulars were incorrect on the
basis that the reference to the section of the
statute creating the offence
contained an error in the subsection.
learned Magistrate erred in finding that to amend the subsection of the section
of the statute creating the offence outside the
limitation period was
prejudicial to the respondent.
learned Magistrate erred in not exercising her discretion under
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
(SA) (‘the CP Act’) to amend the
Information where defects were identified.
learned Magistrate erred in dismissing the Information under r 64.1(1)(c) of the
Joint Criminal Rules 2022.
The respondent also filed a Notice of
Alternative Contention. The respondent contends that the decision to dismiss the
Information
should have also been made on the following grounds:
the expiation notice issued to the respondent did not sufficiently identify the
general nature of the alleged offence as laid
in Court, such that the relevant
limitation period was six months from the date of the alleged offence, in
accordance with s 52(1)(a)(ii)
of the Act.
Accordingly,
the limitation period expired on 10 October 2023. The Information filed on 13
October 2023 was therefore statute barred
and liable to be
Central to the grounds of appeal is a complaint that the
Magistrate mischaracterised the nature of the amendments that the prosecution
sought to make to the Information. There is no dispute on this appeal that if
the amendments proposed by the prosecution created
‘a new charge’ or
‘a new proceeding’, the application to amend was correctly refused,
as the respondent would
have been denied the immunity which s 52 of the CP Act
It was the appellant’s contention that the Magistrate erred in refusing
the application to amend the Information, as both proposed
changes were minor,
technical corrections that would not have prejudiced the respondent or resulted
in a new or different charge.
These typographical errors were plainly amenable
to amendment under s 181 of the CP Act.
Notice of Alternative Contention is dismissed. The expiation notice was not
invalid, and it therefore follows that the Information
was not laid out of time.
2. Grounds 2, 3 and 4 have been established.
3. The appeal is allowed.
4. The orders of the Magistrate are set aside.
2 of the Information is to be amended to delete the words “Incomplete
Charge Info” and add the words “Drug
drive” before the
particulars of the offence, and to amend the subsection of section 47BA from (l)
6. The matter be remitted back to the Magistrates Court for
trial before another Magistrate.
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
Expiation of
Offences Act 1996
Road Traffic Act 1961
Expiation of Offences Regulations 2011
(SA) sch 1;
Criminal Rules 2022
(SA) rr 62.1, 62.2, 63.1, 64.1, referred to.
City of Playford v Mathie
[2025] SASCA 45
Graham v Magistrates
Court of South Australia
[2018] SASC 28
Johnson v Miller
[1937] HCA 77
(1937) 59 CLR 467
Riessen v State of South
(2001) 79 SASR 82
Rossiter v Adelaide City Council
S v The Queen
[1989] HCA 66
(1989) 168 CLR 266
Walker v Police
, discussed.
POLICE v SMITH
[2025] SASC 183
Magistrates Appeal: Criminal
McDONALD J.
is an appeal by the Commissioner of Police (‘the appellant’) against
a decision of a Magistrate to dismiss an Information
dated 13 October 2023. The
Information charged the respondent with one count of driving a motor vehicle
with methamphetamine in
his fluid or
that was alleged to have
occurred on 10 April 2023. The respondent had initially been issued with
an expiation notice. On 27 July
2023, the respondent elected to be prosecuted
for the offence. At a pretrial conference on 14 August 2024, the Magistrate
the application of the respondent to dismiss the Information.
grounds of appeal are:
learned Magistrate erred in finding that the particulars were incorrect on the
basis that the reference to the section of the
statute creating the offence
contained an error in the subsection.
learned Magistrate erred in finding that to amend the subsection of the section
of the statute creating the offence outside the
limitation period was
prejudicial to the defendant.
learned Magistrate erred in not exercising her discretion under
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
(SA) to amend the Information where defects
were identified.
learned Magistrate erred in dismissing the Information under rule 64.1(1)(c) of
Joint Criminal Rules, 2022
there are four grounds of appeal, in essence they reflect the steps in the
reasoning process adopted to arrive at the decision
to dismiss the Information.
respondent has filed a Notice of Alternative Contention. The respondent
contends that the decision to dismiss the Information
should have also been made
on the following grounds:
the expiation notice issued to the respondent did not sufficiently identify the
general nature of the alleged offence as laid
in Court such that the relevant
limitation period was 6 months from the date of the alleged offence, in
accordance with
s 52(1)(a)(ii)
Criminal Procedure Act
Accordingly,
the limitation period expired on 10 October 2023. The Information filed on 13
October 2023 was therefore statute barred
and liable to be dismissed.
the grounds of appeal and the notice of alternative contention are amended
versions of the documents initially filed. As a
consequence, the appellant and
respondent require leave to rely on the amended version of their respective
applications. Neither
opposes the other being granted leave and I so
10 April 2023, the respondent was driving a motor vehicle on Onkaparinga Valley
Road, Woodside, when he was stopped by police
for the purpose of conducting a
random breath test. The respondent returned a positive result to a drug
screening test. The respondent
then provided an oral fluid sample, which was
forwarded to Forensic Science SA for analysis.
14 and 27 April 2023, the analysis was conducted and methylamphetamine was
detected in the sample.
29 April 2023, the respondent was issued with an expiation notice for the
offence of “MOBILE DRIVER TESTING – METHYLAMPHETAMINE”.
mentioned, on 27 July 2023, the respondent elected to be prosecuted for the
The adjudication process
25 August 2023, APP Symons was allocated the task of adjudicating the matter.
The adjudication process involves a police prosecutor
considering the evidence,
advising on whether a prosecution should be commenced, and if so, nominating the
offence/s to be charged.
matters that begin as expiation notices, BEAMS is the system used by police for
adjudications. When a matter is adjudicated,
the prosecutor enters the proposed
charges onto the BEAMS system, and an administrative employee from the
prosecution unit creates
a summons and emails the summons to the relevant court
registry. The summons generated by the BEAMS system does not contain the
description of the offence (‘the offence details’), only the
particulars of the offence.
receipt of the BEAMS generated summons, court staff are required to manually
transfer the data to the Electronic Court Management
(‘ECMS’). At that point, court staff also add in a description of
the offence. An ECMS generated summons is
then created by court staff, which is
sent back to the prosecution unit administration team, in order for the service
of the summons
to be facilitated by police.
25 August 2023, APP Symons entered a charge of “47BA(1)(A) RTA” into
BEAMS, which created count 1 on the Information.
For reasons that
APP Symons cannot now recall, she did not complete the adjudication process
6 October 2023, APP Symons went back to the file and erroneously entered into
BEAMS another count of “47BA(1)(A) RTA”.
That had the effect of
creating two counts on the Information when there should have only been one. At
that time, the duplication
error went undetected.
12 October 2023, the BEAMS summons was generated by the Mount Barker Prosecution
Unit administration team, which contained the
erroneously duplicated offence.
This summons was emailed to the Mount Barker Magistrates Court Registry
(‘the Registry’)
on 13 October 2023.
or about 13 October 2023, the Registry emailed the Mount Barker Prosecution unit
the final Information as generated through ECMS
and service of the summons was
21 February 2024, the duplication error had been identified and count 1 of the
Information was withdrawn, leaving only count 2
to be determined by the Court.
Count 2 read:
Offence Details:
Incomplete Charge Info
Particulars:
2 On the 10TH day of APRIL, 2023 at WOODSIDE in the said State drove a motor
vehicle REGISTRATION NUMBER S308AKG SILVER BMW SEDAN
on A ROAD namely
ONKAPARINGA VALLEY ROAD whilst there was present in HIS ORAL FLUID a drug.
Section 47BA (
)(a) of the
Road Traffic Act, 1961
This is a summary offence,
It is further alleged that the prescribed drug found in the ORAL FLUID
METHYLAMPHETAMINE
(Emphasis added to indicate the two errors)
remaining count particularised a breach of “
)(a)”, instead of “
Section 47BA(
Road Traffic Act 1961
(SA) (‘RTA’). It is of note that
there is no
section 47BA(l)(a)
in the RTA. It would seem from the chronology
that I have set out, that the error that occurred in entering the letter l
of the numerical 1 must have taken place when the Information was put
into ECMS by court staff in the
matter came before the Court on a number of occasions leading to the dispositive
hearing that took place on 14 August 2024.
Over the course of the earlier
hearings, no issue was raised about the form or the validity of the Information.
The events of 14 August 2024
14 August 2024, the matter came back before the Court. It was confirmed that
the police were only proceeding on the second count
on the Information and that
negotiations between the parties had been unsuccessful.
that time, counsel for the respondent raised two issues with the Information.
Those were that the “offence details”
were stated as
“Incomplete Charge Info” and that there was an error in the
particulars in referring to
s 47BA(l)(a)
of the RTA.
response, the prosecution foreshadowed an application to amend the
Information.
The respondent
indicated that the application would be opposed. The basis of that opposition
was that it was suggested that to
permit the application would have the effect
of changing the charge or creating a new charge outside of the six-month
period. The respondent submitted that in those circumstances the
Information should be dismissed.
foreshadowed, the prosecution made an application to amend the Information and
opposed the application for it to be dismissed.
It was submitted that the
particulars of the offence were correct and that the errors on the Information
were minor and of a technical
nature and could be appropriately cured by
amendment. Further, given that the particulars of the offence were correct, the
would suffer no prejudice by allowing the application to amend the
Information.
Magistrate acceded to the respondent’s application and dismissed the
Information. I set out her Honour’s reasons
application to dismiss count 2 has been made by defence on the basis that the
statutory provision in the particulars is incorrect.
Section 47BA.
particulars indicate that it is (l)(a) of the
Road Traffic Act 1961
submission is that on the Information, the numerical 1 written in 1961 is
different to (l)(a) of 47BA which indicates that it
is the letter (l)(a)
therefore defence argue that the statutory provision is incorrect. Secondly,
they argue that the offence details
do not indicate what the offence is.
Prosecution
argue that the particulars of the offence are correct and therefore the omitting
the offence details is not sufficient
grounds to dismiss the charge. They argue
that it can be rectified where the court may pursuant to s 181(2)(a) of the
Criminal Procedures
Act, amend the information to cure the defect.
I find that the particulars are on the face of it incorrect, given that the
subsection appears to be an (l) instead of a
(1) and therefore to amend that
part of the particulars outside of the six-month time limit is prejudicial to
the defendant.
I find that the offence details are not included and therefore the Information
does not comply with rule 62.1(7)(a) of the
Joint Criminal Rules 2022 whereby
offence details must be entered. I use my discretionary power under rule
64.1(1)(c) to dismiss
the charge.
ironically, because the Magistrate’s reasons were printed in the Times New
Roman font, the letter l appears identical
to the number 1, highlighting the
very technical nature of the error.
the chronology of relevant events, it is convenient to deal with the Notice of
Alternative Contention before considering the
grounds of appeal. In the event
that the respondent is successful in his alternative contention, the appeal
grounds become otiose.
The Notice of Alternative Contention
– The invalidity of the expiation notice
respondent raises three complaints as the basis for the contention that the
expiation notice did not sufficiently identify the
general nature of the
allegations, and was defective. These are:
expiation notice did not state the statutory provision that created the offence,
but referred only to “code A880”;
expiation notice did not refer to a short statement of the offence in simple
language but rather stated “mobile drive testing
methamphetamine”; and
expiation notice was issued to “Scott M Smith” when the
respondent’s name is Scott Michael Kristian Smith.
is no dispute that if the expiation notice was invalid, as contended by the
respondent, the relevant Information was filed
out of time as a consequence of
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
(SA) (‘the CP
Act’). This section relevantly provides:
52—Limitation on time in which proceedings may be
(1) Subject to any provision of an Act to the contrary, if a person is to be
prosecuted for a summary offence, the proceedings must
be commenced within the
following time limits:
(a) in the case of an expiable offence—
(i) if an expiation notice was given to the person—the proceedings must be
commenced within 6 months of the expiry of the expiation
period specified in the
(ii) if an expiation notice was not given to the person—the
proceedings must be commenced within 6 months of the date on
which the offence
is alleged to have been committed;
Consequently,
if the alternative contention is correct, the applicable limitation period was
six months from the date of the alleged
offence, which expired on 10 October
2023. The Information was filed on 13 October 2023, which would have been at a
time when the
laying of the charge was statute barred.
considering the issues that have been raised, I propose to say something about
the purpose and nature of expiation notices.
Expiation of Offences Act 1996
(SA) (‘the EO Act’) creates a
scheme that permits a person to avoid prosecution for minor offences, with the
of a fine. A person alleged to have committed an offence that falls
within the scheme may, nonetheless, elect to be prosecuted under
s 8 of the EO
expiation of an offence does not constitute an admission of guilt or of civil
Conveniently,
the Court of Appeal recently gave consideration to the expiation notice scheme
under the EO Act in
City of Playford v
and made the following
observations:
regulates the expiation of some summary offences committed in South Australia.
It provides a legislative scheme through which
minor offences may be dealt with
by expiation. The scheme operates by allowing a person alleged to have
committed a minor offence
to accept liability for the alleged offence but avoid
prosecution by paying a fee to expiate the offence.
Despite the implication of criminal liability, the expiation scheme is
fundamentally administrative in nature by way of its operation.
Blue J described the
object of the EOA as follows:
The object of the Act is to provide a simple and expedient alternative to the
institution of prosecution proceedings for relevant
summary offences. This
provides advantages to the issuing authority in avoiding the time and expense of
instituting criminal proceedings.
It provides advantages to alleged offenders of
avoiding the time, expense, distraction and emotional cost of being involved in
proceedings and it also avoids any finding of guilt being made or
conviction being recorded against the alleged offender. It provides
to the Government in that it reduces the resources otherwise committed to and
expenses otherwise incurred in larger court
systems to deal with prosecutions
for all summary offences.
The countervailing advantages and disadvantages associated with the expiation
of an offence have been described as involving a ‘statutory
between the issuing authority and the person to whom an expiation notice has
been issued.
More recently, in
Rossiter v Adelaide City
Livesey J (as his
Honour then was) observed with respect to the procedural status of an expiation
... The giving of an expiation notice, together with the opportunity to elect
to be prosecuted, is a procedure created by the
Expiation of Offences Act
(SA). As the word “expiation” suggests, it is a procedure
for summarily expiating what is otherwise, and in any event,
an offence. The
right to prosecute does not ultimately depend upon whether the defendant has
been given an effective expiation notice.
(Footnote omitted; citation omitted.)
5(1) of the EO Act provides that certain offences may be expiated, if the
expiation notice is given to the person who is
alleged to have committed a
relevant offence.
6 of the EO Act prescribes various requirements for a valid expiation notice,
including that it be in a “prescribed
The prescribed
form for such a notice is contained in sch 1 of the
Expiation of Offences
Regulations 2011
(SA) (‘the EO Regulations’). The requirements
that a prescribed form must comply with are:
1—Expiation
(1) The prescribed form for an expiation notice is a form that complies with
the following requirements:
(a) the form must include a heading identifying it as an expiation notice under
Expiation of Offences Act 1996
(b) the form must specify—
(i) the expiation notice number; and
(ii) the date of issue of the expiation notice; and
(iii) the name of the issuing officer or a code enabling the issuing authority
to identify the issuing officer;
(c) the form must contain an allegation that a person committed an offence or
offences and specify—
(A) if the notice is to be addressed to the person as the owner or driver of
a vehicle without naming or otherwise identifying the
person—the vehicle
registration number;
(B) in any other case—the name and address of the person; and
(ii) the general nature of the alleged offence or offences; and
(iii) the time or times and date or dates of the alleged offence or offences
(but if the time or date is the same as that of the
notice, the time and date
need not be separately identified); and
(iv) the place or places at which the alleged offence or offences were
(d) the form must inform the person that the offence or offences may be expiated
and specify—
(i) the amount of the expiation fee for each offence; and
(ii) if a levy is payable, the amount of the levy for each offence; and
(iii) the total amount payable; and
(iv) to whom the amount must be paid; and
(v) the date by which the amount must be paid;
(e) the form must include a statement of the choices available to the alleged
offender, for example—
YOUR CHOICES:
You may on or before the due date for payment—
Dispute the
allegation that you committed the offence(s) (or any of them) and elect to be
prosecuted for that offence (or offences).
If you elect to be
prosecuted, you may get a summons. The summons will set out when and where to
attend court.
Pay the total
amount due for the offence(s) not disputed (including levies).
Enter into a
payment arrangement with the Chief Recovery Officer which may include payment of
the amount of the fee(s) in instalments,
an extension of time in which to pay or
other options by agreement with the Chief Recovery Officer. A fee will apply to
an arrangement.
If you think
the offence(s) (or any of them) was trifling—apply to the [
] for a review of the expiation notice (for special meaning of
trifling see
section 4(2)
Expiation of Offences Act
If applicable:
If you were not
the person who committed the alleged offence to which the expiation notice
relates, the relevant legislation may enable
you to provide a statutory
declaration to that effect.
requirements are informed by the object and purpose of the scheme for the
expiation of offences. As observed by the Court
established a scheme for efficiently determining certain summary offences which
sits outside of traditional criminal prosecutions
and does not invoke the
criminal jurisdiction of the Court. Properly understood, that scheme is not
concerned with the charging
requirements for criminal proceedings, and it was
erroneous to draw any analogy between what must be included in an Information to
properly advise a defendant of the case he or she must, and the less onerous
provisions of the EOA and EOR relating to an expiation
notice. The difference
lies primarily in the purpose of the contents of an expiation notice. An
expiation notice is merely concerned
with providing sufficient information for
the recipient to determine whether he or she wishes to expiate the offence,
while the purpose
of particulars in criminal proceedings is to ensure that a
defendant to a criminal prosecution, and indeed the relevant court, have
sufficient details of the prosecution case to understand the case the defendant
must meet. The latter imposes a more onerous or
rigorous requirement.
expiation notice is not concerned with the engagement of the criminal
with the inherent
requirements of fairness relevant to the adjudication of criminal guilt, which
is the basis for the long-established
principles governing the institution of
criminal proceedings.
proper content of an expiation notice has been prescribed by Parliament having
regard to the low seriousness, low penalty value,
high volume occurrence and
high repetition of the offending which may be the subject of an expiation
notice. As a matter of public
policy, it is appropriate that an expiation
notice be issued with less specificity and detail as an alternative outcome to a
charge, by which criminal conduct may otherwise be dealt.
Relevantly,
under s 6(3) of the EO Act, a broad category of persons are authorised to
issue expiation notices without requirement
for any form of legal training. It
is the clear legislative intention that the EO Act provides a means for a range
of government
employees to issue expiation notices as an alternative to
embarking on a criminal proceeding. Despite the implication of criminal
liability, the expiation scheme is fundamentally administrative in nature by way
of its operation.
Did the expiation notice adequately
identify “the general nature of the alleged offence”?
to sch 1(1) of the EO Regulations, it is necessary for an expiation notice to
the name and
address of the person;
the general
nature of the alleged offence;
the time and
date of the alleged offence; and
the place at
which the alleged offence was committed.
expiation notice nominated “Scott M Smith, 16 Monterey Drive Munno Parra
West SA 5115” as the subject of the notice.
The respondent contends that
this was insufficient to satisfy the requirement that the person is named on the
expiation notice.
reject that submission. There is no basis upon which to suggest that there is a
requirement that the person’s middle name
is included on an expiation
notice. No doubt, the requirement for the provision of the name and the address
of the relevant person
on the notice is to ensure that it is received by the
intended recipient. The details set out in the expiation notice, adequately
served that purpose.
also reject the suggestion that it was necessary for the expiation notice to
include a reference to the statutory provision that
created the offence. To do
so is not required under the EO Regulations. Whilst it may have been preferable
for there to have been
reference to the relevant legislation, all that is
necessary under the EO Regulations is that there is sufficient information to
identify “the general nature of the alleged offence”. In my view, a
description of “mobile drive testing –
methamphetamine” is
sufficient to satisfy that requirement. It follows that I do not accept the
submission that it was necessary
to include a further description such as
“drug driving”. It would be expected that any reasonable member of
the community
would understand what was meant by the description that was
dismiss the Notice of Alternative Contention. The expiation notice was not
invalid and it therefore follows that the Information
was not laid out of time,
at a time when it was statute barred.
The Grounds of Appeal
to the grounds of appeal is a complaint that the Magistrate mischaracterised the
nature of the amendments that the prosecution
sought to make to the Information.
It is therefore necessary to say something about particulars on an Information
and the role that
they play in a criminal prosecution.
principles – adequacy of particulars
purpose of an Information is to require the prosecution to accurately identify
the offence with which an accused is charged.
It is a basic consideration of
fairness in criminal proceedings that an accused should know the case that he or
she needs to meet.
Johnson v Miller
context of determining whether an Information contained a latent ambiguity,
Dixon J made some general observations about the
purpose of particulars in
an Information. His Honour
opinion [the prosecutor] clearly should be required to identify the transaction
on which he relies and he should be so required
as soon as it appears that his
complaint, in spite of its apparent particularity, is equally capable of
referring to a number of
occurrences each of which constitutes the offence the
legal nature of which is described in the complaint. For a defendant is entitled
to be apprised not only of the legal nature of the offence with which he is
charged but also of the particular act, matter or thing
alleged as the
foundation of the charge. The court hearing a complaint or information for an
offence must have before it a means
of identifying with the matter or
transaction alleged in the document the matter or transaction appearing in
S v The Queen
and McHugh JJ also discussed the importance of an Information identifying the
particular transaction relied upon by the
prosecution:
rule against duplicitous counts has, for a very long time, rested on other
considerations. One important consideration is
the orderly administration of
criminal justice. There are a number of aspects to this consideration: a court
must know what charge
it is entertaining in order to ensure that evidence is
properly admitted, and in order to instruct the jury properly as to the law
be applied; in the event of conviction, a court must know the offence for which
the defendant is to be punished; and the record
must show of what offence a
person has been acquitted or convicted in order for that person to avail himself
or herself, if the need
should arise, of a plea of autrefois acquit or autrefois
convict. ...
The rule against duplicitous counts has also long rested upon a basic
consideration of fairness, namely, that an accused should know
what case he or
she has to meet. ...
charge should be interpreted in the manner in which a reasonable accused would
understand it,
giving reasonable
consideration to the words of the particulars in their
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
common law position has been modified by statute. Section 22A of the CP Act
22A—Description of offence
(1) Every information, summons, warrant, or other document under this Act in
which it is necessary to state the matter charged against
any person shall be
sufficient if it contains a statement of the specific offence with which the
accused person is charged, together
with such particulars as are necessary for
giving reasonable information as to the nature of the charge.
(2) The statement of the offence shall describe the offence shortly in
ordinary language, avoiding as far as possible the use of technical
without necessarily stating all the essential elements of the offence, and, if
the offence charged is one created by statute,
shall contain a reference to the
section of the statute creating the offence.
(3) After the statement of the offence, necessary particulars of the offence
shall be set out in ordinary language, in which the use
of technical terms shall
not be required.
finding that an Information does not comply with s 22A of the CP Act does
not lead to the conclusion that it is invalid in the
sense that the proceeding
is a nullity. In circumstances in which a charge is defective, the irregularity
may be cured by an amendment.
The power to amend an Information is found in s 181 of the CP
181—Charges
(1) An information is not invalid because of a defect of substance or of
(2) A court may—
(a) amend an information to cure a defect of substance or form (but if the
defendant has been substantially prejudiced by the defect,
no amendment may be
(b) dismiss an information if the defect cannot appropriately be cured by
The Joint Criminal Rules 2022 (SA)
Joint Criminal Rules 2022
(SA) (‘the Rules’) also contain a
number of rules relevant to the drafting and filing of Informations. Rule 62.1
62.1—Information
(1) A proceeding must be instituted by filing an Information in the
prescribed form.
(6) The Information must show each offence charged in a separate numbered
(7) The Information must include the following details in respect of each
count as required by the prescribed form—
(a) offence details being the short name of the offence and statutory provision
if applicable;
(b) particulars of the essence of the elements of the offence and in accordance
with rule 62.2;
Section 100(1)(b) of the Procedure Act requires an Information charging an
indictable offence to contain “such particulars as
are necessary for
giving reasonable information as to the nature of the charge”.
62.2 sets out the particulars required on an
Information:
62.2—Particulars
(1) If an offence comprises—
(a) any one of several different acts or omissions;
(b) an act or omission in any one of several capacities;
(c) an act or omission with any one of several intentions; or
(d) any other element in the alternative,
the acts, omissions, capacities, intentions or other matters in the
alternative may be stated in the alternative in the count charging
63.1 provides for the amendment of an Information, with or without leave. Of
particular relevance to this appeal, r 63.1(3)
63.1—Amendment with or without leave
(3) The informant may not amend under subrule (1) or (2) if the amendment
would add a count against a party that is statute barred
due to the effluxion of
make three observations about the combined effect of the CP Act and the
first is that both require a “statement of the offence” (CP Act) /
“offence details” (the Rules).
the CP Act, the “statement of the offence”
... describe
the offence shortly in ordinary language, avoiding as far as possible the use of
technical terms, and without necessarily
stating all the essential elements of
the offence, and, if the offence charged is one created by statute, shall
contain a reference
to the section of the statute creating the offence.
the Rules, the “offence details” must include “the short name
of the offence and statutory provision if
applicable”.
the provisions are not identical, clearly the requirement for a statement of the
offence/offence details is to inform an accused
of the offence with which they
have been charged, and the legislation under which the offence was created.
details would have ordinarily been included under the heading “Offence
Details” in the impugned Information.
second observation is that both the CP Act and the Rules require that an
Information provides adequate particulars. The CP Act
identifies the
requirement as particulars “necessary for giving reasonable information as
to the nature of the
be set out in ordinary language, in which the use of technical terms shall not
be required”.
as to particulars are more prescriptive and require the prosecution to set out
the acts and omissions relied upon, as
set out at [52]-[53]. The requirements
under the CP Act and the Rules both focus on the prosecution identifying the
conduct relied
upon to establish the commission of the offence.
final observation I make about the combined effect of the CP Act and the Rules
is that it is plain that they are designed to
ensure procedural fairness,
focussing on substance over form. It is therefore unsurprising that both permit
the amendment of an
Information in circumstances that do not materially
prejudice an accused.
The nature of the errors in the
Information
is plain that there was a typographical error in the reference to the relevant
section of the RTA. The particulars were otherwise
appropriate and accurately
drafted. As I have said, relevantly, there is no subsection 47BA(l)(a) of the
RTA. There could not be
(nor was there any suggestion) of genuine confusion or
ambiguity arising out of the error.
is also no dispute that the Information contained a further defect in that the
offence details were incorrect and instead of
“Incomplete Charge
Info” the words “Drug Drive” should have been included.
is obvious that what has occurred is that the court registry staff have omitted
to add in the “Offence details” when
entering the matter on to the
ECMS, and by default, an “error” type entry of “Incomplete
Charge Info” has
been automatically inserted.
it cannot possibly be suggested that the respondent was in any way misled or
disadvantaged by this administrative oversight
given the other details contained
on the Information.
Consideration of the Grounds of
grounds 1 and 2 only relate to the error in the reference to the statutory
section creating the offence in the particulars,
there were, of course, two
would seem that it was on the basis of the combination of those two defects that
the Magistrate dismissed the
That decision turned on
a finding by the Magistrate that to permit the prosecution to amend the
Information to correct those matters
would amount to alleging a new offence,
which was out of time. Further, that for the prosecution to adopt such a
course, would amount
to an impermissible attempt to avoid the six-month
limitation period, which would be prejudicial to the respondent.
is no dispute on this appeal that if the amendments proposed by the prosecution
created ‘a new charge’ or ‘a
new proceeding’, the
application to amend was correctly refused, as the respondent would have been
denied the immunity which
s 52 of the CP Act provides.
it appears that the Magistrate considered the combined effect of the two errors
on the Information, in order to give proper
consideration to the nature and
impact of those errors, it is appropriate to consider each
separately.
Offence details
requirement for the name of the offence (the offence details/statement of the
offence) to be included on the Information arises
only as a consequence of
s 22A of the CP Act and r 62.1(7)(a). However, neither the CP Act or the
Rules require that the statement
of the offence must necessarily appear under a
separate heading on the Information.
would appear that the standard manner in which this requirement is satisfied, as
is apparent from the pro forma Information, is
to include these details under
the heading “Offence details”. That did not occur here.
issue that then arises is what consequence, if any, did this have for the
respondent.
relevant section of the RTA (albeit with the identified error) is contained
within the particulars. The particulars also contain
the date and location of
the offence, as well as the nature of the conduct said to constitute the
offence. It cannot be said that
the omission of an appropriate entry under the
heading of “Offence details” created any ambiguity or confusion
the allegations made by the prosecution.
therefore follows that insofar as it was necessary, any amendment to this aspect
of the Information would have been of a technical
nature and would have caused
the respondent no prejudice.
Magistrate was therefore in error in refusing the application to amend the
Information to permit the deletion of the words “Incomplete
Info” and the insertion of the words ‘Drug Driving’ pursuant
to s 181 of the CP Act.
The particulars
error in the particulars was first identified by counsel for the respondent at
the pretrial conference that took place on 14
August 2024, the occasion upon
which the Magistrate dismissed the charge.
the outset of proceedings the respondent’s counsel raised the two defects
on the Information and said the
issue there is that the offence details are stated as ‘Incomplete Charge
Info’, and the wrong provision of the
Road Traffic Act
I’ve had some discussions with my friend about that and some negotiations
which haven’t been successful.
I understand that prosecution is seeking
to amend the information and that applications opposed. In our submission to
insert offence
details and change the provision reference would have the effect
of creating a new charge or changing the charge and the charge is
time. There’s a six-month limitation period. So my application is for
your Honour to dismiss the charge pursuant
s.181(2)(b)
Procedure Act
would appear that despite this, the prosecutor failed to detect the
typographical error in the particulars and put to the
Yes, so the
particulars of the offence are correct. So the defendant was charged with a
drug driving offence being one; with methylamphetamine
that was detected. The
correct section is 47 BA(1)(a) and it is correctly referenced I would submit in
the information.
not picking up on the typographical error and focussing on the more obvious
defect, the police prosecutor addressed his submissions
to the error in the
offence details.
would seem that (even after her attention was drawn to it) the Magistrate also
had difficulty in detecting the error in the particulars,
respondent’s counsel had to make her point by taking the Magistrate to
another numerical 1 that appeared on the Information
to highlight the
difference. During the course of which, the Magistrate
look at the actual information I can’t tell the difference between whether
it is a 1 or a l except it’s just
got a stroke. So you’re saying
that’s an 1.
calling on the police prosecutor, the Magistrate then ruled to dismiss the
I have said there is no s 47BA(I)(a) of the RTA. There could be no
confusion about the offence with which the respondent was
charged, particularly
given the accompanying particulars. It cannot be suggested that he was misled
to his detriment.
was plainly a typographical error of a very minor nature. It was the type of
error which was readily amenable to an amendment
under s 181 of the CP Act.
The amendment would not have resulted in the formulation of a new or different
charge laid out of time.
The Magistrate was in error in failing to amend the
Information by replacing the letter “l” with the number
find that grounds 2, 3 and 4 have been established. I make the following
allow the appeal.
orders of the Magistrate are set aside.
2 of the Information be amended to delete the words “Incomplete Charge
Info” and add the words “Drug drive”
before the particulars of
the offence, and to amend the subsection of section 47BA from (l) to (1).
matter be remitted back to the Magistrates Court for trial before another
Magistrate.
Road Traffic Act 1961
s 47BA(1)(a).
Joint Criminal Rules 2022
(SA) r 30.1(3).
There is no dispute that both
errors in the Information were administrative errors.
The application to amend only
related to the error under the heading “offence details”. It would
appear that the prosecutor
assumed that this was the error relied upon by the
respondent and had failed to identify that the letter “l” had been
entered instead of the number “1”.
The Information was in Arial
font, which made the error slightly more apparent.
Expiation of Offences Act
[2025] SASCA 45.
Ibid at [54]-[57].
Walker v Police
Riessen v State of South
(2001) 79 SASR 82
at [27], [31].
Rossiter v Adelaide City
[2020] SASC 61
Expiation of Offences
City of Playford v
[2025] SASCA 45
[1937] HCA 77
(1937) 59 CLR 467.
Ibid at 489-490.
[1989] HCA 66
(1989) 168 CLR 266.
Ibid at 284-285.
Graham v Magistrates
Court of South Australia
[2018] SASC 28
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Cth) v Poniatowska
[2011] HCA 43
(2011) 244 CLR 408
Criminal Procedure Act
Joint Criminal Rules
(SA) r 62.1(7)(a).
Criminal Procedure Act
Criminal Procedure Act
The Magistrate’s
reasoning is unclear. Although both errors are referred to, her Honour found
that to permit the amendment
to the particulars would be prejudicial to the
respondent. She dismissed the charge on the basis that the offence details were
included and therefore the Information did not comply with r 62.1(7)(a) of
Joint Criminal Rules 2022
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (436 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter