URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCFC/2024/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:07:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
LEGAL PROFESSION CONDUCT COMMISSIONER v MCCARDLE (No 2) [2024] SASCFC 4 (17 December 2024)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Full Court)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
LEGAL PROFESSION CONDUCT COMMISSIONER v MCCARDLE (No
[2024] SASCFC 4
Judgment of The Full Court
(The Honourable President Livesey, the Honourable Justice S Doyle
and the Honourable Justice S David)
17 December 2024
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES - LAWYERS - COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE –
DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS - GENERALLY
The Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner applied for orders that the
practitioner’s name be struck off the roll of legal practitioners
maintained under the
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
(SA) and that the
practitioner pay the Commissioner’s costs of the application to be agreed
The Court principally considered the practitioner’s conduct in the
disciplinary proceedings before the Tribunal and the Court,
including the
practitioner’s determination to relitigate an adverse jurisdictional
ruling. The Court also had regard to the
findings made against the practitioner
by the Tribunal.
Absent submissions regarding the proper interpretation of
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
(SA) and the scope of the Court’s
inherent power, the Court did not rely on any factual findings made in the High
WASAT, the Family Court, and the Federal Magistrates or Federal
Circuit Court decisions referred to by the Tribunal.
The Court held (granting the applications):
Court had regard to the findings made by the Tribunal, the adverse
but, principally, her
conduct in the disciplinary proceedings before this Court including her
determination to relitigate an adverse
adverse findings made in the District Court of Western Australia. [123], [125]
most concerning feature of the practitioner’s conduct concerned her
written and oral submissions which traversed issues
far removed from the issues
at stake in these disciplinary proceedings and included sweeping corruption
allegations. The practitioner’s
conduct in these proceedings demonstrated
that she cannot adhere in any disciplined or logical way to a discussion about
issues actually before the Court and, instead, she exhibited a
tendency to drift into a discussion about matters that were at best
if not outright fantastic, quite disengaged from reality. [133]
though the practitioner never intends to return to legal practice, it would be
dangerous to allow her to continue to be held
out as a person who is fit and
proper to practise the profession of the law. [134]
practitioner’s name will be removed from the roll of legal practitioners
maintained under the
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
(SA). The practitioner
is ordered to pay the Commissioner’s costs.
Observations
made about the basis upon which the Court can have regard to findings made by
the Tribunal pursuant to a combination
of an implication derived from
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
(SA) and the inherent power of the
Court. [81]-[114]
Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution
Family Court Act 1975
Family Court Act 1997
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
Legal Profession Act 2008
Legal Profession Conduct Rules 2010 (WA)
Mutual Recognition
Mutual Recognition (South Australia) Act 1993
Supreme Court Act 1935
, referred to.
Law Society of South Australia v Jordan
[1998] SASC 6809
Mitsubishi v Kowalski
[2005] SASC 154
New South Wales Bar Association
(1988) 14 NSWLR 173
, discussed.
ASIC v Macks (No 2)
[2019] SASC 17
Australian Postal Commission v
Dao and Anor (No 2)
(1986) 6 NSWLR 497
Barristers’ Board v
[2001] QCA 556
Brandy v Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
[1995] HCA 10
(1995) 183 CLR 245
Burns v Corbett
(2018) 265 CLR 304;
Cannon v Acres
[2014] FamCA 104
Clyne v New South Wales Bar
Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
Council of the Law Society of New South
Wales v Jafari
[2020] NSWCA 53
Fenton & Marvel
[2012] FamCAFC
Georganas v Barkla
[2021] SASC 47
Gerber & Bradley & Ors
(Security for Costs)
[2011] FamCAFC 206
Gull & Gull
Huddart, Parker and Co Pty Ltd v Moorehead
[1909] HCA 36
(1909) 8 CLR 330
In Re Maidment
(unreported, 26 August 1992, Judgment No S3583);
Practitioners
(1980) 26 SASR 275
Keane v Woolworths Group Ltd (No 4)
[2024] SASCA 113
Law Society of New South Wales v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
Law Society of South Australia v Murphy
[1999] SASC 83
Society of South Australia v Murphy
(1999) 201 LSJS 456
Law Society of
South Australia v Rodda
[2002] SASC 274
(2002) 83 SASR 541
Law Society of South
Australia v Russell
[1999] SASC 389
Legal Practitioners Complaints
Committee v De Alwis
[2006] WASCA 198
Legal Profession Complaints
Committee v Amsden
[2014] WASAT 57
Legal Profession Complaints Committee
[2020] WASAT 51
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v
[2003] SASC 241
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v Clisby
[2012] SASCFC 43
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v Fletcher
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v Kerin
[2006] SASC 393
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v Le Poidevin
[2001] SASC 242
Profession Conduct Commissioner v Cleland
[2021] SASCA 10
Profession Conduct Commissioner v Kaminski
[2021] SASCFC 39
Profession Conduct Commissioner v McCardle
[2024] SASCFC 3
Profession Conduct Commissioner v Morcom
[2016] SASCFC 121
Services and Complaints Committee v McCardle (No 2)
[2023] WASAT (22
December 2023);
Legal Services and Complaints Committee v McCardle (No 2)
[2023] WASAT 131
(23 February 2024);
Legal Services and Complaints Committee
v McCardle [No 2]
[2023] WASAT 131(S)
(24 April 2024);
[2013] WADC 182
McCardle v McCardle
[2014] HCASL 213
McCardle v Victorian Legal Services Board (Legal Practice)
[2021] VCAT
(9 July 2021);
Medlon v Medlon
(ex tempore reasons delivered 31 July
Medlon v Medlon
[2014] FamCAFC 163
Mealon v Mealon
Medlon v Medlon (No 5)
[2015] FamCAFC 156
Medlon v Medlon
(indemnity costs)
[2015] FamCA 157
Mitsubishi Motors Australia
Ltd v Kowalski
[2004] SASC 302
New South Wales Bar Association v
[2001] NSWCA 284
(2001) 52 NSWLR 279
Official Trustee in Bankruptcy v Gargon (No
[2009] FCA 398
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
R v Gallagher; Ex parte Aberdare Collieries
(1963) 37 ALJR 40
Re Cram; Ex parte Newcastle Wallsend Coal Co
[1987] HCA 29
(1987) 163 CLR 140
Rigney v Rigney
(1987) 48 SASR 291
Rola Co (Australia) Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
[1944] HCA 17
(1944) 69 CLR 185
Law Society v Westbrook
[1910] HCA 31
(1910) 10 CLR 609
Tesseract International Pty
Ltd v Pascale Construction Pty Ltd
(2024) 98 ALJR 880
Vunilagi v R
(2023) 97 ALJR 627;
Waterside Workers’ Federation of Australia v JW
Alexander Ltd
[1918] HCA 56
(1918) 25 CLR 434
Wentworth v The New South Wales Bar
Association
(1992) 176 CLR 239
Ziems v The Prothonotary of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
, considered.
LEGAL PROFESSION CONDUCT COMMISSIONER v MCCARDLE
[2024] SASCFC 4
Full Court – Livesey P, S Doyle and David JJ
Introduction
application dated 26 August 2024, the Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner (the
Commissioner
) seeks the following orders concerning the respondent,
Roxanne Marie McCardle (the
practitioner
the name of the practitioner be struck off the roll of legal practitioners
maintained under the
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
the practitioner pay the Commissioner’s costs to be agreed or taxed.
Commissioner relies on affidavit evidence which exhibits, amongst other matters,
the reasons for decision of the Legal Practitioners
Conduct Tribunal dated 12
January 2021,
and on penalty dated
3 June 2022.
Also exhibited are
decisions of the Western Australian State Administrative Tribunal (the
) delivered on 22 December
and on penalty on 24 April
recommending that the
practitioner’s name be removed from the roll of practitioners maintained
by the Supreme Court of South
the 2021 Tribunal reasons, the Tribunal rejected the practitioner’s
together with the
practitioner’s contention that the charges comprised an abuse of process.
In the result, the Tribunal refused
to summarily dismiss charges relating to the
practitioner’s failure to co-operate with what were said to be the
Commissioner’s
reasonable requests concerning information about two
complaints.
the 2022 Tribunal reasons,
it found, by a majority,
that the practitioner had twice engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct
on or about 25 March 2017
by failing to adequately respond to the
Commissioner’s reasonable requests for information. The Tribunal also
found, unanimously,
that the conduct of the practitioner during the proceedings
before it was so substantially and consistently below the standard required
legal practitioner that she was not a fit and proper person to practise the law
and she posed a danger to members of the public.
consequence, the Tribunal recommended that disciplinary proceedings be commenced
in the Supreme Court pursuant to s 82(6)(v) of
these proceedings were commenced, the practitioner made a number of attempts to
adduce a large volume of evidentiary material,
none of which appeared to relate
to the matters the subject of the adverse findings made against her.
addition, the practitioner’s affidavit evidence and written submissions
were generally prolix and ill-focussed. At times,
a number of scandalous
allegations were made by the practitioner, directed to the former and present
Commissioners and others, such
as a Family Court judge, Federal Magistrates or
Federal Circuit Court judges and senior counsel for the practitioner’s
husband. These allegations were not supported by evidence and were
repeated in this Court. Regrettably, the practitioner’s
conduct before
this Court served to buttress the basis upon which it must be concluded that the
practitioner is not a fit and proper
person to practise the profession of the
law. The practitioner is either ignorant of, or ignores, rudimentary
professional standards.
the following reasons, it is necessary to strike the practitioner’s name
from the roll.
Notwithstanding
the jurisdictional ruling made by the Tribunal on 12 January 2021, and earlier,
similar rulings in other jurisdictions,
the practitioner again attempted to rely
on the contention that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction because her interstate
raised a question of Federal diversity jurisdiction. It is not
necessary to address the submission in any detail because the jurisdiction
the Tribunal is not affected by
Constitution
Burns v Corbett
Commissioner and the Tribunal are not to be conflated with the State of South
Australia and these proceedings are not properly
to be regarded as proceedings
between the residents of different States. The relevant jurisdiction relied on
by the Commissioner
before this Court invokes a combination of statutory and
common law powers. The practitioner put forward no reason to reject the
findings made in other tribunals that this jurisdictional challenge should be
The Tribunal had
practitioner challenged the jurisdiction of this Court as well. The Supreme
Court has jurisdiction over “legal practitioners”
within the meaning
of s 5 of the Act:
legal practitioner
practitioner
(a) a person duly admitted and enrolled as a barrister and solicitor of the
Supreme Court; or
(ab) an interstate legal practitioner who practises the profession of the law in
this State ...
practitioner was admitted and enrolled as a legal practitioner within the
meaning of s 5 of the Act on 8 May 2006, when she participated
in an admission
ceremony and signed the roll maintained by this Court.
practitioner’s contention that this Court does not have jurisdiction
because she is not a practitioner within the meaning
of s 5 of the Act must be
rejected. The Commissioner relied on the following:
power conferred by s 89(1) of the Act, which permits this Court to act on the
recommendation of the Tribunal following its inquiry
practitioner’s conduct;
power conferred by s 89(1a) of the Act, to act on the findings, orders and
recommendations of a court, here the WASAT, following
its inquiry and
recommendations, as a result of which the Commissioner formed the opinion that
the name of the practitioner should
be struck off the roll; and
as may be necessary, s 88A(2) of the Act, which preserves the inherent
conduct of the practitioner which was considered by the Tribunal between 2021
and 2022 occurred in South Australia in the course
of investigations conducted
by the Commissioner under Part 6 Division 2 of the Act, as well as during the
Tribunal’s inquiry
conducted pursuant to s 82(4) of the Act.
conduct of the practitioner considered by the WASAT occurred in South Australia,
Western Australia and whilst the practitioner
was practising in Victoria.
Although the practitioner practised law in Western Australia and Queensland, she
was never admitted
in those jurisdictions.
the practitioner has not held a practising certificate in South Australia since
30 June 2012, she remains a legal practitioner
and held out as such for so long
as her name remains on the roll maintained by this
The practitioner was
permitted to practice in other Australian jurisdictions by reason of the mutual
recognition arrangements.
is no evidence that the practitioner was admitted in any other Australian
whether she might also be an
interstate legal practitioner within the meaning of s 5 of the Act.
even if she had been admitted interstate, and were her name to be removed from
those interstate rolls, that would have no
direct impact on her admission in
South Australia because the Supreme Court of South Australia has exclusive
oversight and maintenance of the roll in South
under the Act or pursuant to its inherent jurisdiction (preserved by s 88A(2) of
the Act), the Supreme Court of South Australia
may supervise, control and, if
necessary, discipline legal practitioners. The proper conclusion is that the
Supreme Court of South
Australia has primary jurisdiction to supervise and, if
necessary, discipline the legal practitioners it has admitted for so long
they are enrolled.
Broad overview of the practitioner’s misconduct and
adverse findings
general terms, the practitioner’s misconduct concerns the way in which she
participated in her own Family Court and other
proceedings involving her former
husband, as well as her conduct in response to an investigation conducted by the
Commissioner and
during an inquiry by the Tribunal.
some of these events occurred more ten years ago, and the practitioner has not
practised for some years, she told the Court
that she did not intend to return
to legal practice but she opposed the Commissioner’s application.
order to understand the various findings made in this case, it is necessary to
set out some of the facts which underpin the hearings
in which the practitioner
has been criticised.
1 March 2010, the practitioner obtained an interim Domestic Violence order (DVO)
in the Victor Harbor Magistrates Court. By 29
November 2011, she had, with the
consent of her former husband, finalised a property settlement in the Federal
Magistrates Court
in Adelaide.
mid-February 2012, the practitioner had relocated from South Australia to
Busselton in Western Australia. On 11 July 2012, the
practitioner obtained an
interim Violence Restraining order (
) in the Busselton Magistrates
24 August 2012, the practitioner applied in the Federal Magistrates Court in
Adelaide to set aside the property settlement, as
well as obtain a restraining
order against her former husband. On 30 October 2012, the practitioner’s
application for a restraining
order was dismissed, as was her substantive
application concerning the setting aside of the property settlement.
27 November 2012, the practitioner filed an appeal in the Family Court before a
single judge against the 30 October 2012 decision
of the Federal
Magistrates Court. By 28 February 2013, that appeal was deemed abandoned.
20 March 2013, there was a hearing of the practitioner’s application for a
final VRO in the Busselton Magistrates Court
and, on the application of the
practitioner’s former husband, a permanent stay was granted.
days later, on 25 March 2013, the practitioner applied to reinstate her Family
Court appeal.
10 April 2013, the practitioner filed an appeal in the District Court against
the dismissal decision made in the Busselton Magistrates
Court on 20 March
8 May 2013, the practitioner’s application to reinstate the Family Court
appeal was adjourned to 31 July 2013. The practitioner
then indicated her
intention to apply to restrain the former husband’s counsel from
continuing to act by reason of what was
alleged to be a conflict of interest.
In support of that contention the practitioner filed an application in the
Family Court to
issue subpoenas on 24 June 2013.
28 June 2013, the hearing to issue subpoenas was adjourned because the
practitioner had failed to file an application to restrain
counsel, with the
result that there was no basis for the application to issue subpoenas.
5 July 2013, the practitioner filed an application and affidavit in the Family
Court seeking orders that the presiding judge disqualify
himself, that her
former husband’s counsel and instructing solicitor be restrained from
acting and for leave to issue various
19 July 2013, the subpoena application dated 24 June 2013 was dismissed, as it
was overtaken by the application filed on 5 July
31 July 2013, the practitioner’s application to reinstate the Family Court
appeal was heard. It was during this hearing
that the practitioner was alleged
to have misread from a transcript and made a number of scandalous comments. On
the same day, the
practitioner’s disqualification application was
dismissed as a result of which the practitioner appealed to the Full Court
the Family Court.
28 August 2013, the practitioner sent various emails to the Registrar of the
Family Court making intemperate, discourteous and
scandalous comments.
27 November 2013, the practitioner’s appeal against the Magistrate’s
decision on 20 March 2013 was dismissed by the
District Court of Western
7 January 2014, the practitioner filed an appeal in the Court of Appeal against
the District Court decision made on 27 November
20 June 2014, the Western Australian Court of Appeal refused the
practitioner’s application to extend the time to appeal
against the
District Court decision.
1 July 2014, there was a hearing in the Full Court of the Family Court regarding
the practitioner’s appeal against the dismissal
of her disqualification
application. The question of costs was also agitated. In September 2014, the
Full Court dismissed the practitioner’s
appeal. On 10 December 2014, the
practitioner applied for special leave to appeal from the High Court. The High
Court dismissed
that application.
12 February 2015, the balance of the practitioner’s application dated
5 July 2013 seeking the restraint of the legal representatives
former husband was heard in the Family Court. On 13 March 2015, the
practitioner’s application was dismissed.
27 March 2015, the practitioner’s application to reinstate the Family
Court appeal was heard and dismissed.
28 August 2015, the practitioner applied to the Busselton Magistrates Court to
set aside its own decision of 20 March 2013. On
24 September 2015, that
application was dismissed by Magistrate Hamilton.
5 November 2015, the practitioner filed another appeal in the District Court
against the decision made on 24 September 2015.
On 3 March 2017, that appeal
was dismissed.
10 September 2019, disciplinary proceedings were commenced against the
practitioner in the WASAT by the Legal Profession Complaints
Committee (WA)
concerning conduct engaged in by the practitioner between 2012 and 2017 when a
party to proceedings in various courts
in Western Australia, in the Family Court
of Australia and in the Federal Magistrates Court.
19 November 2019, the practitioner applied to dismiss those proceedings, relying
on the contention that the WASAT lacked jurisdiction.
7 February 2020, a charge of professional misconduct was laid in the Tribunal by
the Legal Practitioners Complaints Commissioner
13 March 2020, the practitioner’s jurisdiction argument was rejected and
the application to dismiss proceedings was dismissed
by the WASAT (as earlier
5 May 2020, the practitioner applied to dismiss the South Australian charge on
the basis that the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction.
On 12 January 2021, that
application was dismissed and reasons were given (as earlier outlined).
29 September 2021, the Tribunal concluded its inquiry into the conduct of the
practitioner. All members of the Tribunal expressed
concern about the
practitioner’s conduct during the course of the Tribunal proceedings. As
the majority
feature of the Practitioner’s behaviour which was most concerning was her
refusal to accept the Tribunal’s ruling
as to its jurisdiction. She
continually, and repeatedly raised this objection long after the reasons for
that ruling were published
and the time for her to appeal had passed. It was
evident that the Practitioner either had no understanding of, or alternatively
no respect for, the finality of the Tribunal’s ruling (either of which is
troubling). The Practitioner wasted considerable
time by repeatedly raising the
Remarkably,
the practitioner had asserted that the Commissioner and the Tribunal members had
been “engaging in misconduct,
maladministration and, if reasons were
published, defamation”.
2022 the Tribunal recorded with concern that the practitioner was focussed on
perceived unfairness and prejudicial treatment by
the Commissioner, as well as
raising unrelated matters concerning disciplinary investigations concerning
Mr Viscariello and Mr McGee,
to an extent that she failed to
“meaningfully engage in the very narrow and discrete issues” before
the Tribunal.
The Tribunal
Tribunal also finds that the written submissions made by the Practitioner
throughout these proceedings were prolix, repetitive,
in large parts confused,
misconceived and irrelevant. The Practitioner was unable or unwilling to assist
the Tribunal to understand
her defence and showed no understanding of the proper
way to go about gathering and presenting evidence in support of her position,
times appearing to believe this was the Commissioner’s responsibility.
Tribunal went so far as to find that the practitioner demonstrated a lack of
insight, and her allegations of improper conduct
directed to others were
“far removed from
Tribunal concluded that the allegations made by the practitioner as to the
Commissioner’s improper and dishonest conduct
were unfounded and that it
was unprofessional for her to make
making its recommendation that proceedings be commenced in this Court, the
Tribunal was concerned that references to the conduct
of the practitioner in
other courts could only be considered by this Court. The Tribunal gave as a
“non‑exhaustive list
of examples”, the following findings made
in the various courts and hearings already mentioned:
reasons delivered 31 July 2013 by
Strickland J), [8]-[14], [21], [30], [36]:
observe that the wife failed to accept that ruling and over my objections
continued to make the same submission throughout the hearing.
wife has also suggested today, and indeed I recall on the last occasion that the
matter was before the court as well, that what
should be happening in this case
is the application seeking reinstatement should be heard. She professes to be
confused as to why
that has not taken place and suggests that it is part of some
grand scheme to avoid that application being heard. What I pointed
wife on the last occasion, and I do again now, is that the only reason that
application has not been heard and determined
is the wife’s own
application that I be disqualified, and that Ms Nelson be restrained from acting
in the matter on the ground
of conflict of interest. It is quite simple, and
there is no mystery about that. It is perfectly obvious that both of those
applications
have to be heard and determined before the application in an appeal
can proceed whereby the wife seeks reinstatement of her appeal.
wife today has adopted the approach of taking the court to the transcripts of
the hearings on 8 May 2013 and 28 June 2013. She
has spent a significant amount
of time in reading out various parts, indeed the majority of those transcripts,
and at various points
making comments in relation to what appears in the
transcript. As the transcript of the hearing today will record, at various
I interrupted the wife in an attempt to ascertain the point of referring
to all the transcript in the way that she was, given that
the hearing was about
an application for disqualification. The wife assured me that the necessity for
that would become apparent
as the hearing progressed. I indicated to her at the
various points that I raised that issue, that up to then there had been nothing
demonstrated to me which provided a basis for me to disqualify myself, and that
remained the position at the conclusion of her submissions.
I did so intending
to prompt the wife to get to the point. However, the wife insisted on
continuing to read out the transcripts
unnecessarily, and make various comments
along the way, taking a significant amount of time.
relation to the comments that the wife made, they were invariably comments where
the wife either sought to explain her own statements
as recorded in the
transcript, or to dispute the factual material recorded in the transcript. When
she did this I interrupted the
wife and put to her that comments like that were
irrelevant to the application before me. The wife though took no notice of what
I said in that regard and continued to make such comments. They were not only
irrelevant but generally inappropriate and unhelpful,
and they contributed to
the hearing taking far longer than it should have, as did her insistence in
reading out the majority of the
transcripts.
also observe, and the transcript of the hearing today will confirm this, that it
became apparent that when the wife was allegedly
reading from the transcripts of
the previous hearings she did not always accurately repeat what was in those
transcripts. I made
a point of raising this during the hearing because I was
concerned that someone reading the transcript of the hearing today might
that what the wife was putting, and allegedly reading, was in fact an accurate
representation of what was in those transcripts,
when it was not. There are
also many examples of where the wife would read something out from a transcript
but not read out the
entire part, or not read out the next part, which in a
number of instances resulted in an inaccurate picture being presented.
I perceive about the approach that the wife has adopted in pursuing this
application, is that many of the complaints which she
makes arising from the
transcripts, are complaints against findings and ultimately the orders made by
the court at the conclusion
of those hearings. It is obvious to me that with
many of those complaints the wife should have, if she was so minded, looked to
appeal against the orders made. One of the particular orders that she is
obviously unhappy about is the order that I made that she
pay costs. She spent
a significant period of time during the hearing referring to the transcripts and
making comments as to what
she says are the true facts, as opposed to what was
revealed at the hearing. However that does not go to any issue of
disqualification.
The appropriate course for the wife in relation to those
matters was to appeal, rather than bringing the application that she has.
because she is unhappy with the findings and the orders made does not
demonstrate that there is a reasonable apprehension of
bias on my part.
also note unfortunately that throughout the hearing at various times the wife
was disrespectful to senior counsel appearing for
the husband, and on those
occasions I was obliged to indicate to her that such comments were inappropriate
and that she should not
do that. Yet, again, the wife took no notice of those
rulings, and continued to make such
also observe that the wife attempted in her submissions to suggest that I was
actually biased as opposed to there just being an
apprehension of bias.
However, this submission was inappropriate given that in her application and her
supporting affidavit she
only alleged the latter and there was no suggestion of
the former. Again though, although I directed the wife to not raise this
submissions, she ignored that direction.
other comment is warranted about paragraph 2 of the wife’s affidavit.
There the wife deposed that I said to her “Oh,
what would you know”
when discussing the assets received by the husband. However, the wife was
unable to take the court to
where those words appeared in the transcript, and
neither I nor Ms Nelson have been able to find them. It is concerning that the
wife, a legal practitioner, has been prepared to swear in an affidavit that I
used these words when the transcript does not support
that. It adds to my
concern about her preparedness to inaccurately repeat parts of the transcripts
when reading those transcripts
out during the hearing.
the wife failed to accept the discipline of the court, she failed to accept my
rulings, she failed to comply with my directions,
and she refused to acknowledge
my obligation to control the proceedings. That inevitably led to my need to
interrupt her and to
stop her from putting submissions that were inappropriate,
unnecessary and irrelevant.
[2013] WADC 182 (Judge
Fenbury), [7]:
The submissions
were discursive, prolix, repetitive and difficult to read. They were not very
being in effect the husband’s
application to bring the proceedings to an end without a consideration of the
[2014] HCASL 213 (Bell
and Gageler JJ), [4]:
Court of Appeal applied settled principles of law in the exercise of a
procedural discretion. The prolix materials filed in support
of the application
do not identify any question suitable for the grant of special leave nor are the
interests of the administration
of justice engaged by the application.
[2014] FamCAFC 163 (May
, Ainslie-Wallace and Aldridge JJ),
[108]-[110], [113], [121]-[122]:
immediately point out that the appeal is brought in relation to his
Honour’s order that the wife pay the husband’s
costs of 31 July 2013
and that the costs be paid on an indemnity basis. Even if the assertions
contained in the grounds of appeal
were factually based none has any apparent
relevance to the order for costs.
assistance in understanding the thrust of the grounds is gleaned from the
“Revised Summary of Argument” filed out of
time on 27 June 2014 by
the wife in support of the appeal. It is discursive and relates in large part
to the wife’s appeal
against the order of Federal Magistrate Kelly (as her
Honour was then) dismissing the s 79A application. It further contains
inappropriate
and scandalous comment.
no part of this document addresses the appeal against the orders of
9 September 2013 that the wife pay the costs of the 31
the preparation of appeal books is the obligation of the appellant, the books
prepared and forwarded to the court by the wife
were wholly deficient and failed
to comply with the relevant rules. At the request of the appeals registrar, the
solicitor agreed to prepare a set of appeal books for the court.
the wife has been wholly unsuccessful. However, her conduct in the proceedings
is a significant factor. This was an appeal
which was foredoomed to failure,
the grounds of appeal raised irrelevant and unrelated issues. The summary of
argument did not address
the grounds of appeal in the disqualification appeal
but rather repeated the submissions made to the judge on the application. The
summary of argument was filed after the time prescribed. Further, it failed to
address the issue of the costs appeal at all. The
document included, as we have
indicated, irrelevant, insulting and scandalous comment. The oral argument of
the appellant was redolent
of her submissions before the judge. It was
discursive and failed to engage with the appeal.
should not be overlooked that the wife is a solicitor conducting practice in
Western Australia. She must have appreciated that
her conduct of the appeal was
not in any way orthodox or in accordance with the rules or proper practice.
v Medlon (No 5)
[2015] FamCAFC 156 (Strickland
J), [14]‑[18], [20],
[24], [37] and [39]:
hearing proceeded, but partway through the same the wife abruptly and
deliberately hung up the telephone and she then would not
allow the court to
reconnect with her; the calls simply went to message bank.
occurred at the point where I was attempting to explain to the wife what she
needed to demonstrate to succeed in her application.
In any event, given that
this was a deliberate action by the wife, that I had earlier refused her
application to adjourn the hearing,
that the wife had effectively completed her
oral submissions, and that this was the second occasion that the wife had
abruptly hung
up the telephone in an attempt to bring the hearing to a close, I
continued with the hearing and received the oral submissions of
husband’s senior counsel.
at the conclusion of the hearing I made orders that the court provide the wife
with a full transcript of the hearing, that
the wife file and serve written
submissions, both in response to the submissions of the husband’s senior
counsel and generally
in relation to the application, and that the husband have
leave to file any written submissions in reply.
transcript was duly forwarded to the wife, and she filed written submissions on
23 April 2015.
first thing to note is that nowhere in those submissions was there any reason
given by the wife for her actions in hanging up
the telephone, or any
recognition by her of the subsequent indulgence afforded to her by this court.
The second thing to note is
that those submissions did not provide any better
assistance to the court in determining her application for reinstatement than
previous written and oral submissions or her affidavit material. She
continued to be under the same misconception as before in relation
to the issues
involved, and I will say more about that later in these reasons. She did
attempt to rewrite, or reframe the grounds
of appeal, by including an expansive
narrative detailing the complaints that she has with the decision of the Federal
Magistrate,
but as I will also explore later in these reasons, still not so that
any appealable error by the Federal Magistrate was
demonstrated.
many respects her submissions were nonsensical and demonstrated her lack of
understanding of the issues to be determined by this
court, and the appeal
process itself. It is again of significant concern that a legal practitioner
simply does not appreciate what
is required in making an application pursuant to
s 79A of the Act, what is required to achieve reinstatement of an appeal deemed
abandoned, what an appeal against orders of a trial judge entails, and that
applications, once determined, cannot be re-agitated.
with the wife’s cavalier attitude to orders of this court, and in
particular in relation to orders for the filing
of documents, without
explanation the wife forwarded an affidavit to the court on 24 March 2015
expecting it to be filed. Not surprisingly
it was not accepted for filing, and
it was left for the wife to seek to tender the affidavit at the hearing.
is difficult to discern from the documents relied on by the wife what reason or
reasons she proffers for her failure to file the
draft appeal index within time,
but doing the best I can, it seems that she suggests that it was because of the
time difference between
Victoria and Western Australia, to which State she had
then “recently” moved, and her allegedly suffering stress, anxiety,
depression and memory loss. Frankly, I fail to see how the latter can be a
legitimate reason for missing the deadline, and in any
event no medical evidence
to support these claims has been presented. Further, it is not correct that she
had only “recently”
moved to Western Australia; indeed she had moved
there 12 months before. Thus, I am not satisfied that there is an adequate
for the wife’s failure to comply with the timeframe for the filing
of the draft appeal index. However, the fact of the matter
is that the wife was
only a few hours late in faxing the draft appeal index to the Southern Appeal
Registry, and it would be unjust
if she was not able to pursue the appeal for
that reason alone.
considering these grounds of appeal in the context of the reasons for judgment
of the Federal Magistrate, I cannot say that any
of them have any chance of
success. They variously comprise narrative, mere assertions, combinations of
assertions and evidence,
nonsensical claims, and complaints that do not disclose
any appealable error by the Federal Magistrate, particularly when bearing
mind that the application before her Honour was a s 79A application and not a
property settlement application. I emphasise that
because, plainly, the wife
has misconceived the nature of a s 79A application, in framing some of the
grounds of appeal as being
alleged errors by the Federal Magistrate in
addressing “an application for a s 79A adjustment” (e.g., Grounds
v Medlon (No 6)
(indemnity costs)
[2015] FamCA 157 (Strickland
what is relevant is that the applications should never have been brought in the
first place. As explained in
Medlon & Medlon (No. 3)
applications never had any chance of success, and, given that the wife is an
admitted legal practitioner, she should have
been aware of that.
in relation to the application to restrain Ms Collie, the wife has made
scandalous allegations for which she produced no
evidence, and they were
allegations that should never have been made (see [42] – [47] of
& Medlon (No. 3)
). For example, in oral submissions the wife alleged
that Ms Collie was “attempting to pervert the course of justice”
(transcript 12.2.2015, page 37, lines 12‑13), yet no evidence was
presented to establish that claim.
there is the circumstance that the wife was estopped from pursuing her
application against Ms Collie as from 31 October 2014,
yet she still maintained
the application thereafter (see [48] of
Medlon & Medlon
(No. 3)). It
was only during the hearing on 12 February 2015 when the court was alerted to
the email that the wife sent to the Appeal
Registrar and to Ms Collie on 31
October 2014, that the wife accepted that she could not pursue the application
and that it should
be dismissed.
[2016] FCCA 2805 (Judge
Kelly), [28], [35]-[36], [57] and
conclude that most of the orders sought by the wife in her Amended Response are
without foundation. Paragraph 1 has already been
considered by the Full Court
and dismissed, in Appeal SOA25 of 2015. Paragraphs 2 – 5 are akin to an
informal s.79A Application,
seeking to revisit the 2011 final Orders.
the wife is self-represented, it must be remembered that she is a (occupation
omitted). She should understand the need to present
actual evidence in support
of any Application brought before the Court. She has been reminded of this
numerous times, both by this
Court and by the Full Court.
failure to comply with this basic requirement leads me to conclude that the
order sought in this paragraph is a vexatious proceeding.
I find that the wife
has brought this Application to annoy and harass the husband, rather than for
any legitimate purpose. My conclusion
is strengthened by the wife’s
Affidavit where she states that she intends to file a further Application in the
WA Magistrates
Court seeking to set aside the earlier decision dismissing her
application for a Violence Restraining Order.
conclude that this Application is a vexatious proceeding. The interim orders
sought clearly identify the basis for the wife’s
claim and all of the
matters referred to in those interim orders have been addressed in earlier
proceedings – the Holden (omitted),
the Ford (omitted) motor vehicle, the
husband’s ability to access refinancing immediately after the consent
orders were made
above discussion demonstrates that the wife has filed a number of proceedings in
this Court that are without merit and are vexatious,
within the meaning of
s.102QB. As discussed by Davies J and endorsed by Benjamin J, the requirement
of “frequency” may
be met by a relatively small number of
proceedings, if the proceedings are an attempt to re-litigate proceedings that
have already
been determined.
conclude that the wife’s history of litigation in this Court during 2015
and 2016 is sufficient to find that she has frequently
filed vexatious
proceedings.
accept the wife has not filed these proceedings purely out of spite, to harass
or annoy the husband, but the impact of these vexatious
proceedings upon the
husband cannot be ignored. It is clear that the wife continues to believe the
2011 final orders reflect a grave
miscarriage of justice perpetrated by the
husband against her. The wife appears unable to accept that she has now
exhausted all
legal avenues in this regard. She is unable to accept “the
principles of finality of litigation” as discussed by Perram
102QB is designed to protect parties and the Court from exposure to repetitive
and unmeritorious proceedings. Such proceedings
can be a considerable drain
upon Court resources and can cause great cost and inconvenience to other
litigants, such as the husband
in this case.
a citizen’s access to the Court system is a very significant step. It is
not a decision that any Judge takes lightly,
but only after due consideration
and reflection on the evidence presented. However, a citizen’s right to
access the Court
must be balanced against another citizen’s right to be
protected from vexatious Court proceedings. In this matter, there is
a real risk
that the wife will continue to initiate further proceedings that will be equally
without reasonable grounds and an abuse
of process. I conclude that the wife
should be restrained from initiating any proceedings in this Court or any other
Court exercising
Family Law Act 1975
without first being granted leave pursuant to
husband also seeks an order for security of costs, should the wife seek such
leave to commence further proceedings.
Section 102QB
(2)(c) empowers the Court
any other order the court considers appropriate...
and this includes an order for security of
extent of past litigation and the quantum of outstanding costs orders already
made in the husband’s favour in various courts
leads me to conclude that
an order for security for costs may be appropriate and may provide some level of
protection for the respondent
husband. However, this question would need to be
determined in relation to any further proceedings the wife may seek leave to
taking into account the relevant legal principles in relation to security
relation to the Applications still before the Court, the wife’s Amended
Response to an Application in a Case filed 4 March
2015 should be dismissed, as
the orders sought are either vexatious, or misguided. The same conclusion
applies to her Applications
filed 18 December 2015 and 12 January 2016. Having
determined that the wife’s Initiating Application formally filed on 31
March 2016 is also a vexatious proceeding, that Application should also be
wife’s Application in a Case filed 11 December 2015 should be dismissed,
aside from paragraphs 2 and 3. The wife’s
Application in a Case filed 15
March 2016 is conceded by the husband and I will stay the Enforcement Warrant
and associated proceedings.
The wife’s Application in a Case filed 29
March 2016 has not yet been determined.
now make orders as published at the commencement of these Reasons. The Court
will hear brief submissions in relation to the paragraphs
2 and 3 of the
wife’s Application in a Case filed 11 December 2015 and her Application in
a Case filed 29 March 2016.
14 April 2022, the Commissioner consented to certain conduct of the practitioner
being dealt with in Western Australia pursuant
Profession Act 2008
407. Conduct to which this Part
applies — generally
(2) This Part also applies to an Australian legal practitioner’s
conduct occurring outside this jurisdiction but only —
(a) if it is part of a course of conduct that has occurred partly in this
(i) the corresponding authority of each other jurisdiction in which the conduct
has occurred consents to its being dealt with under
this Act; or
(ii) the complainant and the practitioner consent to its being dealt with under
(b) if it occurs in Australia but wholly outside this jurisdiction and the
practitioner concerned is a local lawyer or a local legal
practitioner, and
(i) the corresponding authority of each jurisdiction in which the conduct has
occurred consents to its being dealt with under this
(ii) the complainant and the practitioner concerned consent to its being dealt
with under this Act;
(i) it occurs wholly or partly outside Australia; and
(ii) the practitioner concerned is a local lawyer or a local legal
practitioner.
(3) This Part does not apply to conduct occurring in this jurisdiction if
(a) the Complaints Committee consents to its being dealt with under a
corresponding law; or
(b) the complainant and the Australian legal practitioner consent to its being
dealt with under a corresponding law.
(4) Subsection (3) does not apply if the conduct is not capable of being
dealt with under the corresponding law.
(5) The Complaints Committee may give consent for the purposes of
subsection (3)(a), and may do so conditionally or unconditionally.
55 On 5 May 2022, there was a final hearing of the disciplinary proceedings
in the WASAT.
3 June 2022, the Tribunal delivered its decision, making a finding (by majority)
of unsatisfactory professional conduct and (unanimously)
recommending that
disciplinary proceedings be commenced in the Supreme Court of South Australia.
its own inquiry, on 22 December 2023, the WASAT found the practitioner guilty of
professional misconduct and on 23 February
2024 it made orders giving effect to
those findings.
broad outline, WASAT made the following findings about the conduct of the
practitioner:
practitioner’s conduct would reasonably be regarded as disgraceful or
dishonourable by a practitioner of good repute and
competence;
practitioner was not a fit and proper person to engage in legal practice;
practitioner contravened rr 6(2)(b) and 6(2)(c) of the
Legal Profession
Conduct Rules 2010
6. Other fundamental
ethical obligations
(2) A practitioner must not engage in conduct, in the course of providing
legal services or otherwise, which —
(b) may be prejudicial to, or diminish public confidence in, the administration
of justice; or
(c) may bring the profession into disrepute.
24 April 2024, the WASAT made orders recommending that the practitioner’s
name be removed from the roll of practitioners
maintained in South Australia and
on 6 May 2024 it delivered its penalty decision. By that decision, the WASAT
summarised its findings
concerning the practitioner’s
instances in proceedings in different courts of either commencing or maintaining
applications or appeals which comprised an abuse
of process;
number of instances on which the practitioner made submissions or communicated
with a court in a manner that was discourteous, intemperate
and scandalous;
from a transcript in a manner which had the potential to mislead the appeal
court in circumstances where the respondent
was recklessly indifferent to that
possibility; and
and filing an affidavit that was false in a material respect, where the
practitioner was recklessly indifferent as to whether
the affidavit was false
and as to whether the appeal court would be misled.
WASAT found:
individual instances of conduct, the subject of each of the grounds, were,
individually, serious or very serious instances of
professional misconduct.
Taken collectively, the practitioner’s conduct overall was extremely
serious professional misconduct.
Each of those instances of conduct was demonstrative of a failure to
appreciate and observe the most fundamental standards expected
of practitioners,
namely their duties to the courts not to pursue baseless proceedings, and
thereby to waste the time and resources
of the courts ...
WASAT found that the practitioner’s conduct was not isolated and involved
multiple departures from the fundamental duties
of a lawyer as well as of the
essential qualities for legal practice. The WASAT found that the
practitioner’s misconduct was
indicative of a fundamental lack of
understanding of the standards of behaviour expected of a legal practitioner,
together with a
lack of respect for the
WASAT acknowledged that the practitioner’s misconduct occurred up to ten
years previously, but her disciplinary history
suggested that she had continued
to engage in similar misconduct. The WASAT referred to findings made earlier by
the WASAT in 2015,
as well as the findings and recommendations made by the
Tribunal in South Australia in 2022. It was observed that there was some
similarity in the conduct that was considered by the WASAT and the
WASAT regarded it as important that the practitioner had expressed no remorse
and had never offered any explanation for her misconduct.
The practitioner had
not engaged with WASAT in connection with the findings as to her conduct
relevant to the determination on penalty,
save for sending emails and
submissions by email. The WASAT observed that there was no evidence of any
mitigating factors that could
be taken into account when assessing or moderating
the seriousness of the practitioner’s misconduct.
all of these circumstances, the only appropriate remedy was to recommend
strike-off.
hearing in the Full Court
the hearing before this Court, the practitioner participated by telephone. The
practitioner answered a number of allegations
in a vague and general way,
without detail or evidence concerning particular allegations. For example, in
response to the allegation
that she had earlier terminated a telephone call
hearing in the Family Court, she said that she had experienced a panic attack.
No detail or medical evidence was given, and this explanation may not have been
given to the WASAT.
general nature of the practitioner’s responses may possibly have been a
function of the time that had passed since the
relevant events had occurred.
That might also explain the absence of some corroborating evidence, including
medical evidence. However
the practitioner’s conduct was generally
aggressive to the point of truculence, and she was insistent that there was no
for the Commissioner’s application.
practitioner renewed her applications for evidence, that is, to obtain an answer
to a notice to admit served on the Commissioner,
for leave to issue subpoenas
and to obtain other evidence. It became clear that the practitioner’s
purpose in seeking this
material was, amongst other matters, to demonstrate
impropriety on the part of the Commissioner, that senior counsel for her former
husband was conflicted and had misled a court, and that there was a conspiracy
between Federal Magistrates Court or Federal Circuit
Court judges (as they were
formerly described) and a Family Court judge (as those judges were formerly
described), to make orders
against her and punish her in costs.
the hearing in this Court, the practitioner reiterated that senior counsel for
the husband had been prevented by a conflict
from acting. The practitioner said
that the conflict arose as a result of the practitioner’s email to senior
counsel, in which
she asked senior counsel to represent her and set out the
details of the case. She said the staff at the chambers of senior counsel
responded that senior counsel declined to act. No details were given, and the
practitioner was not in a position to adduce evidence
to support her
contentions.
was no explanation given for the assumption that senior counsel must have read
the email, and it was inferred rather than demonstrated
that the email contained
privileged and confidential information as distinct from an outline of the case.
No further information
was provided by the practitioner which explained or
justified the contention that there was a relevant conflict of interest. As
explained, the practitioner may have been in difficulty with details and
evidence by reason of the effluxion of time.
importantly, the practitioner seemed determined to prove contentions such as
these in this Court for reasons that she could
never satisfactorily explain.
For example, the practitioner did not suggest that establishing her conflict
contention might address
or perhaps mitigate the adverse findings she
confronted. Rather, the practitioner seemed determined to re-litigate past
cases without
reference to the adverse findings and rulings made in them.
hearing submissions, the Court dismissed the practitioner’s
applications.
an example of the way the practitioner failed to respond to the matters on which
the Commissioner relied in these proceedings,
the practitioner responded in her
amended outline of submissions along the following lines (underlining in the
The complaints by Ms Nelson QC [senior counsel for the
former husband] and her instructing solicitors, Ms Colie and Mr Grant were
collusion and under the instruction of either the former husband or
It is deemed important to ascertain whether the former
husband instructed and paid for these complaints to be collated and lodged
the LPCC because if so then it is another form of family violence ie coercive
control using proxy use of the lawyers and the
LPCC. The LPCC then should not
be involving itself nor allowing to be used by proxy in the form of further
violence against the
Respondent. It is unethical at best.
The Respondent
had lodged complaints against all three lawyers in 2013/14 with the most serious
against Ms Nelson QC (now KC) including
her regular misleading of courts
(plural) on material fact issues on which she had to know was misleading
because she had a copy of Consent Orders and the transcripts of the hearings
plus she attended the hearings as the barrister for the
former husband from 2012
onward until around 2015
. The complaints by the Respondent were made in
2013/14 and prior to their colluded complaints against the Respondent inn late
It is known to have been collusion as each of the three lawyers took a
set time period each and their complaints period did not
cross over at all. It
was extremely obvious to have been by collusion by the three lawyers. It is
also obvious that the complaints
against the Respondent were vexatious and or
counter-complaints
practitioner’s submissions continued in this vein for many pages.
objection from the practitioner, the Commissioner put before the Court an email
the practitioner had sent to the Court and
the Commissioner the previous
evening. The practitioner’s email dated 5 December 2024
Good afternoon All
I am not logged into CourtSA nor intend doing so as I have no computer for
ease of such access, so can you send me a copy of that
hearing date and time
please as an attachment to an email? Also can you ensure it is readable with no
overlaid symbols hiding the
date and time? Wonderful.
While we are on the subject of hearings then I give notice that this Supreme
Court has no inherent jurisdiction to hear the LPCC application
against me. Why?
Because I am not a local legal practitioner holding a practising certificate nor
have I held one for around 7 3/4
years as per the inherent jurisdictional powers
outlined in the
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
. As far as my current and past
character goes, it is excellent for a person nearly 66 years of age. No client
complaints, no criminal
charges, no fraud, no deaths by hit and run, no drug
labs, no firearms etc. I am a fit and proper person to be within any profession.
Instead I am being undermined deliberately by the LPCC since 2013/14 where they
never investigated my complaints. They are protecting
those I complained
against. They are alleging conduct against me which in fact Ms Nelson KC did eg
she regularly misled the courts
on material fact issues. I was shocked by her
conduct and it caused me distress. That on top of the stress from family
violence and
stress from my university research on corruption within SA which
exposed me to threats and dangers. Further, now the LPCC argue they
their funding from the fidelity fund each year so are not part of the
government. Well, yes they are a government body, a
State government entity as
per their ABN. Still further, the AG has to authorise any release of funds from
the fidelity fund and
he requires reasons for any release. It's discretionary by
use of the word "may" in the
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
. The LPCC is a
government body and s75(iv) of the Australian
Constitution
applies. The argument
it does not because the SA and WA tribunals are administrative is wrong. Every
tribunal is administrative and
every State tribunal is both administrative and
prevented from hearing such classes of matters as noted in
Constitution
, and as per the decision in Burns v Corbett
[2018] HCA 15.
and WA are audited by the government. As for VCAT, then Member Tang rejected
Burns v Corbett on the opposing argument I was
still a Victorian resident and
only temporarily elsewhere due to a serious immobility condition from April 2017
ie from a lumbar
block which left me partially paralysed. That argument was
wrong because I wasn't a Vic resident at that time, I had no base in Vic
whilst I was recuperating for months, then I went to my home State of Qld where
I encouraged both LPCC's in SA and WA to transfer their files to Qld but both
declined for fear of losing their control it would appear.
Yet still further, between around 2014 until a later amendment to the said
Act, the time period for charges by the LPCC was within
3 years. In around 2019
that time period was amended back to 5 years. However, any likely charges from
the 2015 revenge complaints
towards me in retaliation for my initial complaints,
would have expired in 2018 or should have been closed if the LPCC did not seek
an extension of time prior to its end date. It did not do so. Pray tell, why
from 2015 onwards was I responding to both SA and WA
on the very same complaints
from the very same revenge complainants for 9 and 8 years respectively? That is
grossly unfair, such
alone to be sufficient for a dismissal.
Again, I note, I have been railroaded into a past tracked hearing without
being given adequate time for what are 12 year files and
documents up to the
current date. I work Monday to Friday and have little computer time at the
public library.
This is a deliberate denial of procedural fairness or natural justice and I
am not happy so I will be seeking a review or appeal of
these outcomes. A
reasonably informed observer would know this has been unfair since the first
hearing and won't be fair unless it's
either dismissed or withdrawn and
transferred to Qld.
the practitioner was asked by this Court whether she maintained the allegations
of improper and dishonest conduct against the
Commissioner, as referred to in
the 2022 Tribunal reasons at [79], she said that these accusations were
justified and, in effect,
the Tribunal was
wrong to find that they were unfounded, and the Tribunal was also wrong to find
that it was unprofessional of her
to make them.
the practitioner was asked to respond to the proposition that her insistence on
maintaining unmeritorious jurisdictional challenges
and unfounded allegations of
improper and dishonest conduct against the Commissioner tended to demonstrate
that she was not a fit
and proper person to remain as a legal practitioner, she
gave a long speech.
practitioner commenced her speech by reiterating that she did not want to
practice law, but that she did not want to be “held
as unfit to
practise”. She said that she had put up with 9 years of bullying by the
disciplinary authorities and that this
“is why so many lawyers end up with
mental health issues when they have to respond to these regulators”. She
how this could be allowed to occur in a State where the Equal
Opportunity Commissioner had just released a damning report concerning
harassment in the legal profession, and where Dr Colin Manock had been permitted
to operate as a pathologist.
practitioner said that she knew the Court would “strike me off” but
that this was because she stood up for herself.
She said that this was despite
official corruption in this State, and the investigation she had carried out
into that corruption.
The practitioner said that as a result she had been shot
at and her daughter had been assaulted in circumstances of family violence.
said that no one cared about that, and no one asked about the corruption she was
investigating.
will be seen, we have taken the practitioner’s conduct in this Court into
account. Indeed, we have given that conduct principal
weight in our
determination about the practitioner’s fitness to remain a practitioner of
this Court.
The findings on which this Court has been invited to
Commissioner invited the Court to adopt and act on the findings of the Tribunal
and the WASAT without further inquiry in accordance
with s 89(5) of the Act.
Section 89 provides:
89—Proceedings before Supreme
(1) Where the Tribunal after conducting an inquiry into the conduct of a
legal practitioner recommends that disciplinary proceedings
be commenced against
the legal practitioner in the Supreme Court, the Commissioner, the
Attorney-General or the Society may institute
disciplinary proceedings in the
Supreme Court against the legal practitioner.
(1a) If the Commissioner is of the opinion that the name of a legal
practitioner should be struck off the roll of legal practitioners
under this Act or the roll kept in a participating State that corresponds to the
roll maintained under this Act because
the practitioner has been found guilty of
a serious offence, or for any other reason, the Commissioner may, without laying
before the Tribunal, institute disciplinary proceedings in the Supreme
Court against the practitioner.
(i) a recommendation is made by the Tribunal that disciplinary proceedings be
commenced against a legal practitioner in the Supreme
(ii) the Commissioner has advised a legal practitioner in writing of his or her
intention to institute disciplinary proceedings against
the legal practitioner
in the Supreme Court; and
(b) the legal practitioner informs the Court in writing that he or she would
consent to an order that his or her name be struck off
the roll of legal
practitioners maintained under this Act or the roll kept in a participating
State that corresponds to the roll
maintained under this Act,
the Court may, despite the fact that disciplinary proceedings have not been
instituted, order that the name of the legal practitioner
be struck off the roll
maintained under this Act or kept in the other State (as appropriate).
(2) In any disciplinary proceedings against a legal practitioner (whether
instituted under this section or not) the Supreme Court
may exercise any one or
more of the following powers:
(a) it may reprimand the legal practitioner;
(b) it may make an order imposing conditions on the legal practitioner's
practising certificate (whether a practising certificate
under this Act or an
interstate practising certificate)—
(i) relating to the practitioner's legal practice; or
(ii) requiring that the legal practitioner, within a specified time, complete
further education or training, or receive counselling,
of a specified type;
(c) it may make an order suspending the legal practitioner's practising
certificate (whether a practising certificate under this
Act or an interstate
practising certificate) until the end of the period specified in the order or
until further order;
(d) it may order that the name of the legal practitioner be struck off the roll
of legal practitioners maintained under this Act
or the roll kept in a
participating State that corresponds to the roll maintained under this Act;
(e) it may make any other order (including an order as to the costs of
proceedings before the Court and the Tribunal) that it considers
(4) In any disciplinary proceedings the Supreme Court may refer any matter to
a Judge or Associate Justice, or to the Tribunal, for
investigation and
(5) In any disciplinary proceedings—
(a) the Supreme Court may, without further inquiry, accept and act on any
findings of the Tribunal or of a Judge or Associate Justice
to whom a matter has
been referred for investigation and report under subsection (4); and
(b) the Supreme Court may—
(i) receive in evidence a transcript of evidence taken in any proceedings before
a court of any State and draw any conclusions of
fact from the evidence that it
considers proper;
(ii) adopt, as in its discretion it considers proper, any findings, decision,
judgment or reasons for judgment of any such court
that may be relevant to the
proceedings.
(6) Where the Supreme Court is satisfied, on the application of the
Commissioner, the Attorney-General or the Society, that a legal
practitioner is
disqualified or suspended from practice under the law of any other State
(whether or not that State is a participating
State), it may, without further
inquiry, impose a corresponding disqualification or suspension under the
provisions of this section.
Commissioner argued that this Court could act on the Tribunal’s findings
under s 89(5) and on the WASAT findings under
s 89(5)(b) of the
are a number of difficulties with this approach.
there is a difficulty with the Commissioner’s contention that this Court
may “without further inquiry” decide
to “accept and act upon
the findings of the Tribunal” under s 89(5)(a) of the Act. This provision
is clearly intended
to confer on the Court the capacity in any disciplinary
proceedings to have regard to findings made by the Tribunal in certain
circumstances,
relieving the Court of the need to make its own findings, as well
as overcoming any perceived issue with giving testimonial effect
to what might
otherwise be hearsay statements made by the Tribunal. As a provision designed
to confer power on the Court, it should
be read broadly and beneficially.
words of s 89(5)(a), however, necessarily invite reference to s 89(4). The
focus of s 89(4) is on the capacity of the Court
to delegate fact-finding where
that may be thought necessary only after the commencement of disciplinary
proceedings in this Court.
That kind of power has long been available to the
Supreme Court, for example, where it may formerly have directed a Master or
to inquire and report to
when one reads these provisions together, as they must be, s 89(5)(a) cannot be
read as if it simply said, “the Supreme
Court may, without further
inquiry, accept and act on any findings of the Tribunal”. Effect must
also be given to the words
following, “or of a Judge or Associate Justice
to whom a matter has been referred for investigation and report under subsection
it might be suggested that these words only qualify referrals by a Judge or an
Associate Justice, when these provisions are
read together s 89(5) must be read
as a corollary of the power of referral conferred by s 89(4). That is, in cases
where the Supreme
Court has referred any matter to a Judge or Associate Justice
or to the Tribunal, for investigation and report, and the Tribunal,
Associate Justice has reported, only then may the Court “without further
inquiry, accept and act on any findings of
the Tribunal or of a Judge or
Associate Justice”.
that reading of these provisions, s 89(5)(a) provides no free-standing power to
act on Tribunal findings because the inquiry conducted
by the Tribunal
concerning the practitioner during 2021 and 2022 was not one which had been
referred to the Tribunal by the Supreme
Court for investigation and report under
s 89(4) of the Act. On the contrary, the charge laid in the Tribunal
followed an investigation
conducted by the Commissioner on his own initiative
pursuant to s 77B, and the subsequent inquiry was conducted by the Tribunal
to s 82(4) of the Act.
however, is not the approach which has been taken to Tribunal findings in
previous decisions.
As Doyle CJ
explained in
Law Society of South Australia v
would be peculiar if, in such a case, the Court had no choice but to rehear the
evidence, or to go through the process of referring
to the Tribunal, for
investigation and report, the matters with which it had already dealt. It is
for those reasons that I consider
that s89(1) by implication authorises the
Court to receive and to act upon findings of the Tribunal.
earlier decisions have taken the view that there is an implication to be derived
from s 89(1) that the Court has the power to
act on Tribunal findings,
regardless whether the Tribunal has made those findings on a referral made under
s 89(4), and that the
Court also has the power to act on Tribunal findings in
the exercise of its inherent
for that approach may be seen in the scheme of Part 6 of the Act, including ss
82 and 89, when read as a whole. That scheme
demonstrates that the power in the
Tribunal to conduct an inquiry on the laying of a charge may result in a number
of specific findings
or conclusions enumerated in s 82(6). Section 82 of the
Act is as follows:
82—Inquiries
(1) Subject to this section, a charge may be laid under this section alleging
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct—
(a) on the part of any legal practitioner; or
(b) on the part of any former legal practitioner who was at the time of the
alleged unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct a legal
practitioner.
(1a) A charge may not be laid before the Tribunal relating to conduct by a
legal practitioner or former legal practitioner if the
Commissioner has
exercised a power under section 77J in relation to the conduct.
(2) A charge may be laid under this section by—
(a) the Attorney-General; or
(b) the Commissioner; or
(c) the Society; or
(d) a person claiming to be aggrieved by reason of the alleged unsatisfactory
professional conduct or professional misconduct.
(2a) A charge may not be laid before the Tribunal more than 5 years after the
day on which the person laying the charge became aware
of the conduct to which
the charge relates unless—
(a) the charge is laid by the Attorney-General; or
(b) the Tribunal allows an extension of time.
(2c) A charge may be laid before the Tribunal despite the fact that criminal
proceedings have been or are to be commenced in relation
to a matter to which
the charge relates.
(3) A charge laid under this section must be in the form prescribed by rules
under this Division.
(4) Where a charge has been laid under this section, the Tribunal must,
subject to subsection (5), inquire into the conduct of the
legal practitioner or
former legal practitioner to whom the charge relates.
(5) The Tribunal may summarily dismiss any charge that it considers frivolous
or vexatious and may, for the purpose of dealing with
such a charge, consist of
(6) If after conducting an inquiry under this section the Tribunal is
(a) that a legal practitioner is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
or professional misconduct it may exercise any one
or more of the following
(i) it may reprimand the legal practitioner;
(ib) it may make orders with respect to the examination of the legal
practitioner’s files and records by a person approved
by the Tribunal (at
the expense of the legal practitioner) at the intervals, and for the period,
specified in the order;
(ii) it may order the legal practitioner to pay a fine not exceeding—
(A) $50 000; or
(B) if the Tribunal is constituted of 1 member in accordance with section
80(1a)(a)—$10 000;
(iii) it may make an order imposing conditions on the legal practitioner's
practising certificate (whether a practising certificate
under this Act or an
interstate practising certificate)—
(A) relating to the practitioner's legal practice (provided that, in the
case of an order made without the consent of the practitioner,
such conditions
must not operate for a period exceeding 12 months); or
(B) requiring that the legal practitioner, within a specified time, complete
further education or training, or receive counselling,
of a specified type;
(iv) it may make an order suspending the legal practitioner's practising
certificate (whether a practising certificate under this
Act or an interstate
practising certificate) until the end of the period specified in the order, not
(A) 12 months; or
(B) if the Tribunal is constituted of 1 member in accordance with section
80(1a)(a)—3 months;
(v) it may, unless constituted of 1 member in accordance with section 80(1a)(a),
recommend that disciplinary proceedings be commenced
against the legal
practitioner in the Supreme Court; or
(b) that a former legal practitioner was, while he or she remained a legal
practitioner, guilty of professional misconduct—it
may order the former
legal practitioner to pay a fine not exceeding—
(i) $50 000; or
(ii) if the Tribunal is constituted of 1 member in accordance with section
80(1a)(a)—$10 000.
(c) that a former legal practitioner was, while he or she remained a legal
practitioner, guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct—it
the former legal practitioner to pay a fine not exceeding—
(i) $25 000; or
(ii) if the Tribunal is constituted of 1 member in accordance with section
80(1a)(a)—$5 000.
(6b) A condition imposed on a practising certificate or interstate practising
certificate pursuant to an order under this section
may be varied or revoked at
any time on application by the legal practitioner.
(7) After completing an inquiry under this section, the Tribunal must
transmit the evidence taken by the Tribunal on the inquiry together
memorandum of its findings to the Attorney-General, the Society and the
Commissioner.
(8) If, after conducting an inquiry into a charge alleging professional
misconduct by a person who is a legal practitioner or former
legal practitioner,
the Tribunal—
(a) is not satisfied that the person is guilty of professional misconduct;
(b) is satisfied that the person is guilty of unsatisfactory professional
the Tribunal must find the person not guilty of professional misconduct, but
may find the person guilty of unsatisfactory professional
can be seen that the Tribunal has the power to exercise any one or more of a
number of powers after an inquiry conducted under
s 82(4) of the Act. These
include ordering a reprimand, imposing a fine, imposing conditions on practice,
ordering suspension from
practice for up to 12 months and, under s 82(6)(a)(v),
the Tribunal may “recommend that disciplinary proceedings be commenced
against the legal practitioner in the Supreme Court”. The Tribunal may
recommend proceedings where it has in mind strike-off
or suspension for longer
than 12 months, these being powers reposed only in the Supreme Court and not in
the Tribunal.
disciplinary proceedings are then brought in accordance with the
Tribunal’s recommendation, s 88A makes it clear that
Part 6 does not
derogate from the Court’s inherent jurisdiction, and s 89(1) assumes that
those disciplinary proceedings will
be instituted in the Supreme Court, whether
on the application of the Commissioner, the Attorney-General or the Society.
Thereafter,
a number of provisions facilitate the conduct of disciplinary proceedings,
including where they follow a recommendation
made by the Tribunal after an
inquiry conducted under s 82(4). For example, s 89(1a) allows the Commissioner
to institute disciplinary
proceedings in the Supreme Court without previously
laying a charge where the Commissioner is of the opinion that the name of the
legal practitioner should be struck off (even if the practitioner was admitted
elsewhere) where “the practitioner has been
found guilty of a serious
offence, or for any other reason”.
addition, by s 89(1b), where the Tribunal has recommended that disciplinary
proceedings be commenced against the legal practitioner
in the Supreme Court, or
the Commissioner has in writing advised the practitioner of an intention to
institute those proceedings,
and the practitioner consents to strike off, the
Court may make an order for strike-off even if proceedings have not yet been
instituted.
The powers conferred on the Court by s 89(2) expand on those available to the
Tribunal and also include, as has been seen, the power
to order strike-off and
suspension for longer than 12 months.
the Part 6 scheme is viewed in this way, the reference to proceedings being
commenced following an inquiry by the Tribunal in
s 89(1) is complementary to
the power of the Tribunal to conduct inquiries under s 82(4), particularly where
the anticipated sanction
is only within the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.
On that approach, the Court may have regard to Tribunal findings made: (1)
following an inquiry under s 82(4) and proceedings commenced under s 89(1); (2)
under the inherent jurisdiction of the Court which
is preserved by s 88A;
and (3) following a referral made under s 89(4) of the Act after proceedings
have been commenced.
follows that, in the circumstances of this case, the power conferred by
s 89(5)(a) is not available to this Court and the Commissioner’s
submission must be rejected because there has been no referral to the Tribunal
made under s 89(4). Nonetheless, the general approach
may be supported under a
combination of an implication derived from s 89(1) and the inherent jurisdiction
of this Court. Whilst
the syntax is far from elegant or clear, this general
approach accords with the scheme of Part 6 as well as the authorities earlier
Nonetheless,
the second difficulty with the Commissioner’s approach concerns whether,
under s 89(5)(b)(ii), this Court may
adopt “any findings, decision,
judgment or reasons for judgment made by any ... court”, being the
findings of the WASAT
or, alternatively, the decisions of the courts on which
the WASAT has relied.
Commissioner submitted that the word “court”, when used in s
89(5)(b), should be given an “expansive”
construction and held to
embrace a tribunal such as the WASAT, and not merely a “Chapter III
Court”, namely, a court
as might be ordinarily
understood.
The Commissioner
cited no authority in support of this approach to findings made by interstate
tribunals charged with responsibility
for disciplining legal practitioners.
Nonetheless, the Commissioner gave as an example the approach taken to the
interpretation
Supreme Court Act 1935
(SA) by Bleby
This case was not in the
Commissioner’s written submissions or list of authorities, but it and the
decision of the Full Court
addressed below were the subject of supplementary
written submissions. In those submissions, the Commissioner emphasised the
convenience
associated with the capacity for this Court to rely on the findings
of the WASAT. In her lengthy written submissions, which were
ill-focussed and at times offensive, the practitioner disagreed but did not
address these decisions apart from her submission
that “the 2005 case did
not involve a class of matters defined in
Constitution
Mitsubishi v Kowalski
, in the course of vexatious litigant declaration
proceedings concerning Mr Kowalski, Bleby J followed Full Court authority which
had construed a reference to a court in
as encompassing a
At the time of that
decision the Supreme Court was only explicitly permitted by
to have regard
to decisions made in State
the proceedings said to be vexatious by the plaintiff are proceedings instituted
in the Workers Compensation Tribunal (“the
Tribunal”) constituted
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Compensation Act”). At a directions hearing during the course of these
proceedings a Master ordered that the question
“whether or not the Workers
Compensation Tribunal is a court for the purposes of
be heard and determined before any other issue in dispute”.
It was further ordered that the question be referred to the Full
Court. The Full
Court gave its decision on 24 September 2004:
Mitsubishi Motors
Australia Ltd v Kowalski
[2004] SASC 302.
Although the decision was handed
down after the amendment, the argument had been heard before the amendment and
was based on the
provisions of
as they were before the amendment. The Full
Court answered the question:
“The Workers Compensation Tribunal is a ‘court of the
State’ for the purposes of
Supreme Court Act
In view of the answer given it is not necessary to consider whether the
amendments to
had any retrospective effect. It is now clear that both
before and after the amendment, the “proceedings” referred to
sub-section (1) include proceedings in the Tribunal whenever instituted. So far
as it affects the resolution of this application,
the amendment has made no
material difference. It does not mean, as the defendant now contends, that the
amendment has the effect
of rendering the Tribunal not a court at any time
preceding the amendment. It will be necessary to return to consider the meaning
and application of some of the particular terms used in
Mitsubishi Motors Australia Ltd v Kowalski
the Full Court held that
whether the relevant Tribunal was a “court” had to be determined
having regard to the statutory
context and purpose of the
Supreme Court Act
The Full Court
also held that that it was necessary to have regard to the nature, procedure and
powers of the statutory Tribunal
in order to determine whether it was
appropriate to regard it as a “court” for the purposes of the
undertaking that analysis, the proper construction could not be arrived at
simply by reference to a checklist of
but by commencing
with whether there has been an investing of judicial power and its incidents,
such as whether the body makes binding
and authoritative decision on
controversies, determines existing rights and duties according to law rather
than by the formulation
of policy or the exercise of an administrative
discretion, and whether the body has the capacity to give a decision enforceable
the Court of Appeal explained in
New South Wales Bar Association v
, in connection with a case concerning whether commissioners
comprised a “court” for the purposes of the law of
determination of whether a body is a “court” to attract the
protection of the law of contempt must be considered in
the light of all of the
characteristics of that body. Whether a body may be categorised as a
“court” depends not upon
an artificial check list of universal
application but upon the purposes for which the categorisation is made. Thus, a
decision that
a body is a “court” for the beneficial provisions of
Suitors’ Fund Act
, may not necessarily determine whether
that body is a “court” to attract the very great power which
accompanies the application
of contempt law: cf
Australian Postal Commission
v Dao (No 2)
(1986) 6 NSWLR 497
at 513 and the cases there cited. Obviously,
some of the same considerations will overlap. But in each case it is important
in mind the reason for the search ...
There is no simple answer to this question, as the parties conceded. It is a
matter of considering the criteria by which the categorisation
is to be made and
then examining the statutory and other material to decide whether the
commissioners fall inside or outside the
category for this purpose.
this passage makes clear, whether a body is a “court” will usually
turn on “the reason for the search”.
Recently, the High Court
accepted that the laws relating to proportionate liability which referred to a
“court” were
capable of applying to an arbitral
Court received no submissions from the Commissioner about whether or to what
extent the WASAT exercised judicial power and its
necessary incidents sufficient
to warrant its characterisation as a court for the purposes of s 89(5) of the
Act, in the manner explained
by the Full Court in
Mitsubishi Motors Australia
Ltd v Kowalski
. Whilst the Commissioner submitted, and there may be much to
be said for the proposition that the WASAT should be regarded as a
court for the
purposes of s 89(5), especially where it is charged with responsibility for
disciplining legal practitioners and making
associated findings, that conclusion
should await a case in which it is necessary to decide it with the benefit of
considered submissions
on both sides of the debate.
for the Commissioner’s alternative contention, that this Court could
simply consider the underlying court decisions relied
on by the WASAT, that
contention must address the difficulties posed by the actual words of s 89(5)(b)
of the Act.
the Commissioner emphasised s 89(5)(b)(ii) and the broad discretion in this
Court to adopt findings or reasons for judgment,
they are findings or reasons
“of any such court”. Here again it is necessary to read these words
in their proper context.
They invite attention to s 89(5)(b)(i) and the
reference to a transcript “taken in any proceedings before a court of any
Whilst some decisions emanated from the Magistrates Court,
District Court or Court of Appeal in Western Australia, most were Family
or Federal Magistrates or Federal Circuit Court proceedings, each of which would
ordinarily be thought to be Federal courts,
not State courts. On the face of
it, the findings made in those Federal courts fall outside the scope of s
89(5)(b) of the Act.
it turns out, and unusually, the Family Court of Western Australia is a State
court. Although the Family Court of Western Australia
was first established by
Family Court Act 1975
(Cth), it is now continued by the
Court Act 1997
Family Court of Western Australia is a court of
and vested with both
federal and non-federal
Nonetheless,
the Court received no submissions from the Commissioner about whether or to what
extent Federal courts could be regarded
as State courts for the purposes of s
89(5)(b) of the Act, nor about whether and to what extent the decisions made in
Western Australia
affecting the practitioner were made by the Family Court of
Western Australia or, alternatively, by the Family Court or the Federal
Magistrates or Federal Circuit Court.
no submissions were made about whether the High Court should be regarded as a
State court for the purposes of s 89 of
the Act, especially where that Court
sits at the apex of this State’s legal system.
whilst there may be much to be said for the proposition that this Court should
be able to have regard to evidence led and
findings made in the High Court and
Federal courts and tribunals when looking at the conduct of legal practitioners
and making associated
disciplinary findings about them, that conclusion should
await a case in which it is necessary to decide the issue with the benefit
considered submissions on both sides of the debate. That debate will likely
commence with the submissions made by the Commissioner
that these provisions of
the Act were likely drawn up at a time before there was widespread movement in
the legal profession as a
result of the mutual recognition
arrangements
counterparts, and there are a number of considerations, including considerations
of efficiency, which would support a broad
reading of s 89(5) of the Act.
the Court received no submissions from the Commissioner on whether it might be
feasible to resort to the inherent powers
of the Court and, in that way, take up
the evidence or findings of the High Court, the WASAT and Federal courts and
tribunals when
determining disciplinary proceedings concerning a practitioner
admitted by this Court. Whilst it might be said that this should
case for the exercise of the Court’s inherent
and that save where
an Act or rules of court address these issues in a
manner inconsistent with the continued recognition of the inherent power, the
of the inherent power is not limited or
circumscribed,
it is again appropriate to defer a conclusion until the issue can be determined
with the benefit of considered
giving consideration to whether this Court can or should act on the transcript
or findings made by another court or tribunal,
it will usually be necessary to
know the nature of the hearing and the degree of participation by the
practitioner in that hearing.
It would usually be necessary to know, for
example, if it was a disciplinary hearing concerning the conduct of the
practitioner,
whether the practitioner was given a procedurally fair hearing and
an opportunity to be heard and challenge the evidence before the
tribunal made adverse findings. Whether rights of appeal were taken up
might also be relevant.
the Court is being invited to act on transcript or findings in hearings where
the practitioner was appearing for a client,
or on the practitioner’s own
account, it will again be necessary to know, at least in a broad way, the nature
of the hearing
and the form of the participation by the practitioner in that
hearing. Each case will turn on the particular facts and circumstances
raised though, in some settings, the nature of the hearing and the
practitioner’s role in it will be obvious from a reading
Relevant principles regarding disciplinary
purpose of this Court’s exercise of disciplinary powers concerning a
practitioner is for the protection of the public rather
than the punishment of a
practitioner.
The protection of
the public will require that any disciplinary sanction be exercised having
regard to specific and general deterrence.
In other words, so as to make it
clear to the practitioner and to the legal profession that the Court will not
tolerate misconduct.
deterring misconduct and upholding professional standards, the Court maintains
public confidence in the legal
profession;
that, indeed, is the
purpose of appropriate professional regulation and
enforcement.
will usually be necessary for this Court to have regard to the totality of the
practitioner’s conduct, as well as the character
practitioner.
Because the Court
acts in the public interest, rather than with a view to the punishment of a
practitioner, the personal circumstances
of the practitioner and any extenuating
circumstances are generally of less
importance.
In cases of serious
wrongdoing, it will often follow that a practitioner’s good professional
conduct before or after professional
misconduct will remain a secondary
consideration.
those practitioners who can and do observe the minimum professional standards
expected of the legal profession should be permitted
to remain members of that
profession.
considering whether to strike a practitioner’s name from the roll there
are usually three key considerations. First,
the public must be protected from
legal practitioners who are ignorant of or indifferent to the basic rules and
requirements of proper
professional
Second, to the extent
that the practitioner is not fit to practise, the entitlement to practise should
either be restricted or denied.
Finally, and for so long as a practitioner’s name remains on the roll,
that practitioner is effectively being held out by
this Court as fit to practise
the profession of the law.
Ultimately,
the question for this Court is whether the practitioner is at the time of the
determination of the application fit to
remain a member of the legal
profession.
are many examples of professional misconduct which are capable of demonstrating
a practitioner’s lack of fitness and
propriety to practise the profession
of the law. One is disrespect for the court and its processes in the conduct of
disciplinary
proceedings. For example, a practitioner was struck off the roll
for conduct that included filing affidavits in disciplinary proceedings
with argumentative material, including allegations of gross misconduct against
judicial officers, practitioners and Court
staff, none of which appeared to have
any foundation.
a legal practitioner is personally involved in a legal proceeding, the
practitioner nonetheless remains bound by fundamental
duties of fairness and
For example, a
practitioner’s duty of candour and honesty to a court or tribunal will
operate regardless of whether the practitioner
is acting in a personal or
professional
determination of the Commissioner’s application
this case the Court has had regard to the findings made by the Tribunal, the
adverse jurisdictional rulings made in the Tribunal
and other fora but,
principally, her conduct in the disciplinary proceedings before this Court
including her determination to relitigate
an adverse jurisdictional ruling.
of the difficulties associated with the Commissioner’s reliance on the
findings of an interstate Tribunal (the WASAT),
as well as the High Court, the
Family Court, and the Federal Magistrates and Federal Circuit Court decisions
for the purposes of
s 89(5) of the Act, we have not relied on the findings made
in those decisions except in so far as they provide the context for
understanding
the submissions made by the practitioner to this Court.
be clear, we have not relied on any factual finding made in the High Court, the
WASAT, the Family Court, the Federal Magistrates
or Federal Circuit Court
decisions to which the Tribunal referred (extracted earlier). However, we have
had regard to the Western
Australian District Court findings. We have also had
regard to the adverse jurisdictional rulings made here and interstate, because
they are relevant to understanding the practitioner’s approach to the
Burns v Corbett
point). We have also considered and the relied on the findings made in the
have taken this course even though no clear submission about the effect of s 89
of the Act was made by the practitioner.
these circumstances, and on that basis, the following findings are made. First,
it is clear that the practitioner has consistently,
to the point of vexation,
persisted with unmeritorious challenges to the jurisdiction of various tribunals
including the Tribunal.
At no stage did the practitioner acknowledge these
rulings or explain why they might be wrong or distinguishable. She simply made
the same challenge based on
Burns v Corbett
. We add that the
practitioner persisted with a similarly unmeritorious challenge to the
of sections of the Act. We
have also taken into account the criticisms of what was regarded as
unmeritorious litigation pressed
by the practitioner in the District Court of
Western Australia in 2013 and 2016 (referred to earlier as cases numbered 2 and
the practitioner stubbornly persisted with attempts to introduce evidentiary
material (including by notice to admit and
subpoena) which was intended to
overcome earlier rulings made against her in her own Family Court and other
litigation, without regard
to the issues apparently facing her in these
disciplinary proceedings. That this evidence was irrelevant and unhelpful to a
determination
of the disciplinary proceedings was of no apparent concern to the
practitioner. Indeed, some of the evidence was intended to prove
a conspiracy
directed against her, allegedly engaged in by members of the Family Court and
the Federal Magistrates and Federal Circuit
it is clear that the practitioner made baseless claims of improper and dishonest
conduct against the Commissioner before
the Tribunal, and she persisted with
those kinds of claims before this Court, both orally and in writing.
the practitioner’s participation in the hearing before this Court
demonstrated that she was unable, or at best unwilling,
to address the issues
raised for her response by the application and by the Court, and she had no real
understanding of appropriate
professional conduct. The practitioner
demonstrated a remarkable lack of understanding of the legal issues and the way
legal proceedings should be conducted. She seemed determined to
relitigate her past cases and, at times, she insisted on speaking
Commissioner and the Court, ignoring requests that she allow others to finish
speaking. This was no mere failure in etiquette,
for it reflected a lack of
understanding and respect for the Court and its processes.
practitioner’s conduct would have been surprising in an unrepresented
litigant but, in an admitted legal practitioner,
it was completely unacceptable.
practitioner demonstrated that she was unable to meet the basic, minimum
requirements expected of someone held out by this Court
as fit and proper to
practise as a legal practitioner.
perhaps the most concerning feature of the practitioner’s conduct
concerned her written and oral submissions which
traversed issues far removed
from the issues at stake in these disciplinary proceedings. The
practitioner’s final speech delved,
it will be recalled, into the conduct
of Dr Manock and others, as well as sweeping corruption allegations. The
practitioner’s
conduct in these proceedings demonstrated that she cannot
adhere in any disciplined or logical way to a discussion about the legal
actually before the Court and, instead, she exhibited a tendency to drift into a
discussion about matters that were at best
irrelevant if not outright fantastic,
quite disengaged from reality.
though the practitioner never intends to return to legal practice, it would be
dangerous to allow her to continue to be held
out as a person who is fit and
proper to practise the profession of the law.
will be an order removing the practitioner’s name from the roll of
practitioners maintained by this Court.
practitioner must pay the Commissioner’s costs.
2021 Tribunal
, comprising KE Clark SC, C Gillam and M Dawson, (Ex SH5).
2022 Tribunal
, comprising KE Clark SC, C Gillam and M Dawson, (Ex SH6).
Legal Services and
Complaints Committee v McCardle [No 2]
[2023] WASAT 131 (Pritchard
Member Aitken and Member Povey) (22 December 2023) (Ex SH8).
Legal Services and
Complaints Committee v McCardle [No 2]
[2023] WASAT 131(S) (Pritchard
Senior Member Aitken and Member Povey) (24 April 2024) (Ex SH10).
The recommendation was made
pursuant to
ss 438(2)(b)
Legal Profession Act 2008
Burns v Corbett
265 CLR 304.
Burns v Corbett
265 CLR 304.
Legal Profession Complaints
Committee v McCardle
[2020] WASAT 51
, [8]; 2021 Tribunal reasons, [10]-[28];
McCardle v Victorian Legal Services Board (Legal Practice)
[2021] VCAT
(9 July 2021).
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Kaminski
[2021] SASCFC 39
, [12]. See also
Southern Law
Society v Westbrook
[1910] HCA 31
(1910) 10 CLR 609
Law Society of South
Australia v Murphy
[1999] SASC 83
, [30]-[34] (Doyle CJ, with whom Millhouse
and Prior JJ agreed);
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v Boylen
, [52] (Debelle J).
Mutual Recognition
(South Australia) Act 1993
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v McCardle
[2024] SASCFC 3
2022 Tribunal reasons,
2022 Tribunal reasons,
2022 Tribunal reasons,
2022 Tribunal reasons,
2022 Tribunal reasons,
Cannon v Acres
[2014] FamCA 104
, [483] (Benjamin J).
Official Trustee in
Bankruptcy v Gargon (No 2)
[2009] FCA 398
, [2]-[12] (Perram J).
See legislative note to
s.102Qb(2)(c).
For a discussion of the
relevant principles regarding security of costs, see
Gerber & Bradley
Ors (Security for Costs)
[2011] FamCAFC 206
, cited with
approval by the Full Court in
Gull & Gull
[2012] FamCAFC 150.
Legal Services and
Complaints Committee v McCardle (No 2)
[2023] WASAT 131 (Pritchard
Member Aitken and Member Povey) (22 December 2023);
Legal Services and
Complaints Committee v McCardle (No 2)
[2023] WASAT 131 (Pritchard
Member Aitken and Member Povey) (23 February 2024).
Legal Services and
Complaints Committee v McCardle [No 2]
[2023] WASAT 131 (S)
(Pritchard P, Senior Member Aitken and Member Povey) (24 April 2024).
Legal Services and
Complaints Committee v McCardle [No 2]
[2023] WASAT 131 (S)
(Pritchard P,
Senior Member Aitken and Member Povey) (24 April 2024) [23], [31].
Legal Services and
Complaints Committee v McCardle [No 2]
[2023] WASAT 131(S) (Pritchard
Senior Member Aitken and Member Povey) (24 April 2024), [42].
Legal Services and
Complaints Committee v McCardle [No 2]
[2023] WASAT 131(S) (Pritchard
Senior Member Aitken and Member Povey) (24 April 2024), [49].
These are set out in
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v McCardle
[2024] SASCFC 3.
Commissioner’s
Written Submissions dated 7 November 2024, [9]-[10].
See, for example,
Supreme Court Act 1935
(SA) and the powers to appoint experts
to act as referees or assessors.
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
, 381 [72] (McHugh,
Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ).
Law Society of South
Australia v Jordan
[1998] SASC 6809
), 42-43 (Doyle CJ,
with whom Millhouse and Nyland JJ agreed); followed in
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Le Poidevin
[2001] SASC 242
Le Poidevin
), [24] (Lander J, with whom Bleby J agreed).
Law Society of South Australia v Russell
[1999] SASC 389
(Doyle CJ, with whom Mullighan and Martin JJ agreed) and in
Le Poidevin
[2001] SASC 242
, [3] (Doyle CJ), it was suggested by
Doyle CJ, without any analysis, that the power to act on Tribunal findings was
conferred on
the Court by s 89(5)(a) or s 89(5) of the Act. In
, Doyle CJ had referenced his own reasons the year before in
, as did Lander J (with whom Bleby J agreed). It is the
decision of the Full Court in
that provides authoritative guidance
on the point.
Law Society of South
Australia v Jordan
[1998] SASC 6809
, 42 (Doyle CJ, with whom Millhouse and
Nyland JJ agreed).
Practitioners
(1980) 26 SASR 275 (Mitchell
J, with whom Mohr J agreed);
In Re Maidment
(unreported, 26 August 1992, Judgment No S3583), referred
to with approval in
Law Society of South Australia v Jordan
[1998] SASC
, 42-43 (Doyle CJ, with whom Millhouse and Nyland JJ agreed).
Vunilagi v R
(2023) 97 ALJR 627
Mitsubishi v
[2005] SASC 154.
Mitsubishi v
[2005] SASC 154
, [5]-[6] (Bleby J).
The present definition in s
39(6) to a “prescribed court” and to the “South Australian
Employment Tribunal, and
any other tribunal referred to by regulation”,
was introduced after this decision. See, for example,
Keane v Woolworths
Group Ltd (No 4)
[2024] SASCA 113
, [16]-[19].
Mitsubishi v
[2005] SASC 154
, [5]-[6] (Bleby J).
Mitsubishi Motors
Australia Ltd v Kowalski
[2004] SASC 302
, [9] (Duggan J, with whom Besanko
and Anderson JJ agreed) citing
Australian Postal Commission v Dao and
(1986) 6 NSWLR 497
, 515 (McHugh JA);
Wales Bar Association v Muirhead
(1988) 14 NSWLR 173
, 185 (Kirby P, with
whom Hope JA agreed, Mahoney JA dissenting).
Mitsubishi Motors
Australia Ltd v Kowalski
[2004] SASC 302
, [11] (Duggan J, with whom Besanko
and Anderson JJ agreed).
New South Wales
Bar Association v Muirhead
(1988) 14 NSWLR 173
, 185 (Kirby P, with whom Hope
JA agreed).
Brandy v Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
[1995] HCA 10
(1995) 183 CLR 245
, 267-268 (Deane,
Dawson, Gaudron and McHugh JJ) and, in turn, cases such as
Parker and Co Pty Ltd v Moorehead
[1909] HCA 36
(1909) 8 CLR 330
, 357 (Griffiths CJ);
Waterside Workers’ Federation of Australia v JW Alexander Ltd
[1918] HCA 56
, 451 (Barton J);
Rola Co (Australia) Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
[1944] HCA 17
(1944) 69 CLR 185
, 198-199 (Latham CJ);
R v Gallagher; Ex parte Aberdare
Collieries Pty Ltd
(1963) 37 ALJR 40
, 43 (Kitto J);
Re Cram; Ex parte
Newcastle Wallsend Coal Co Pty Ltd
[1987] HCA 29
(1987) 163 CLR 140
, 149 (Mason CJ,
Brennan, Deane, Dawson and Toohey JJ).
New South Wales Bar
Association v Muirhead
(1988) 14 NSWLR 173
, 185 (Kirby P, with whom
Hope JA agreed, Mahoney JA dissenting).
Tesseract International
Pty Ltd v Pascale Construction Pty Ltd
(2024) 98 ALJR 880
, [116] (Gordon and
Gleeson JJ).
Family Court Act
Family Court Act
Family Court Act
Mutual Recognition Act
Mutual Recognition (South Australia) Act 1993
Rigney v Rigney
(1987) 48 SASR 291
, 298 (White J): “It is not necessary to look for
“statutory back-up” for every procedural rule or activity of the
Georganas v Barkla
[2021] SASC 47
, [16]‑[22];
[209]-[214] (Livesey J).
Georganas v Barkla
[2021] SASC 47
, [212] (Livesey J).
ASIC v Macks (No
[2019] SASC 17
, [155], [180]-[189] (Doyle J) and the cases there
Wentworth v The New
South Wales Bar Association
(1992) 176 CLR 239
, 250-251 (Deane, Dawson,
Toohey and Gaudron JJ);
Law Society of South Australia v Murphy
(1999) 201 LSJS 456
, 460-461 (Doyle CJ, with whom Millhouse and
Prior JJ agreed);
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v Fletcher
, [21] (Debelle J, with whom Besanko and Vanstone JJ agreed).
Law Society of New South
Wales v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
, 471 (Giles AJA).
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Clisby
[2012] SASCFC 43
, [9] (Doyle CJ and Stanley J, with
whom Anderson J agreed).
New South Wales Bar
Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
(2001) 52 NSWLR 279
, [22] (Spigelman CJ, with whom
Mason P and Handley JA agreed).
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Morcom
[2016] SASCFC 121
, [104] (Kourakis CJ, Blue and Doyle
Law Society of South
Australia v Murphy
[1999] SASC 83
(1999) 201 LSJS 456
, 461 (Doyle CJ,
with whom Millhouse and Prior JJ agreed).
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Clisby
[2012] SASCFC 43
, [7] (Doyle CJ, and Stanley J, with
whom Anderson J agreed).
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Kerin
[2006] SASC 393
, [27] (Gray J, with whom Duggan J
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Clisby
[2012] SASCFC 43
, [14] (Doyle CJ and Stanley J, with
whom Anderson J agreed).
Law Society of New South
Wales v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
, 441 (Mahoney JA).
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Kaminski
[2021] SASCFC 39
, [12] (Livesey P, Bleby and David
Ziems v The Prothonotary
of the Supreme Court of New South Wales
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
, 297-298 (Kitto
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
(Dixon CJ, McTiernan, Fullager, Menzies and Windeyer JJ);
Law Society of New
South Wales v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
, 441 (Mahoney JA);
Law Society
of South Australia v Murphy
[1999] SASC 83
(1999) 201 LSJS 456
, 461 (Doyle
CJ, with whom Millhouse and Prior JJ agreed);
Law Society of South Australia
[2002] SASC 274
(2002) 83 SASR 541
, 545 (Doyle CJ with whom Williams and Besanko JJ
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v Jafari
, [31] (Bell P with whom White JA and Emmett AJA agreed);
Profession Conduct Commissioner v Cleland
[2021] SASCA 10
Legal Practitioners
Complaints Committee v De Alwis
[2006] WASCA 198
, [111] (Steytler P,
Pullin JA and Murray J).
Legal Profession
Complaints Committee v Amsden
[2014] WASAT 57
, [58] (Parry DP, Senior
Sessional Member Dembo and Sessional Member Kemp).
Barristers’ Board
[2001] QCA 556
, [15] (de Jersey CJ, with whom Davies JA agreed).
Whether there is a
diagnosable condition may perhaps be bedside the point. The Court has no
evidence from a person expert in psychiatry
or psychology of a psychiatric
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (535 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter