URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAET/2025/125.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:57:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hart v Chief Executive, Attorney-General's Department (Department for Health and Wellbeing) (No 2) [2025] SAET 125 (12 November 2025)
Hart v Chief Executive, Attorney-General’s Department (Department
for Health and Wellbeing) (No 2)
[2025] SAET 125
AUSTRALIAN EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNAL
HART, Jennifer
EXECUTIVE, ATTORNEY-GENERAL’S DEPARTMENT (DEPARTMENT FOR HEALTH AND
South Australian Employment Court
Application for Directions
ET-24-02470
HEARING DATE:
6 November 2025
REASONS FOR
DECISION OF:
His Honour Deputy President Judge
DELIVERED ON:
12 November
CATCHWORDS:
The substantive proceeding concerns an
application/money claim where the applicant claims underpayment over the
entirety of her period
of employment of some 34.5 years – for
the reasons given in Hart v Chief Executive, Attorney-General’s Department
(Department
for Health and Wellbeing)
[2025] SAET 28
orders were made that
there be a first hearing to determine any entitlement for underpayment of hourly
rates, personal leave, retention
leave and public holiday pay for the period 7
June 2018 to 25 May 2019 – orders made on 7 August 2025 included
an order that
the applicant file and serve all affidavit evidence to be relied
upon at trial by 31 October 2025 – the applicant did not comply
order and filed an application for directions dated 28 October 2025,
seeking an order that would have the effect of striking
respondent’s answer and provide her with summary judgment – the
purported basis of the application was that the
respondent had failed to comply
with both the
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) and the
Fair Work Act 1994
(SA), that the
Crown, respondent and the respondent’s counsel had deceived the applicant
and Tribunal, that they had acted
in a vexatious manner and their conduct
amounted to an abuse of the court’s process – the applicant
submitted that,
by their conduct, she had been caused unnecessary and ongoing
disadvantage within the ambit of
South Australian Employment
Tribunal Act 2014
and that she should be entitled to summary judgment –
– no evidence was presented which could support a finding of a
contravention of either the
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) or the
Fair Work Act 1994
(SA), or that either the respondent, the Crown generally or counsel for the
respondent had acted either in a deceptive or vexatious
manner, or that they had
engaged in conduct amounting to an abuse of the court’s process –
application for directions
Hart v Chief Executive,
Attorney-General’s Department (Department for Health and Wellbeing)
REPRESENTATION:
Self-represented
Respondent: Ms S Wilson
Solicitors:
Self-represented
Respondent: Crown Solicitor’s Office
The application for directions
application for directions dated 28 October 2025, the applicant Jennifer Hart
(Ms Hart) has effectively sought an order that would
strike out the Answer to
her Application/money claim and that she be entitled to summary judgment. The
basis of the application was
contended to be conduct of the respondent, Chief
Executive, Attorney-General’s Department (Department for Health and
(‘The CE’), her counsel and ‘the Crown’. Ms
Hart submitted they had acted in a deceptive and vexatious manner,
amount to an abuse of the Court’s process. She also submitted that the CE
had contravened the
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) and the
Fair Work Act
the hearing of oral submissions on 6 November 2025 the application for
directions was dismissed. These are the reasons for
that order.
Background and analysis
relevant background, including the detail of the substantive proceeding was set
Hart v Chief Executive, Attorney-General’s Department
(Department for Health and Wellbeing)
(‘the first
decision’).
These reasons
assume a familiarity with the first decision. In the circumstances, I will only
summarise the background leading to
the application for directions.
substantive proceeding concerns an Application/money claim. Ms Hart claims
a total sum of $482,000 by way of underpayments over
a period of 34.5 years
between 19 November 1984 and 25 May 2019. The CE denies any underpayment.
from the period 7 June 2018 to 25 May 2019, Ms Hart requires an extension of
time. That application has been opposed by The
CE. The CE has also raised a
potentially complex jurisdictional issue relating to any claim for underpayment
of long service leave
entitlements.
Hart has consistently demonstrated difficulty in being able to articulate her
case and address matters raised by the CE. In the
first decision, I
I have had regard to all of the matters of fact contained in all of the
documents provided for the Court’s consideration by
the parties. That
exercise has not been without difficulty as a number of the documents relied
upon by Ms Hart have handwritten comments
which sometimes seek to clarify or
dispute what was originally written, refer to other documents or only a part of
a document and
at times, without associated submission as to context, relevance
or meaning to enable the Court to understand fully the use sought
to be made of
the documents or the associated
In relation to the complaint of inadequate particulars Ms Hart initially
referred to “six folders of evidence” and then
“spreadsheets would have the dates” and which reference
“documents” which she said validate her claim. She
referred to these
documents as identifying the hours that she is owed
It is difficult to evaluate the extent to which there may be merit in the claim
being pursued by Ms Hart and the extent of any likely
prejudice to Ms Hart
should the extension of time sought by her not be granted. I accept the
submission of the CE that the particulars
provided by Ms Hart in her
application-money claim dated 7 June 2024, in the context of a claim
that totals $482,000, are inadequate.
The references by Ms Hart, in her
submissions, to “six folders of evidence”, “spreadsheets
[that] would have the
dates” and generally other “documents”
do not provide the particulars in a manner that enables either the CE or
Court to have a clear understanding of the basis of the claim that is being
pursued and the methodology adopted by Ms Hart to
calculate the amount claimed.
Further particulars, in most of the areas identified by the CE and summarised in
paragraph 27 of these
reasons would be required, noting she has provided the
exact amount claimed for the whole period of
employment.
(Citations omitted)
stated that that it is not the function of the Court to draw or settle a
party’s pleading,
party’s case is to be adequately stated in the pleadings and not by
reference to other documents.
also stated that whilst a Court will be alert to the difficulties that may be
experienced by a self-represented litigant, and provide
assistance to the extent
appropriate to enable a self-represented litigant to understand the obligations
associated with the preparation
of documents in the pre-trial process, they are
still required to comply with the relevant rules that apply to proceedings in
determined the most appropriate way to proceed was to conduct a first trial
limited to the claims for underpayment of hourly rates,
personal leave,
retention leave and public holiday pay in relation to the period 7 June 2018 to
25 May 2019. That period does not
require an extension of time and would not
burden Ms Hart with the jurisdictional issue at that time. The first decision
the expectation that this would allow Ms Hart to focus upon the
narrower period of time and to adequately plead her case in relation
Ms Hart was directed to
file and serve an amended Application/money claim by 23 April
The matter was then
adjourned to a directions hearing on 29 May 2025.
amended Application/money claim was filed by Ms Hart on 29 April 2025.
The CE had been directed to file an Answer by 16 May 2025.
13 May 2025, the solicitor for the CE wrote to Ms Hart putting forward the
position of the CE that the amended Application failed
to adequately plead Ms
Hart’s case in accordance with the orders made by me on 2 April 2025. Ms
Hart was put on notice that,
in the circumstances, the CE was not in a position
to file an answer and would, instead, make application to strike out the amended
application. The strike out application was then filed on 16 May 2025.
Hart filed an application for directions dated 18 May 2025. Seeking to strike
out the CE’s application. The amended Application/money
claim filed by Ms
Hart was clearly deficient. It did not comply with the directions made by me on
2 April 2025. A number of the deficiencies
identified in the first decision with
respect to the original drafting permeated through the amended Application/money
25 June 2025, in court, I sought to explore with Ms Hart the
basis of her claim, particularly related to the period 7 June 2018 to
2019. Ultimately, order one of the orders made that day summarised her case in
relation to the first trial to be conducted:
the hearing of oral argument this morning, it is noted that Ms Hart’s
claim by way of money claim for the period 7
June 2018 to
25 May 2019 relates to claimed underpayment for certain days that she
took by way of personal leave during that period.
The relevant days are
19 June 2018 to 22 June 2018 inclusive, 27 June 2018 to 29 June 2018
inclusive, 3 July 2018 to 6 July 2018
inclusive, 9 July 2018 to 12 July 2018
inclusive, 13 October 2018 to 26 October 2018 inclusive, and to 29 October
2018 to 1 November
2018 inclusive. Ms Hart claims that she was entitled to be
paid by reference to the number of hours that she worked per day when
attended at work. She claims that she worked 10.22 hours per day. Her claim is
on the basis that she was paid the equivalent
of 8 hours per day when she took
her personal leave, representing an underpayment of the rate per hour of 2.2
hours per day each
day that she took by way of personal leave. She claims that
she was paid when she worked by reference to an hourly rate of $46.90
been satisfied that the CE had sufficient particulars to understand the case to
be met at the first trial, the application
for directions of the CE dated 16 May
2025 was dismissed. The application for directions of Ms Hart dated 18 May 2025
was dismissed
as no further order was required upon that application. The CE was
directed to file an Answer by 16 July 2025 and a directions hearing
for 7 August 2025.
Hart filed a further application for directions dated 26 June 2015 (sic). She
sought a listing to afford her an opportunity to
‘debate’ aspects of
submissions advanced leading to the first decision. She also sought an
opportunity to address further
orders that Ms Hart considered should be made as
to the content of the Answer to be filed by the CE. There was no merit in the
application
for directions and it was dismissed on 1 July 2025.
CE having filed and served her Answer, on 7 August 2025 orders were made for the
filing and serving of affidavit evidence. Ms
Hart was directed to file and serve
all affidavit evidence to be relied upon at the first trial by 31 October 2025.
She did not do
so. Instead, she filed the application for directions which is
the subject of these reasons. She purported to file a supporting affidavit,
which is subject to the same criticisms of documents previously prepared by Ms
Hart as addressed in the first decision. She continued
to provide documents with
handwritten notations, highlighted sections, references to other documents and
without adequate explanation
as to meaning or relevance. The affidavit was not
admissible by reference to
and (1)(a) of the
South Australian
Employment Tribunal Act 2014
. In any event, Ms Hart did not adequately
address either in the affidavit or in her subsequent oral submissions on 6
November 2025,
how any of the documentation could lead the Court to conclude
that either the CE, her counsel, or the “Crown” have been
or have acted in a vexatious manner, or that the CE had exerted undue influence
or pressure, or how the conduct could constitute
an abuse of the Court’s
process or has caused unnecessary and ongoing disadvantage to Ms Hart. Nor did
she prove any contravention
of either the
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) or the
Fair Work Act 1994
(SA). She also failed to demonstrate how any suggested
contravention could be relevant to the substantive proceeding and the orders
sought in her application.
best I could understand the submissions advanced by Ms Hart, the CE has acted
inappropriately by not accepting as a proper pleading,
Application/money claim in combination with the large volume of documents that
she has produced to the respondent, and
that she has somehow been disadvantaged
by not being permitted to proceed to trial to address at the one time all of the
underpayment over the whole of the period of employment. There is no
need to provide any further reason to those set out in the first
decision as to
why that is without merit.
Hart also submitted that the CE's action, via her solicitor, of writing to Ms
Hart by letter dated 13 May 2025, putting her on
notice of an intended
application to strike out the amended Application/money claim and the filing of
that application only two days
later, was evidence of an abuse of process of the
Court and that the CE had behaved in a vexatious manner. For the reasons set out
above, there is no merit to that submission.
submissions of the CE were brief. They referred to the difficulty in
understanding the basis of the application and the CE submitted
that Ms Hart had
failed to demonstrate any merit in her application. For the reasons given, those
submissions were accepted.
application for directions dated 28 October 2025 was thereby
[2025] SAET 28.
The first decision [23].
The first decision [17].
The first decision [31].
The first decision [48](3).
The first decision [55].
The first decision [56].
The first decision
The first decision [64].
Order 4 of the orders set
out at the end of the first decision.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (171 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter