URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCAT/1999/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:09:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Guiseppe Perre v Workcover v Royal and Sun Alliance Workers Compensation (SA) Ltd (Penna Concrete Construction Service Pty Ltd) [1999] SAWCAT 2 (23 March 1999)
WORKERS COMPENSATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
In the matter of an appeal by
GUISEPPE PERRE
the worker, against
a determination of a
REVIEW OFFICER
dated the 19th day of October 1998,
which also concerns
WORKCOVER/ROYAL AND SUN ALLIANCE WORKERS COMPENSATION
(SA) LTD. (PENNA CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION SERVICE PTY. LTD.)
(No. 40W of 1998)
His Honour Acting Deputy President Thompson
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED THE 23RD
DAY OF MARCH
Appeal by Worker - High toned neurosensory deafness -
Section 31(2)
constitutes `proof to the contrary' - Admissibility of expert opinion
contrasted with weight to be attributed - Rule in Ramsay
v. Watson - Appeal
Cases Cited:
Stead v. B.H.A.S. Pasminco Metals Ltd.
Ramsay v. Watson
[1961] HCA 65
108 C.L.R. 642.
Appearances:
M.S. Saies for the Appellant.
C.A. Sargent for the Respondent.
The worker appeals against a determination of a Review Officer that confirmed
the Corporation's decision to reject his claim for
hearing loss. The findings
of the Review Officer were:-
1. Mr. Perre's description of his work environment and his work duties with the
employer cannot be relied upon.
2. Mr. Perre produced no objective evidence of any sort to support his
3. The reports of Ellis Drewitt and Associates were undertaken in a
professional, competent and independent manner consistent with
the standards
required by the Act and can be relied upon by the Panel for making the decision
required by
Section 31(2)
4. I prefer the evidence of Dr. Tomich over that of Dr. Marzec. ...
Accordingly, I find that:
The noise to which Mr. Perre was exposed as a concrete finisher for the 10
months he was employed with Penna Concrete Construction
Services Pty Ltd was -
for the purposes of Schedule 2 of the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
noise capable of causing noise induced hearing loss.
That in any case the respondent has produced proof (medical, technical and
anecdotal) that Mr. Perre's hearing loss did not and
could not have occurred as
The worker was born on 24 January 1956. His trade is a concrete finisher. In
late December 1994 he became associated with the respondent
employer or its
predecessor. From late January until October 1995 he subcontracted his skills
to the respondent. Prior to 1994 he
had worked in his trade for the previous
decade in the building industry with various employers.
By virtue of the combination of the definition of `contract of service' and
`employment' and Regulation 4(1)(h)(i) of the Claims
Registration
Regulations
, the Appellant is a `deemed worker for the purposes of this
The Respondent strenuously denied that position in 12 short hearings between 26
August 1996 and 21 April 1998 on which latter date
it was conceded.
The Review Officer properly accepted the fact that the worker suffered from a
`high tone neurosensory hearing loss' - also known
as `boilermaker's deafness'
or `industrial deafness'. That was the unanimous view of three ear, nose and
throat consultants:-
Mr. B.M. Irani and measured the loss on 22 September 1995 as 13.5% binaural.
Mr. Edward Marzac who measured the loss on 3 August 1998 at 13.2% binaural.
Dr. J. Tomich who measured the loss on 26 September 1996 at 18.7%.
The Appellant is entitled to the statutory evidentiary presumption in Section
31(2) of the Act.
`If a worker suffers a disability of a kind referred to in the first column of
Schedule 2 and has been employed in work of a type
referred to in the second
column of Schedule 2 opposite the disability, the worker's disability is
presumed in the absence of proof
to the contrary to have arisen from that
employment.'
Schedule 2 says:-
Column 1 Column 2
`Noise Induced Hearing Loss Any work involving exposure to noise.'
The word `that' in `that employment' in Section 31(2) refers to the work
referred to in second column of Schedule 2. It being agreed
that the worked
suffered from industrial deafness it follows that if he can show that he was
exposed to noise in his employment he
is entitled to be compensated - subject
to proof to the contrary.
To the extent that what I said by way of
obiter dicta
B.H.A.S. Pasminco Metals Ltd.
A.36/1996 is to the contrary,
`The Second Schedule contemplates not just noise - indeed every occupation has
noise in a generic form - but noise `capable of
causing noise induced hearing
I was wrong.
The evidentiary presumption arises upon proof that the worker suffers from
noise induced hearing loss i.e. industrial deafness -
if he has been engaged in
work `involving exposure to noise' - and no more.
The respondent has the legal onus to the civil standard of proving the
In this case the evidence in support of the proposition that the worker
suffered from industrial deafness is in the three medical
The evidence that he was engaged in work involving exposure to noise - was the
undisputed evidence of the worker. Indeed the Respondent's
own expert evidence
from Ellis Drewitt did not dispute this.
Hence, in the absence of proof to the contrary, the workers industrial deafness
is presumed to have arisen from `that employment'
i.e. the employment of the
Respondent.
The evidence adduced by the Respondent to `prove the contrary' ie. that the
Appellant's industrial deafness was not caused in `that
employment' was
supplied by Messrs. Ellis Drewitt and Associates Pty. Ltd.. They were
commissioned by the Corporation to conduct
noise level tests on machinery
allegedly used by the worker. The machinery tested included a trowelling
machine - a vibrator - a
concrete drill - a quick cut grinder and a concrete
The tests took place at the property of B. and D. Nicholls Taylor Road Penfield
on 20 August 1996 - some 10 months after the worker
had left the employer
respondent. Follow-up tests were made at a time and a place both
unspecified.
Dr. Tomich, who was commissioned by the Corporation to provide an expert
opinion said:
(i) the Appellant's industrial deafness was due to the `worker's industrial
(ii) He was unable to say where or when the damage occurred.
(iii) His view on causation was based on the results of Ellis Drewitt and
Associates' survey, and perhaps the opinions and conclusions
therein expressed,
which he characterised as `objective data'.
The Ellis Drewitt survey opined that the Appellant's exposure to the noise
(they tested) would not have caused industrial deafness.
The Review Officer held, consistent with the opinion of Dr. Tomich that
exposure to noise levels disclosed in those tests would
not have caused the
worker's industrial deafness. Therefore the Respondent had discharged the
burden of `proof to the contrary'.
The issue is whether on the evidence the presumed causal link between the noisy
employment and the industrial deafness has been
In my view the Ellis and Drewitt survey suffers from fatal defects.
Among the defects are:-
1. The tests were not conducted at the location at which the Appellant was
exposed to noise.
2. There is no evidence to show that the Penfield location (at which the
Appellant was never employed) was sufficiently similar
to the employment
locations at which the Appellant did work.
3. There is no evidence to show that the machines tested were the same machines
as the Appellant used, or if they were the same
machines that they were in
either the same condition or substantially the same condition as when used by
the Appellant.
4. Tests in 1996 relied significantly upon the input of the employer
Mr. Penna. Mr. Penna did not give evidence nor did the tester
evidence of the input in detail. All that was disclosed in the expert report
were some conclusions the tester drew from conversations
he had had with
Mr. Penna, i.e. the expert made certain factual assumptions. From some of
the assumptions, conclusions were drawn.
It is trite law eg.
[1961] HCA 65
(1961) 108 C.L.R. 642
and the material at paragraph 29075 of the
current edition on Cross-On-Evidence that this is not sufficient to confer any
on the expert opinion.
Expert opinion is said to be usually a matter of inference from facts proved
. The expert opinion has no or negligible weight unless
and until the preferred assumptions upon which the opinion is predicated are
independently verified (and subjected to cross-examination to test their
accuracy, unless the facts are agreed).
5. The August 1996 report seems to confuse the issue of the regulatory standard
under Occupational Health and Safety Regulations
with causation of industrial
deafness as if compliance with the Occupational Health and Safety standard was
`proof to the contrary'
for the purpose of Section 31(2). It is not.
6. The expert did not deal with the scenario proposed by the Appellant of two
machines operating at the same time and being exposed
to noise from both
7. The expert did not deal with the Appellant's scenario of being as close as
five metres to concrete cutting machines - which if
accepted must have lead to
a different conclusion on the relation of the noise to the disability.
The material conclusions in the second report of 2 June 1997 are overwhelmingly
(i.e. 8 out of 10 paragraphs) based on hearsay material
emanating from the
employer Mr. Penna, and drawn from documents in the sole possession of the
employer - which documents were not
produced to the Appellant.
This hearsay material was not proven in evidence. e.g. One assumption of the
`... as the concrete work would have been separated by some distance, the
actual noise levels would not have been significant'.
That proposition is in direct conflict with the sworn evidence of the Appellant
At to the hearsay assertions from the employer who was not called to give
evidence detailed in the report I was told from the Bar
`Mr. Penna wasn't called because he couldn't comment. He wasn't present at the
various worksites and the chief reason he wasn't
called was that he himself
could only given hearsay evidence'.
This makes suspect any reliance upon an expert opinion based on that quality of
input. The `objective facts' which are the foundation
of the expert opinions of
Ellis and Drewitt were based upon hearsay and indeed hearsay twice removed. The
expert opinion has no weight.
Consequently the opinion of Dr. Tomich on the
causality issue is also destroyed.
The fact that the Reports went into evidence by consent merely shifts the
consideration from the admissibility of the reports to
the weight that should
be attached to the opinions expressed therein.
In a sense the
rule is directed to weight
and not to admissibility. The admissibility aspect deals with expert opinion
being admissible as an exception
to the hearsay rule. However when admitted,
the Tribunal of fact must make a proper judgment of the weight to be attached
expert opinion according to law.
In this case no weight at all should have been attached to the expert opinion -
or at the very least, not sufficient weight could
have been attached as to
displace of the evidentiary and legal onus in Section 31(2) resting on the
Corporation.
In essence, all that the Ellis and Drewitt report was capable of showing - was
that if the Appellant had been exposed to the factual
conditions under which
the test were conducted - the noise levels in those tests would not have caused
his industrial deafness. However
until the Appellant was subjected to test
under the identical - or practically identical conditions under which he worked
was no `evidence to the contrary' to displace the statutory
presumption.
If there was a static condition ie. a 100 ton press in a car factory in 1996
with ambient noise - which was tested in 1999 in the
same location
much the same noise around
it, then some confidence might be placed in
the results of those tests. It is a static unchanging position. In this case
no such parallel.
That is sufficient to dispose of the appeal in the Appellant's favour.
As to the Review Officer's findings - the first finding on the Appellant's
credibility is unduly hard.
1. No reason is given for this finding. The worker was a semi-literate concrete
worker of Italian extraction. He gave evidence through
an interpreter which
evidence consisted of retailing the type and time of work done in the 10 months
between January and October
1995 i.e. three years prior to giving evidence.
That there should be confusion in his evidence is not at all surprising. In any
this is not a case where credibility is a significant matter.
2. The second cannot be sustained:
`Mr. Perre produced no objective evidence'. Three experts unanimously agreed
that the Appellant had a high level of neurosensory
deafness. That is objective
3. Whatever can be said about the Reports of Ellis Drewitt and Associates - it
couldn't be said that they had any probative value
in this case.
As to the quantum of hearing loss. The appeal - and probably the Review case
was conducted on the basis that the appropriate loss
should be that assessed by
Mr. B.M. Irani 13.5% - because the audiograms were produced on 2 December
1995 shortly after the worker
left the employer's service.
Finally, the case argued on appeal was not argued before the Review Officer.
There can be no criticism of the Review Officer who
was never invited to form a
view of the weight of expert opinion. However, the Appellant is not precluded
on an appeal from taking
this point of law.
I therefore uphold the appeal. I set aside the Review Officer's findings. The
Appellant should be compensated pursuant to Section
43 for binaural hearing
loss of 13.5% i.e. at the 75% of the prescribed sum for 1995 of $98,100 which
is 13.5% x 75% x 98100 = $9,922.50.
There is liberty to apply on the arithmetic.
I order the Respondent to pay the Appellant's costs.
In accordance with the requirements of section 93 of the
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
the parties are notified that if a
party wishes to apply to the Full Supreme Court for leave to appeal against any
part of this decision
which raises a question of law, such appeal must be
instituted within one month after a party who is entitled to appeal receives
notice of this decision.
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are respectfully requested to note the provisions of the Supreme Court
Rules 96.04(a) and 97.05 which require that in the
event of an appeal a copy of
the Notice of Appeal filed in the Supreme Court is to be served upon `the
proper officer of the Court
or Tribunal below'.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (23.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter