URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWPRP/2014/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:11:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Shahin Enterprises v WorkCover [2014] SAWPRP 1 (28 January 2014)
[2014] SAWPRP 1
WORKCOVER PREMIUM REVIEW PANEL
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
SHAHIN ENTERPRISES PTY LTD
No. E06034709 — file reference 200511841)
(Applicant)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION
OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
Member P.G. Eblen
Member E. Siami
Deputy Member D.A. Black
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED 28 JANUARY
Application for review — disputed classification of particular
workplace — head office of employer with multiple locations
in multiple
industries — no activities of substantive nature carried on at head office
— whether appropriate to classify
as “ancillary” to other
locations and assign one of the same classifications — “location
— need for consistency of approach — search for
classification of best fit —
(repealed),
(repealed),
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Cases referred to:
Adventure Tours v. WorkCover
[2007] SAWLRP 2
Skilled Engineering v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2001] SAWLRP 11
Faucett Holdings v. WorkCover
[2000] SAWLRP 3
Olga’s Fine Foods v. WorkCover
[2004] SAWLRP 4
Robbins v. Harbord and GMH
[1994] SASC 4571
Chiropractors Association & Perry v. WorkCover
Corporation
[1999] SASC 470
; (1999) 75 SASR 470
Quark Technologies and Hocking v. WorkCover Corporation
[1997] SASC 6367
(1997) 70 SASR 153
194 LSJS 299
Leveda v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2004] SAWLRP 6
Appearances:
Mr S.J. Hanus of counsel, with him Mr J.P. McRostie, for the applicant
Mr S.C. Cole of counsel for the respondent WorkCover, with Mr L.A. Hayford,
Manager Premium Operations.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
is the determination of an application dated 17 June 2011, pursuant to section
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Act”) as it then stood, seeking a review of a decision assessing the
applicant’s levy rate for the financial
year 2010-2011, embodied in
correspondence from WorkCover dated 19 April 2011.
72, at the relevant time, provided as
(1) Where an employer considers that a decision of the Corporation as
(aa) the estimate of remuneration that is to be used for the calculation of a
(a) the fixing or assessment of a levy; or
(b) the imposition of penalty interest or a fine; or
(c) the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead to the
imposition of a supplementary levy,
is unreasonable, the board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a levy,
penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined
by the board, by the board itself, or by a committee or
person to whom the board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the board has an
absolute discretion as to whether
it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the board may—
(aa) alter an estimate;
(a) alter a levy or an assessment;
(b) quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
(c) direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
(d) quash or vary a condition imposed by the Corporation. ...
Panel is the Board’s delegate under the section (see the
WorkCover Levy
Review Determination 2002
South Australian Government Gazette
29 October 2009, contains a consolidation at p.4977 encompassing all
amendments), and under the new equivalent provision (section
72M since the
amendments that were proclaimed from 1 July 2012): see
WorkCover Premium
Review Panel Determination 2012
South Australian Government Gazette
10 May 2012, p.1617). Clause 1 of Part 9 of the 2012 Determination directs that
an application lodged before 1 July 2012 or relating
to a period before that
date be dealt with under the 2002 Determination. The application before us is
such an application, although
the circumstances giving rise to it, as will be
seen, represent a continuing situation.
applicant employer operates at a large number of locations throughout South
Australia and interstate. The contentious decision
made by WorkCover on 19 April
2011 was a decision to change the classification of a particular location,
designated Location 90,
488105 Confectioners and Tobacconists
486401 Automotive Fuel Retailing
. The applicant employer does a large
amount of retailing at various locations in South Australia and elsewhere in
Australia. It is
not controversial that confectionery, tobacco and automotive
fuel are among the items retailed. However, no retail sales at all take
Location 90, which is the corporate headquarters at The Parade, Kensington
WorkCover’s
decision was governed by section 66 of the Act, which, until 1 July 2012,
provided as follows (subsections not relevant
to these proceedings
66—Imposition
(1) An employer (not being a self-insured employer) is liable to pay a levy
to the Corporation under this section.
(2) The levy is a percentage of the aggregate remuneration paid to the
employer's workers in each class of industry in which the
employer employs
workers. ...
(3) The Corporation may for the purposes of this section divide the
industries carried on in the State into various classes.
(4) The Corporation may determine any question as to the class of industry
in which an employer employs workers.
(5) In determining the class of industry in which an employer employs
workers the following provisions will be applied—
(a) if the employer employs a worker in two or more classes of
(i) the worker will, subject to any determination by the Corporation to the
contrary, be treated as if solely employed in the class
of industry in which he
or she is predominantly employed; and
(ii) if it is not possible to determine which is the predominant class, the
worker will be treated as if solely employed in a class
of industry determined
by the Corporation; and
(b) if the employer employs workers in different classes of industry at a
particular workplace, all workers employed at the workplace
will, if the
Corporation so determines, be treated as engaged in the predominant class of
industry; and
(c) in determining what is the predominant class of industry, the
Corporation will have regard to—
(i) the importance within the employer's total operations of each class of
industry in which workers are employed; and
(ii) any other relevant factor. ...
equivalent provision since 1 July 2012 is (new) section
of industry
(1) The Corporation may, for the purposes of the calculation of premiums,
divide the industries carried on in the State into various
(2) The Corporation may determine any question as to the class of industry
in which an employer employs workers.
(3) In determining the class of industry in which an employer employs
workers the following provisions will be applied:
(a) if the employer employs a worker in 2 or more classes of
(i) the worker will, subject to any determination by the Corporation to the
contrary, be treated as if solely employed in the class
of industry in which he
or she is predominantly employed; and
(ii) if it is not possible to determine which is the predominant class, the
worker will be treated as if solely employed in a class
of industry determined
by the Corporation;
(b) subject to
paragraphs (c)
employer employs workers in different classes of industry all workers employed
by the employer will, if the Corporation
so determines, be treated as engaged in
the predominant class of industry;
(c) if the employer
employs workers at 2 or more workplaces, all workers employed at a
particular workplace will, if the Corporation
so determines, be treated as
engaged in the predominant class of industry conducted at that workplace;
(d) in determining
what is the predominant class of industry, the Corporation will have regard
(i) the importance within the employer's total operations of each class of
industry in which workers are employed; and
(ii) any other factor determined to be relevant by the Corporation.
(4) The Corporation
may, as it thinks fit, review and revise a determination previously made under
or for the purposes of this section.
(5) A revision may be made under
subsection (4)
at any time (including in respect of a period that is underway).
speaking, as we have said, the application before us focuses, as it must, on the
applicant’s levy for the 2010-2011
year, i.e., the year affected by
WorkCover’s reviewable decision when it was made. However, as section
2(1)(f) of the Act emphasises,
as an objective of the Act, the
“reduc[tion] of litigation and adversarial contests to the greatest
possible extent”
we should avoid, if possible, producing a situation where
the parties are sent straight back into dispute regarding subsequent years.
parties addressed us on the significance of the variations between old section
66 and new section 69 and we will say something
said that, we must acknowledge that section 72 (and new section 72M) does not
confer jurisdiction to directly alter a classification.
However, it is now well
established that the power to “alter a levy or an assessment”
permits the Panel to alter the
levy (premium) to reflect the classification it
considers appropriate. For practical purposes, the effect is the same. We will
briefly to this topic also.
facts are not contentious. They emerge from the statements of Shawki Shahin,
Group Financial Controller of the applicant, dated
10 May 2013 and Lee Anthony
Hayford, Manager Premium Operations of WorkCover, dated 8 July 2013. Neither was
required for cross-examination.
What is contentious is the conclusions to be
drawn from the facts, and the uses to which those conclusions are to be put.
applicant has been trading in South Australia since 1987 and has been registered
under the Act as an employer since 30 September
1987, the date when WorkCover
began. It is a much larger organisation now than it was then, when it was
primarily engaged in operating
Smokemart stores. According to Mr Shahin’s
statement, it now operates in South Australia some three stand-alone Subway
eight stand-alone On The Run drive-through convenience stores
selling fuel), two stand-alone car wash sites, and 79 combined fuel
and convenience stores.
79 combined stores are generically branded as On The Run, and each contains some
combination of fuel retailing, convenience store,
bakery, coffee, fast food
(WokinaBox, Subway, Hungry Jack’s and Oporto franchises), car washing,
trailer hire and Smokemart.
(We understand that no, or at least very few, sites
would combine all of these, but most locations combine several.)
Shahin’s statement also outlined the deployment of some 1 443 workers
across the fuel and convenience operations in South
Australia and some 377
workers in the dedicated Smokemart stores across Australia (of whom 120 are in
South Australia). He also outlined
the approximate contributions of the
different areas to group profitability, asserting that retail and customer
service sales produce
a much greater level of overall profitability to the group
than fuel or automotive related sales.
a (routine, we gather) audit of the employer over 2010-2011, in the course of
which it should in fairness be noted that
WorkCover determined the employer was
entitled to a refund for substantial overpayments that had been made, WorkCover
wrote to the
employer by letter dated 19 April 2011, which included the
“Employer No: 06034709
“Location No: 0090
“Dear Employer
“Employer Classification
“WorkCoverSA is an industry based classification system under which
each employer location is assigned a classification that
reflects the
predominant activity or industry of that employer. Under this system, all
employers predominantly engaged in performing
the same or similar activities are
included in the same industry class.
“From the information obtained, it has been determined that the
predominant activity in which you are engaged is automotive
fuel retailing.
“Accordingly, your classification will be amended to:
“Sawic 486401 Automotive Fuel Retailing
“This change is effective from 1/5/2011. Details of your new WorkCover
Levy Rate (WLR), based on the new classification, have
been included with this
letter. An adjusted tax invoice will be issued to you shortly ...”
Hayford’s statement confirmed that an audit of the applicant employer had
been conducted between 20 March 2010 and 8 April
2011. The auditor noted that
the employer operated a large number of service stations, as well as other
retail outlets, many of which
sold tobacco products.
Hayford said that WorkCover had determined that location 90 was an ancillary
unit. He said an ancillary unit was defined as an
employer location that is
predominantly engaged in the provision of services and support to another
location or locations of the
same employer or locations of an associated or
related employer. Importantly, he said, an ancillary unit is not assessed in
with its own predominant activity but under a reflected class of
industry, as determined by the Corporation under section 69(1) of
corresponding to the predominant class of industry of the locations served. The
predominant activity of the locations served
by the ancillary unit is determined
by the measure of activity in terms of the number of workers and remuneration of
workers in the
employ of the employer engaged in activity at or from those
locations served.
said that information provided to the WorkCover auditor indicated that
remuneration relating to the automotive fuel retailing businesses
for the year
ended 30 June 2010 was almost four times that relating to the confectionery and
tobacconist businesses. Based on remuneration
alone, the auditor concluded that
the predominant activity of the locations served was fuel retailing. He denied
that the proportion
of profit attributable to each activity was a relevant
consideration for determining the employer’s predominant activity.
relation to the Corporation’s national head office policy, referred to in
Adventure Tours v. WorkCover
[2007] SAWLRP 2
, Mr Hayford said it
was considered inapplicable to the present case because the employer’s
activities were predominantly carried
out in South Australia, and
WorkCover’s criteria required the national head office to be directed
predominantly towards the
employer’s operations outside South Australia.
His analysis showed that the employer employed approximately 7.4 workers in
South Australia for every worker employed elsewhere, and the remuneration total
for South Australian workers was 6.6 times the remuneration
total for workers
based in other jurisdictions.
The parties’
parties recognised that the Panel has no power to directly change an
employer’s classification. Both acknowledged that
, at [4], the Panel said:
“It is to be noted that
section 72 confers no power to directly alter the industry classification of an
employer. However, in
deciding whether a levy assessment is unreasonable, the
appropriateness of the industry class to which an employer has been assigned
WorkCover is an obvious factor to consider where that is the source of the
employer’s complaint about the levy that has
note that at an earlier time, in
Skilled Engineering v. WorkCover
[2001] SAWLRP 11
, at p.7, the Panel expressed the same thought
slightly differently, but with the same effect:
“Questions of
whether the Panel strictly has the power under section 72 to alter a
classification decision as such do not arise
because the Panel undoubtedly has
the power under section 72(4)
to alter the dollar amount of the levy
to the amount that would have been calculated under the classification in which
thinks the employer was entitled to be included, regardless of the
classification chosen by the Corporation. The practical result
achieved by
section 72 in this way is that the final ‘decision ... as to the fixing or
assessment of a levy’ is made
‘reasonable’ and the employer
pays the ‘correct’ amount, regardless of the strict reviewability of
made further up the decision-making chain, which may or not
be beyond the reach of section 72.” (Emphasis in original.)
those cases were decided, the terms of the Panel’s delegation were altered
in 2008. Instead of a plenary delegation of
the Board’s powers under
section 72, the 2002 Determination was amended to delegate “the functions
of the Board under
section 72 ... in reviewing decisions of the Corporation
pursuant to ...”, followed by a “shopping list” of sections
and subsections that includes, significantly, section 66(4) and (5). Whether a
delegation in such terms is effective to confer on
the Panel the ability to
alter classifications when it is expressed to be subject to the limitations of
“the functions of the
Board under section 72” is perhaps a moot
point, given the approach set out in
Adventure Tours
Skilled Engineering
parties also addressed us on the effect of the variations between old section 66
and the new section 69. The applicant found
considerable significance in new
section 69(3)(c), which it was argued would be decisive of the matter if it were
in force at the
relevant time. WorkCover denied it would be decisive and
contended that since it was not in force at the relevant time, it was wholly
irrelevant to the present proceedings.
we have already indicated, the fact situation presented by this application is
an ongoing one. While new section 69 is not applicable
to the 2011-2012 levy
— and Mr Hanus did not suggest otherwise — it will certainly be
applicable to the 2012-2013 and
future premium assessments, and our mandate to
“reduce litigation and adversarial contests to the greatest possible
suggests that the new form of the provision is worth bearing in
Hanus, for the applicant, submitted that the legislation must take precedence
over internal “policies” developed by
WorkCover. He said that under
the old section 66, the question of the predominant class of industry in which
workers were employed
at Location 90 did not arise, because neither of the
conditions for the application of that test is met. Section 66(5)(a) provides
for the predominant activity test where a single worker works in two or more
classes of industry. Section 66(5)(b) provides for it
where workers in different
classes of industry work at a single workplace. He argued that the
classification of the particular workplace
must be determined by reference to
activities carried out at that location. Given that classifications apply
location by location,
he argued, it is unreasonable to classify a particular
location other than by reference to the activities actually carried on at
WorkCover, Mr Cole said the section is not to be read as though it limits where
the predominance test applies. He defended the
rationality of the
“ancillary unit” approach as being consistent with section 66 as it
stood. He submitted that it was
not unreasonable to classify the industry
conducted at Location 90 as an ancillary unit performing functions ancillary to
support of the predominant class of activity conducted by the applicant
across all its business locations. He said there was no sound
favouring by classification an employer large enough to have its office and
administrative activities in a separate location
over an employer which is small
enough to have its office and administrative activities in the same workplace as
its substantive
activities. In the latter case, he said, section 66(5)(b) would
apply to extend the predominant class test to the whole premises.
contended it was not unreasonable to determine that the activities at Location
90 are ancillary to the applicant’s main business
activity. That main
business activity, by reference to the number of employees, which is the focus
of the levy vis-à-vis the
risk of claims and payments, clearly comprises
the On The Run automotive fuel retailing outlets.
Cole said that the national head office policy was not applicable on the facts.
WorkCover’s criteria were not met. An incentive
to move a head office to
South Australia was not relevant.
are indebted to both counsel for their helpful and informative presentations and
their written outlines of argument.
starting point must be the Act. Something that might appear superficially
“reasonable” cannot be reasonable if it
is not in accordance with
the law that establishes the WorkCover scheme. It could not be reasonable for a
statutory corporation to
act contrary to the statute establishing it.
66(1) provides that an employer must pay a levy to the Corporation (defined as
WorkCover) under the section. Section 66(2)
defines that levy as a percentage of
the aggregate remuneration paid to the employer’s workers
in each class
of industry in which the employer employs workers
. Section 66(2a), which we
have omitted above, is irrelevant for present purposes.
66(3) provides for the Corporation to divide the industries carried on in the
state into various classes. Although the permissive
word “may” is
used, the Act in reality leaves WorkCover with no alternative to doing this.
Theoretically, we suppose,
WorkCover could refrain from dividing the industries
into classes and charge all employers a flat levy, but doing so would make a
nonsense of subsection (2), which presupposes WorkCover has indeed divided the
state’s industries into classes. In practice,
WorkCover has adopted a
schedule dividing the state’s industries into classes under subsection (3)
on an annual basis (section
Acts Interpretation Act 1915
provides that a power of this sort is capable of exercise from time to time, not
simply once) and fixed levies (now premiums) accordingly.
The annual division is
based on a statistical standard called ANZSIC (Australian and New Zealand
Standard Industrial Classification),
and the result is referred to as SAWIC
(South Australian WorkCover Industrial Classification). The SAWIC schedule of
industries and
rates has been published annually in the
South Australian
Government Gazette
since the commencement of the scheme.
66(4) gives the Corporation the power to determine any question as to the class
of industry in which an employer employs workers.
Review of such decisions is
specifically delegated to this Panel by clause 4 of the
WorkCover Levy Review
Determination 2002
(and by clause 4 of
WorkCover Premium
Review Panel Determination 2012
), although that delegation remains subject
to the difficulty we referred to at [
66(5) tells the Corporation
it is to determine questions as to the
class of industry in which an employer employs workers. Paragraph (a) is
directed to situations
where an employer employs a particular worker in more
than one class of industry. Paragraph (b) is directed to situations where an
employer pursues multiple industries at the one workplace and workers are
employed in the one location in different classes of industries.
paragraphs (a) and (b), attention is directed to the predominant class of
industry, and paragraph (c) deals with the determination
of that predominant
is to be noted that section 66(5)(b) contains the only reference to particular
workplaces. There is no provision specifically requiring
or authorising
WorkCover to further divide the enterprises conducted by employers into
particular workplaces, beyond the initial
division into industries. However, it
is an inescapable consequence of section 66(5)(b) that employers may be charged
different levy
rates in respect of various workplaces they conduct if different
industries are conducted at those different workplaces. This is
how WorkCover
has always approached the matter, and we respectfully consider it to have been
correct in doing so.
note in passing that the reference to particular workplaces has been transposed
into new section 69(3)(c) under the 2012 amendments.
Much was made of the new
provision at the hearing of this matter in anticipation, as we have said, that
it may make a difference
when later years’ premiums come to be considered.
The new provision, it was said, focuses attention on the predominant class
industry conducted
at the particular workplace
rather than across all the
employer’s workplaces. With respect, we are not so sure that the revised
terms of paragraph (c)
represent a radical departure. WorkCover has always
imposed levies under different SAWICs at different workplaces operated by the
same employer, and old section 66(5)(a) and (b) have always focused on the
predominant class of industry in which each worker is
employed at each
workplace. Very many employers with multiple locations — including this
employer — have different classifications
assigned to individual
locations. The real question here on which the parties are divided is what
industry is conducted at Location
Board policy document headed
Divide Industries into Various Classes
2007) that was submitted to us was of little assistance in our task. It is
mainly a statement of philosophy on matters in which
the legislation, as we have
explained, in truth gives WorkCover little choice. The Act leaves no room for
the so-called “occupational
approach” that is discussed as a
possible alternative to the “location approach”, which it seems to
us is deeply
entrenched in practice, as well as in the legislation itself.
Board policy headed
Industrial Classification—Treatment of Certain
Activities Sec 66(4) & (5)
(p.123 of the book of documents before us)
appeared to us of greater relevance, especially the following
“The Head Office policy permits the classification of
an ancillary location to a classification other than that of the main
of the business,
where the main business activities are predominantly
located outside of South Australia
“Often workers are employed at a site within SA where the activity is
not directly attributable to the predominant activity
of the total activities of
the employer, eg. Transport Company operates from a depot in Victoria but the
administration centre is
located within SA.
“Head Office activities may include such activities as:
accounting;
Internal audit;
Other activities
with a similar focus.
“These locations are generally described by the employer as an
Australian Head Office or National Head Office. It is considered
as a separate
and indirect involvement in the operation of the employer’s business and
the Corporation may assign an industry
class other than the predominant class in
which an employer operates on a State, National or International basis. ...
“South Australian head office locations (i.e. locations predominantly
engaged in administrative or ancillary unit activities
relative to South
Australian operations) are considered to be operating in an ancillary capacity
and are therefore classified to
the predominant class of industry of the
locations served.” [
Emphasis added by us.
is not immediately obvious to us which provision of the Act authorises this
policy; certainly nothing among the objects of the
Act in section 2 seems to
point to it. However, as no submissions were made by either party on the origins
of this policy, it is
not necessary to consider them.
made that observation, it does seem to us that the employer is a genuine
national operator with legitimate operations in several
other states. All
operations are directed from the Parade head office known as Location 90, but it
certainly could not be said that
the main business activities are outside SA.
The employer is a South Australian-grown company with its largest presence in
this state.
is difficult to see the logic of the restriction we have highlighted above (also
emphasised in Mr Hayford’s statement), apart
from the encouragement of
interstate employers to set up head offices in this state, referred to in
Adventure Tours.
The same objective of public policy that
encourages the establishment of head offices in South Australia for companies
originating
in other states surely applies equally to the
head offices of South Australian companies that could conveniently re-locate to
other states or territories.
respect, we do not consider that the argument is much advanced by pursuing
hypothetical comparisons such as the argument that
classifying a head office
under an “administrative”-type SAWIC would be unfair to smaller
employers who lack the ability
to establish separate head offices. The
difficulty is that such hypothetical comparisons always invite other, perhaps
equally fanciful,
comparisons, such as the response that a smaller employer is
free (and many do) to outsource much of its administration, say to an
accountant, who will unequivocally be entitled to an administrative (or, in the
case of the accountant, a professional) classification.
this reason, we think it is preferable to focus on the terms of the Act in order
to establish what is permissible and what is
Consistency
of approach
it is seen that the “location” approach is firmly entrenched both by
the terms of the Act and by a quarter of a century
of practice by the
Corporation, it is necessary to ensure that this approach is applied
consistently. To do otherwise would be to
risk arbitrariness and unfairness. It
would also risk, in our respectful opinion, unlawfulness.
achievement of consistency is not a straightforward matter, however. If, for
example, an employer operated a large number of workplace
locations at each one
of which the same industry was pursued, there would be some logic in maintaining
that a separate head office
was engaged in that industry. That is the
“ancillary” approach for which WorkCover has argued. Where, as in
the present
case, a large number of workplace locations have a variety of
individual classifications, WorkCover would say, indeed, does say,
the workplace
at which only administrative activities occur should be classified in accordance
with the predominant class of industry
in which the employer, as a whole, is
is not, however, what the “predominant class” test is used for by
the Act. It is prescribed by section 66(5)(b) for
situations where industries
are mixed at a particular workplace, and an analogous but not identical concept,
“the class of
industry in which he or she is predominantly employed”
is prescribed by section 66(5)(a) for situations where a single worker
two or more classes of industry. Nowhere does the section suggest the
“predominant class” test be used by reference
to an aggregation of
an employer’s workplace locations to classify an individual one of them,
and it seems to us that any such
suggestion is inconsistent with the overall
“location approach”. Any such suggestion does not, in our view,
accord with
the “ancillary approach” requires an enquiry into the predominant
class of industry of the employer’s
overall operations. Numerically, the
overwhelming majority of the applicant’s other locations are classified as
486401 Automotive Fuel Retailing Service
, but the applicant’s
contention is that fuel retailing is only marginally profitable by comparison
with other retailing that
takes place at those locations, such as tobacco,
grocery and fast food sales. The logical extension of that argument is that all
the other locations classed in accordance with that SAWIC might not be correctly
classified. The classifications of those locations
do not arise in the present
proceedings, however, so we need not consider it further.
test for determining the predominant class of industry for the purposes of
section 66(5)(b) appears in section 66(5)(c). and requires
WorkCover to have
the importance within the employer’s total operations of each
class of industry in which workers are employed
any other relevant
Panel has considered this test on more than one occasion. As long ago as
Faucett Holdings v. WorkCover
[2000] SAWLRP 3
, the Panel
“It is mandatory for the predominant class of industry
to be determined by WorkCover (and, on review, by this Panel) in accordance
subsection (5)(c), but there is a great deal of room for debate within that
constraint. What the provision says is that WorkCover
must have regard to two
things; not that those two things determine the issue — and one of those
things is expressed very widely,
as ‘any other relevant factor’.
Thus, it is necessary to weigh ‘the importance within the employer’s
operations of each class of industry in which workers are employed’
along with ‘any other relevant factor’, and
reach a determination.
Parliament has not attempted to direct the weighing process.
“Although it is tempting to assume that ‘the importance within
the employer’s total operations of each class of
industry in which workers
are employed’ means that WorkCover is bound to favour the class of
industry that produces the most
revenue for the employer, that is by no means
necessarily so. ‘Importance within the employer’s total
operations’
might equally refer to the contribution of each activity to
the overall profitability of the employer, as to which no information
volunteered, or to the total number of workers employed in each activity (given
the subject matter with which the section
deals — levies for workers
compensation — it would be difficult to reject that approach out of hand).
There may be many
other indicators of ‘importance’.”
remarks were made by the Panel in
Olga’s Fine Foods v.
[2004] SAWLRP 4.
“Importance”
is an ordinary English word and we doubt that resort to dictionaries will
enhance understanding of its significance.
It is apparent, to us, that each
party in this matter has emphasised a measure of importance that would appear to
yield itself the
best result: the applicant referring to the comparative
profitability of various activities in which it is engaged, and WorkCover
referring to the number of workers involved or,
in arguendo
, perhaps the
total payroll for each activity. WorkCover, in particular, has an obligation in
procedural fairness to consider
possible indicators of importance
where an administrative determination is to be made, and not “simply to
consult its own interests”:
Robbins v. Harbord and GMH
[1994] SASC 4571
(1994) 62 SASR 229
, at 236 (King CJ). In our opinion, where it
is necessary to determine the predominant class of industry in which an employer
is involved,
at a particular workplace or otherwise, all relevant indicators of
the importance of each class of industry within the employer’s
operations must be considered, whether to the employer’s advantage or
contrary to the employer’s advantage, and
weighed fairly before deciding.
That includes the profitability of the various activities and the number of
workers (and the associated
payrolls) involved in each activity, but is not
confined to those factors. And it must be acknowledged that where a worker
a cash register is taking money for petrol from some customers,
tobacco products from others, groceries from others, coffee or fast
still others, or a combination of several from many, the real industry in which
that worker is deemed to be engaged may
be quite difficult to discern and needs
to be weighed very carefully indeed.
Subparagraph
(ii) of section 66(5)(c) makes it clear that the weighing process even goes
beyond indicators of importance as outlined
above. We merely add that we would
doubt that the drafting changes seen in new section 69(3)(d)(ii), referring to
any other factor
determined to be relevant by the Corporation
this position. There can be no doubt that in its determination of relevance,
WorkCover will be required to act fairly:
Robbins v. Harbord and
Chiropractors Association & Perry v. WorkCover
Corporation
[1999] SASC 470
; (1999) 75 SASR 470,
Technologies and Hocking v. WorkCover Corporation
[1997] SASC 6367
(1997) 70 SASR 153
194 LSJS 299.
any event, we take the view that it is not necessary to attempt the exercise of
determining the predominant class of industry in
which the applicant, as a
whole, is engaged in order to arrive at the appropriate classification for its
administrative office at
Location 90. To do so, in our respectful opinion, would
be to depart from the “location approach” which, as we have said,
well entrenched in both the Act and in the practice of the Corporation. We do
not see any warrant for departing from this approach
on an arbitrary basis in
contradiction of the usual practice, and in contradiction of the approach
clearly implied by the Act itself.
conclude that the Act requires that, when the classification of an individual
workplace is being considered, the enquiry is confined
to the activities of the
workers at that particular workplace, not other workers of the same employer at
other workplaces. A major
flaw in the “ancillary approach” is that
many of the SAWIC codes describe industries that serve other industries, and
is not considered necessary in those cases to consider the classifications of
those other industries. It seems to us that the
clerical and administrative
activities carried out at Location 90 comprise a field of human endeavour
equally as well as many of
the other industries described in the list of SAWIC
codes, and logically do not need to be related to the activities of a client
any other industry, whether conducted by an external arm’s-length client
or an internal client, such as other parts of the
employer’s own
is a common English word that, according to section 3(1) of the Act
“includes any business or activity
in which workers are employed”.
Although this is an inclusive definition that contemplates the word retaining
its ordinary
meaning as well, we do not think recourse to dictionary definitions
is required in this case. We think the inclusive definition in
the Act points in
the direction of our conclusion that service industries are industries in their
own right and that a focus on the
actual “business or activity in which
workers are employed” at a particular workplace is what is necessary, not
an examination
of the business or activity in which other workers are employed
at other workplaces.
note that the present case is very different from that in
WorkCover (No. 2)
[2004] SAWLRP 6
, where mobile support workers,
rendering hands-on personal care services in clients’ homes, were based in
and operated out
of the head office: see [23] of that decision. We regard as
crucial to the present case the finding that no worker at Location 90
in retailing.
Classification
turn to the question of the preferable classification for Location 90. This is
not free of difficulty.
applicant argued for a classification consistent with the Corporation’s
national head office policy. However, despite the
elaborate provisions of that
policy, there is no actual SAWIC code for a national head office. The policy
simply directs the attention
of WorkCover officers to Division I (Finance,
Property and Business Services), that is, classifications in the 600000 range.
are the choices (from the relevant SAWIC schedule for the 2010-2011 levy
year, published in the
South Australian Government Gazette
, 27 May 2010,
at p.2082):
seem appropriate to the workplace under consideration in this case, or, it must
be said, many national head offices (however defined)
or head offices in
general. It will be remembered that the same difficulty presented itself in
Adventure Tours
: see [41] – [42] of that decision.
is no classification in this range, or elsewhere in the SAWIC schedule, for
administration or office work. This no doubt reflects
WorkCover’s view
that these are not activities that stand on their own, but are necessarily
ancillary to another activity.
As we have mentioned, this can also be said for
many of the activities to which SAWICs are assigned, and a consistent
application
of the location approach requires administration to be acknowledged
as a “business or activity in which workers are employed”.
specific classifications argued for by the applicant were
617201 Services to
finance and investment nec
638901 Business services nec
understand that “nec” in the SAWIC codes means “not elsewhere
counted”.) Mr Hanus’s submission
617201 Services to
finance and investment nec
was the “best fit”, which no doubt
was a reference to what the Panel said in
Faucett Holdings
p.8) and has repeated on a number of occasions since:
task of this Panel on review is to identify the class into which the individual
employer best fits, viewed objectively,
without regard to the financial
consequences of that decision (although the Panel may often be aware of the
likely financial impact
of its judgment). The adequacy of the SAWIC table of
classifications adopted by the Board of WorkCover under section 66(3), which
a major topic of discussion at the hearing of this matter, is not a matter
within the jurisdiction of the Panel in these proceedings
— the Panel is
identifying the class into which the employer best fits
proceedings such as these, the Panel may only apply the law as it exists, and
apart from the possibility of enquiring into the
question whether the
classifications with percentages have been properly gazetted as required by
section 66(6), the Panel is bound
by the table of classifications
published.”
[Emphasis added by us.]
only qualification to that observation now would be that, since the reduction in
our delegated powers introduced in 2008, the
Panel’s entitlement to
enquire into the question of whether the classifications have been properly
gazetted as required by
section 66(6) may no longer be open. In any case, no
such enquiry is called for in this case: we have already cited the
the hearing, there was some discussion relating to
638901 Business services
. WorkCover’s classification manual, parts of which were included
in the book of documents before us, describes that classification
Business Services Nec
Description
This class consists of locations predominantly engaged in providing
business services nec.
Primary Activities
Airport trolley collection service; Business service nec; Business Services
nec; Contract Supply Services; Interpreting service; Supermarket
collection service; Telephone answering service; Trades fair or exhibition
organising; Translation service.
repetition (twice, with a slight variation) of the heading in the body of
“primary activities” is not a typographical
error by us.
details of the applicant’s preferred classification of
617201 Services
to finance and investment nec
appear in the following
Services to Finance and Investment Nec
Description
This class consists of locations predominantly engaged in trading in
stocks, shares or other financial securities for others, in underwriting
security issues, or in providing nominee, trustee, investment management or
advisory services or other services nec in the field
of finance or investment
(except insurance or superannuation).
Primary Activities
Bill broking service; Broking service (financial securities); Bullion
broking service; Commodity contracts broking or dealing (on
commission);
Commodity contracts or fixtures exchange operation; Commodity futures broking or
dealing (on commission); Currency exchange
service (non-bank); Executor service;
Finance broking service; Finance consultancy service; Finance service nec;
Investment broking
service; Investment consultancy service; Investment
management (on a commission or fee basis; for unit trusts, land or property
mutual fund companies, or charitable, educational or other trusts or
funds; except superannuation funds); Investment service nec;
Management company
operation (investment; except separately constituted superannuation funds);
Money changing service (non-bank);
Mortgage broking service; Nominee service;
Patent or copyright broking or dealing (on commission); Portfolio, investment,
(on a commission or fee basis); Security valuation service; Services
to Finance and Investment Nec; Share broking (on commission);
Share registry
operation; Share trading (on commission); Stock broking or trading (on
commission); Trustee service; Underwriting
(new security issues); Unit trust
management company operation.
note that here, too, “primary activities” repeats the heading (but
not twice), presumably as some sort of catch-all.
perusing the schedule, it did occur to us that there seemed some superficial
relevance, at least in the heading, of
471002 General agents dealing in
combination of goods in three or more industry groups — not physically
handling any stock
. Details of that classification are expressed in these
General Agents Dealing In Combination of Goods In Three or More Industry
Groups — not physically handling any stock
Description
This class consists of locations predominantly engaged in a combination of
activities primary to three or more of the other groups
in this subdivision (but
not physically handling any stock), provided gross receipts from activities
primary to any one of the other
groups does not account for 50 per cent or more
of total gross receipts of the location from wholesale trade.
Primary Activities
General Agents Dealing In Combination of Goods In Three or More Industry
Groups — not physically handling any stock.
does appear from the details of this classification that repetition of the
heading is a common feature of “primary activities”
descriptions; in
this case, the only item.
were attracted to look at this classification because it is the essence of this
matter that no retail stock is physically handled
at Location 90, and the other
workplaces serviced from Location 90 do extend over three or more other industry
groups (given the
fuel retailing, the confectionery and tobacco businesses, and
the fast food businesses). The material before us does not suggest
that any one
of the other groups contributes more than 50% of receipts, but receipts are, as
we understand it, by and large not from
trade, and the
subdivision into which the three or more other groups are required to fall is
subdivision of the Wholesale and Retail Trade
perceive that wholesaling implies dealings with a third party. We have
considered whether there is an analogy by way of what may
be, in effect,
“internal wholesaling” as some of the activities at Location 90 may
amount to that. We do not, however,
consider this would be a desirable course to
adopt without hearing from the parties as to the appropriateness of using this
classification
in this way, and, indeed, whether there is an evidentiary basis
for doing so.
employer’s argument for
617201 Services to finance and investment
, as we understood it, revolved around the management of the Shahin
family investment portfolio. Leaving aside the question of whether
this is the
same entity, we accept that a profit-making corporation may invest its profits
and employ staff to look after that activity.
But the evidence before us does
not suggest that this is the focus of activities at Location 90. The whole
thrust of these proceedings
seemed to be to establish, as we consider the
applicant has, that the focus of activities is the administration and
supervision of
activities at the other registered locations of the applicant. Of
the 176 total employees at Location 90, according to Mr Shahin’s
statement, the largest single group (49) is engaged in “occupational
support, including workers responsible for site visits
and inspections,
administration work, staff support and training”. The next largest group
(38) is engaged in “general
office administration”, and after that
come in-house human resources training (18), finance (17), and marketing and
information
technology services (14 each). While we would accept that the
management of investments is a part of the activities at Location 90,
evidence does not satisfy us that it is a major part, warranting classification
of the workplace as
617201 Services to finance and investment nec.
are almost equally uncomfortable with the prospect of classifying Location 90 as
638901 Business services nec
, in view of the typical activities outlined
in the SAWIC manual (set out above). Superficially, the heading itself seems the
appropriate of those available, but we hesitate to assimilate this
workplace with locations involved in airport or supermarket trolley
services, interpreting and translation services, or organising trade fairs. We
were informed that a major part of the
IT workers’ tasks was operating a
telephone answering.
we have observed, each description of typical activities seems to repeat the
heading. We think the effect of this must be somewhat
“inclusive” definition in legislation, preserving the ordinary
meaning of the heading along with the more
specialised examples set out. As we
have noted, the “primary activities” of
638901 Business services
includes “business services nec” twice. Is this for
emphasis? We doubt it. However, not without reluctance, we have found
leaning towards the conclusion that this description best fits the activities
carried out at Location 90.
this classification includes such activities as the collection of airport and
supermarket trolleys, which carry obvious risks
of injury, this classification
attracts a higher levy rate than either
617201 Services to finance and
investment nec
471002 General agents dealing in combination of goods
in three or more industry groups — not physically handling any stock
In fact, its rate is the same as
486401 Automotive Fuel Retailing
, which may make such an outcome seem to the applicant like something
of a Pyrrhic victory. This, however, is not a matter that can
influence us.
may be that inclusion of this workplace in this classification would bring its
rate down in the future. That also is not a matter
have considered in some detail the two alternative classifications that were
discussed at the hearing, and one alternative classification
that was not. We
are not yet satisfied that we have found the “best fit”, although it
may be that one of these three
will have to be selected. It may be helpful if we
could be informed of the classifications that have been assigned to successful
applicants for national head office status, although we appreciate that
WorkCover’s position is that this applicant is not
in that category. We
would also like to hear, and procedural fairness may well demand that we hear,
the parties’ views on the
classification we considered that did not arise
at the hearing. We do not think our powers extend to the creation of new
classifications,
but does our responsibility to cure unreasonableness by
“alter[ing] a levy or assessment” extend to adjusting the levy
“fair” rate without reference to the schedule at all? Probably not,
but we are prepared to hear the argument, if
Accordingly,
we think the justice of this case will best be met by extending to the parties
the opportunity to make further submissions
only on the question of the
classification we should finally adopt
, in the light of our reasoning
this end, we will arrange a further directions hearing to fix a date for those
submissions, if either party wishes to make them
orally, or to fix a deadline if
the parties are both agreeable to making them in writing.
at this late stage, with the guidance of our observations above, the parties may
be able to find agreement. While we do not think
we can do it, the Corporation
certainly has the power to create a suitable new classification that may meet
the situation. The parties
are encouraged to continue
negotiations.
Determination
For the reasons we have outlined above, we reserve final determination of this
application pending further submissions from the parties.
Deputy Member
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (10.5 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter