URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCRP/2000/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:09:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Butler v GH Michell & Sons (Aust) [2000] SAWCRP 1 (14 January 2000)
[2000] SAWCRP 1
Review Officer Duigan
Determination No. 1/2000
Workers Compensation Review
BUTLER AND GH MICHELL & SONS (AUST)
(004008005/02/04)
Determination of Review Officer made
on 14/1/2000
(ex infirmaria)
Review Officer Duigan
This is a determination of an Application for Review
lodged by solicitors acting for Deborah Ann Butler on
The Application for Review seeks to dispute
the determination made by the exempt employer – GH Michell & Sons
Ltd on 23/4/96 in which it sought to vary or discontinue income
maintenance payments to Ms Butler pursuant to Sections 36(1)(b),
36(1)(c) and
36(2)(b) of the Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act as it was of that
The Application for Review refers to the determination of the
exempt employer to discontinue or reduce weekly payments pursuant to
and seeks to dispute it on the basis that:
(i) the determination was against the evidence and the weight of evidence
(ii) the worker had not returned to work and nor had the worker ceased to be
incapacitated.
The determination to reduce or discontinue
income maintenance in April 1996 followed upon the acceptance of a Notice of
and Compensation Claim Form having been lodged by Ms Butler on
14/9/93 in respect of a compensable disability to her back having
occurred on
that same date. Ms Butler’s notional weekly earnings for the purposes of
her income maintenance entitlement as
a consequence of her total incapacity was
set at $651.76. Subsequent adjustments made pursuant to Section 35(2)(b) and
at the end of the first 12 months of total incapacity (on 12/9/94)
and at the end of the second year of total incapacity (on 10/10/94)
respectively set at $532.28 and $552.00.
The court file indicates that
from 22/11/93 GH Michell provided Ms Butler with rehabilitation programs through
DePoi Consultancy Services
and rehabilitation and return to work programs from
2/6/94 up until 26/10/95.
It appears from the court file that there was a
gradual return to work (albeit on alternative duties) from about August 1995 up
to her pre-injury duties she was being paid for the alternative
clerical duties
that she was performing and that the exempt employer was providing income
maintenance to the level of her pre-employment
The determination
issued by GH Michell on 23/4/96 is long and comprehensive. It is attached to
this determination as
. As noted at point 3.14, 3.15 and 3.16
on page 5 of that determination, GH Michell determined that in respect of the
injury giving
rise to a compensable disability on 14/9/93 that Ms Butler’s
entitlement to income maintenance was $273.04 provided that she
demonstrate ongoing partial incapacity which prevented her from carrying out the
duties that were available and on offer to
her and that were within her
capacity, or at worst that she had no entitlement on the grounds that all of the
duties which were available
to her and offered to her were within her existing
On its face, this was a dispute of the kind familiar to the
Review Panel and which in and of itself did not constitute any greater
legal or evidentiary complexity than other matters dealt with by the
True it is that shortly after Ms Butler’s graduated return
to work in August 1995 she lodged a subsequent Notice of Disability
Compensation Claim Form for alleged injuries arising out of an incident on
4/10/95. That Notice of Disability claimed injuries
to her lower back, left leg
and mental injury including anxiety and depression.
It is not clear
when that claim was lodged. It is clear, however that a separate and additional
Notice of Disability and Compensation
Claim Form was lodged in March 1996
referring to the October 1995 incident but identifying (i) a different medical
practitioner as
having certified the injury and (ii) alleging that the
“mental” element of the alleged disability was traceable and
linked not only to the October 1995 incident but in fact back to the
original September 1993 compensable disability.
Those claims for
compensation were in any case rejected by way of a determination issued by GH
Michell on 11/10/96.
That determination and the Notice of Dispute against
it is not before me.
It became the subject of proceedings in the
Workers Compensation Tribunal and was heard by his Honour Acting Judge Gilchrist
determination (JD 55/1999) to reject the worker’s Notice of Dispute
and confirm the GH Michell determination has been appealed
by Palios Meegan
& Nicholson to the Full Court of the Workers Compensation Tribunal. The
Full Court has heard argument and reserved
its decision which is expected some
time later in January 2000.
The matter before me is the Section 36 Notice
following upon the acceptance by GH Michell of Ms Butler’s 1993 claim for
compensation
for “pulled muscle – lower back”.
matters involving GH Michell and Ms Butler proceeded in the respect of the
was advised from the bar
table variously that:
(i) the matters could proceed in parallel or in tandem,
(ii) that the review matter should be dealt with and completed first,
(iii) that the matter before the Tribunal should be dealt with separately and
(iv) that the two matters should be joined before the Tribunal,
(v) that the parties may well be able to resolve all issues in dispute following
final submissions to the Tribunal.
The Application for Review
was first listed by the Review Panel on 21/6/96, 5 weeks after the lodging of
the Application for Review.
It was listed on 14 further separate occasions and
in addition was the subject of correspondence between the Panel and both parties
on at least 5 occasions in 1998 and 1999. A schedule which is appended to this
determination as
lists the dates of those hearings before the
Panel and the notes made on the court file. It also identifies the
representation for
each of the parties on each of those occasions. It will be
noted that while the representation for both Ms Butler and GH Michell
respectively with Palios Meegan & Nicholson and Fountain & Bonig, they
were each represented at the hearings by no
less than 5 separate and different
solicitors and that each party had independent counsel assisting whose court
diary had to be accommodated
in determining dates for Review Panel hearings.
While these requests were a common occurrence and an expected courtesy for
counsel at the Review Panel they are hardly in accordance with either the
spirit or the letter of Section 88(4) of the Workers Compensation
Rehabilitation Act 1986 in relation to proceedings before review
authorities.
Despite these numerous hearings and the “advice”
of the parties, the Application for Review remains incomplete –
notwithstanding that Ms Butler’s evidence in chief at one abandoned
hearing was accepted into evidence in the matter before
the Workers Compensation
Tribunal and quoted in D.P. Gilchrist’s determination.
1996 there have also been a number of other impediments placed in the way of the
expeditious disposal of this matter.
Legislative changes to the Workers
Compensation and Rehabilitation Act in 1996 abolished the jurisdiction of the
Review Panel for
all disputes following the proclamation of the new and current
division 6 (Review and Appeals) section of the Act as from 3/9/96.
date no further commissions could be issued for Review Officer as their
existence had been abolished by virtue of the
amendments to the Act. Similarly
no extensions of the commission of Review Officers appointed prior to the
proclamation date was
possible. Furthermore, if Review Officers commissioned
under the repealed section of the Act did not receive subsequent appointments
Conciliation and Arbitration Officers under the new Review and Appeals section
then their tenure, and their ability to hear review
matters expired with the
expiration of their commission and/or their employment as Review
This matter was originally heard before Review Officer
Bowering, then before Review Officer Meredith, prior to a short hearing before
Review Officer Palmer. Review Officer Palmer was the only officer of the three
who received a further commission as a Conciliation
and Arbitration Officer but
because by the time the matter came before him his commission to hear Panel
matters was all but extinguished,
he referred the matter to the only remaining
Review Officer whose commission continued, namely the current
Issues that were not in dispute at the lodging of the
Application for Review in 1996 became so after it had been heard by Review
Bowering and Meredith.
Review Officer Bowering was asked to rule
on two preliminary points, namely:
(i) whether Ms Butler was entitled to continuing payments of income maintenance
pursuant to Section 36(4)(a) while her dispute against
the determination was in
progress and
(ii) whether the determination of GH Michell was invalid on the grounds that it
sought to both
discontinue
payments to Ms
Review Officer Bowering issued a determination on
these points on 18/3/97 and as requested by Deputy President Gilchrist submitted
his reasonings to him on that day. Review Officer Bowering found that:
(i) “The within notice is not vague or misleading and provides all of the
detail required by the Act and the Regulations and
in particular the grounds
upon which the exempt employer relies are set out in commendable detail covering
nearly 3 pages of the
decision with specific references to grounds that are
relied upon in the alternative. There can be no misunderstanding of what is
being alleged by each decision and what is relied upon; it does not suffer from
ambiguity... I find against the proposition that
simply because this notice
contains two decisions made by the exempt employer, even if they are in the
alternative, it follows that
the notice is invalid.”
(ii) He did not make any award for continuing payments or any order to reinstate
payments previously suspended.
(iii) He noted that the matter should proceed to be heard on its
Such a hearing on the merits began before Review
Officer Meredith on 8/9/97. At that hearing Ms Butler gave her evidence in
Cross examination did not commence. There were a range of legal issues
argued before Ms Meredith including;
(i) who was to be
(ii) the issue of how credibility of the applicant was to be determined,
(iii) the range and number of medical witnesses to be called,
(iv) the disclosure and production of surveillance film held by the exempt
(v) the relationship between the evidence provided by Ms Butler in the Review
Panel matter as against the evidence provided by her
in the Tribunal matter,
(vi) whether or not any evidence in relation to alleged psychiatric injuries
were admissible in the Panel proceedings as distinct
from the Tribunal
proceedings when the Section 36 notice in dispute before the Panel did not
relate to any accepted compensable disability
in respect of alleged psychiatric
injury but only in respect to lower back strain suffered in September 1993.
The hearing was then adjourned for 5 weeks and subsequently at the
request of the parties for a further 3 months.
The questions that arise
as a consequence of the hearings before Review Officers Bowering and Meredith
whether there is
a need or requirement for the issues argued before Review Officer’s
Bowering and Meredith need to be re-argued
and re-determined by the present
Review Officer and,
whether the
evidence of Ms Butler is required to be heard again in
Those issues of a technical and procedural nature were not
issues in May 1996 when the Application for Review was first lodged. Now
however some 42 months later I am advised by solicitors for Ms Butler that
“this matter is now urgent, should now be called
on for hearing” and
by solicitors for the exempt employer that it is “inappropriate for the
worker’s Section 36
Application for Review to come on for a full hearing
until such time as the Full Bench of the Tribunal has handed down its decision
against the judgement of Deputy President Gilchrist”.
text of the letters from the respective parties follows:
Letter from Palios Meegan & Nicholson to Review Officer Duigan dated
“We note that your commission is shortly to
expire. The above matter is still before the Workers Compensation Review Panel
and we understand adjourned sine die, pending the outcome of the proceedings in
the Workers Compensation Tribunal. Those proceedings
resulted in a judgment of
Deputy President Gilchrist which has been appealed to the Full Bench of the
Tribunal. The Full Bench heard
argument in early September but has not yet
delivered Judgment. We had hoped that a Judgment might assist in confining the
still before the Review Panel.
Unfortunately judgment has not been delivered. Therefore it is urgent that
this matter now be called on for hearing.
It is our submission that the “decision” under dispute is fatally
flawed because the “Notice Decision” does
not give notice of any
“decision” but rather of two “in the alternative” and
inconsistent possible “decisions”.
It is impossible for the exempt
employer to have reached two inconsistent decisions at the same time. The
was, in reality, an attempt to plead alternative
reductions of weekly payments sought by the exempt employer. That is not the
in which this Act works.
The worker is entitled to accept a “decision”. This was
obviously not possible in the present case.
The document purporting to be “Notice of Decision” did not give
any notice of a decision but rather of alternative outcomes.
It therefore could
not have given any basis for a decision and consequently is in breach of
Regulation 16 and therefore invalid.
This question was fully argued before Review Officer Bowering at an earlier
time. If you are not prepared to able to accede to our
argument in this respect
then the matter must now be called on for urgent hearing prior to the expiry of
your commission.”
Letter from Fountain & Bonig to Review Officer Duigan dated 21/12/99
“As you are aware, we have been forwarded by
facsimile a copy of a letter from the worker’s solicitors to you dated 20
December 1999. We wish to respond on our client’s behalf.
We note the request made by the worker’s solicitors for you to consider
a preliminary point relating to the validity of our
client’s section 36
notice. In our view there can be no doubt that, for the reasons set out herein,
it is inappropriate for
you to further consider the preliminary point.
As the worker’s solicitors said in their above mentioned letter to you
the issue of the validity of our client’s section
36 notice was fully
argued before Review Officer Bowering at an earlier time. The worker’s
solicitors are quite correct in
that regard. On 18 March 1997 Review Officer
Bowering published a determination in which he dealt, among other things, with
an application
by the worker’s solicitors that the section 36 notice
should be held to be invalid. After argument, Review Officer Bowering
that contention. We enclose for your information a copy of the determination of
Review Officer Bowering made on 18 March
1997 in which you will see that he has
clearly determined the issue now sought to be re-agitated by the worker’s
solicitors.
In the circumstances, Review Officer Bowering was
functus officio
this issue. Moreover, in our view an estoppel clearly applies in relation to
the issue; that estoppel precludes you from any
further consideration of this
Finally, we wish to also advise that do not agree with the conclusion reached
by the worker’s solicitors that if you are unprepared
to accede to their
request in relation to the preliminary issue
“then the matter must now
be called on for urgent hearing”.
In our view it is inappropriate for
the worker’s section 36 application for review to come on for a full
hearing until such
time as the full bench of the Tribunal has handed down its
decision against the judgment of Deputy President Gilchrist. As stated
worker’s solicitors it is likely that the ruling of the Full Bench will
assist in determining the relevant issues for
consideration by the Review
Please advise us if you require any further clarification regarding the
matters set out above.”
Letter from Registrar to Palios Meegan & Nicholson cc to Fountain &
Bonig dated 22/12/99
“Your letter dated 20 December 1999, seeking
to have this matter called on for hearing has been referred to me by Review
Review Officer Duigan is currently unavailable to hear this matter and will
not be available to hear it before his Commission as a
Review Officer expires in
mid January 2000, as he is currently recovering from an operation.
However, he will deliver a decision before his Commission expires on the
material on the file and currently before him.”
Letter from Fountain & Bonig to Registrar dated 5/1/00
“Thank you for forwarding us a copy of your
letter dated 22 December 1999 to Palios Meegan & Nicholson regarding this
which we received on 4 January 2000.
We note that it is proposed that Review Officer Duigan will deliver his
decision on the material he has on file and currently before
him before his
Commission expires. We also note that his Commission is due to expire in
mid-January 2000. We do not believe that
this approach is appropriate. We
believe that a decision cannot be made at this stage as the material before the
Review Officer
is so inadequate. We believe that any attempt to make a decision
would amount to a denial of natural justice to the parties.
The worker’s application for review was previously part-heard before
Review Officer. The initial hearing of the application
for review took place on
8 and 9 September 1997. On 8 September a number of preliminary issues were
discussed and resolved. No
substantive evidence was taken until 9 September
when the worker was called to give oral evidence. Not only did the worker not
her evidence, but her cross-examination did not even begin. The worker
gave extensive evidence in chief; that evidence was not in
any way been tested.
Moreover, had the hearing continued it was the intention of our client (and
presumably also the intention of
the worker) to call a number of other
witnesses. Due to events beyond our client’s control that has never
As the Review Officer who began hearing the matter left the Review Panel
shortly after, the hearing of the matter would in any event
have to begin
As stated, it is our view the proposed approach of a decision being made on
the basis of a part-heard case (before another Review
Officer) and other
materials would amount to a denial of natural justice. In saying this we are
mindful of the comments made by
Deputy President Thompson in
LGA (City of
Holdfast Bay) v Field
(A87/1997). A similar situation occurred where a
Review Officer decided to hand down his decision in two part-heard applications
for review as his commission was about to come to an end. The exempt employer
appealed against one of those decisions on the basis
that it had, in the
circumstances, been denied natural justice. In allowing the exempt
employer’s appeal, Deputy President
Thompson said (at p4):
“However, I am informed from the bar table that at least one further
witness was to be called on the notice point i.e. the Human
Resources Officer of
the Council. This person would give some evidence of the duties of the worker
in December 1994 and how he performed
them. It is not clear to me how that
might have been relevant. Nevertheless the appellant was entitled to at least
adduce the evidence
and have a ruling on whether it was relevant or not. It was
not open to a Review Officer without warning to cut short the presentation
the case to be adduced by one party. Hence the appeal must
While certain distinctions naturally exist between that case and the present,
the underlying principle is in our view apposite.
A failure by the Review Officer to conduct the hearing in this matter in
accordance with the principles of natural justice would in
our view clearly
amount to the removal of an important (and indeed the primary) level of hearing
and determination contemplated by
the legislation.
It should also be noted that the present difficulty could have been avoided
had the issues before the Review Panel in the worker’s
application for
review been joined with those before the Tribunal. The Tribunal’s file
will show that while our client was
prepared to agree to a joinder of the issues
pursuant to section 88DA, the worker was not.
For the reasons set out above, we voice our strong opposition to the course
of action proposed in your letter to the worker’s
solicitors dated 22
December 1999.
Finally, we also maintain the view set out in our facsimile to the Review
Officer dated 21 December 1999, namely that it is in any
event inappropriate for
the Review Panel matter to come on for hearing until the Full Bench of the
Tribunal has handed down the decision
on the worker’s appeal.
If you wish to discuss the matter further, please do not hesitate to contact
the writer.”
Letter from Registrar to Fountain & Bonig dated 5/1/00
“I refer to your letter dated 5 January
I note the content of your letter and have referred it to Review Officer
Duigan. However I can only relate to you the reality that
R.O. Duigan is now
the only person holding a commission as Review Officer and that expires on 15
January 99. There is no prospect
of this commission being extended nor any
other commission being no prospect of this commission being extended nor any
other commission
being issued. In mid 1999 when it became absolutely clear that
this would be the case, the President’s direction was sought
as to dealing
with unfinished Review matters as this date approached; that direction was to
the effect that is now being followed.
Mr Duigan has had surgery and is basically immobilised. He is not expected
to return to active duty until mid February, that is after
his commission as a
Review Officer has expired; he is simply unable to formally hear this or any
other matter until his return.
Consequently the only available course is for him to decide the matter on the
material now available, before his commission expires,
and make the appeal
processes available to the parties if they see fit to exercise them.”
Letter from Palios Meegan & Nicholson to Review Officer Duigan dated
“We refer to the letters from Messrs Fountain
& Bonig to yourself, dated 21 December 1999, and the Industrial Registrar
ourselves, dated 22 December 1999.
We do not accept the assertion by Messrs Fountain & Bonig that any
estoppel arises in relation to the preliminary issue outlined
in our letter of
20 December 1999, whether at the Review Panel level or at any other level.
We do, however, agree with Messrs Fountain & Bonig that the matter should
await the Judgment of the Full Bench of the Workers
Compensation Tribunal. If
that is not possible, then the matter must be called on for hearing. On that
point, we do part company
with Messrs Fountain & Bonig.
We do not accept the suggestion made by the Industrial Registrar that this
matter can be determined on the documents. The worker
is entitled to be heard.
She is entitled to adduce her evidence. The employer is entitled to adduce its
evidence. Any other method
of proceedings with this matter would involve a
denial of natural justice to both parties. Both parties are entitled to their
before the Workers Compensation Review Panel.”
Letter from Tribunal to Palios Meegan & Nicholson dated 11/1/00
“Thank you for your letter dated 6/1/00
regarding the above mentioned worker. Please note that the letter has been
to Review Officer Duigan, along with all other correspondence in
relation to this file.”
This matter cannot be left to lie in limbo
any further. Both parties have been familiar with the legislative abolition of
Panel since mid 1996. Both parties have been aware of the
extinguishment of the jurisdiction of the Panel for the same period.
parties have been aware that the current Review Officer has been the only Review
Officer with an existing commission to deal
with outstanding review matters for
at least 2 years. Both parties have received a number of letters from the
current Review Officer
reminding them that the jurisdiction of the Panel and the
expiration of his commission was imminent and that all outstanding matters
be dealt with expeditiously. (
includes the most recent copies
of that correspondence). Both parties have been involved in other matters
before the current Review
Officer both separately and jointly in relation to
disputes that were not completely finalised before the Panel within the required
time frame. Both parties were aware of the advice that I sought and received
from the President of the Tribunal in 4/5/99 and in
which the President
indicated the procedure that should be followed in respect of outstanding
disputes. (see
) Both parties have in fact sought to have
other matters finalised in exactly that manner. Any suggestions therefore that
the Panel, the system or the current Review Officer who is responsible for
a delay in a decision in this matter are unwarranted and
unjustified.
have not heard Ms Butler’s evidence; I have not heard her evidence tested
in cross examination; I have not heard from any
of the medical witnesses. I
cannot therefore make any independent findings in respect of Ms Butler’s
credibility, her capacity
or her ability to undertake alternative duties whether
they are available at GH Michell’s or elsewhere.
I can therefore
make no findings.
Nonetheless I can make no adverse comment about the
production and leading of evidence from either party such as should prejudice
them in wishing to pursue the matter further if the determination of the Full
Court of the Tribunal does not provide sufficient or
satisfactory resolution of
the issues in dispute. I note again as I have noted above that the issues
before the Full Court are whether
or not Ms Butler was suffering from a
compensable disability as a consequence of an injury suffered at work in
compensable circumstances
on 4/10/95 being injuries to her lower back, left leg
and mental injury including anxiety and depression. (I have already noted
there is also a second Compensation Claim Form which identifies the date of
injury not as 4/10/95 but as 14/9/93 – to
4/10/95 and again a separate
entry identifying the time of injury as 16/8/95 – 9/3/96). However those
matters are dealt with,
Ms Butler remains entitled to dispute the Section 36
notice issued by GH Michell on 23/4/96 pursuant to Section 36 of the Act
or discontinuing her entitlement to income maintenance as a consequence
of a reduction or cessation of her incapacity arising out
of injuries identified
by her in her Compensation Claim Form dated 14/9/93 (i.e. pulled muscle, lower
back) and accepted by GH Michell
on 17/12/93.
The only practical way that
that can now occur is for there to be a decision of the Panel which she can
appeal to the Workers Compensation
Appeal Tribunal. That decision should be the
decision of GH Michell issued pursuant to Section 36 as noted.
Accordingly, and taking into account all of the circumstances I confirm
the determination of GH Michell of 23/4/96.
Furthermore I provide Ms
Butler with her entitlement to appeal this decision and to be able to do so
without being unnecessarily circumscribed
by the evidentiary provisions of the
Act which would otherwise prevent her from leading material at a subsequent
Appeal Tribunal
hearing that she has not had the opportunity to lead at a Review
Panel hearing.
I make a general order as to costs in the sense that Ms
Butler is entitled to the costs of her Application for Review in accordance
the regulated scale of fees and for reasonable disbursements but that any figure
is to be agreed between the parties or argued
at the Appeal Tribunal in lieu of
which it will be taxed by the Registrar on the basis of written submissions from
the parties.
Any appeal against this determination must be lodged with
the Workers’ Compensation Appeal Tribunal within one month of the
this determination. Enquiries about appeals may be directed to the Registrar of
the Tribunal, Riverside Centre, North Terrace,
Adelaide, (Phone: 207.0999) and
forms for appeal are available from the same address.
Review Officer
This is the last determination
of the Workers Compensation Review Panel and of this Review Officer whose 5 year
appointment for all
purposes pursuant to Section 77B expires on
ATTACHMENTS (FORMING PART OF THE DETERMINATION)
A: Determination of exempt employer
B: Schedule of hearings
C: Correspondence re extinguishment of the Review Panel jurisdiction
D: Presidents advice
Schedule of hearings 1996
EXEMPT EMPLOYER REP
Date of determination
Application for Review
Tony Corrighan (PMN)
John Fountain (FB)
Sally Huxter (GH Michell)
- closed 28/5/96
– dismissed NFJ
– 36(4A) to
SH 21/6/96 – 4.00 pm
Tony Corrighan (PMN)
John Fountain (FB)
Sally Huxter (GH Michell)
i) 36(4A) no order
ii) Matter listed as priority
Jane Angelopoulos (PMN)
Arlene McDonald
Ralph Bonig (FB)
available & 10.00 am relisted for pm
for pm but prelim arguments as per 3
36 notice invalid. Weekly payments should continue. Parties request written
determination.
Arlene McDonald
Ralph Bonig (FB)
Further arguments re above 2 points.
Panel lists full hearing before John Palmer on 5 & 6 May 1997
PMN to Panel – worker’s counsel not available 5 & 6 May
Gilchrist to Bowering
Decision please
Bowering to Gilchrist
Determination and findings re preliminary points
Tony Corrighan (PMN)
John Fountain (FB)
Validity of decision and 36(4A) already determined
Nick Economous (PMN)
Ralph Bonig (FB)
Adjourn to 5/8/97 pending outcome of hearing before Gilchrist on
Jarred Warren (PMN)
John Fountain (FB)
Gilchrist hearing... Matters to proceed separately. Review matter first on
8 & 9 September 1997
Michael Kernot
John Fountain (FB)
Steve Apps (counsel)
Workers evidence in chief
Michael Kernot
Steve Apps (counsel)
Arguments about admissibility of material relating to psychiatric sequelae.
Matter adjourned. Hearing set for 17/10/97 and 20/10/97
to accommodate Mr Apps.
Cross-examination of worker to proceed
Telephone attendance by Michael Kernot seeking
adjournment
dates not suitable
Parties told to consult and agree on new dates. Set for 2 & 3 February
John Fountain advises at counter... Tribunal matter may resolve all issues,
seeks adjournment of 2 & 3 February 1999 with consent
PMN (Jarred
Granted liberty to apply
Jarren Warren (PMN)
Jenny Myers (FB)
Final callover notice. Parties advise related matter still at Tribunal.
Seek short hearing 9/11/98
Jarred Warren (PMN)
Prue Reid (FB)
Adjourned by consent – pending Tribunal decision by Gilchrist
Jarred Warren (PMN)
John Fountain absent with consent and agreement
Matter still before DP Gilchrist. Liberty to call on RO. Note bring up
Panel to parties re progress report
Advise final submissions to Gilchrist scheduled for 12/3/99. Bring up
Panel to parties. Gilchrist decision delivered. Please advise
No response
Final Panel letter (PLEA) to all parties in
review matters to
files as matter of extreme urgency
No response
PMN to Panel. A hearing in this matter is now urgent. Julia Palios
See determination
John Fountain (FB) to Panel.
Any hearing premature now that Gilchrist
decision is being reviewed by Full Bench of Tribunal
See determination
Prepared by Review Officer Duigan from Review Panel file. 14.1.2000
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (129 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter