URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRC/2017/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Boland v Saxon Energy Services Australia Pty Ltd [2017] SAIRC 12 (13 April 2017)
Boland v Saxon Energy Services Australia Pty Ltd
[2017] SAIRC
MAGISTRATES COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(INDUSTRIAL
OFFENCES JURISDICTION)
BOLAND, Marie
SAXON ENERGY
SERVICES AUSTRALIA PTY LTD.
Prosecution
2442 of 2015
HEARING DATE:
14 February
JUDGMENT OF:
Industrial Magistrate SM Lieschke
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Prosecution - Guilty plea - Failure to
ensure, so far as was reasonably practicable, the safety of two employees
working on a drilling
rig platform - Two employees suffered serious injuries,
while exposed to a risk of fatal crush injuries - Injuries arose from the
inadvertent operation of a powered mechanical arm, which was engaged from a
different touchscreen to those controlled by the designated
driller - Defendant
had not identified that the arm could be operated by the second touchscreen -
Safety solution was to reprogram
the controls -
: Fine of $210,000
(after reduction of 40%) - Conviction recorded - Ss 19 & 32 Work Health and
Safety Act 2012 - Criminal Law
(Sentencing) Act
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant: Mr K
Defendant: Mr D Edwardson QC
Solicitors:
Complainant: Crown
Solicitors Office
Defendant: Norton Rose Fulbright Australia
28 April 2013 two employees of Saxon Energy Services Australia Pty Ltd (Saxon)
suffered serious crush injuries while working on
the floor of a drilling rig in
the Cooper Basin.
an investigation by SafeWork SA, Saxon was charged with one breach of s 32 of
Work Health and Safety Act 2012.
charge was by Information laid in April 2015. After numerous adjournments and an
aborted trial listing, the particulars were amended
to those set out below.
Offence Details
Energy Services Australia Pty Ltd, on 28 April 2013 in the Cooper Basin in South
Australia, being a person having a health and
safety duty, failed to comply with
that duty, exposing Dempsey Reweti and Andrew Calderbank to a risk of serious
Contrary to s 32 of the
Work Health and Safety Act 2012.
Particulars
1.1 The defendant, as a person conducting a business operating drilling rigs,
had the safety duty prescribed in s 19 of the Act
to ensure, so far as was
reasonably practicable, the health and safety of workers engaged by it while the
workers were at work in
that business.
1.2 Dempsey Reweti and Andrew Calderbank were workers engaged by the defendant
who, while at work in its business on Rig 188 (at
a well site named Chorizo 1 in
the Cooper Basin in South Australia), were exposed to a risk to their safety
1.2.1 Rig 188 was equipped with plant called an ST-80 Iron Roughneck.
1.2.2 It was possible for the ST-80’s hydraulic arm to extend into the
area of the rig floor where Dempsey Reweti and Andrew
Calderbank were required
1.2.3 It was possible for a worker in that area of the rig floor to become
trapped between the ST-80’s arm and other items
of plant in that area.
1.2.4 It was possible for such a worker to suffer serious
1.3 The defendant failed to comply with its duty because:
1.3.1 It failed, so far as was reasonably practicable, to minimise the risk that
the ST 80s arm might be operated by a computer terminal
other than the
driller’s computer terminal.”
entered a guilty plea. It is now to be sentenced. The maximum penalty is a fine
of $1,500,000. This is Saxon’s first health
and safety offence.
following facts were either agreed prior to the sentencing hearing, or arose
from the sentencing submissions.
the time of the offence Saxon conducted a business operating drilling rigs. It
had been contracted to Santos in July 2012 to undertake
a drilling program.
Saxon’s management structure is part of a much larger international
operation. No submission was made as
Saxon’s ownership.
brought into Australia a set of drilling rigs it owned, including Rig 188.
The rig was re-assembled and commissioned in Queensland
then transported to the
Cooper Basin.
188 comprised an enclosed control room called a ‘doghouse’ and a rig
floor equipped with various items of plant. These
included lengths of drill
piping that could be joined vertically by threaded joints to form a drill
string, used to penetrate the
rig floor at its well centre.
rig floor included the ST-80 Iron Roughneck, which sat on the edge in its
retracted position. Its hydraulic arm could be remotely
operated to extend to
the well centre, where its wrench assembly could grasp drill piping and rotate
it in order to screw drill pipe
joints together, or to unscrew them from each
rig floor also included ‘manual tongs’, which could also be remotely
operated to grasp pieces of drill piping to join
or unscrew them.
the usual course, the ST-80 and manual tongs were operated by the Driller using
one of three touchscreen monitors arrayed in front
of his position in the
Driller’s Chair inside the control room, facing the rig floor.
was the Driller’s job to operate the controls of much, if not most, of the
equipment that was out on the rig floor.
the ST-80 and the manual tongs could also be operated from a separate
touchscreen monitor to the right of the Driller’s
Chair, and in front of a
different chair.
meant that more than one person could control the same piece of powered plant
from inside the control room.
touchscreen pages for the manual tongs and the ST-80 had similar formats and
appearance.
The incident
between 3.00am and 4.00am Mr Calderbank and Mr Reweti were working on the rig
floor, assisting the Driller with the task
of unscrewing pipe joints. For this
purpose they needed to use the manual tongs, following the ST-80’s failure
to unscrew a
pipe joint.
addition to the Driller, a second operator was inside the control room at this
time, sitting in the chair next to the Driller.
The second operator’s job
was to operate the manual tongs by using the touchscreen directly in front of
his position.
manual tongs had to be physically held in position against the drill pipe while
cables were tensioned. Mr Calderbank and Mr Reweti
were to perform this task,
while the second operator was to control the cables and tongs. The task required
them to be in the danger
zone, where the ST-80 could reach and crush a person
against the pipe string.
Calderbank and Mr Reweti entered the zone, and each held one set of tongs onto
the drill pipe.
doing so they necessarily they had their backs to the ST-80.
rig floor was a noisy environment.
of the operators in the control room then had to retract the cables attached to
the tongs to tension them against the pipe. The
two workers then intended to
leave the danger zone of the rig floor before the pipes were unscrewed.
second operator pushed a panel of the touchscreen in front of him marked
“retract”, but the tong cables did not retract.
Based on his past
experience the operator thought the solution would be to briefly touch the
“extend” panel, so he did
operator in fact touched the “extend” panel of the ST-80 control
screen, instead of the tongs control screen.
ST-80 arm reached full extension at the pipe within a couple of seconds. Neither
worker saw or heard the approaching arm.
worker observing this process from near the rig floor yelled out. Mr Calderbank
heard him and tried to escape. But his right
leg became trapped against the
tong, the pullback line and the ST-80.
Reweti could not escape. He was trapped between the ST-80’s ‘roller
jaws’, the drill string and his set of tongs.
Fortunately the tongs
prevented the ST-80 from crushing him against the drill pipe, with a high chance
of fatal consequences. While
trapped, Mr Reweti felt the automatic pulsing of
the ST-80 arm as it tried to overcome the tong’s resistance.
in the control room the second operator realised the ST-80 had incorrectly been
extended and so shouted a warning to the
Driller, who had been doing some
paperwork. The Driller immediately hit the stop and retract panels, thereby
releasing Mr Calderbank
and Mr Reweti.
Consequences
Victim Impact Statement was completed by Mr Calderbank in February 2017. It
details his immediate injuries to his right lower leg
and knee, together with
secondary psychological trauma, low back and left leg symptoms. Mr Calderbank
was initially off work for
six weeks recovering then returned to work on
modified duties until his employment was terminated in December 2013. He
to suffer from pain, aching and nerve symptoms in his right leg and
foot, as well as low back and left leg symptoms. His ongoing
symptoms are a
barrier to him returning to similar physical work; as a result he suffers a
continuing significant loss of income.
He received workers compensation income
support for the six weeks off work. His workers compensation rights to medical
expenses ceased
on 30 June 2016, and he is left with the burden of having to pay
his ongoing medical treatment expenses.
Reweti’s Victim Impact Statement details his immediate injuries of a
fractured left arm and bruised coccyx. Three and a half
years after the offence
Mr Reweti is left with sharp shooting pains from a trapped nerve in his low
back, a visibly disfigured coccyx,
sleep and psychological problems, and need
for ongoing medical treatments. He was initially put on light duties while his
in a cast and he had treatment for his back injury. Upon being cleared
for full duties he was made redundant, and has not been able
to return to
similar well-paid work. In December 2015 Mr Reweti received a payment of $1,500
from the workers compensation authority
to cover future medical expenses until
when they ceased 30 June 2016. He also has to wear the cost of his ongoing
treatment since
Reweti separately acknowledged the high level of compassion and help given to
him by Saxon staff.
victims of this industrial crime are likely to continue to suffer physically,
emotionally and financially.
submitted that the retrenchment of the victims had nothing to do with their
injuries. I am bound to accept that submission.
Calderbank and Mr Reweti fall within a new category of second-class victims of
industrial crime. The
Criminal Law (Sentencing) Act
precludes them from
being compensated for their residual losses, based on the former policy
assumption that the workers compensation
scheme will fully compensate them. That
assumption is no longer valid under the 2015 workers compensation law, which
applies to existing
injuries. The position of victims of industrial crimes who
need income support or medical treatment for their injuries, but who are
assessed to be within the very small category of “seriously injured
workers”, is now much worse than before, yet
they remain precluded from
accessing compensation under the
Sentencing Act
the premise that Parliament did not intend to disadvantage seriously injured
victims of industrial crimes, compared with similarly
injured victims of general
crime, I recommend a review of the statutory restriction against compensating
such victims under s 53
Sentencing Act
. I also recommend a review
of the statutory maximum of compensation of $20,000 for each offence,
irrespective of the number of victims,
as this sum has not been adjusted for
inflation for over two decades.
Saxon’s response
however has recognised the ongoing losses of its former employees, and has
offered to consent to an order for compensation of
$10,000 each, being half of
the statutory limit. As I do not have power to make the order, even by consent,
I will instead treat
Saxon’s offer as its undertaking to promptly make a
payment of reparations of $10,000 to each victim. I have given this positive
of reparation favourable consideration in determining sentence.
SA’s initial investigation resulted in an Inspector issuing a Prohibition
Notice on 2 May that required deactivation
of the touchscreen monitor located to
the right of the Driller’s Chair. That notice was complied with by 14
Inspector then issued an Improvement Notice requiring Saxon to ensure the
control system was modified in consultation with workers
unintentional activation of critical functions that may affect the health and
safety of the workers on the rig.
June that monitor was reprogrammed by the company which developed the operating
system, so that neither the ST-80 nor the manual
tongs could be operated from
reprogramming took approximately 30 minutes. Saxon submitted the time taken to
plan the modification had a manpower cost of approximately
independently briefed its crews as to the details of the incident, issued a
safety alert requiring all crews to activate an
e-stop button to isolate the
ST-80 before entering the rig floor danger zone, and installed an isolation
valve on the rig floor.
accept that Saxon acted promptly and professionally to satisfy the Prohibition
and Improvement Notices, and was co-operative with
the authorities throughout
the investigation.
Safety precautions before the offence
accept that Saxon had a comprehensive, (albeit obviously deficient with respect
to the ST-80), health and safety management system
that included elements of
recruiting and training, risk management, incident reporting, audits and
inspections. And that it had developed
a specific safety management plan for its
scope of works undertaken on Rig 188.
accept that prior to commencing operations Saxon undertook a formal
commissioning process of the rig, including engaging multiple
third party
consultants, considered to be experts, in an attempt to ensure OHS compliance.
The commissioning process did not identify
the risk or hazard that arose from
the fact the ST-80 could be operated from the touchscreen monitor to the right
of the Driller’s
Chair. The commissioning otherwise identified and
adequately guarded against the other hazards of the rig.
information was provided by Saxon as to the content of the hazard identification
and risk assessments it relied on in the commissioning
or audit processes, nor
how and why they each failed to identify the fact the ST-80’s controls had
been provided to the second
touchscreen and were accessible to two operators.
Saxon’s lack of explanation of its understanding of why its systems failed
is of some concern, but relevant only to mitigation for sentencing purposes.
Assessment of penalty
offence has a high level of objective seriousness. All reasonably practicable
precautions were not taken to guard against the
potentially lethal interaction
between employees and powered plant in relation to Saxon’s core operations
of drilling holes.
The risk of injury arising from its flawed system of
controlling powered plant was readily foreseeable and identifiable. The risk
very serious consequences for two skilled employees, and put them at some
significant risk of death.
accept that prior to the offence Saxon had made considerable efforts to ensure
its workers were as safe as reasonably practicable,
and that it remains
committed to full OHS compliance.
a result of the safety measures introduced after the offence, I accept that a
similar occurrence involving the ST-80 could not
happen again.
its lawyer, Saxon gave a public apology and expressed its sincere regrets to
both Mr Calderbank and Mr Reweti for their injuries.
all the circumstances I determine the appropriate starting point is a fine of
$350,000. After reducing this amount by 40%, as supported
by the prosecutor for
Saxon’s early guilty plea, and for its demonstrated contrition, I impose a
fine of $210,000.
addition I record a conviction against Saxon Energy Services Australia Pty
I order Saxon to pay a Victim of Crime Levy of $160, the Court filing fee of
$250, and legal costs of $800.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (163 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter