URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SADC/2025/114.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:56:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v KOVAC [2025] SADC 114 (19 September 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Criminal: Application)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
Reasons for Ruling of Her Honour Judge
19 September 2025
EVIDENCE - GENERAL PRINCIPLES - VOIR DIRE - GENERALLY
CRIMINAL LAW - PROCEDURE - ARREST, SEARCH, SEIZURE AND INCIDENTAL POWERS -
Application to exclude evidence of the fruits of the search of a motor
vehicle at Mitchell Park. In the early hours of 22 May 2024
police stopped the
vehicle for a licence check after it had left a house of interest at Brenda
Street, Mitchell Park. There were
four occupants in the vehicle. The accused was
sitting in the front passenger seat – it was discovered he was in breach
curfew conditions of bail on another matter. Paperwork in the name of another
person was found in his possession. He also denied
ownership of a backpack
placed in the footwell of the front passenger seat, which the driver confirmed
belonged to him (not the accused).
The vehicle was searched pursuant to
Summary Offences Act 1953
(SA) and methylamphetamine and MDMA were
found in the backpack.
Held: Prosecution’s evidentiary burden as to searching officer’s
state of mind not discharged. Searching officer reconstructed
substantial parts
of his evidence. Further, on the information available to the searching officer,
there was insufficient basis for
forming reasonable suspicion to enliven the
excluded on
the exercise of public policy discretion. The police officer’s
approach to his search powers was reckless. Other factors considered.
Controlled Substances Act 1984
Summary Offences Act 1953
Joint Criminal Rules 2022
(SA), referred to.
MacPherson v The Queen
[1981] HCA 46
(1981) 147 CLR 512
Cleland v The Queen
[1982] HCA 67
(1982) 151 CLR 1
[2015] SASCFC 7
Zenuni v The King
[2022] SASCA 106
McHugh v The Queen
[2022] SASCA 5
Young v The
[2024] SASCA 47
(2013) 117 SASR 432
[2020] SASC 147
Bae v The Queen and Koo v The Queen
R v Frantzis
(1996) 66 SASR 558
Queensland Bacon Pty Ltd v
[1966] HCA 21
(1966) 115 CLR 266
R v AS and Raynor
[2023] SADC 60
v R; Morrison v R
(1994) 176 LSJS 435
Bunning v Cross
[1978] HCA 22
(1978) 141 CLR
R v Rockford
(2015) 122 SASR 391
R v Armistead
[2019] SASCFC
[2017] SASCFC 61
Kadir v The Queen
[2020] HCA 1
(2020) 267 CLR
Alzuain v The King
[2025] SASCA 67
R v Swaffield
Cleland v The Queen
[1982] HCA 67
(1982) 151 CLR 1
Ridgeway v The
(1995) 184 CLR 19;
[2000] SASC 48
(2000) 77 SASR 24
Director of
Public Prosecutions v Moore
[2003] VSCA 90
(2003) 6 VR 430
Question of Law Reserved (No
[1998] SASC 6634
(1998) 70 SASR 281
Pollard v The Queen
[1992] HCA 69
(1992) 176 CLR
, considered.
[2025] SADC 114
Introduction
accused, Steven Kovac (
), is charged on an Information dated
26 February 2025 with two counts of trafficking a controlled drug pursuant
to 32(3) of the
Controlled Substances Act 1984
(SA). Count one relates to
5.56 grams of
methylamphetamine; and count two
relates to 3.54 grams of MDMA (also known as ‘Ecstasy’).
two charges arise out of the discovery of the methylamphetamine and MDMA during
a police search of a Great Wall (GW) utility
on 22 May 2024. The vehicle was
stopped by the police in Lanark Avenue, Mitchell Park, at approximately 2.00 am
with four occupants,
including Kovac – who was sitting in the front
passenger seat. The backpack, in which the methylamphetamine and MDMA was
discovered,
was on the floor of the utility in the footwell of the front
passenger seat nearest to where Kovac was sitting.
) purportedly pursuant to
Summary Offences Act
to search suspected vehicles, vessels, and persons
(1) A police officer may do any or all of the following things, namely, stop,
(a) a vehicle or vessel in or upon which there is reasonable cause to
suspect that—
(i) there are stolen goods; or
(ii) there is an object, possession of which constitutes an offence; or
(iii) there is evidence of the commission of an indictable offence;
(b) a person who is reasonably suspected of having, on or about his or her
(i) stolen goods; or
(ii) an object, possession of which constitutes an offence; or
(iii) evidence of the commission of an indictable offence.
(2) In this section—
“stolen goods” includes goods obtained by the commission of an
27 June 2025, shortly before the jury trial in this matter was listed to
commence, Kovac filed an application pursuant to rule
39.1(d) of the
Criminal Rules 2022
seeking the exclusion of evidence obtained as a result
of the search of the vehicle.
evidence sought to be excluded concerned the fruits of the search conducted by
Adams of the GW utility, specifically the drugs
found in a backpack alleged to
be in the possession of Kovac prior to his arrest on the two counts of
trafficking a controlled drug.
Kovac contended that that the search of the
vehicle was unlawful and that I should exercise my discretion to exclude the
on public policy grounds. This evidence will be critical to the
prosecution’s case at trial.
was for Kovac to make out a proper basis for the exclusion of otherwise relevant
evidence, as a matter of discretion, on the grounds
that it was obtained by
unlawful means.
However, in the
circumstances in which the lawfulness of the search relied upon the state of
mind of Adams, an evidential onus lay
upon the prosecution to adduce evidence
that Adams held the requisite suspicion to justify the search of the GW
The standard of proof is
on the balance of probabilities.
The prosecution case
prosecution contended that the search was lawful because Adams formed a
reasonable suspicion, against his background of being
an experienced police
officer, based upon the combined force of the following four key pieces of
information he allegedly knew before
conducting the search:
to being intercepted, the GW utility had left from a premises at Brenda Street,
Mitchell Park, which Adams knew to be a place
of interest to the police because
it was associated with a wanted person and other criminal activity;
was a passenger in the vehicle, and was in breach of his bail curfew conditions,
and was wanted in connection with a serious
criminal trespass matter;
SA and council “paperwork” in the name of another person
(Mr Jack Fountas) was found on Kovac when he was searched
at the scene, and
when questioned about it, Kovac indicated that he might have found it at the
had denied ownership of the backpack in the utility, in which the drugs were
ultimately found, and Adams formed an opinion that
it was unusual that nobody
would claim ownership of the backpack considering it was sitting in the footwell
of the front passenger
seat of the GW vehicle.
Powell for the prosecution contended that, even if I found the search to be
unlawful, I ought not exclude the evidence from trial
because the search did not
demonstrate deliberate or reckless impropriety of the police, or otherwise
warrant exclusion in the exercise
of the “public policy” discretion.
Mr Powell also emphasised the seriousness of the charges laid against Kovac to
I must also have regard in determining whether to exclude the
The defence case
for Kovac, Mr Mead, contended that the search was unlawful because Adams did not
have the requisite suspicion.
substantive case for the accused was that the police had always intended to
2024, and had planned to do
so well before it was stopped for a traffic check - and certainly before Adams
knew that Kovac was in
breach of curfew on his bail. Mr Mead submitted that what
had occurred was an “old-fashioned turnover of a vehicle” by
and that Adams and Senior Constable Ralph (
) had reconstructed their
evidence of matters relevant to the forming of reasonable suspicion. Mr Mead
contended that this could be
inferred from the failure of Adams and Ralph to
disclose the reasons for a series of mobile phone calls between them in the 30
or so prior to the vehicle being stopped, which inference was compounded
by the existence of those phone records only being revealed
to the court
part-way through the hearing. If that was so, Mr Mead contended there is a clear
case for me to exclude the evidence.
view of the decision I have reached, it is unnecessary for me to formulate any
conclusions about whether this was an “old-fashioned
turnover of a
vehicle” by police, and whether Adams and Ralph had deliberately
reconstructed their evidence in that regard.
I am not sufficiently satisfied
that they were deliberately reconstructing their evidence to that end. However,
I declined to accept
certain key aspects of their evidence - and I will come to
describe those details later in these reasons. I consider it probable
memories of the events that evening were reconstructed, having been infected by
their speculation as to what could have
occurred, or should have occurred, in
order to validate their search powers.
to the information allegedly relied upon by Adams in forming his suspicion, Mr
Mead contended that prior to deciding to search
the vehicle, Adams could not
have relied upon information about: (i) Kovac being wanted in relation to
serious criminal trespass,
because the evidence did not support him being
informed about it; or (ii) there being a dispute about the ownership of the
because that had only occurred once the vehicle search was underway. I
address both matters in some detail below.
Mr Mead contended that even if all information upon which Adams alleges he
relied was available to him prior to deciding
to conduct the search, such that
he subjectively held a suspicion (which the defence rejected), there was still
not a sufficient
basis for him to form the requisite
for the purposes of
Summary Offences Act
Mr Mead contended that Adams had misunderstood his search powers and misapplied
them, which was a sufficient reason of itself
for me to exercise my discretion
to exclude the evidence. Though I have not accepted that Adams misunderstood the
, I have found that he did not turn his mind to the
exercise of that power and displayed a rather cavalier approach to what is
to satisfy the pre-conditions for the exercise of the power. Further,
it is evident from the responses Adams gave under cross examination,
not an aberration from his usual approach to the exercise of his search powers.
Issues to be determined
of the application turns on two issues.
did Adams have reasonable cause to suspect that a search of the GW utility might
uncover an object, possession of which constitutes
an offence? This was the
specific limb of
upon which Adams said he relied to form his suspicion,
though he did not use this precise language. During his examination he also
mentioned suspecting that the search would reveal “evidence” of an
offence, which would need to be directed to the evidence
of the commission of an
indictable offence for the purposes of
determination of this issue requires the court to put itself in the position of
Adams, with his experience and knowledge held
at the time, and to ask whether a
reasonable person in possession of that information would have entertained the
same suspicion.
if the search was unlawful, should the evidence be excluded in the exercise of
the public policy discretion?
Evidence on the voir dire
application to exclude evidence was heard on the voir dire over four days.
prosecution called oral evidence from three police officers; Adams, Ralph and
Constable Johnson (
), who were all present at the scene of the
vehicle search. Their body worn camera (
) footage from that evening
was also admitted and played in
Adams’ partner that
evening, Probationary Constable Mochan (
), who had travelled in the
same police car with him to the scene, was not called. I draw no inference from
Mochan not being called.
The audio recording of police radio communications
relevant to the stopping of the GW utility that evening was also admitted and
played in court, together with a written schedule of the time of those radio
The mobile phone records of
Ralph, showing various calls made to Adams that evening, were also admitted
(being discovered during
the three week
adjournment).
of the key events of the traffic stop of the GW utility in the early hours of 22
May 2024 are uncontroversial because they are
apparent from the BWC footage of
Adams, Ralph and Johnson and supported by the mobile phone records and police
radio audio played
into court. The following chronology of the key events is
at least five
mobile phone calls from Ralph to Adams took place between 1.33 am and shortly
before 2.00 am (the purpose and content
of those calls was in issue before
shortly prior to
2.00 am, Ralph and Johnson were in an unmarked police car on Nellie Avenue,
Mitchell Park, for the purposes of observing
movements at the nearby Brenda
Street address, particularly relating to a person of interest known as
“Scott Pitt”;
stepped out of his car for closer observation of the Brenda Street address. He
saw the GW utility parked outside the house
with someone sitting in the
driver’s seat, and he heard noises that made him think that the GW utility
was preparing to leave;
Johnson followed the GW utility, stopping it for a licence check nearby on
Lanark Avenue, Mitchell Park at about 2.00 am;
Ralph approached
the driver of the vehicle, Mr Sam Burdon (
), requesting his licence
and, at that time, he also recognised Kovac, who was known to him, sitting in
the front passenger seat;
at 2.02 am,
Ralph made a mobile phone call to Adams which lasted for 14 seconds (the
content and purpose of this call was in issue
before me);
at about 2.04
am, Ralph ran a check, via the police “SHIELD” system, in his police
car and found Kovac to be in breach
of the curfew conditions on his bail for an
unrelated matter (whether or not Ralph was also alerted at that time to Kovac
being wanted
in relation to a serious criminal trespass matter was in issue
before me);
at about 2.07
am, Adams and Mochan arrived on the scene;
at about 2.08
am, Ralph asked Kovac to get out of the car and a discussion took place about
the breach of curfew on his bail, Adams
was standing nearby;
at about 2.09
am, Ralph returned to his police car to re-check Kovac’s bail status, and
during this time Adams and Kovac have
a conversation about the charges relating
to his breach of bail – with Kovac saying he did not think he had any
curfew on his
bail, and also giving a muddled description of some past events.
Ralph then returned and confirmed to Kovac that he was “still
curfew, for that other matter, carry offensive”;
at 2.11 am,
Ralph announced that he was arresting Kovac for “breach of curfew”
and in the process of being arrested there
is a garbled discussion between Adams
and Kovac about the backpack; noting from the BWC footage that Kovac had not
held or moved
the backpack and Adams appears to assume it was Kovac’s
because he said to him: “it was right next to you”. Kovac
indicated it belonged to Burdon (the driver), which Burdon is heard on
Johnson’s BWC to confirm (these matters are alleged
to be significant to
Adams having reasonable suspicion);
over the next
several minutes, Ralph handcuffed Kovak and conducted a body search, with Adams
assisting him; paperwork was found on
Kovak, which consisted of a letter on
“Services SA” letterhead and a council letter addressed to another
person. When
Ralph asked Kovac why he had that paperwork he responded in a
disjointed way but indicated he had found it “in the bin just
(this was also an important aspect of information which the prosecution claims
was relevant to the forming of reasonable
suspicion to search the vehicle);
at 2.15 am,
Ralph and Adams put Kovac into the back seat of the police car;
at 2.15.45 am,
each of Ralph and Adams briefly turned off their BWC, Ralph for 23 seconds, and
Adams for 28 seconds (in issue were
the details of any conversation that took
place between the officers at this time);
at 2.16.13 am,
Adams is seen by his BWC footage to be back at the GW utility where he announced
he intended to search the GW utility,
“before we start searching the car”;
and he also directed the remaining three men to get out and sit on the kerb.
He asked whether there was anything he needed to be aware
needles” and shone his torch in the tray area of the GW utility;
at about 2.17
am, after speaking with one of the passengers, Mr Matthew Pitt, Ralph returned
to his police car to conduct checks;
Adams and Ralph then questioned the other
occupants of the GW utility (it was apparent that Scott Pitt, the person of
interest, was
not in the GW utility);
at 2.21.20 am,
Adams and Ralph had a discussion, which followed Ralph announcing “no
warrants, no bail or anything”;
at 2.22 am,
Adams searched another one of the occupants;
at about 2.24
am, Adams appeared to find a pole under the driver’s seat of the GW
utility and, at about 2.29 am, he appeared
to find another bag from the back
at about 2.35
am, Adams picked up the backpack that he had earlier removed from the front
passenger seat of the GW utility; and asked
the driver (Burdon) whether it was
his. There was then a dispute about ownership of the backpack (see paragraph 63
from about 2.37
am to 2.45 am, Adams searched the backpack in which the drugs, amongst other
things, were found.
key evidence given orally by Johnson related to:
he and Ralph
being present at Nellie Avenue shortly prior to 2.00 am in their unmarked police
car observing the Brenda Street address;
their intention
being, at that time, to follow the GW utility when it left the Brenda Street
address for the purpose of stopping it
for a licence check;
understanding of their interest in observing the Brenda Street address, and in
intercepting the GW utility, was that it was for
the purpose of trying to locate
a person of interest, being Scott Pitt; and
his memory that
when they were following the GW utility it was not speeding or driving in a
manner that would otherwise cause the
vehicle to be intercepted.
found him to be an honest and reliable witness. In giving his evidence Johnson
was thoughtful, and he was prepared to accept that
he could not recall precisely
all of the details of the events of that evening. I did not sense he was
attempting to conceal or reconstruct
any evidence to improve the police case.
My impression of him as a witness was that he gave an accurate account of
those matters
he could remember, which were also consistent with contemporaneous
evidence presented from the BWC footage and the mobile phone records.
evidence was not challenged.
gave evidence about carrying out observations of the Brenda Street address, with
Johnson, at about 1.55 am on 22 May 2024.
He gave evidence, consistent with that
of Johnson, that they had an interest in observing the house in Brenda Street
because they
were looking to apprehend Scott Pitt – who he said was wanted
for matters involving dishonesty.
said that their unmarked police car was parked on Nellie Avenue next to Brenda
Street when they were carrying out these observations.
He said he got out of the
police car, and while on foot, observed the GW utility parked outside of the
Brenda Street house with someone
sitting in the driver’s seat. He had then
heard noises which indicated to him that the vehicle might be leaving and he
to his police car with Johnson. He said he then saw two vehicles drive
past “at speed”; one being the GW utility, the
other being a Holden
sedan. He decided to follow the vehicles because they were leaving Brenda Street
and there was a possibility
that Scott Pitt was on board one of them. He said
that both vehicles were travelling at speed. He said he lost sight of the Holden
sedan, but kept following the GW utility, pulling it over on Lanark Avenue.
Consistent with Johnson’s evidence, he said the purpose of intercepting
the vehicle was for a “licence check”
of the driver. But he said,
inconsistently with Johnson’s evidence, the GW utility had turned left and
right down side streets,
and split from the Holden sedan, in a way which he
understood was common for losing police (albeit there does not appear to have
been any chase or pursuit). Also, in cross-examination, Ralph had to concede
that his notes did not record the GW utility driving
suspiciously or
accelerating at speed; though he continued to maintain that it was speeding and
trying to evade police. As noted
above, this was quite different to
Johnson’s account. Johnson’s account was more consistent with
Ralph’s acceptance
that the GW utility stopped and pulled over when the
lights on their unmarked police car were activated. It was also apparent from
the BWC footage that when Ralph first approached the driver of the GW utility
after it was stopped there was no attempt to escape
or evade the police, and the
driver (Burdon) responded co-operatively with Ralph’s requests. Further,
nothing is heard on any
of the BWC footage or audio of police radio about the
vehicle being driven erratically or speeding.
was no allegation that the GW utility had been unlawfully stopped. As such,
nothing much turned on the different accounts of
Johnson and Ralph about the
manner in which the GW utility was driving. I prefer Johnson’s account
because his evidence proved
to be more immediately consistent with the mobile
phone records and timeline of events, and he was overall a more credible witness
than Ralph (for reasons which become apparent below). Ultimately, I have found
there was no attempt made by the GW utility to evade
police and no suspicion can
arise from the manner in which the GW utility was driven. To the extent Ralph
was attempting to convince
the court that the GW utility was being driven in a
way to evade police, I consider he was reconstructing the events of that evening
to bolster the grounds police had for searching the vehicle.
the GW utility was pulled over at 2.00 am, Ralph said he got out and approached
the driver for the purpose of conducting a licence
check. Curiously, Ralph does
not immediately inquire of the driver whether Scott Pitt is in the GW utility -
being the specific reason
he gave for following the GW utility. Ralph recalls
seeing four men in the car, and he said he recognised Kovac – who was
to him, in the front passenger seat. This is also apparent from his BWC
footage which was turned on as he was approaching the GW
utility shortly after
it had stopped. His BWC footage then provides an accurate account of the next 35
minutes or so, other than
when he switches it off for a short time when he is
back in the police car conducting the checks on the driver and Kovac, and again
for a short time after Kovac is arrested.
said that when he was back in the police car, shortly after the traffic stop, he
then called Adams to ask him to come and assist
with Kovac’s arrest. In
his examination in chief on the first day of the hearing, Ralph said he could
recall contacting Adams
to assist him with the arrest of Kovac; however, he
could not recall the conversation (or whether it was via mobile phone or police
radio). He said:
... I would have advised him that I had Mr Kovac
breaching his bail and I was intending to arrest him.
when and what Ralph told Adams during this call was challenged. Under
cross-examination, Ralph confirmed that he could not
remember making a phone
call and there was no reference to any conversation that he had with Adams at
that time in his notes –
other than a mention of: “Requested Mochan
Adams to attend”. He also confirmed that he had not made a note of any
conversation
with Adams in his earlier statements of 13 September and 15
December 2024 filed in this matter, and he conceded that he had no memory
providing Adams with information over the phone in terms of the traffic stop.
cross-examination on the first day of the hearing, Ralph was asked about his
mobile phone records. These were later tendered
on day three of the hearing
(after an adjournment of more than three
Once presented with this
evidence, which revealed at least six outgoing mobile calls made to Adams from
1.33 am to the 2.02 am, during
examination-in-chief the following exchange
Q. Do you remember making those phone calls, any of those
phone calls.
can’t recall the specific calls themselves, but it is common practice that
I would be making phone calls during my shift,
said previously that you remember making a phone call to Brevet Sergeant Adams.
Do any of these calls stick out to you
as being that particular call that you
made to Brevet Sergeant Adams.
the one, I believe it to be on the first page, p.1, the 2.02 am, that
would’ve been when I was requesting them to come
so maybe just focussing on the other phone calls that we know are Brevet
Sergeant Adams’ phone number, firstly, do you remember
making those phone
can’t recall exactly making the phone calls. I do recall being in contact,
now it’s been refreshed my memory with these
phone calls, when I was at
the Brenda Court speaking to Brevet Sergeant Adams, advising him that I had two
can’t remember the specific content of those phone calls.
you recall being at 3 Brenda Court when you remembered them.
recall being at 3 Brenda Court and, as per my phone calls, I made those calls.
So when I was at that location it would have been
in relation to that location
and what I’d seen there, and the other call would be after the vehicle
you remember any reason why you would have made those phone calls.
because it’s common practice. I think as I said previously while giving
evidence, we were trying to arrest Scott Pitt,
as he was wanted, and that was an
address of interest and the team all were briefed on his behaviours and where he
was attending,
and so we would report to each other information that we would
gather during the shift.
cross-examination, Mr Mead challenged the premise that Ralph telephoned Adams at
2.02 am for the purposes of helping him arrest
Kovac as patently false because
Ralph gave evidence that when he returned to the police car, also at 2.02 am, to
perform the driver’s
licence check it then took him five minutes to
perform those checks – first checking the driver, then Kovac. There is
in Mr Mead’s submission that the 14 second mobile phone call at 2.02
am from Ralph to Adams could not have been about the imminent
arrest of Kovac
for breach of bail, or about being wanted in relation to serious criminal
trespass, because, by his own account,
Ralph could not have performed that check
on Kovac by that time and was not initially aware that Kovac had any outstanding
or was in breach of his bail conditions. During cross-examination,
Ralph refused to resile from his earlier account that he had called
2.02 am to assist with the arrest of Kovac. The following exchange
your evidence about having to request Officer Adams to assist you in the arrest
of Mr Kovac is not true, is it.
maintain that’s true, do you.
understand you’re under oath.
your evidence is that even though you had no intention at the time you spoke to
Officer Adams of arresting Mr Kovac, the reason
you requested his attendance was
to help you arrest Mr Kovac.
Ultimately,
nothing substantive turns on this difficulty with Ralph’s evidence because
it is apparent that Adams knew Kovac
was being arrested for breach of his bail
conditions before he commenced to search the vehicle. However, this exchange
dampened my
opinion about Ralph being a credible witness. It also diminished the
reliability of his oral evidence more generally and contributed
to my forming
the impression that Ralph was seeking to reconstruct the events of that evening
to improve the prosecution’s
case for reasonable suspicion.
Mead sought to deploy Ralph’s inconsistent evidence as a basis upon which
I should find that Ralph and Adams were intending
to illegally search the GW
utility from the time Ralph and Johnson began following it after it left Brenda
Street. Mr Mead also contended
that the five earlier outgoing mobile calls made
by Ralph to Adams, about which Ralph had no detailed recollection – and
failed to mention at all in his notes or earlier statements, also pointed to
there being a plan between Adams and Ralph to illegally
Ralph denied that he had sought to conceal these conversations.
I have concerns about the reliability of Ralph as a witness, I do not go so far
as to conclude that he was being dishonest
or deliberately attempting to
reconstruct the events of that evening to conceal any alleged plan to illegally
from the time it left Brenda Street. However, my
impression is that Ralph reconstructed parts of his evidence because it was what
he envisaged “would have” or “should have” occurred and
he was motivated to bolster the prosecution’s
Ralph’s admissions that he could not recall the details of what he
informed Adams that evening during the five earlier
phone calls, I do not accept
his evidence that he told Adams that Kovac was wanted in connection with serious
criminal trespass.
There was simply no contemporaneous evidence of any mention
being made to Adams of Kovac being wanted in connection with serious
trespass, including in Ralph’s notes, on the BWC footage or audio played
from the police radio. Further, there was
little scope for such conversations to
have occurred when their BWCs were turned off. Again, I find this is something
reconstructed to bolster the grounds for forming reasonable
was the police officer with carriage of the search. The information that was
available to him and his perception of matters
prior to deciding to commence the
to address his evidence
in the context of those matters.
proceeding to the evidence Adams gave about the matters he claims informed his
reasonable suspicion, it is appropriate for
me to say something about his
credibility, and the reliability of his evidence.
gave conflicting evidence about when he was contacted by Ralph to attend the
scene and how long it took for he and Mochan to
arrive. His early evidence was
that he and Mochan had been at the Sturt Police Station having a meal when he
was called by Adams
to come and assist with the arrest of Kovac. He had said
that he recalled it taking him in the order of 20 to 25 minutes to arrive
scene after receiving that call. However, later, during cross examination, it
became obvious that his arrival at the scene
(at or about 2.07 am) was not
compatible with: (i) the time of the traffic stop (shortly after 2.00 am); and
(ii) the mobile phone
records of Ralph showing the 14 second call to Adams (at
2.02 am). When confronted with this inconsistency, Adams then claimed he
have “just got [his] times wrong” and proceeded to give a
substantially different account of his travel to the scene,
saying he was:
“literally the next suburb along” and it was possible to arrive at
the scene in that much shorter timeframe.
This inconsistent account of his
evidence caused me to strongly doubt the reliability of Adams’ memory of
the events of that
evening. His response to being confronted with
inconsistencies in his evidence gave me a real concern as to his credibility. It
to me to be a deliberate attempt by him to navigate his way around a
perceived difficulty in the prosecution’s case.
aspects of Adams’ evidence were also of concern to me, which I have
addressed in the context of his reasons for the
When was the search power activated?
McHugh v the Queen,
in relation to a general search warrant under
Offences Act
, the Court of Appeal made it clear that the requisite degree of
suspicion must exist at the time of the search, that is the time
of the warrant
being executed.
While there is
no warrant required to execute a search under
, whether there was the
requisite degree of suspicion is also to be determined at the time that the
in relation to
Young v The
links the existence of the reasonable suspicion to the police
officer’s conduct in entering, breaking open and searching the
premises or receptacle.
By parity of reasoning, the same construction must apply to
that the police officer’s reasonable cause to suspect is adjudged at the
activation of the search power.
It is apparent from Adams’ BWC footage that he announced that he intended
to search the GW utility at 2.16.13 am and then
commenced to act upon it. At or
and looked into it.
When he approached the occupants, he
seat forward. Everyone take a seat on this curb, take a seat on the curb right
behind the car. Just take a seat right here,
everyone take a seat. Alright take
a seat on the curb. On the curb mate. Yeah alright before we start searching the
car is there
anything in there that we need to be aware of. No anything
that’s gonna stick me, needles, otherwise.
It was my impression from viewing the BWC footage that these actions by Adams
marked the commencement of the search. However, I
understood the prosecution to
be contending that the search commenced several minutes later, at about 2.21.20
am, following a conversation
between Adams and Ralph, as
No warrants, no bail or anything (Ralph’s
But there’s definitely going to be something in the
...in that backpack he is trying to say is not his
[whispering is heard]
Ultimately,
nothing significant occurs between 2.16 am and 2.21 am, other than checks on
occupants which did not reveal any further
relevant information (ie “no
warrants, no bail or anything”). As such, whether the search power was
activated at 2.16
am or at 2.21 am has no real bearing on the outcome of
this matter. I pause here to mention, I found it at odds with the statement
Ralph (above), that Adams did not go immediately to the backpack when the search
was commenced; in fact, the BWC footage reveals
the backpack was left towards
the end of the search.
Mr Mead had contended that a decision to search the GW utility had been made by
Adams and Ralph from the time it left Brenda Street.
I accept that when the GW
utility departed from Brenda Street both Ralph and Adams may have been eager to
a view to finding what was in it. I am also inclined to
accept that the five or so mobile phone conversations between them from
am to 1.57 am may have canvassed the topic of searching vehicles
leaving Brenda Street and this may have fuelled Adams’ eagerness
the vehicle. To my mind, there is nothing inherently wrong with those kinds of
discussions taking place between police
engaged in carrying out surveillance
provided that they were not hellbent on a search without meeting the
pre-conditions to enliven
the search power. In other words, there was nothing
unlawful about the police contemplating a potential search of a vehicle that
might leave Brenda Street. What matters is whether there were sufficient grounds
to support the forming of reasonable suspicion by
the time the search
What did Adams say justified the vehicle
his examination in chief, Adams was asked about what justified his decision to
Q. When you
when Senior Constable Ralph pulled over Mr Kovac, he called me to assist. I
attended. He was currently wanted for serious criminal
trespass and for
breaching his curfew bail agreement. He was arrested and as part of that arrest
a safety search was conducted where
I located paperwork or Senior Constable
Ralph located paperwork in the name of another person. There was also questions
backpack that was sitting by his feet in the footwell of the vehicle,
next to him. No-one was claiming ownership of that backpack,
time of night and
the fact that the other three people in the vehicle we also bona fide had some
previous criminal history and dealings
with police. I deemed it reasonable to
suspect that there may be other possessions or objects in the vehicle that would
an offence, so I searched it.
my mind, it is also relevant that Adams’ evidence points to the matters of
the paperwork and the backpack raising suspicion
in relation to Kovac personally
and not necessarily providing a link to the possibility of offending objects
being in the vehicle
– so as to justify searching the vehicle (as opposed
to a search of Kovac under
s 68(1)(b)).
For example, in relation to the
paperwork, he said during examination in chief (emphasis
what did you think when you saw that paperwork.
raised my suspicions of other
objects or items that may be in his possession
or in the possession of the backpack
, which at the time was being debated at
whose it was, that there may be evidence of an offence as not – people
normally carry around paperwork that’s not in their name.
in relation to the backpack, Adams said during examination in chief (emphasis
Q. What did
you think when he said that the backpack wasn’t his.
raised my suspicion further to think that he was trying to deny it belonging to
because there was something in it that may afford evidence of an
during examination in chief the following exchange took place concerning what
Adams thought he might find in the backpack:
Q. So, what did you
think would be in the backpack at that time.
is generally something what I would ask for if it's going to hurt me or stick
me, it's generally a needle, because, obviously,
I don't want to be stuck by
that. Other than that,
I was uncertain at that time, but thought it would
have possessions that belonged to
Adams is believed, these exchanges reveal that his subjective suspicion was
based on a “debate” about ownership of
the backpack and finding
paperwork on Kovac in someone else’s name; coupled with Kovac being wanted
for serious criminal trespass
and being in breach of curfew on his bail, and the
three others in the vehicle having previous criminal history and dealings with
police. For the reasons that follow, I find that not all of this information was
available to Adams and that it is more probable
than not that he has
reconstructed his evidence to justify the search of the vehicle.
is also relevant to my determination of this matter that Adams did not give
cogent evidence that linked his suspicion in respect
of the paperwork and the
backpack to finding an offending object (or stolen goods) or evidence of the
commission of an indictable
offence in the vehicle. It is difficult for me to
regard his suspicion arising from the backpack and the paperwork as having a
logical connection to the possibility of finding any offending
objects in the vehicle, other than a slight one because Kovac was
a passenger. I
address these matters further in my reasons below.
history of occupants
is uncontroversial that Adams knew Kovac was in breach of the curfew conditions
of his bail agreement prior to 2.16 am. However,
given the timeline of events I
have analysed above, I find it was not probable that Adams had known Kovac was
in the GW utility until
he arrived at the scene at about 2.07 am. Adams also
admitted in cross-examination that he did not have information about any of
other three occupants (being the driver and the two passengers in the back seat)
prior to commencing the vehicle search. In any
event, the checks ultimately
carried out on the driver and other passengers did not reveal any
“warrants, bail or anything”.
find that Adams could not have (subjectively) relied on the “criminal
history and dealings with police” of the occupants
of the GW utility
(other than Kovac) prior to conducting the search (referring to his statement
set out at paragraph 47 above). I
note this was not information upon which the
prosecution placed reliance. I am concerned that this amounts to another example
Adams seeking to reconstruct his evidence to bolster the prosecution’s
case. Such matters are relevant, later in these reasons,
to the manner in which
I have found Adams approached his search powers more
Kovac wanted in connection with a serious criminal
trespass matter
said that he had a conversation with Ralph when he arrived at the scene and was
told that one of the people was wanted for
a serious criminal trespass offence.
Adams confirmed that was “part of” his suspicion in terms of
Like Ralph, even when confronted with evidence from the
BWC footage to the contrary, Adams resisted accepting that he had not been
informed by Ralph, shortly after his arrival at the scene, about Kovac being
wanted in connection with a serious criminal trespass
matter. The following
exchange occurred during cross-examination:
do you agree that at no time during that portion of the video is the term
‘serious criminal trespass’
A. Correct.
as I understand your evidence, this is when - it was that portion that you say
you were informed that Mr Kovac had an outstanding
serious criminal
A. I believe in my notes it does say that.
Q. Do you accept your notes are wrong.
say, having watched that portion of the video, that you were told that Mr Kovac
was wanted for a serious criminal trespass.
A. If I can refer to my
notes I'll be able to say exactly what they say in my notes.
not asking you about your notes, I'm asking you about what's displayed on your
body-worn footage which actually records what happened.
have done checks in the vehicle on the way there and been informed that he had
other matters that he was wanted for, because
we have access to that. I can't
recall how it was determined.
Q. You accept that you're not
A. Yes, I accept that I'm not told.
you did give evidence only a matter of minutes ago that all you knew when you
arrived at the scene was that you were there to
assist with the arrest of
Q. That was your evidence, wasn't it.
do you agree again that there's no mention at all from Officer Ralph about a
serious criminal trespass in relation to Mr
Q. And, indeed, he was being arrested for a breach of bail.
Q. In relation to a curfew.
want to suggest to you that that's all that was mentioned while you were present
in relation to the arrest of Mr Kovac. Do you agree
A. Yes. Yes.
do you agree that at the time you decided to search the vehicle you had heard
nothing at the traffic stop about a serious criminal
trespass in relation to Mr
can't determine whether that - I haven't heard anything from Senior Constable
Ralph about the SCT, or whether I had done checks
prior to on our police
systems, I can't tell you whether I did or didn't.
Q. You don't have
any memory of doing those checks, do you.
your evidence previously was that when you arrived all you knew was that you
were going to assist in the arrest of someone.
that you'd only had a very brief conversation with Officer Ralph while you were
in the dining room at the Sturt Police Station.
you accept, therefore, that you had no information about Mr Kovac being wanted
in relation to a serious criminal trespass.
Based upon the above exchange, and the contemporaneous BWC footage, I am
satisfied that Adams was not aware of Kovac being wanted
in connection with any
serious criminal trespass matter prior to commencing to search the vehicle. In
any event, Adams gave no specific
evidence about the details of the alleged
serious criminal trespass matter, including where it had occurred and whether it
connection with something that had occurred that evening or some time
ago. At best, the information was vague, and I have difficulty
finding it would
have informed any suspicion to search the vehicle, even if known to Adams.
My impression of the above exchange, in Adams giving his evidence, is that he
was reconstructing events to bolster the prosecution’s
confronted with difficulties in his evidence about Kovac being wanted in
relation to serious criminal trespass he sought,
in a misconceived way, to
navigate his way around those difficulties grasping at alternative possibilities
that he thought were favourable
to the prosecution’s case (like conducting
a search on Kovac using the SHIELD system in the police car on the way to the
- when he could not have known about Kovac being present at that stage).
Adams’ refusal to concede the possibility of any error
on his part also
demonstrates his obstinance and supported my view that he was not a credible or
reliable witness.
What did Adams know about the paperwork found
relation to the “paperwork” Adams gave the following evidence in
Q. What did you think when – well, Senior Constable
Ralph found that paperwork.
A. Yes, and handed it to me.
Q. And what did you think when you saw that paperwork.
raised my suspicions of other objects or items that may be in his possession or
in the possession of the backpack, which at the
time was being debated at whose
it was, that there may be evidence of an offence as not people normally carry
around paperwork that’s
not in their name.
don’t want to put words in your mouth, but it seemed unusual to you, is
that fair to say.
Q. Did you ask Mr Kovac about the paperwork.
Q. What did you ask him.
A. Whose is this paperwork? Where did you get it?
Q. Did he answer you.
A. He said it wasn’t his.
Q. Did he give an explanation for why he had it.
A. Not that I can recall.
above exchange reveals that Adams was relying only upon the
“paperwork” being in someone else’s name; the forming
subjective suspicion in relation to the paperwork must be so confined. It
appears from the BWC footage that when the paperwork
was discovered on Kovac he
indicated that he might have found it “in the bins”. As noted, Adams
does not appear to have
relied upon this in informing his subjective suspicion.
As the BWC footage reveals that it is likely a reasonable person would have
heard Kovac’s disjointed response about finding it at the bins, I
consider it in the context of the forming of reasonable
suspicion below.
What information did Adams have about the backpack?
relation to the backpack, Adams gave the following further evidence in chief,
after stating that the backpack was in the footwell
at the front left side of
the vehicle when he arrived at the scene (emphasis added):
pausing there, when you walked up, just maybe going back a step, when you walked
up to the vehicle and spoke to Senior Constable
Ralph, where was Mr Kovac at
A. I believe he was still sitting in the
Q. And did you have a look through the window to look at him.
Q. Did you see the backpack at that time.
Q. Where was it situated.
A. It was situated it the footwell next to Mr Kovac's legs.
Mr Kovac was searched, you found some paperwork, did you at that time make any
assumptions about who that backpack belonged to.
A. I believed or
had suspicion to believe that it was Mr Kovac's backpack.
Q. And why did you assume or suspect that it was his backpack.
asked all the other occupants in the vehicle if the backpack belonged to them,
they denied. We also - it was sitting right next
to him at the time when we
pulled him over.
Q. Did you ask Mr Kovac whether it was his
Q. What did he say.
said he found it near a bin earlier. [This refers to a later statement made
after 2.35 am.]
Q. Sorry, at that time when he was under -
A. He said it wasn't his.
Q. What did you think when he said that the backpack wasn't his.
raised my suspicion further to think that he was trying to deny it belonging to
him because there was something in it that may
afford evidence of an offence.
Q. Was there anything about his answer that caused you to
just felt like it was odd that no-one was claiming that a backpack that was in
the vehicle belonged to them, the fact that he had
it sitting by his legs and
was denying knowing about it was suspicious
cross-examination Adams clarified what he knew about the backpack prior to
making the decision to search the vehicle:
also then, as I understand it, had some sort of conversation with the person you
now know to be Mr Kovac and the people in the
vehicle about the ownership of the
A. Correct.
Q. And you say you spoke to the people in the car.
Q. At that time.
at that time, when they were outside the car, in the vehicle, sitting on the
kerb, on the body-worn.
Q. And that was at a time after you had
begun to search the vehicle, wasn't it.
Q. And that was at a time after you'd formed your intention to search the
in fact, hadn't had any conversation with anyone in the car prior to that time
A. Other than
Q. The only person was Steven, Mr Kovac.
Q. And he said it wasn't his.
A. He claimed it was Sam's [being Burdon – the driver].
Q. And at the time Sam had agreed that it was his.
A. I believe so, yes.
Q. And that was the only information you had at that stage about the
of the conversations about the disputed ownership occurred when the other
gentleman was sitting outside the vehicle, do you agree
Q. And that was after you had, in fact, started to search the vehicle.
there was some controversy at the hearing about this topic, it is important that
I address the evidence very carefully as to what
information was available to
Adams in relation to the so-called “dispute” about ownership of the
backpack when he made
the decision to search the vehicle.
is no doubt that there was a “dispute” or “debate”
between the driver and the other passengers about
ownership of the backpack
after the search of the vehicle had commenced and when they were out of the
vehicle and sitting on the
kerb. The footage from Adams’ BWC captures this
dispute from about 2.35 am, being well after the search of the vehicle had
commenced. An excerpt from the BWC footage is as follows: (emphasis
[Adams to driver and other passengers: 2.35 am]
Adams: Is this your backpack or his, he’s saying its yours,
it was yours in the car
. Is this yours?
Adams: ... don’t know yet its either his or yours. Yes no maybe?
Burdon: Not mine.
Adams: It’s not yours.
[Adams to Kovac: 2.35.30 am]
Adams: Is this your backpack.
Kovac: Yes, we, I found it was at the bins before.
Kovac: Its not my bag like ... yeah I put my bumbag in there and that’s
Adams: Ok alright.
is obvious that this dispute could not have informed Adams prior to commencing
to search the vehicle at or before 2.16 am; or
even prior to 2.21 am when the
prosecution claims the decision to search the vehicle was made (as described at
paragraph 44 above)
or even later as the driver’s seat was being searched
(at about 2.24 am).
only so-called dispute about the backpack that was extant prior to the
commencement of the search could have only related to
brief comments made by
Kovac when he was asked to get out of the GW utility to be arrested for breach
of his bail conditions. That
discussion occurred at 2.11.35 am and is captured
on the BWC of both Adams and Ralph:
Ralph: Keep your stuff with you,
and your backpack in the car.
Kovac: That’s not mine, not my backpack
Ralph: Well, it was right next to you in the front there, why are [you]
saying that’s not your backpack.
Kovac: It’s his [indicating the driver] backpack not mine.
Ralph: What do you mean that the backpack
Kovac: Sam [being Burdon, the driver] that’s yours not mine aye,
that’s not my backpack that’s yours, yeah I didn’t
[over?] with anything that’s not my backpack.
was standing nearby when Kovac was being arrested at that time. His BWC also
picks up this discussion with Kovac about the
backpack. On the footage of his
BWC, at 2.11.50 am, the driver, Burdon, can be heard to claim ownership of the
Burdon: Hm? What’s going on? Hm?
Kovac: That’s yours it’s not mine.
Burdon: Hey?
Kovac: That’s not my backpack its yours.
Burdon: Yeah, it is – my backpack.
is apparent from the later discussions about the backpack at 2.35 am between
Adams and Burdon (set out at paragraph 63 above),
that Adams is cognisant of
Burdon having claimed ownership of the backpack at the earlier time (which
contrasts with Adams’
earlier oral evidence that there had been a
“dispute” about ownership of the backpack).
view of these matters, I find it is more probable than not that Adams’
memory (if genuine) of a “dispute” or
“debate” about the
backpack was a memory of the dispute which in fact took place at about 2.35 am,
after the search of
the vehicle had commenced. The extent of Adams having any
cause for suspicion in relation to the backpack is therefore confined to
earlier conversation that took place when Kovac was being arrested during which
he denies ownership of the backpack when Adams
assumes it is his. It is possible
Adams held a subjective suspicion about the contents of the backpack, though at
this stage it may
have bordered on being nothing more than idle wondering or
curiosity. In any event, for reasons I address below, I do not give this
any significant weight in relation to the formation of
suspicion enlivening the power to search the GW utility.
Adams have requisite suspicion?
Legal principles
of the application in relation to the vehicle search turns on whether Adams
suspected that a search of the vehicle might uncover an
object, possession of which constitutes an offence (including stolen
are two prongs to determining this, first, whether Adams subjectively held a
relevant suspicion prior to searching the GW utility;
and secondly, whether that
suspicion was
suspicion is a state of conjecture or surmise where proof is lacking but it must
be more than mere “idle wondering”
it is a positive feeling of
actual apprehension or mistrust, amounting to a slight opinion without
sufficient evidence.
also be a rational connection between the supporting material and the suspicion,
which is a factual
suspicion attaches to certain conduct or circumstances is a
factual question and an element of objectivity is imported into the
assessment.
It requires an
assessment of whether the information available to the police officer at the
time the power of search is engaged would
“rationally produce a suspicion
in the mind of ... a person thinking reasonably about that
information”.
Significant
to this matter, the requisite degree of suspicion must exist at the time of the
as I have found above,
the decision by Adams to search the GW utility was made no later than 2.16.13
am, being the time when Adams
announces he is going to search the vehicle and
directs the remaining occupants to sit on the
The search commenced, at
the latest, by about 2.24 am – though I consider it more likely commenced
shortly before this time
(see paragraph 44 above).
must evaluate the reasonableness of this suspicion in the context of the purpose
of the search power, and the civil liberties abrogated
This provides a reason
for the courts to retain a supervisory role in determining whether a
subjectively held suspicion was in fact
a reasonably held one in the
circumstances of a particular case.
It is not reasonable to suspect the existence of facts on flimsy material or by
a process of reasoning which relies on tenuous,
albeit rational,
connections.
On the other hand,
it would be unreasonable, and would deny the power much of its utility, to
demand material which supports a positive
belief in the existence of the
relevant facts.
The assessment
is necessarily fact sensitive, and no universal or prescriptive rules apply.
determination of this issue requires me to put myself in the position of Adams,
with the knowledge he had at the time of commencing
the search, and to ask
whether, in those circumstances, a reasonable person in possession of such
information would have entertained
In so doing, the
prosecution emphasised the need for me to have regard to the significant
experience of Adams in his various roles
as a police officer since 2016,
including his experience in investigating serious drug offences and conducting
vehicle searches following
a traffic stop. For Adams’ suspicion to be a
reasonable one, there had to be something more than a tenuous, even if rational,
connection between the information he had available to him and the working
hypothesis that there was an offending object in the
Information
available to Adams
I have set out above, the prosecution contends that the search was lawful on the
basis that Adams had reasonable cause for suspecting
that there were
“possessions or objects” in the vehicle that would constitute an
his evidence-in-chief on day one of the hearing, Adams said that he had formed a
suspicion based upon knowing the following
information:
Kovac was wanted
for serious criminal trespass and breaching his “curfew bail
agreement” (as mentioned above (paragraph
56), I am not satisfied any
information about Kovac being wanted in connection with serious criminal
trespass was available to Adams);
“paperwork” in the name of another person had been found on Kovac
during his safety search (as mentioned above
(paragraph 59), Adams does not
subjectively rely on the disjointed indication by Kovac that he might have found
the paperwork at
there had been
“questions around the backpack that was sitting by his feet in the
footwell of the vehicle” next to Kovac
and “no-one was claiming
ownership of that backpack” (as mentioned above (paragraph 66), the driver
had in fact claimed
ownership, and the other occupants were not denying
ownership);
the time of
night when the vehicle was stopped; and
the three other
people in the vehicle also “bona fide had some previous criminal history
and dealings with the police”
(as mentioned above (paragraph 54), I am not
satisfied such information was available to Adams).
day three of the hearing, after being recalled, he said in a challenge to his
evidence during
cross-examination:
I don’t believe my suspicions were based on the car
leaving 13 Brenda. I believe my suspicions were based on the defendant,
Kovac, having a letter in someone else’s name on his person.
suspicion enough for me at that time of night, and the fact they were denying
who the bag belonged to, that I could enter
that vehicle and search under my
then, almost immediately, seemed to step away from that statement, with the
following exchange:
your evidence now is that the fact the vehicle had left Brenda Avenue had
absolutely nothing to do with your reasonable suspicion
in searching the
added to my suspicions. I’m not saying it had nothing to do with it, but
I’m saying it was a very minor part of my
suspicions.
By the end of this exchange, it seems all Adams was relying upon to form his
subjective suspicion was finding Services SA and council
paperwork in someone
else’s name; the occupants of the vehicle denying who the backpack
belonged to (which the contemporaneous
evidence did not support); the time of
night, and the vehicle leaving Brenda Street.
As I have found Adams to be an unreliable witness (see paragraphs 39, 51, 54
and 57 above), who attempted to reconstruct his evidence
to bolster the
prosecution’s case, I have difficulty in accepting much of what he said he
relied upon to form his subjective
suspicion. Accordingly, I am not satisfied
that the prosecution has discharged its evidentiary burden which relies upon
establishing
Adams’ state of mind. I think it is more probable than not
that Adams did not turn his mind to forming a
subjectively
held suspicion
wondering. Instead, I find it more probable
than not that Adams later turned to
reconstructing his evidence in an effort to demonstrate he had made a rational
connection between
information he thought (in hindsight) would have been known
to him and the suspicion he needed to form to conduct the search. In
my finding, as to Adams not having the requisite suspicion, is wrong, the issue
of the lawfulness of the search is able
to be conclusively determined by
considering whether Adams held the requisite
reasonable suspicion.
to that issue which I now turn.
Ultimately, in closing, Mr Powell contended that the key pieces of information
to support Adams having requisite reasonable cause
to suspect there were objects
in the vehicle, possession of which would constitute an offence, were his
knowledge that:
vehicle had come from a house of interest to the police in Brenda Street,
Mitchell Park;
was in breach of his bail conditions (with less emphasis on the knowledge of
Kovac being wanted for serious criminal trespass);
discovery of the paperwork of another person on Kovac, with Kovac indicating
that he found it in the bins;
existence of the backpack in the front footwell of the GW utility and Kovac
denying ownership of it.
Powell submitted that these pieces of information must be viewed together, such
that one informs the other, with each piece of
information being viewed in the
context of the other pieces of information.
Mead contended that even if I were to find that all those pieces of information
were known to Adams, prior commencing the search,
they do not constitute a
sufficient foundation for formation of reasonable suspicion. For the reasons
that follow, I agree with Mr
Mead that there was insufficient information upon
which Adams could have had reasonable cause to suspect that there was an
object in the vehicle.
turn now to consider, in turn, each piece of the information which the
prosecution claims a reasonable person standing in the shoes
of Adams could have
taken into account prior to deciding to conduct the search. I am mindful that it
is necessary for me to have
regard to the combined force of the information
available. No one piece of information should be excluded from examination of
reasonableness of the suspicion merely because, standing alone, it might be
intractably neutral or otherwise
explicable.
However, information
or circumstances that have a readily apparent and innocuous explanation are
unlikely to add much to the broader
assessment that must be
Brenda Street property at Mitchell Park was considered by Adams and Ralph to be
a known place of interest to police. Ralph described
it by reference to Scott
Pitt who was wanted for offences involving dishonesty. This was also consistent
with Johnson’s evidence.
Adams gave an account of having some prior
knowledge of Brenda Street as a house at which he knew of “past drug
and of “vehicles coming and going from the address at all
times of the day and night”. He confirmed he had never been
house. Adams did not give any evidence to specify what criminal activity he
associated with the house on the evening the
GW utility was intercepted. I find
that Adams had only vague knowledge that Brenda Street was a house of interest
for police as he
did not draw any connection between the house and any category
of object he might have expected to find because the GW utility had
that house.
there was some confusion in the evidence provided by both Adams and Ralph as to
precisely when Adams was informed about the
GW utility having left the Brenda
Street address, I am satisfied on the evidence of Johnson that that information
was conveyed by
Ralph to Adams during the one minute and 30 second mobile phone
call that took place at 1.57 am while Ralph and Johnson were sitting
police car at Nellie Avenue. However, it is significant that there was nothing
at that stage to connect Kovac with the Brenda
Street address or with him being
a passenger in the GW utility. I agree with the contention of Mr Mead that the
14 second mobile
phone call that took place at 2.02 am, after the GW
utility had been stopped, was made by SC Ralph to inform SC Adams only that the
vehicle had been stopped on Lanark Avenue.
accept Adams’ evidence that he considered there was a possible connection
between the GW utility and the Brenda Street address
because he had been told by
Ralph that it was parked outside that property. However, that connection was
tenuous. It was also speculative
to think that there was any nefarious
connection between Kovac and that address, noting that Adams told the court that
know Kovac prior to that evening. Ultimately, the only fact
connecting the GW utility to the Brenda Street address was that it had
parked outside that address.
There is a possibility that Ralph had informed Adams during one of the earlier
calls to his mobile phone that a person of interest,
Scott Pitt, might be
travelling in the vehicle from Brenda Street. However, it is not evident from
the BWC footage of any of the
officers or the audio from the police radio that
there was any interest in determining whether Scott Pitt was in the vehicle when
it was stopped. Once it was determined that Scott Pitt was not in the vehicle,
any connection with Brenda Street would seem to be
of no relevance to conducting
the search of the vehicle.
fact that Adams knew the GW utility had been parked at the Brenda Street address
is to my mind of little consequence to informing
Breach of bail and serious criminal trespass
Adams arrived at the scene of the traffic stop he commenced assisting Ralph with
the arrest of Kovac for breach of bail. I accept
that Adams was therefore aware
that Kovac had breached the curfew conditions on his bail before he searched the
GW utility. However,
I am not satisfied that Adams knew that Kovac was also
wanted in connection with a matter of serious criminal trespass. In any event,
it never became clear as to the capacity or purpose for which Kovac was wanted
in relation to serious criminal trespass; and no details
were mentioned at the
hearing or otherwise revealed.
was no mention of serious criminal trespass on any of the BWC footage of the
three police witnesses played in court or in the
audio recording of the police
radio. Ralph could not find any mention of Kovac being wanted in relation to
serious criminal trespass
in his eight pages of notes that he was permitted to
refer to in the witness box. Further, though Adams had given evidence that when
he arrived at the scene he had an “in-person” conversation with
Ralph about Kovac being wanted in relation to a serious
criminal trespass, after
being played footage from his BWC from the evening, he confirmed he was not told
anything by Ralph about
any serious criminal trespass when arriving at the
This is evident from the
following part of the
cross-examination:
watched your body-worn footage do you accept that you weren’t told
anything about serious criminal trespass when you
I arrived, correct.
also accepted this was contrary to his sworn statement which he had signed on 14
July 2024 – about which he could give no
explanation to the court. He
further accepted that he had not mentioned any telephone communication with
Ralph prior to arriving
at the scene in his sworn statement of 13 January 2025,
and he had maintained in that statement that he had been informed about the
serious criminal trespass when he arrived at the
In the face of the BWC
footage he was forced to accept that did not
was a possibility of Ralph informing Adams about the serious criminal trespass
matter during an approximate 28 second break
when the BWC of Ralph was turned
off immediately before Adams announced he was going to search the vehicle.
However, I am not satisfied
that such information was given to Adams at that
time because it was a very short window of time during which Adams also walked
the police car back to the GW utility; during this time Adams is heard
speaking to Kovac on his BWC footage, and there was no reference
to any such
conversation about the serious criminal trespass matter in any of their earlier
sworn statements.
other possibility of Adams being informed about the serious criminal trespass
matter was traversed when Adams was giving evidence
that he looked up Kovac on
the police SHIELD system when driving to the scene, after receiving the (14
second) call from Ralph at
2.02 am. However, I am not satisfied that this
occurred because the mobile phone call to Adams occurred at 2.02 am, being
immediately when Ralph returns to the police car to commence the check on
the driver’s licence, and before he could have had
time to carry out any
check on Kovac. Further, Ralph gave evidence that when he recognised Kovac in
the passenger seat of the vehicle
he was not then aware that Kovac was in breach
of his bail curfew or that he was wanted in connection with a serious criminal
matter. It is also apparent that Adams could not have known at any
earlier time that Kovac was in the GW utility so as to conduct
a check on him.
The BWC footage of Ralph shows that he returned to the GW utility at 2.08 am to
inform Kovac that he was in breach
of his bail, with Adams and Mochan arriving
at the scene at 2.07 am.
when Ralph is in the process of arresting Kovac at about 2.11 am they discuss
the backpack and his curfew, and it is a stark
omission that no mention is made
by Ralph or Adams at that time about Kovac being wanted in connection with
serious criminal trespass.
In the context of the conversation that occurred with
Kovac at that time during the process of his arrest, I find it implausible
neither Ralph nor Adams would not have mentioned the matter of the serious
criminal trespass if it had been known to them.
view of these matters, I find that Adams was not aware of Kovac being wanted in
connection with serious criminal trespass at the
time he made the decision to
think it would of itself
be of little weight; Kovac being wanted in relation to
a serious criminal trespass matter did not provide any cogent link to finding
offending object in the GW utility. In contrast, it was not a case where it was
alleged, for example, that Kovac had been fleeing
the scene of a serious
criminal trespass that evening.
is uncontroversial that Adams knew Kovac was in breach of the curfew conditions
on his bail agreement when he decided to search
the vehicle. A person being in
breach of bail does not provide a logical connection to suspicion of an
offending object then being
in the vehicle in which that person is travelling.
Even in the context of Ralph being an experienced police officer, and the
stop occurring in the early hours of the morning with the vehicle having
left a place of interest, I am not satisfied that the discovery
of the fact that
Kovac was in breach of his bail to be of any great consequence for the decision
to search the vehicle. It adds little
to the formation of any reasonable
suspicion to search the GW utility that evening.
conducting a “safety search” of Kovac during the process of his
arrest, Services SA and council paperwork in the
name of another person,
“Mr Jack Fountas”, was found in Kovac’s pocket. Adams gave
evidence that he did not consider
it normal for people to carry around paperwork
“that's not in their name”, and the prosecution also placed emphasis
Kovac indicating to Adams (albeit in a disjointed way) that he had found the
paperwork “in the bin”. As noted above,
Adams did not rely on this
indication about “the bin” to inform his subjective suspicion.
my mind, there is nothing inherently incredulous or suspicious about a person
being found with paperwork in the name of another
person; there could be any
number of valid explanations for this. I accept that the odd and disjointed
explanation proffered by Kovac,
that he had found the paperwork in the bins, may
have contributed to a reasonable person thinking that Kovac was lying about the
paperwork and, in turn, this may have spawned his curiosity about what Kovac had
been doing that night. However, this piece of information
rises no higher than a
minor contributing factor to determining whether Adams formed the requisite
reasonable suspicion. As noted
above, in this regard it is relevant that the
paperwork did not provide any real connection to the vehicle – the only
being that it was found on Kovac who was a passenger in (and not even
the driver or owner of) the GW utility.
The backpack
backpack, which was found to contain the methylamphetamine and MDMA - being the
subject of the charges against Kovac, was an
item of particular focus for the
prosecution.
his submissions, Mr Powell sought to confine Adams’ reliance upon the
so-called dispute about the backpack to Kovac denying
ownership of it when he
was being arrested (at or about 2.11 am) – being prior to the commencement
of the search. It was appropriate
for him to do so because the later dispute
could not have informed the decision to search the vehicle (see paragraphs 60 to
gave evidence that it seemed unusual to him that nobody would claim ownership of
the backpack, considering it was sitting in
the footwell of Kovac's passenger
seat. And it was the denial by Kovac that he owned the backpack that Adams said
indicated to him
that there may be ultimately items constituting an offence
located in that backpack. I accept this may have informed Adams’
subjective suspicion. However, the issue for the court is whether it is
significant to the forming of reasonable suspicion.
question for the court is therefore whether the statements made by Kovac that
the backpack was not his – but the drivers,
and the driver confirming it
was his backpack, are sufficient to contribute to Adams forming a reasonable
suspicion to conduct the
that the BWC footage did not show Kovac giving any indication to the police
officers that he owned the backpack; it was merely an assumption made by Adams
because it was sitting in the footwell next to him.
For example, at no relevant
stage did Kovac touch, hold or pick up the backpack or take anything from it
that would then more obviously
make a denial of ownership seem suspicious. I
note that this was not a circumstance where no one wanted to know about the
- to the contrary, Burdon had said it was
Further, there was no
indication that anyone had lied to the
Powell impressed upon me the fact that the backpack was in the footwell of the
front passenger seat where Kovac had been sitting
contributed to Adams finding
it “unusual to him that nobody would claim ownership of the bag”.
Further, Mr Powell submitted
that the exchange between Kovac and Burdon, where
Burdon claims ownership of the backpack, ought not to have voided Adams’
suspicion in relation to the backpack. I accept that a reasonable person would
not be naively gullible, however that is not this
Mead said there was not a “dispute” about ownership of the backpack
prior to the search commencing. I accept Mr Mead’s
submission and find
that Kovac’s denial of ownership of the backpack prior to the search to be
of little consequence to the
formation of reasonable suspicion. For the reasons
that follow, I reject the proposition that there was any real question or
commencement of the search, that could have contributed to Adams’
reasonable suspicion in any material sense.
find that in giving his evidence Adams has also likely confused the sequence of
the events of that evening, perhaps subconsciously
so. As such, his evidence was
misguided in giving emphasis to there being a dispute over ownership of the
When the conversation about the ownership of the backpack occurs, prior to any
decision being made to search the vehicle, I think
it is inaccurate to describe
it as a “dispute”; I find that it amounted to no more than a denial
of ownership by Kovac.
And I find that there may have been a very good
explanation for Kovac to deny ownership. For example, the backpack may have in
belonged to Burdon (the driver) – which Burdon confirmed at the time
(and Adams knew he had so confirmed). It should be thought
by a reasonable
person to be very usual for a driver to place their belongings on the front
passenger seat beside them and, if a
passenger is sitting on the seat, for those
belongings to be put in the footwell of that seat. It was not reasonable for
be overly incredulous about Kovac denying ownership of the backpack in
those circumstances.
As such, to my mind, Kovac’s denial of ownership of the backpack is of
marginal relevance to the formation of reasonable
Conclusion on reasonable suspicion
I have analysed the above pieces of information separately, it should not be
thought that I have viewed them in isolation
to one another. One piece of
information will be informed by the other pieces of information, and I must
consider all information
in a holistic way to determine whether it is sufficient
to have caused suspicion in the mind of a person thinking reasonably about
information. It is also necessary for me to consider the combined force of all
these pieces of information in the context of
Adams being an experienced police
officer at the scene that evening.
my view, the reasonableness of the suspicion of Adams was insufficient. The
information that was available to Adams prior to commencing
to search the
vehicle was only that:
Kovac was a
passenger travelling in the vehicle, which had been stopped in the early hours
of the morning for a licence check by Ralph
and Johnson - in the hope of finding
Scott Pitt in the vehicle (he was not so found);
the vehicle had
travelled from a house of interest to the police - which Ralph and Johnson had
been observing, but Adams did not know
of any other connection which the vehicle
or its occupants had to that house (I accept Adams also had some past general
that night);
Kovac was in
breach of curfew on his bail conditions, but Adams did not know that Kovac was
also wanted in connection with a matter
of serious criminal trespass;
paperwork on him which was in the name of someone else, which Kovac indicated,
in a disjointed manner, that he found in
the bin; and
Kovac denied
ownership of a backpack that was in the footwell of the front passenger seat
where he had been sitting, but the driver
had confirmed it was his and there was
no reason for Adams to think otherwise.
In my opinion, any connection between these facts and the existence of an
offending object in the vehicle was a tenuous one and
something more compelling
than the information Adams had before him was required. Just because a vehicle
has travelled from a place
of interest in the early hours of the morning
(without any other connection to any criminality at that address), and a
in the vehicle is found to be in breach of curfew conditions on their
bail agreement, does not present a factual foundation for searching
the vehicle.
This remains so even when: (i) paperwork in the name of the other person is
found on a passenger, such a matter is of
no great moment in terms of suspecting
the existence of offending objects in the vehicle in which they are travelling;
and (ii) the
front seat passenger denies ownership of a backpack in the footwell
of his seat. As I have said above, the denial of ownership of
the backpack was
of little consequence because a person acting reasonably would have viewed it as
extremely plausible for the backpack
to have belonged to the driver.
To my mind, the only fact of any real consequence, something which Adams did
not himself recall, was the odd and disjointed indication
by Kovac that he found
the Services SA and council paperwork “in the bin”. To my mind when
viewing the BWC footage this
indication by Kovac was of little moment in the
context of the scene. I accept it may have given an impression of a
consciousness
of guilt by Kovac. However, I am not satisfied it provides any
telling link to the GW utility and to suspicion about any offending
evidence that might be in the vehicle (even when considered together with the
other available information). I accept
does not require the searching
officer to have knowledge of a particular offence or of the kinds of objects in
the vehicle. However,
to my mind, it is not a determinative or significant
factor weighing on the formation of reasonable suspicion to ground a search
the vehicle.
When taken together, the information available to Adams was not capable of
giving rise to a reasonable cause for him to suspect
there was an object in the
vehicle, possession of which constituted an offence (including stolen goods), or
that there was evidence
of the commission of an indictable offence in the
vehicle. The search of the GW utility was therefore unlawful.
Despite my concluding that the search was unlawful, I acknowledge that, in a
case such as this, the task of deciding whether to
hours of the morning may not be an easy one for police. Imbued with the role of
police is the noble
objective of keeping our community safe; however, the law
also demands that the important civil liberties of individuals abrogated
exercise of police search powers be borne steadily in mind when exercising those
powers. Such sentiments are picked up below
in my discussion of the public
policy discretion.
The public policy discretion
view of my having found that the search of the GW utility was unlawful, it is
necessary for me to consider whether the incriminating
evidence obtained in
consequence of the search should be excluded in the exercise of the public
discretion.
legal principles applicable to the exercise of that discretion are well
Ultimately, I must navigate between the need for bringing offenders to
account, and the need to ensure the court is not seen to provide
endorsement of the unlawful conduct of the
Further, it is well
understood that, in a matter such as this, the exercise of the discretion is not
concerned with fairness to the
exercise of the
Bunning v Cross
discretion to exclude will be informed by
considering and balancing a number of matters,
nature of the offence charged.
probative value of the evidence, and its importance in the proceedings.
the police conduct involves illegality,
impropriety,
entrapment,
unfairness.
the conduct by police was deliberate, or resulted from a mistake.
the nature of the conduct affected the cogency of the evidence so obtained.
ease with which those responsible might have complied with the law in procuring
the evidence in question.
legislative intention (if any) in relation to the law that is said to have been
the conduct was encouraged or tolerated by those in higher authority in the
police force or, in the case of illegal conduct,
by those responsible for the
institution of criminal
proceedings.
Powell submitted that the key consideration for me in the exercise of the
discretion is whether the unlawfulness was born from
a deliberate or reckless
impropriety by police, or born out of some mistake. I understood Mr
Powell’s reference to mistake
to be a reference to the police having a
genuine misunderstanding about their search powers as opposed to a deliberate or
attitude towards them, which is consistent with the test as it was
articulated by the High Court in
Bunning v Cross.
In this regard, I note
that it has been observed that the discretion to exclude unlawfully obtained
evidence on public policy grounds
is directed to “deliberate or reckless
disregard of the law by those whose duty it is to enforce
have not found Adams to have deliberately flouted the search powers under
However, for the reasons that follow, I consider the manner in which he
approached the exercise of the search power to have been
reckless. His reckless
approach was of a kind where he did not really care whether he had sufficient
cause to exercise his search
power and simply thought himself entitled to do
is clear to me that Adams made a decision to search the GW utility in an
instinctive way based largely on his curiosity about
what he might find. He
failed to turn his mind to whether there was any actual connection between what
he knew and what he might
find in the vehicle. This meant that when he gave
evidence during the hearing about what information he based his reasonable
upon he was unable to articulate it clearly. In fact, he prevaricated
under cross-examination about what was the basis for his forming
suspicion. This
meant I had difficulty in accepting that he did hold any genuine (subjective)
suspicion arising from information
available to him that evening. I think it is
more likely that Adams largely reconstructed the information forming his
suspicion that
evening for the purposes of the voir dire hearing.
example of Adams’ misconceived efforts in giving evidence occurred when he
was challenged during cross-examination about
why he had only given evidence
earlier about a single phone call with Ralph that evening, despite Ralph’s
mobile phone records
(produced later) showing multiple calls that had occurred
prior to 2.00 am. The following exchange occurred: (emphasis added)
I further suggest the only reason you mentioned any phone call in your statement
on 26 June was to try and bolster your reasonable
suspicion in relation to the
facts you say you relied on to conduct the search.
don’t believe that phone call is essential to any facts of the reasonable
suspicion to search the vehicle.
I think without that phone call I have
plenty of suspicion to search that vehicle.
similar exchange is set out at paragraph 80 above, where Adams says: “that
is suspicion enough for me”, in relation
to the paperwork in someone
else’s name and the so-called denial of ownership of the backpack.
demeanour revealed his generally presumptuous attitude to what the legislature
requires to enliven search powers. In
this regard, it is relevant to note that
there was no concession made by Adams that he might have made a mistake that
acting too hastily on scant information or in the heat of the moment.
Adams displayed no willingness to reflect on his conduct that
evening. To the
contrary, as revealed by numerous exchanges during cross-examination, Adams
remained overly confident, and somewhat
arrogant, about what was necessary to
enliven the search power.
there is no basis for me to find that Adams was acting that night in an unusual
or uncharacteristic way. Perversely, even
when confronted with difficulties in
his evidence, Adams maintained his presumptuous attitude and did not resile from
the approach
he took to the search. I was left with the strong impression that
Adams’ offhand attitude displayed in responding to difficulties
evidence meant that he would be likely to knowingly repeat his actions in
foundations.
such, I find that Adams took a reckless approach to his power to search the GW
utility, and without the disapproval of the court
he (and other like-minded
police officers) would be likely to do so again. My concern is heightened
by Adams being a more senior
and experienced police officer, who would be
expected to demonstrate leadership to the probationary and junior officers who
present that evening.
deciding to exclude the evidence, it is also relevant for me to have regard to
the dearth of any careful notetaking by Adams about
the information upon which
he founded his search powers, which then meant he had to rely upon his memory of
the events of that evening.
As I have found, his memory of certain matters
proved fallible when tested against the BWC footage and Ralph’s mobile
records, and other contemporaneous evidence. The unreliability of
Adams’ account of the events was also made apparent when
cross-examined about why his earlier sworn statements filed in this matter had
not mentioned any phone calls received from
Ralph, and the first time a phone
call is mentioned was in the very recent statement provided on 25 June 2025
– shortly prior
to the voir dire hearing. This reflected the unfortunate
position of Adams not having an accurate detailed contemporaneous record
information he relied upon for the purposes of conducting the search. As such,
he was forced to reconstruct reasons for conducting
the search and the
surrounding events from his memory, substantial parts of which proved to be
unreliable.
A relevant consideration for discretionary exclusion is also whether the
would be found upon
a search of the vehicle, such that the approach to the search was genuinely
thought to be lawful. Given my finding
at paragraph 127 above, that Adams was
reckless in his approach to the search power, I do not give much weight to this
consideration.
Further, as already mentioned, I strongly doubt that Adams had a
state of mind beyond idle wondering.
completeness, I also note that the cogency of the evidence obtained on account
of the search was not in any way diminished by
the illegality of the search.
However, with rare exceptions, that will ordinarily be the
an unlawful search
that infringed the accused’s civil liberties in a moderate way was
nonetheless held to warrant the exclusion
of the illegally obtained evidence,
notwithstanding the cogency of the evidence was unaffected. In that case, the
degree of departure
from a proper exercise of intrusive powers compelled the
exclusion of the evidence, noting that no evidence was adduced to show it
isolated error.
Additionally,
I do not lose sight of the fact that trafficking drugs is a serious offence,
carrying a maximum term of imprisonment
of 10 years (and more for serious drug
offenders), and that it is in the community’s interest that drug offenders
be apprehended,
tried and brought to account where their guilt is proved to the
criminal standard. I also take into account that the evidence obtained
unlawful search will be critical to the trial of Kovac in this matter. However,
I consider the alleged offending, in this
case detected as a result of the
unlawful search, does not appear so grave as to supply a powerful justification
for declining to
exclude the evidence if the other factors relevant to the
exercise of my discretion point in favour of exclusion. In this regard,
reliance upon the following observation of Deane J in
Pollard v The
duty of the courts to be vigilant to ensure that unlawful conduct on the part of
the police is not encouraged by an acceptance
of judicial acquiescence.
I note that Mr Mead also contended that Adams misunderstood his powers pursuant
Summary Offences Act
He principally based that submission
upon Adams’ evidence in chief in the following exchange:
Summary Offences Act
, if I have reasonable cause to suspect
that there may be an object or good in possession of that vehicle, I can
identify who the
driver is. I can search any vehicle, vessel or aircraft.
Anything that entails evidence of the commission of an indictable offence,
there may be objects or goods in possession
of that vehicle, I can search
I accept that his description of the search power was clumsy, and confused
aspects with other search powers, I am satisfied
that Adams understood the
necessity to have information to ground reasonable suspicion before commencing a
must be directed to objects in the vehicle,
possession of which would constitute an offence or evidence of the commission of
an indictable
offence. However, as I have concluded above, the difficulty for
Adams was not so much a misunderstanding of the search power but
his reckless
and cavalier approach to exercising it.
conclude that
of the evidence obtained as a result of the
the appearance
of judicial acquiescence in unlawful conduct on the part of the
The application was also for
exclusion of a pre-arrest conversation, which exclusion was not pressed for at
the hearing.
v The Queen
[1981] HCA 46
(1981) 147 CLR 512
at 519 – 520 (Gibbs CJ and Wilson J);
Cleland v The Queen
[1982] HCA 67
(1982) 151 CLR 1
at 16 (Murphy J) and 20 (Deane
Zenuni v The King
[2022] SASCA 106
Exhibits VDP1, VDP3 and VDP8.
Transcript of the BWC footage prepared by officers Ralph and Adams were tendered
and marked for identification
as VDPMFI4 and VDPMFI2 respectively.
Exhibits VDP5 and VDP7.
Exhibit VDP6.
Exhibit VDP6.
McHugh v The Queen
[2022] SASCA 5.
Ibid at [7] (Kourakis CJ,
with Doyle and Lovell JJA agreeing) and [16] (Lovell JA).
Young v The King
[2024] SASCA 47
(Doyle JA, with Kourakis CJ and David JA agreeing).
Exhibit VDP1. Also see the
transcript of the BWC footage at Exhibit VDMFI2 (page 7 of 23, lines 27 to
This does not appear in
full in the transcript of Adams’ BWC footage (Exhibit VDPMFI2) but it can
be clearly heard on the
recording itself as played into court (Exhibit VDP1). It
is also heard on Ralph’s BWC footage and appears on the transcript
Ralph’s BWC footage (VDPMFI4).
117 SASR 432
at [21] (Kourakis CJ, Blue and Stanley JJ).
R v Mitchell
(Lovell J).
117 SASR 432
Bae v The Queen and Koo v The Queen
(2020) SASR 522
at [76] (Kelly J, with Stanley and Parker JJ agreeing).
R v Mitchell
(Lovell J);
R v Frantzis
(1996) 66 SASR 558.
Exhibit VDP1 – disc
of BWC footage of Adams.
117 SASR 432
Queensland Bacon Pty Ltd
[1966] HCA 21
(1966) 115 CLR 266
at 303 (Kitto J).
T139.30-36.
T139.37-T140.4.
R v AS and Raynor
[2023] SADC 60
Compare the facts in
Morrison v R
(1994) 176 LSJS 435.
Bunning v Cross
[1978] HCA 22
(1978) 141 CLR 54
at 78-80 (Stephen and Aickin JJ);
R v Rockford
(2015) 122 SASR 391
at [39] and [41] (Stanley J, with Kourakis CJ and Sulan
J agreeing).
R v Armistead
Kadir v The Queen
[2020] HCA 1
(2020) 267 CLR 109
at 125 (Kiefel
CJ, Bell, Keane, Nettle and Edelman JJ);
[2017] SASCFC 61
(Stanley J, with Parker J agreeing).
Bunning v Cross
74-75 (Stephen and Aickin JJ).
Alzuain v The King
[2025] SASCA 67
(the Court) adopting
Middlin-Hannah v The Queen
(2020) 137 SASR 366
at [155] (Livesey J), citing
Bunning v Cross
74-75 (Stephen and Aickin JJ) and
R v Swaffield
(1998) 192 CLR 159
[135] (Kirby J).
Cleland v The Queen
[1982] HCA 67
(1982) 151 CLR 1
at 20 (Deane J).
Ridgeway v The
(1995) 184 CLR
19 at 31-32 (Mason CJ, Deane and Dawson JJ).
[2000] SASC 48
Question of Law Reserved (No 1 of 1998)
[1998] SASC 6634
(1998) 70 SASR 281
288-289 (the discretion does not apply where police officers give false evidence
as to how material was obtained),
Director of Public Prosecutions v Moore
[2003] VSCA 90
(2003) 6 VR 430
(the unlawful or improper conduct must be the means
by which the evidence was obtained).
Ridgeway v The
(1995) 184 CLR 19 at 31-32 (Mason CJ, Deane and Dawson JJ).
Bunning v Cross
78 (Stephen and Aicken JJ);
Pollard v The Queen
(1992) 176 CLR at 204
Bunning v Cross
79 (Stephen and Aickin JJ).
117 SASR 432.
Pollard v The Queen
[1992] HCA 69
(1992) 176 CLR 177
at 202-203 (Deane J).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (593 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter