URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRC/2017/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Boland v S & AD Basheer Nominees Pty Ltd [2017] SAIRC 3 (25 January 2017)
Boland v S & AD Basheer Nominees Pty Ltd
[2017] SAIRC
MAGISTRATES COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(INDUSTRIAL
OFFENCES JURISDICTION)
BOLAND, Marie
BASHEER NOMINEES PTY LTD
Prosecution.
3332 of 2015
HEARING DATE:
September 2016
JUDGMENT OF:
Industrial Magistrate M
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Whether the exercise of powers by the
regulator was invalid – Whether bringing of the prosecution was invalid
to 10 September 2015 the Work Health and Safety Act was committed
to the Minister for Industrial Relations and SafeWork SA was a
business unit of
the Attorney-General’s Department –
: The exercise of
powers by the regulator was not invalid – the Information laid was valid
– The matter is referred into
chambers to set a timetable for its future
Egan v Willis
[1998] HCA 71
(1998) 195 CLR 424
Project Blue
Sky Inc & Ors v Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR
Australian Broadcasting Corporation v Redmore Pty Ltd
[1989] HCA 15
Morton v Union Steamship Co of New Zealand Ltd
[1951] HCA 42
(1951) 83 CLR
REPRESENTATION:
Informant: Mr M
Defendant: Mr P Barry
Solicitors:
Informant: Crown
Solicitor’s Office
Defendant: HWL Ebsworth Lawyers
Introduction
Informant issued an Information and Summons on 5 May 2015 alleging that the
Defendant, being a person conducting a business or
undertaking, and who had a
health and safety duty, failed to comply with that duty, and that failure
exposed a person to a risk of
death or serious injury contrary to s 32 of the
Work Health and Safety Act 2012
(SA) (WHS Act).
a directions hearing on 11 September 2015 the Defendant informed the Court that
it wished to plead guilty and requested that the
matter be listed for
submissions as to penalty.
Crown Solicitor, as the model litigant, in a letter dated 19 November 2015,
wrote to the Defendant’s legal representative
to raise certain matters
prior to the submissions on penalty being heard on 3 December 2015. There was
an expressed intention to
file a fresh Information identical in all respects but
for the date and that the Defendant re-enter its plea in respect of the new
Information. The letter went on to discuss the reasons behind the proposal to
file a fresh Information namely:
On Thursday, 10
September 2015 the Governor committed the WHS Act to the Attorney-General under
Administrative Arrangements Act 1994
Prior to 10
September 2015 the WHS Act was committed to the Minister for Industrial
Relations and SafeWork SA was a business unit
of the Attorney- General’s
Department.
The action taken
on 10 September 2015 was to address an argument that might otherwise have been
made namely that the Regulator under
the WHS Act had not been properly
If the Regulator
was not properly appointed any evidence gathered by the use of powers derived
from the Regulator has arguably been
illegally or improperly obtained.
If the Regulator
was not properly appointed, it is arguable that the proceedings were not brought
by a person with the authority to
do so. Arguably, if the Informant was not the
Regulator at the relevant time, then the proceedings could not have existed as a
of law before the date of the proclamation.
receipt of the letter dated 19 November 2015 from the
Crown Solicitor’s Office the Defendant applied to adjourn the
set down for 3 December 2015 to seek an opinion from counsel. Subsequently this
matter was listed for legal argument to take
place on 8 and 9 September
Informant’s submissions
for the Informant advised that there is no longer a challenge to the validity of
the appointment of the Regulator. The challenge
is to the exercise of powers by
the Regulator, and whether that exercise of power was valid during the relevant
period. The relevant
period concerns the committing of the WHS Act to the
Minister for Industrial Relations on 20 December 2012 and subsequently the
of the WHS Act to the Attorney-General on 10 September 2015.
Act S 4 provides definitions relevantly as follows:
means the Executive
Executive Director
means the person for the time being holding, or acting
in, the position of Executive Director of that part of the Department that
directly involved in the administration and enforcement of this Act.
means the administrative unit of the Public Service that is,
under the Minister, responsible for the administration of this
is not defined by the WHS Act. Counsel contended that there were two possible
constructions of
; one emanating from the
Public Sector Act
(PS Act), the other from the AA Act.
was said that s 28 of the PS Act is crucial as regards the contention that it is
the PS Act rather than the AA Act which governs
the situation. Section 28
“The Governor may, by proclamation, designate the
Minister who will be an administrative unit’s Minister with responsibility
for the unit.”
The AA Act provides that “the Governor may, by proclamation, commit the
administration of an Act to a
followed from the two Acts was that a Minister with responsibility for an
administrative unit under the PS Act may control the
activities of the
administrative unit. A Minister with responsibility for an act under the AA Act
does not have the direct capacity
to control the means by which an act, so
committed, is to be enforced or administered.
29 of Division 3 of the PS Act states that there is to be a Chief Executive
of each administrative unit. Section 30 empowers
the Chief Executive to
employ persons and s 31 describes the general duties of the Chief Executive,
including the fact that the Chief
Executive is responsible to the Premier and
the department’s Minister (this being the Minister proclaimed under s 28
PS Act). Section 31 refers to the Chief Executive being responsible for
the attainment of performance objectives set from time to
time by the Premier
and the department’s Minister and further being responsible to the Premier
and department’s Minister
for the effective management of the department
and the general conduct of its employees.
situation that prevailed was that the Attorney-General was the Minister
responsible for the administrative unit (Attorney-General’s
Department)
and Safe Work SA was a business unit within the Attorney General’s
Department.
predecessor to the WHS Act (namely the
Occupational Health, Safety and
Welfare Act 1986)
had an amended definition of
inserted as part
of a suite of amendments consequent on the enactment of the
Public Sector Act
. This definition of
was identical to the definition
that was subsequently contained in the WHS Act.
case turns on the meaning of the word
as it appears in the
definition of department. The construction contended for is the notion of
Minister as appears in s 28 of the
this is the correct meaning of the word
the following situation
prevails namely:
Attorney-General was the Minister proclaimed to have oversight of the
Attorney-General’s Department;
SafeWork SA was
a unit within the Attorney-General’s Department assigned to that
department on 1 July 2014; and
means the administrative unit of the public service under the
contended Counsel for the Informant, it all lined up. SafeWork SA was a unit
within the Attorney-General’s Department
under the Attorney-General.
was made to Part 6 of the PS Act which deals with the public service. Section 24
states that the “public service consists
of administrative units which may
take the form of a department”. Section 26 states that the Governor
“may by proclamation
establish a department”. Section 28 states that
the Governor by proclamation can designate the Minister with responsibility
the administrative unit. It follows that once a Minister is designated with
responsibility then the practical operation of an
administrative unit follows on
as appears in Division 3 of the PS Act. This includes a Chief Executive of an
administrative unit
who is responsible to the proclaimed Minister. The
proclaimed Minister has oversight and power to control the Chief Executive,
in turn has the power to control and direct the employees in that
administrative unit.
for the Informant said that he accepted the significance of the doctrine of
responsible government set out in the Defendant’s
outline. This included
the reference to the High Court decision in
wherein the plurality
“[referring to a United Kingdom publication
‘Questions of Procedure for Ministers’] Each Minister is responsible
to Parliament for the conduct of his or her department, and for the actions
carried out by the Department in pursuit of government
policies or in the
discharge of responsibilities laid upon him or her as a Minister. Ministers are
accountable to Parliament, in
the sense that they have a duty to explain in
parliament the exercise of their powers and duties and to give an account to
of what is done by them in their capacity as ministers or by their
departments.”
Defendant’s outline also made reference to the South Australian
Ministerial Code of Conduct, in particular the concepts
Ministers are
responsible to Parliament for their actions and the actions of the departments
and agencies within their portfolio;
Ministers should
not make an official decision without first giving due consideration to the
merits of the matter at hand and the
impact the decision is likely to have on
the rights and interests of the people involved and the citizens of
South Australia; and
Ministers must
provide information to the Parliament when requested to do
Counsel for the Informant agreed with these
for the Informant also agreed with the conclusion that appears in the
Defendant’s outline of argument (par 17) wherein
the Defendant said that
the role of ministerial responsibility is a vital one and a Minister is not just
a member of Parliament,
but as a member of the Executive Government, trust is
placed in ministers for the proper administration of government and the
responsibility
for acts to which they are committed.
concepts of ministerial responsibility, it was said, support the
Informant’s contention that the meaning of
picks up the
concept of ministerial responsibility provided for under the PS Act.
is not defined in the WHS Act. The meaning of
is not determined
Acts Interpretation Act 1915
(AI Act) as contended for by the
Defendant. Section 4 of the AI Act states:
“the Minister means--
(a) when used in an Act – the Minister of the Crown to whom the
administration of the Act has been committed by the Governor,
or in whom the
administration of the Act is otherwise vested; and
(b) when used in a statutory instrument – the Minister of the Crown to
whom the administration of the Act under which the statutory
instrument was made
has been committed by the Governor, or in whom the administration of that Act is
otherwise vested,
and includes a Minister of the Crown for the time being discharging the duties
of that Minister or acting in the exercise of powers
or functions delegated by
that Minister”
Informant’s position was that the term
contained in the
definition of
in the WHS Act means the Minister who is
responsible for the administrative unit pursuant to s 28 of the PS Act.
definition of
introduced into the predecessor legislation
(namely the
Occupational Health, Safety and Welfare Act 1986)
the same terms as appears in the WHS Act, decisively underpins a construction of
in the definition of
as intending to
pick up the concept of
proclaimed under s 28 of the PS Act, as
the minister responsible for an administrative unit, and not by reference to the
the AI Act.
could not be Parliament’s intention that the operation of the WHS Act
could be stymied by the failure to proclaim the Minister
who has oversight of
the department as the Minister who is also responsible for the administration of
fact that the definition of
refers to an administrative unit
of the public service that is under the Minister, should not distract attention
from the plain reading
of the definition which requires identification, not of
the Minister who is responsible for the administration of the act, but of
department as the administrative unit that is responsible for the administration
of the act. The Attorney-General’s Department
at the relevant time was
responsible for the administration of the Act.
for the purposes of the definition of
in the WHS Act was at
the relevant time the Attorney-General. The Attorney-General was responsible for
the Attorney-General’s
Department which was the administrative unit
responsible for the administration of the WHS Act.
Defendant in para 24 of its outline refers to matters over which the
Attorney-General may have had input if he was correctly appointed.
The Informant
maintained that it was not the Minister (Industrial Relations) assigned the
administration of the Act under the AA
Act who had the power to direct and
control the operations of the Act. The relevant Minister who had the power was
the PS Act Minister
namely the Attorney-General.
is accepted that during the period from 1 January 2013 to 9 September 2015 the
Minister accountable to the Parliament for the WHS
Act was the Minister for
Industrial Relations. The Defendant in para 26 of its outline stated that
“such a Minister with oversight
of the WHS Act is incapable however of
reporting to Parliament on matters such as prosecutions commenced by the
regulator and to
what extent, for example, those proceedings complied with the
relevant prosecutorial guidelines.” The Informant accepts that
Minister for Industrial Relations was in that position but maintains that at all
times the Attorney-General was capable of speaking
to all those issues.
concerns raised by the Defendant in para 29 of its outline, namely that the
regulator during the relevant period was incapable
of performing an inherent
part of her function, namely, being able to report to the correct Minister with
ministerial oversight over
the WHS Act, were according to the Informant,
concerns that did not arise. There was at all times a Minister (Industrial
in Parliament able to speak to issues about the Act in Parliament and
there was a Minister (Attorney-General) capable of speaking
to the PS Act
appears in B. Selway, The
Constitution
of South Australia
firstly under the heading of
“Responsible Government” Ministers are responsible to the Parliament
for the administration
of acts for which they are responsible and for the
actions of the departments and public servants under their control.”
under the heading Ministers “Ministers are responsible to the
Parliament for the administration of their departments. They
are responsible to
Parliament for the proper administration of those acts the administration of
which has been committed to them.”
The Informant said that these passages
demonstrate that there are multiple strands of responsibility and as a result
there was no
gap in the arrangements herein.
for the Informant referred to the Defendant’s contention that the
regulator during the relevant period was incapable
of performing an inherent
part of her function that is being able to report to the correct Minister who
had ministerial oversight
over the WHS Act. According to the Defendant any
powers exercised by the regulator during the relevant period, including
prosecutions, must be invalid. Further the fact that the incorrect
Minister was given responsibility for the WHS Act cannot be ignored.
deliberately chose the Minister for Industrial Relations to have responsibility
but during the relevant period no such
responsibility was capable of being
exercised by that Minister. The High Court in
Project Blue Sky Inc & Ors
v Australian Broadcasting Authority
(“Project Blue
considered the question
of invalidity and the intention of Parliament. The Defendant contended that
Project Blue Sky
test of invalidity the proceedings herein are
Informant maintained that Parliament cannot be taken to have intended that the
appointment of the Minister for Industrial Relations
in the circumstances herein
would lead to an Information laid by the regulator as being invalid. Reference
was made to
Project Blue Sky
(supra) wherein the majority
“An act done in breach of a condition regulating
the exercise of a statutory power is not necessarily invalid and of no effect.
Whether it is depends upon whether there can be discerned a legislative purpose
to invalidate any act that fails to comply with the
condition. The existence of
the purpose is ascertained by reference to the language of the statute, its
subject matter and objects,
and the consequences for the parties of holding void
every act done in breach of the condition.”
was also made to a decision of the High Court namely
Australian Broadcasting
Corporation v Redmore Pty Ltd.
The ABC had failed to obtain Ministerial approval to its entering into a
contract as required by its enabling Act. The majority were
of the view that
non-compliance with the Act did not render the contract illegal or
unenforceable. As the majority in
Project Blue
“A better test for determining the issue of
validity is to ask whether it was a purpose of the legislation that an act done
in breach of the provision should be invalid.”
Information laid, in the context of this case, must be valid because the
statutory text simply does not provide a foundation for
the implication that it
ought to be rendered invalid. The regulator reported to the Chief Executive of
the Attorney-General’s
Department. If the Attorney-General had concerns as
to the way in which SafeWork SA was being operated, the Attorney-General is able
to exercise control by giving direction to the Chief Executive.
Defendant’s Submissions
Defendant summarised its position in four points:
deliberately intended the Minister for Industrial Relations to have
responsibility for the WHS Act;
ministerial responsibility is essential and in this case it did not occur;
The exercise of
power by the regulator was therefore invalid; and
The bringing of
this prosecution was therefore invalid.
factual background surrounding the error of committing the wrong Minister to the
Act was as follows:
20 September
2012 Parliament committed through the Governor the Act to the Minister for
Industrial Relations;
1 January 2013
WHS Act came into force;
1 January 2013
to 30 June 2014 the WHS Act was under the Department of Premier and
1 July 2014
onwards it came under the Attorney-General’s Department;
August 2013 and 30 July 2014 the Regulator undertook an investigation in
relation to the Defendant;
5 May 2015 a
single charge was laid against the Defendant which was signed by the Executive
Director of SafeWork SA as the Informant.
At the time the charge was filed it
was done without the correct Minister being committed to the Act, namely the
Attorney-General;
10 September
2015 the WHS Act was committed to the Attorney-General.
aspect of responsible government is ministerial responsibility. The High Court
of Australia cited with approval the United Kingdom’s
position as regards
ministerial responsibility.
Ministerial responsibility is a vital safeguard in the system of responsible
government in which the correct Minister oversees the
administration of an act
that he or she is committed to. In that framework the Minister is individually
accountable to Parliament
and to the people of the State in relation to the
administration of the act.
the WHS Act, definitions are set out in s 4. In particular
means the “
administrative unit of the Public Service that is, under the
Minister, responsible for the administration of this Act
”. The words
“under the Minister” are words deliberately used by Parliament and
signify the important connection
between the correct Minister and the
administration of the act.
is not defined but the AI Act does define
and this definition
applies to the word Minister in the WHS Act. It means the minister committed to
the WHS Act and not the Minister
responsible for the department under which the
regulator sits. Section 4(1) of the AI Act begins with “
In this Act and
in every other Act or statutory instrument, unless the contrary intention
appears...”
The action of committing the Minister to the WHS Act,
demonstrates Parliament’s intention that the meaning of the word
in the act, is found in the definition of Minister in the AI
152(a) of the WHS Act indicates that a function of the Regulator is to advise
and make recommendations to the Minister and
report on the operation and
effectiveness of the act. This reference to
is the Minister to
whom the act is committed and means that the responsible Minister has an
important role to play in the oversight
of the act.
are the consequences as a result of committing the wrong Minister to the WHS
Act? The proceedings are invalid. The High Court
Project Blue Sky
deals with the test involved in determining the issue of
the relevant period namely 1 January 2013 to 9 September 2015 when the Minister
for Industrial Relations was committed to the
Act this was the person to whom
the Regulator was to advise and make recommendations and report on the operation
and effectiveness
of the Act. During this entire period the Regulator was either
under the Department of Premier and Cabinet and then the
Attorney-General’s
Department.
function of reporting to the Minister includes prosecutions. The Minister who
was meant to oversee the Act, namely the Attorney-General,
was not the minister
committed to the Act. During the relevant period the Regulator may have
performed functions against the wishes
of the Attorney-General. It was the
Minister for Industrial Relations who had oversight of the Act but not the first
law officer
of the Crown (Attorney-General) and this Minister was incapable of
reporting to Parliament on prosecutions that have been commenced
and whether
such prosecutions complied with prosecutorial guidelines.
disconnect between the Regulator and the correct Minister meant that the
Regulator, without that correct oversight, was incapable
of being able to
perform an inherent function namely reporting to the correct Minister with the
oversight of the Act. In
Project Blue Sky
(supra) the Chief Justice
“When the Parliament confers a power and
statutorily directs the manner of its exercise, ‘[t]he ambit of the power
be ascertained by the character of the statute and the nature of the
provisions it contains’.
Therefore a provision conferring the power must be so construed as to conform
with a provision governing the manner of its exercise.
The authority conferred
on the repository of a general power cannot be exercised in conflict with a
provision which governs the manner
of its exercise; the constraint on the
exercise of the power defines the ambit of the power granted. A purported
exercise of a power
in breach of the provision which governs the manner of its
exercise is invalid, since there is no power to support
during the relevant period appointed the Minister for Industrial Relations to
have responsibility for the Act. That Minister
was incapable of exercising
correct responsibility. Then in September 2015 Parliament appointed the
Attorney-General. During the
relevant period the Regulator was not accountable
to the correct Minister nor could the correct Minister direct the Regulator in
the administration of the Act. Neither of these consequences can be said to be
the intention of Parliament.
is nothing in the WHS Act which takes one to the PS Act in order to define the
. The correct definition of
as far as the
WHS Act is concerned is the definition in s 4 of the AI Act.
PS Act does not deal with ministerial responsibility over an act. Ministerial
responsibility as regards the WHS Act is contained
within the act itself. The
act deals with the administration of the act, the valid exercise of powers under
the act, and the question
as to whether a lawful prosecution has been laid under
that act. These questions or issues are not answered by examining the employment
relationship that exists between the Minister and the department. It is the
legal consequences of the Regulator’s exercise
of powers and not
departmental practical matters that these proceedings are concerned with.
Crown appears to be saying that the Minister who supervises a department of
employees equates to sufficient ministerial oversight
over the Regulator and
exercise of the Regulator’s powers under the WHS Act. This ignores the
words “under the Minister.”
It was Parliament’s clear
intention that it wished there to be correct ministerial responsibility over the
administration of
Crown in contending that the Minister for Industrial Relations had oversight
over s 152(a) and the Attorney-General had oversight
through departmental
supervision over other parts of the Act, seems to advance an argument that the
in the WHS Act means more than one minister. This must be
wrong as the WHS Act does not refer to two ministers. Only one minister
committed to the Act. When the error was discovered the Attorney-General was
committed to the Act.
canon of construction, namely that a word used consistently in legislation
should be given the same meaning is relevant. The WHS
Act is in its infancy.
There is not a long history of amendments, operations or additions. The word
is clear and unambiguous and means the minister committed to the
act with oversight of the act.
Crown’s argument is wrong that s 28 of the PS Act applies to the word
otherwise the WHS Act would be frustrated. The WHS Act is not
frustrated. It is the actions of the Regulator that are invalid. The
concerns legal invalidity.
Consideration/Conclusion
chronology of events and dates are not in dispute.
20 September
2012 Parliament committed through the Governor the Act to the Minister for
Industrial Relations pursuant to s 5 AA Act;
1 January 2013
WHS Act came into force;
1 January 2013
to 30 June 2014 the WHS Act was under the Department of Premier and
1 July 2014
onwards it came under the Attorney-General’s Department;
August 2013 and 30 July 2014 the Regulator undertook an investigation in
relation to the Defendant;
On 5 May 2015 a
single charge was laid against the Defendant which was signed by the Executive
Director of SafeWork SA as the Informant;
On 10 September
2015 the WHS Act was committed to the Attorney-General.
am of the view that the definition of
introduced into the
predecessor legislation (namely the
Occupational Health, Safety and Welfare
in exactly the same terms as appears in the WHS Act at the time
the PS Act was enacted, leads to the conclusion that the construction
is that of a minister proclaimed under s 28 of the PS
Act as the minister responsible for an administrative unit.
SA was a business unit within the Attorney-General’s Department. The
Attorney-General was the minister responsible
for the administrative unit - the
Attorney-General’s Department. The AttorneyGeneral’s Department as
from 1 July 2014
was responsible for the administration of the WHS Act.
Executive Director in her
indicated that at the
time the Information was laid, SafeWork SA was a business unit within the
Attorney-General’s Department
and SafeWork SA employees formed part of the
Attorney-General’s Department. The minister proclaimed with responsibility
the Attorney-General’s Department was the Attorney-General. The
minister to whom the WHS Act was proclaimed to be committed
was the Minister for
Industrial Relations. Annexed to the affidavit were Gazette references
confirming this state of affairs.
Executive Director in her affidavit confirmed that SafeWork SA as a business
unit had responsibility for the administration and
enforcement of the WHS Act.
She confirmed that as Executive Director she reported to the Chief Executive of
the Attorney-General’s
Department and that there were approximately 186
employees working for SafeWork SA who come under the direction of the Executive
the course of cross examination the Executive Director referred to the fact that
she reported to the Minister for Industrial
Relations who also was the
Attorney-General.
is accepted that during the relevant period, the Minister for Industrial
Relations had been committed, by proclamation made by
the Governor, to the
administration of the Act. I accept the position advanced by the Informant that
s 5 of the AA Act commits an
act to a minister who is then responsible to
Parliament for the proper administration of the act so committed but there is
in the AA Act that says once an act is committed that the Minister has
any power of direction or control over the way that the act
is administered. The
Attorney-General was responsible to Parliament for the actions of his Department
and those public servants therein
who were under his
Attorney-General being the Minister proclaimed with responsibility for the
Attorney-General’s Department was able to exercise
control over the
operations of SafeWork SA by giving direction to the Chief Executive of the
Department.
the circumstances that prevailed the Information laid by the
Executive Director was valid.
matter is to be referred into chambers to set a timetable for the future conduct
of the same.
will hear the parties further as to any other orders to be made at this point in
Section 5 AA Act.
Section 240
Amendment (Public Sector Consequential Amendments) Act 2009.
[1998] HCA 71
(1998) 195 CLR 424
at 452 para
P 60 para 4.10.4, p80 para
(1998) 194 CLR 355.
P 388-389 para 91.
McHugh,Gummow, Kirby and Hayne
[1989] HCA 15
(1989) 166 CLR 454.
P 390 para 93.
Section 5 of the AA Act.
Egan v Willis
at p 452, see para 17 herein.
See par 31-33 herein.
Morton v Union Steamship
Co of New Zealand Ltd
[1951] HCA 42
(1951) 83 CLR 402
Exhibit I1 at para 5.
See generally the passages
from B Selway, The
Constitution
of South Australia as referred to in para 30
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (206 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter