URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAOmbFOI/2022/26.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:02:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Department for Environment and Water 2022/00666 [2022] SAOmbFOI 26 (2 June 2022)
Department for Environment and Water 2022/00666 [2022] SAOmbFOI 26 (2 June 2022)
Determination
External review - section 39
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Professor Warren Jones
Department for Environment and Water
Ombudsman reference:
Agency reference:
Determination:
The determination of the agency is varied.
Date of Ombudsman’s determination:
2 June 2022
Issues considered:
Deliberation of Cabinet
Exemption clauses relied upon:
Legislation considered:
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Terms of the original application:
All Departmental Reports, correspondence and briefings related to the
National Trust SA of Ayers House from 1/1/20 to 30/6/21
Application for access
1. By application under the
Freedom of Information Act 1991
) the applicant requested access from the agency
All Departmental Reports, correspondence and briefings related to the
National Trust SA of Ayers House from 1/1/20 to
2. For ease of reference, procedural steps relating to the application and
the external review are set out in the
3. This external review is within the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman as a
relevant review authority under section 39 of the FOI Act.
Provisional
determination
4. I provided my tentative view about the agency’s determination to the
parties, by my provisional determination dated 19 May
2022. I informed the
parties that subject to my receipt and consideration of submissions from the
parties I proposed to vary the
agency’s determination.
5. The agency indicated that it had no further submissions to make.
6. I discussed the scope of clause 1(1)(e) with the applicant and he
indicated his desire to discuss my determination with the current
Minister for
Climate, Environment and Water, the Hon. Susan Close, once it was finalised.
7. The applicant otherwise advised that he had no further substantive
submissions to make with regard to the reasons for my determination.
8. Accordingly, my reasons are the same as those expressed in my provisional
determination.
Relevant law
9. A person has a legally enforceable right to be given access to an
agency’s documents in accordance with the FOI
10. The FOI Act provides that upon receipt of an access application, an
agency may make a determination to refuse access where the
documents are
‘exempt’. Schedule 1 lists various exemption clauses which may be
claimed by an agency as a basis for refusing
access. The following clauses are
relevant to this external review:
(1) A document is an
exempt document—
(a) if it is a document
that has been specifically prepared for submission to Cabinet (whether or not it
has been so submitted);
(b) if it is a
preliminary draft of a document referred to in
paragraph (a)
(c) if it is a document that is a copy of or part of, or contains an extract
from, a document referred to in
paragraph (a)
(e) if it contains matter the disclosure of which would disclose information
concerning any deliberation or decision of Cabinet;
(f) if it is a briefing paper specifically prepared for the use of a
Minister in relation to a matter submitted, or proposed to be
submitted to
4—Documents affecting law enforcement and
public safety
(2) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter the disclosure of
(a) could reasonably be expected—
(i) prejudice the investigation of any contravention or possible contravention
of the law (including any revenue law) whether generally
or in a particular
(ii) to enable the existence or identity of any confidential source of
information, in relation to the enforcement or administration
of the law, to be
ascertained; or
(iii) to prejudice the effectiveness of any lawful method or procedure for
preventing, detecting, investigating or dealing with any
contravention or
possible contravention of the law (including any revenue law); or
(iv) to prejudice the maintenance or enforcement of any lawful method or
procedure for protecting public safety; or
(v) endanger the security of any building, structure or vehicle; or
(vi) prejudice any system or procedure for the protection of persons or
property; and
(b) would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest.
7—Documents affecting business affairs
(1) A document is an exempt document—
(a) if it contains matter the disclosure of which would disclose trade secrets
of any agency or any other person; or
(b) if it contains
(i) consisting of information (other than trade secrets) that has a commercial
value to any agency or any other person; and
(ii) the disclosure of which—
(A) could reasonably be expected to destroy or diminish the commercial value
of the information; and
(B) would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest; or
(c) if it contains matter—
(i) consisting of information (other than trade secrets or information referred
paragraph (b)
concerning the business, professional, commercial or financial affairs of any
agency or any other person; and
(ii) the disclosure of which—
(A) could reasonably be expected to have an adverse effect on those affairs
or to prejudice the future supply of such information
to the Government or to an
agency; and
(B) would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest.
9—Internal working documents
(1) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter—
(a) that relates to—
(i) any opinion, advice or recommendation that has been obtained, prepared
or recorded; or
(ii) any consultation or deliberation that has taken place,
in the course of, or for the purpose of, the decision-making functions of the
Government, a Minister or an agency; and
(b) the disclosure of which would, on balance, be contrary to the public
(2) A document is not an exempt document by virtue of this clause if it
merely consists of—
(a) matter that appears in an agency's policy document; or
(b) factual or statistical material.
0—Documents subject to legal
professional privilege
(1) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter that would be
privileged from production in legal proceedings on the ground
professional privilege.
(2) A document is not an exempt document by virtue of this clause merely
because it contains matter that appears in an agency’s
13—Documents containing confidential material
(1) A document is an
exempt document—
(a) if it contains matter the disclosure of which would found an action for
breach of confidence; or
(b) if it contains matter obtained in confidence the disclosure of
(i) might reasonably be expected to prejudice the future supply of such
information to the Government or to an agency; and
(ii) would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest.
17 — Documents subject to contempt
(1) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter the public
disclosure of which would, but for any immunity of the Crown—
(a) constitute contempt of court; or
(b) contravene any order or direction of a person or body having power to
receive evidence on oath; or
(c) infringe the privilege of Parliament.
11. Under section 48, the onus is on the agency to justify its determination
‘in any proceedings’. This includes the external
12. Section 39(11) provides that the Ombudsman may confirm, vary or reverse
the agency’s determination in an external review,
based on the
circumstances existing at the time of review.
Documents in
13. The agency identified 80 documents within the scope of the application.
14. The agency failed to determine the application for access and application
for internal review within the statutory timeframe and
was deemed to have
determined to refuse access to all documents found within scope.
15. The agency has provided submissions to my Office indicating its views
that the majority of documents found within scope are exempt
in part and in
16. In submitting that documents are exempt in part and in full, the agency
has relied upon clauses 1(1)(a), (b), (e), (f), 4(2)(a)(v),
7(1)(b), 9(1),
10(1), 13(1)(b), 15(a), 17(c).
17. The agency also submits that several documents contain out of scope
Issues in this review
18. Having regard to the agency’s submissions and the exemption clauses
provided in Schedule 1 of the FOI Act, it is for me
to determine whether to
confirm, vary or reverse the agency’s determination in regard to the
documents in issue in this external
Consideration
Out of Scope Material
19. The agency submits that several documents contain material, or possibly
contain material, which is out of scope and indicated
its view that the out of
scope material should be redacted and that the documents can be
‘partially’ released. No exemption
clauses have been claimed over
the material.
20. I disagree with the approach taken by the agency and reject its
submission that a document can contain material which is out of
scope and should
be redacted on only that basis.
21. In reaching this view I have given consideration to the following
observation by Justice Hughes in the matter of
State of South Australia
(Department of the Premier and Cabinet v Seven Network (Operations)
Where an agency has identified that it holds a document of which only part
falls within the scope of a request for documents under
the FOI Act –
decision-maker permitted to treat only part or parts that fall within the scope
of the request as constituting the subject of
a determination to grant or refuse
access under the FOI Act;
Answer: No.
withholding of part of a document identified by an agency as not falling within
the scope of a request a refusal to give access
for the purposes of section 19
or 20 of the FOI Act;
Answer: Yes.
Ombudsman have jurisdiction to review, vary or depart from an agency’s
identification of what part or parts fall within
the scope of the request for
the purposes of a determination to grant or refuse access under the FOI
22. Having regard to Justice Hughes’ observations, an agency is not
permitted to treat only a part or parts of a document as
falling within the
scope of a request, and I have jurisdiction to confirm, vary or reverse the
agency’s determination to refuse
access to the material in documents that
the agency claims is out of scope.
23. However, I note that the agency has marked several documents with the
caveat ‘if not exempt, remove out of scope information’,
exemption being marked as clause 1(1)(e).
24. Accordingly I will consider the application of clause 1(1)(e) to the
exempt material.
Clause 1 – Cabinet documents
25. The agency submits that documents 5, 7, 9, 10, 15 - 17, 19, 20 - 22, 24 -
26, 33, 34, 36 - 39, 42 - 45 and 79 are exempt in part
and in full pursuant to
clause 1(1)(e).
26. A document is exempt pursuant to clause 1(1)(e) if it contains matter the
disclosure of which would disclose information concerning
any deliberation or
decision of Cabinet.
27. The South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (
Department of the Premier and Cabinet v Dan van Holst Pellekaan
van Holst Pellekaan
considered the test to be applied when considering whether a document is exempt
pursuant to clause 1(1)(e).
28. Executive Member Stevens considered that clause 1(1)(e) ‘is broader
than the equivalent provisions currently existing in
other Australian
‘information concerning any’ which
do not appear in other
legislation;
In other jurisdictions, the test is whether disclosure will
disclose the deliberations or decisions”
(of Cabinet). Case
law in those jurisdictions must be understood accordingly. Clause 1(1)(e) poses
a broader test. It is whether
disclosure will disclose ”
information
concerning any deliberation or decision of Cabinet
O’Connor v Leaw Pty Ltd
(1993) 42 NSWLR 285
at page 303, Rolfe JH
‘Concerning’ has been defined as ‘regarding’,
‘touching’, ‘in reference or relation to’
‘about’. It is, accordingly, a word of wide
van Holst Pellekaan
, Executive Member Stevens considered that
there were two questions to be addressed in the application of clause
1. Has there been a relevant deliberation or decision of
2. If so, do the documents contain matter the disclosure of which would
disclose information concerning that deliberation or
30. There have been references throughout the documents that evidence the
existence of a ‘Cabinet Note’ and a directive
contained in that
note. The specific directive appears to have been issued prior to the creation
of the documents and appears to
not have been found within the timeframe of the
31. Most relevantly, document 26 contains a subsequent submission by the then
Minister for Environment and Water, the Hon. David Speirs,
which was formally
noted by Cabinet on 2 November 2020.
32. The formal act of ‘noting’, where Cabinet as a collective
decision-making body has received and acknowledged information,
has been held to
constitute a decision of Cabinet.
33. I am satisfied that the requirements for the first limb of the test set
van Holst Pellekaan
have been met. There has been a relevant
decision of Cabinet.
34. The second limb of the test, that clause 1(1)(e) applies if the document
contains matter the disclosure of which would disclose
information
that decision, is one of substantial scope.
35. I have given consideration to a decision of SACAT in the matter of
Department of Treasury and Finance v Stephen Mullighan
36. In the decision of
, Justice Hughes elaborated further on
the reasons given by Executive Member Stevens in
van Holst Pellekaan
37. The following observations in
are of particular
relevance to this matter:
The information in the document under consideration for release must
a deliberation or decision of Cabinet
88. The information referred to in clause 1(1)(e) and to which the
decision-maker must turn his or her mind, must
deliberation or decision (or several).
89. Looking to the words of the provision, there is no requirement of any
sufficiency of relationship between the information and
a deliberation or
decision. There is no constraint on the proximity of the relationship between
the information in the document proposed
for release and the Cabinet
deliberation or decision. It need not “shape” the deliberation or
90. Proximity is not a relevant criterion.
91. Again, from a plain reading of the words of the provision, there is no
qualitative aspect of the exemption with respect to the
value of the information
disclosed. It is irrelevant that the disclosure may provide minimal illumination
of the deliberation or
92. The document need not disclose a deliberation or decision on its face but
need only contain information which if disclosed, would
have the effect that a
deliberation or decision is revealed. That effect may be achieved by the
disclosure of the document without
reference to other information but there is
no basis to confine it so. If the effect is achieved by reference to other
information,
the document will nevertheless be exempt.
38. Further, I note that in
van Holst Pellekaan
, Executive Member
Stevens held that when establishing that a connection exists between a document
and a deliberation or decision
of Cabinet, it does not matter whether the
applicant possesses the information which would allow the connection to be
established;
the relevant question is whether the decision maker considering the
matter can establish that the connection exists based on the
evidence before
39. In light of the above observations by Justice Hughes and Executive Member
Stevens, it is clear that the potential scope of clause
1(1)(e) is, to put
plainly, immense.
40. The Cabinet submission contained in document 26 sets out four
recommendations for Cabinet to note. On my reading of the documents
and having regard to the observations in
, there is room for
suggestion that all of the information that the agency has claimed to be exempt
throughout the 80 documents
those four recommendations.
41. This would not merely be limited to the information claimed to be exempt
pursuant to clause 1(1)(e), and includes information
in documents 5, 7 - 10, 14
- 26, 28 - 34, 36 - 40, 42 - 47, 56 - 59, 61 - 66, 72, 73, 75, 76, and 78 -
42. As Cabinet formally acknowledged those four recommendations, it would
then follow that if the information in issue concerns those
recommendations, the
information would also concern a decision of Cabinet, and the deliberation of
Cabinet in making that decision
to merely note the submissions.
43. I observe that throughout the documents, a constant thread has been
created by the agency that connects the documents to the Minister’s
submission that was formally noted by Cabinet.
44. There is also reference in the documents that the matter under discussion
is highly sensitive and requires the protection of Cabinet
confidentiality.
Document 20 in particular specifies that the information in issue will be
connected to a Cabinet submission that
would be lodged for noting at a future
date. I am satisfied that this did later occur.
45. Whether or not all of the information could be said to concern that
deliberation and decision of Cabinet depends on how far the
scope of clause
1(1)(e) should be read.
46. I note that in a later decision of SACAT in the matter of
Adelaide Local Health Network v Picton
Hughes observed that the ‘outer limits’ of the class of documents
that would be captured under a broad interpretation
of clause 1(1)(e) is a
matter that has yet to be
determined.
47. Having regard to the broad wording of clause 1(1)(e) and the existing
authority, and in the absence of a clear delineation of
where the outer bounds
of clause 1(1)(e) lies, I find myself in a position where I have to conclude
that all of the information in
issue concerns a deliberation or decision of
Cabinet, even if the consequence of such a conclusion is potentially an absurd
48. I acknowledge that one limit to the application of clause 1(1)(e) is that
there is a requirement that a ‘disclosure’
must occur.
49. In the matter of
the following was observed:
Clause 1(1)(e) affords exempt status to documents which, if released, would
disclose certain information. ‘Disclosure’
in this context means a
revelation for the first time. However, this is not to be understood to
refer to the document itself but
to the information. If the information, though
not necessarily the document, is within the public domain, to that extent
of the document containing the information may not constitute a
disclosure as there may not be a revelation. Whether there is or
not will depend
on other information in the document and whether the release of the document
itself amounts to information that has
not been disclosed. In other words, the
existence of the document may itself constitute information concerning a
deliberation or
decision of
50. Having regard to the above, I note that the ultimate outcome of the
deliberation and decision of Cabinet in this matter, as it
relates to Ayers
House and the National Trust, has been heavily publicised. However whilst
accepting that the final outcome of the
Cabinet deliberation and decision is
publicly known, I consider that the information in issue, that is all of the
internal communications that have been marked for exemption which
also includes business information related to third parties, has
publicly disclosed.
51. In light of, it is my view that all of the information marked for
exemption by the agency in documents 5, 7 - 10, 14 - 26, 28
- 34, 36 - 40, 42 -
47, 56 - 59, 61 - 66, 72, 73, 75, 76, and 78 – 80 is covered by clause
52. I acknowledge that the outcome of this conclusion will likely be
unsatisfactory to the applicant, particularly noting the delay
in the agency
handling his application for access.
53. I advise that if the applicant is aggrieved by my conclusion, he may
appeal it with SACAT, and perhaps more guidance may be provided
on how clause
1(1)(e) should be delineated.
54. However in saying this, I consider it appropriate to state clearly that
any disquiet that I have expressed regarding the operation
of clause 1(1)(e) is
not directed at the decisions of SACAT or its members, even if I consider that
some further guidance from the
Tribunal would be beneficial.
55. I note that SACAT is bound, as am I, to follow the words of the
legislation as it exists.
56. The circumstances of this matter, to my mind, have demonstrated that
there are significant issues with the construction of clause
1(1)(e) and how
broadly the inclusion of the word ‘concerning’ has expanded the
scope of its operation.
57. I recognise that there are two other jurisdictions in Australia that have
an equivalent exemption to clause 1(1)(e) where information
that simply
‘concerns’ or is ‘about’ a deliberation or decision of
Cabinet will be exempt.
58. However, the inclusion of the word ‘concerning’ or
‘about’ in those two jurisdictions and in this State
do not appear
to be in line with the majority of Australian jurisdictions. The equivalent
provisions to clause 1(1)(e) in other jurisdictions
do not include the word
‘concerning’, or a similar term, and as such the exemptions appear
to be more limited to information
that reveals a deliberation or decision of
Cabinet itself, as is the case in the equivalent FOI Acts of the
Commonwealth
Queensland,
59. As an aside, I also note that the majority of other jurisdictions extend
Cabinet confidentiality to a period of 10 years, which
is in contrast to the FOI
Act which by operation of clause 1(2)(b) extends Cabinet confidentiality to
documents up to 20 years of
60. I consider that the breadth of the exemption contained in clause 1(1)(e),
and the success at which the agency has woven a tenuous
thread of a Cabinet
deliberation and decision through its internal discussions in order to attract
the confidentiality of Cabinet
to sit at odds with the underlying principles of
the FOI Act.
61. Professor John McMillan, former Australian Information Commissioner and
former Commonwealth Ombudsman, observed in an article
published in the
Australian Journal of Administrative Law that Cabinet exemptions ‘can
easily be invoked by putting documents
on a trolley and walking it into the
Cabinet room’.
62. Whilst Professor McMillan’s comment may be exaggerated and not
completely accurate, particularly with regard to the Commonwealth
consider that what has occurred in the circumstances of this matter is only
slightly removed from what Professor McMillan
suggested is possible.
63. The objects of the FOI Act provide that the purpose of the Act is to
promote openness in government and accountability of Ministers,
and to further
the good government of the State. One of the ways this is achieved is by
allowing the public to more effectively participate
in government
decision-making, and to ensure that there is a suitable level of transparency
over the actions of government agencies.
64. This is however balanced against such restrictions that are consistent
with the public interest and preserving personal privacy.
65. It is apparent that the agency has sought to keep its communications
confidential, and to shield its internal deliberations from
public scrutiny.
Whether the agency sought to do this by deliberately weaving a thread of Cabinet
confidentiality throughout the
discussions is not clear, however the consistent
reference to the Cabinet submission throughout the documents has given rise to
unfortunate outcome that all of the documents at issue can be found to fall
under the clause 1(1)(e) exemption, irrespective of their
actual connection to
the matter. I consider that a situation where material entirely superfluous to a
Cabinet deliberation could
be exempt under clause 1(1)(e) simply because
disclosure could be said to disclose ‘information concerning’ a
deliberation, however slight and contrived by an agency that may be, is
utterly unsatisfactory and at odds with the principles and
objects of the FOI
66. However, based on the legislation as it exists, and having regard to the
existing authority that has clearly indicated how far-reaching
clause 1(1)(e) is
to be interpreted, I consider that I am bound to conclude the information marked
for exemption throughout the documents
is exempt pursuant to clause (1)(e).
67. As I have concluded that the information marked for exemption by the
agency is exempt pursuant to clause 1(1)(e), I do not consider
it necessary to
turn my mind to the potential application of the other clauses the agency has
68. Whilst I propose to uphold the agency’s submissions, and noting
that I have expanded upon the agency’s reliance of
clause 1(1)(e), my
determination is not to be taken as an endorsement of how far the
confidentiality of Cabinet has been extended
to the information in issue.
Determination
69. In light of my views above, I vary the agency’s determination to
the effect that documents 5, 7 - 10, 14 - 26, 28 - 34,
36 - 40, 42 - 47, 56 -
59, 61 - 66, 72, 73, 75, 76, and 78 – 80 are exempt in part and in full
pursuant to clause 1(1)(e).
Wayne Lines
2 June 2022
19 July 2021
The agency received the FOI application dated 19 July 2021.
18 July 2021
The agency failed to determine the application within the 30 day period
required by the FOI Act,
deemed to have refused access to the
22 December 2021
The agency received the internal review application dated 13 December
6 January 2021
The agency failed to determine the application within the statutory time
frame, and is taken to have confirmed the original
determination.
4 February 2022
The Ombudsman received the applicant’s request for external review
dated 4 February 2022.
9 February 2022
The Ombudsman advised the agency of the external review and requested
submissions and documentation.
18 March 2022
The agency provided the Ombudsman with its submissions and
documentation.
19 May 2022
The Ombudsman issued his provisional determination and invited submissions
from the parties.
Freedom of Information Act
section 12.
State of South Australia
(Department of the Premier and Cabinet v Seven Network (Operations) Ltd
[2021] SACAT 60.
State of South Australia
(Department of the Premier and Cabinet v Seven Network (Operations) Ltd
[2021] SACAT 60
Department of the Premier
and Cabinet v Dan van Holst Pellekaan
[2018] SACAT 56.
Department of the Premier
and Cabinet v Dan van Holst Pellekaan
[2018] SACAT 56
Department of the Premier
and Cabinet v Dan van Holst Pellekaan
[2018] SACAT 56
Department of the Premier
and Cabinet v Dan van Holst Pellekaan
[2018] SACAT 56
Department of Treasury and
Finance v Stephen Mullighan
[2021] SACAT 28
Central Adelaide
Local Health Network v Picton
[2021] SACAT 85
Department of Treasury and
Finance v Stephen Mullighan
[2021] SACAT 28.
Department of Treasury
and Finance v Stephen Mullighan
[2021] SACAT 28
Department of the
Premier and Cabinet v Dan van Holst Pellekaan
[2018] SACAT 56
Central Adelaide Local
Health Network v Picton
[2021] SACAT 85.
Central Adelaide Local
Health Network v Picton
[2021] SACAT 85
Department of Treasury
and Finance v Stephen Mullighan
[2021] SACAT 28
Information Act 2002
section 45(1)(v)
Government Information (Public Access) Act 2009
(NSW), clause 2(1)(d) and (e) of Schedule 1.
Freedom of Information
section 34(3).
Freedom of Information
(WA), clause 1(1) of Schedule 1.
Right to Information Act
(Qld), clause 2(1)(b) of Schedule 3.
Freedom of Information
section 28(1)(d).
Freedom of Information
(ACT), clause 1.6(1)(d) of Schedule 1
Right to Information Act
section 26(1)(d).
Professor John McMillan,
‘Transparent Government – Are We Travelling Well?’
AJ Admin L 259
Freedom of Information
section 14(2).
Freedom of Information
section 19(2).
Freedom of Information
section 29(5).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (344 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter