URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCAT/2001/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:08:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Field v Local Government Association of South Australia (City of Brighton) [2001] SAWCAT 1 (8 November 2001)
Field v Local Government Association of South Australia (City of
[2001] SAWCAT 1
WORKERS COMPENSATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL (SA)
FIELD, Kevin Bruce
LOCAL GOVERNMENT ASSOCIATION OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA (City of Brighton)
HEARING DATES:
19 July 2001
JUDGMENT OF:
Her Honour Deputy President Judge HW Parsons
DELIVERED ON:
8 November 2001
CATCHWORDS:
Appeal - Discontinuance of weekly payments of income maintenance on the
basis of return to work - Whether s 36 notice invalid due
to abuse of process -
Whether full time performance of suitable alternative duties evidence of a
'return to work' - Whether date
of discontinuance of weekly payments can be
retrospective - Decision of Review Officer confirmed - Appeal dismissed - S 36
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Minh Ty Lee v Inghams Enterprises Pty Ltd (
1998) SAWCT 100
Laudonia v WorkCover Corporation/NZI Workers Compensation (SA) Ltd (MDI
Concrete Constructions)
Wiechmann v Lovering and WorkCover Corporation
(1992) 59 SASR 203
Philmac v Asti
(1980) 26 SASR 213
Simpson Ltd v Piwinski
Walker Australia Pty Ltd v Kadziela
Sowinski v Walker Australia Pty Ltd
[2001] SAWCT 70
State of South Australia v Day
Judgment No
[2000] SASC 451
distinguished
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr MW Saies
Respondent: Mr SDG Apps
Solicitors:
Applicant: Lieschke and Weatherill
Respondent: Fountain Bonig
1 This is an appeal against the decision of a Review Officer dated 6 August
1999 in which the issue was whether the worker, Kevin
Field, had returned to
work with his employer, the Corporation of the City of Brighton. The decision
of the exempt employer, the
Local Government Association of South Australia
("the exempt employer"), to discontinue the worker's weekly payments of income
maintenance
on the basis of a return to work, was confirmed.
2 The lengthy history of this appeal is that by
Notice dated 2 June 1995
the exempt employer identified injuries to the worker's lower back on
29 April 1992, 21 July 1992 and 22
December 1992, and asserted that
following periods of total and partial incapacity for work, the worker had
returned to full time
alternative duties. The Notice asserted that the worker
had continued to perform alternative duties on a full time basis from 21
December 1994 and gave notice that his weekly payments of income maintenance
had been discontinued as of 21 December 1994.
3 The worker issued an Application for Review on 19 June 1995 in which he
disputed the determination on the basis that he continued
to be incapacitated
for work. As the worker's continued incapacity for work was not in dispute at
the relevant time, his dissatisfaction
with the determination has since been
clarified by his legal advisers. The first point taken was that the Notice was
invalid, and
the second point taken was that there had been no return to work
within the meaning of
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
("the Act"). Subsequent review and appeal proceedings have proceeded on
the basis that, as at the date of the Notice, 2 June 1995,
the worker had a
partial incapacity for work and in these proceedings Mr Saies, counsel for the
worker, said that the clerical duties
made available to the worker and referred
to in the Notice were suitable having regard to his disabilities
4 The validity of the Notice was the subject of a preliminary determination by
a Review Officer on 1 March 1996 and a decision of
the Tribunal, on appeal,
dated 9 July 1996 (A96/1996). The decision of the Tribunal was that the Notice
was valid notwithstanding
that it purported to discontinue weekly payments from
a date earlier than the date of the Notice.
5 The second issue as to whether there had been a return to work was then heard
by another Review Officer who concluded the hearing
on 11 September 1997
just before his tenure as a Review Officer expired, without notice to the
parties and without hearing all the
evidence that the exempt employer wished to
call. An appeal against the Review Officer's decision was upheld on 18 November
on the basis of a denial of natural justice, and the Application for
Review was remitted to the only remaining Review Officer for
hearing. That
hearing commenced in May 1998 and did not conclude until July 1999. The Review
Officer's decision was delivered on
6 August 1999. The subsequent Notice of
Appeal was filed on 3 September 1999. Thereafter there were several attempts to
matter listed before it was ultimately heard in the Tribunal on 19
6 At the commencement of the appeal I gave leave to the appellant to amend the
Grounds of Appeal to include an assertion that the
Review Officer erred in law
in failing to find that the determination was invalid as an abuse of process
because it purported to
have retrospective effect over a period of 163 days.
7 In putting his submission on this ground, Mr Saies sought to draw a
distinction between the earlier decision of a single Member
of the Tribunal as
to the validity of the Notice (A96/1996) which he said went to the assertions
on the face of the Notice, and this
issue which he said went to the
of the decision-making process. Mr Saies accepted that a Notice does
if it is served after the worker has returned to work.
The point sought to be made by Mr Saies was that, if the Notice was dated
1995, it must follow that the decision to discontinue was made at that time,
and if that was so, there was no basis to back-date
the cessation of weekly
payments to December 1994. It was said that this back-dating undermined the
process by which
is invoked (tr 5).
8 With respect this argument confuses two potentially separate matters, the
decision of the employer to discontinue weekly payments,
and the giving of
notice of that decision. Depending on the view taken of certain of the Review
Officer's findings he too may have
melded these two concepts. Notwithstanding
the earlier binding decision of the learned Deputy President that the notice of
discontinuance
was not invalidated because it purported to discontinue weekly
payments at a date prior to that of the Notice, the Review Officer
that it was wrong for the Notice to be issued in June 1995 and "deemed to have
taken effect in December 1994". He stated
that "A decision cannot take effect
before it is made" and he therefore said, "I have taken the date of the issue
to be the date
of implementation" (Supp AB 31). This resulted in specific
* That the Notice issued by the exempt employer on 2 June 1995 was valid and
consistent with the Act, but could only be operative
from the date of issue and
not a date prior to a decision being made.
* That the operative date can be no later than the date on which the decision
was made which was 2 June 1995.
It is unclear whether these are conclusion of law or fact. If the Review
Officer meant to convey that, as a matter of law, the date
of discontinuance
could be no earlier than the date of the Notice, then that was wrong, and Mr
Saies' argument that the Notice is,
as a result, invalidated, cannot
9 Notice of a decision to discontinue weekly payments upon a return to work
must be given "as soon as practicable after the decision
is made (but not
necessarily before it takes effect)"
(s 36(3a)).
The decision to discontinue
weekly payments, in this case, was asserted as 21 December 1994, from which
date it was said that the
worker had returned to work because he had "continued
to perform alternative duties on a full-time basis". (AB 3)
10 The recent
of Gilchrist DP in
Minh Ty Lee v Inghams
Enterprises Pty Ltd (
1998) SAWCT 100
confirms the position when notice of
discontinuance is given at a date later than the date on which the decision to
discontinue is
made. Gilchrist DP made reference to the discontinuance of
weekly payments following a return to work. He said "The right to effect
discontinuance was not contingent upon the giving of a notice. The right
crystallised upon the return to work". As to the timing
of a Notice pursuant to
His Honour also referred to an earlier decision of the Tribunal in
Laudonia v WorkCover Corporation/NZI Workers Compensation (SA) Ltd (MDI
Concrete Constructions)
(JD78/1998) and adopted the comments there about
the consequences of a defect in a Notice subsequently issued for a reduction of
payments. This is particularly relevant here where six months had
elapsed between the decision to discontinue and the giving of the
Notice. His
Honour said:-
"... it is my view that a defect or a failure to give notice `as soon as
practicable after the decision is made' in respect of a
discontinuance based
upon a return to work, as required by
section 36(3a)
, does not affect the right
that had previously accrued, that enabled the employer to discontinue weekly
payments. It seems to me,
that the critical issue, is whether there has been a
`return to work' for the purposes of the Act."
11 If the Review Officer's conclusion that the date of the decision to
discontinue should be taken to be the date of the Notice
was not one of law but
one of fact, then it is necessary to consider whether there was a sufficient
factual foundation for such a
finding and whether the Review Officer was
entitled to act on that evidence notwithstanding the information stated in the
12 There was evidence before the Review Officer as to the circumstances in
which Notice was issued. In particular, there was a statement
Ms Reynolds, the respondent's Senior Claims Agent, who issued the relevant
Notice. At AB Vol 1 pp 212 - 213 the following passage appears:-
notice was prepared on 2 June 1995, a copy of which is attached
and marked `GLG4'.
In it I said that payments were to be discontinued because Kevin had continued
to perform alternative duties on a full-time basis
since 21 December 1994.
As a result of this I said that it was proposed to discontinue his weekly
payments as at 21 December 1994. For this reason I chose
that date because that
was the date Kevin had come back to work after the facet joint injection.
Kevin had however of course been back at work on his clerical duties for a
number of months before this, having recommenced those
duties the week prior to
the case conference on 30 August."
The inference which may be drawn from this passage is that a decision to
discontinue was made on 2 June 1995 and a date in the past
arbitrarily selected
as the date of a return to work.
13 If the Review Officer wrongly proceeded in drawing such an inference then
that is of no practical significance, because the respondent
has not appealed
that, or any, aspect of the decision. Mr Apps, counsel for the respondent, said
in the course of the submissions,
"As to the date fixed for a return to work,
the respondent has no problem with that date, whether it's 2 June or any other
But as it has been fixed by the Review Officer at that date, we have no
problem with that" (tr 58).
14 However, Mr Saies submitted that the Review Officer had effectively modified
the Notice by finding that the return to work occurred
at a later time than
stated on the Notice. This, he said, was outside the scope of the Review
Officer's hearing. The issue before
the Review Officer was whether the exempt
employer was entitled to discontinue the worker's weekly payments from 21
December 1994
because the worker had returned to work at that time.
Notwithstanding that assertion, as the right to discontinue weekly payments
crystallises upon the return to work, it was within the scope of the Review
Officer's determination to conclude that the return to
work occurred at some
time later than 21 December 1994. Comprehensive evidence was given about the
worker's disability, level of
incapacity, activities at the place of
employment, and rehabilitation and return to work plans from August 1994 until
a period following
2 June 1995. Throughout the review hearing it was in the
contemplation of the parties and the Review Officer that all of this evidence
challenged decision. The Review Officer did not step outside
the question which
gave rise to the review in considering this material as part of making a fresh
determination of the disputed determination
Wiechmann v Lovering and
WorkCover Corporation
(1992) 59 SASR 203.
15 On the critical issue whether there had been a return to work the Review
Officer made the following findings: that the worker
was the subject of a
series of successive rehabilitation and return to work plans from
24 August 1994 to 1 June 1995. Pursuant to
each of those plans the worker
performed full time clerical duties in lieu of his pre-injury duties as a
garbage runner. Throughout
this period the worker was paid his full time
equivalent pre-employment wages. The nature of the clerical duties varied
upon the worker's physical restrictions, the availability of
supervision, the location of available duties, and the worker's familiarity
with the duties. During this time the worker claimed one day of incapacity in
respect of which he made a claim for compensation.
He took annual leave by
arrangement with his employer. He was able to function as a full time member of
the workforce within his
restrictions and the duties provided to him were
appropriate.
16 The Review Officer concluded that:-
"... by 2 June 1995 Mr Field was re-employed on full time duties as a permanent
member of the workforce albeit on alternative duties
in accordance with his
ability and his restrictions, that he continued to be incapacitated by his
compensable disability, that he
was still entitled to and was actively involved
in rehabilitation and return to work programmes and that he was in receipt of
pre-injury full time employment salary."
He therefore concluded that the respondent had satisfied the onus required
pursuant to
of the Act.
17 In reaching that conclusion the test which the Review Officer applied as to
whether there had been a "return to work" was that
(1980) 26 SASR 213
- 228 in relation to the meaning of that phrase in
of the now repealed
Workers Compensation Act 1971
decisions of the Workers Compensation Appeal Tribunal and the Workers
Compensation Tribunal have confirmed the continuing
relevance of that test.
Simpson Ltd v Piwinski
Walker Australia Pty Ltd v
Minh Ty Lee v Inghams Enterprises Pty Ltd
Sowinski v Walker Australia Pty Ltd
[2001] SAWCT 70).
18 The question which the Review Officer asked himself was whether the evidence
established that the worker was a settled and established
member of the wage
earning workforce. That was a question of fact and degree. Mr Saies did not
disagree with the test applied by
the Review Officer (tr 26) but submitted that
it had been wrongly applied in certain important respects.
19 Mr Saies placed particular significance on the finding that the worker
performed clerical duties in accordance with a series
of Rehabilitation and
the findings that the worker
was subject to such plans and that he had returned
to work. Mr Saies submitted that these two concepts are inconsistent. He
that view from s 28(2)(b) of the Act which obliges the exempt employer
to establish a Rehabilitation and Return to Work Plan for
a worker in receipt
of weekly payments who is likely to be incapacitated for more than three months
(but has some prospect of returning
to work). He relied particularly on the
passage in brackets stating that the very nature of a Return to Work Plan is
that the worker
is not yet back at work but is moving towards that ultimate
goal. Such a limited view of a Return to Work Plan is not justified.
be established for any incapacitated worker (s 28(1)). A Plan can be as
flexible in terms of hours and duties as the circumstances
require. This means
that sometimes the performance of work pursuant to the Plan will not constitute
a return to work but in other
circumstances it may do so. This position was
confirmed recently in
State of South Australia v Day
(Judgment no
[2000] SASC 451)
at par 32 of the judgment where Bleby J with whom Prior and LanderJJ
concurred that "There is no reason why a rehabilitation and
should not include, if appropriate, the fact that a willing employer would
employ a worker subject to rehabilitation
on a contract of employment in a
particular capacity".
20 In a similar vein Mr Saies submitted that the worker had not returned to
work because he was given clerical duties of a supernumerary
nature until May
1995, when he was given a permanent cemetery register position. It was
submitted that to return to work a worker
must be placed in a real position of
value to the employer. The evidence was that the worker performed clerical
duties on a fulltime
basis and that he performed those duties at different
worksites of the employer, namely the Brighton Library, the Brighton Council
Chambers or Alwyndor Nursing Home. The duties at the three locations were
typically clerical involving, filing, photocopying, data
entry, sorting mail,
assembling property files and other project work (Supp AB 77 - 83). There is
evidence that he was supervised
in those duties and expected to be fully
occupied in their performance (Reynolds AB vol 2 at 550).
21 In terms of whether there had been a return to work it does not matter that
the worker was placed in a supernumerary position.
It is sufficient that the
Review Officer found that the worker performed clerical duties on a full time
basis. The findings of the
Review Officer permit the conclusion that in the
performance of the duties the worker was a settled member of the workforce.
21 Mr Saies also submitted that there was no separate contract of employment
established for the worker in his new position. In
this respect he relied upon
State of South Australia v Day
(supra). Ms Day was a teacher employed by
the Department of Children's Services. She was partially incapacitated for work
a time was provided with alternative duties as a Schools Services
Officer ("SSO") pursuant to a Rehabilitation and Return to Work
Plan, and paid
income maintenance calculated on her salary as a teacher, which payments were
reduced to 80 per cent after the first
12 months of her incapacity. Ms Day
issued proceedings in the Industrial Relations Court claiming an underpayment
of wages seeking
the difference between the rate payable to a SSO and the rate
payable to her pursuant to
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act
22 The unanimous decision of the Full Supreme Court was that there was no
evidence that Ms Day was ever engaged as a SSO pursuant
to a contract of
employment. Rather she had performed the SSO work pursuant to a Rehabilitation
and Return to Work Plan. It was also
found that there had been no variation of
any existing contract of employment.
23 By inference, Mr Saies argued that a determination that the worker had
returned to work required a finding that there was a new
contract of employment
in place between the worker and the employer whereby the worker agreed to
perform clerical duties. In my view
(supra) can be distinguished on
its facts. Ms Day was a contract teacher employed on a yearly contract at the
time that she sustained
her compensable disability. At all relevant times when
she was performing work pursuant to the Return to Work Plan there was no
contract of employment in existence. The worker in this instance, on
the other hand, was employed on an indefinite contract at the
time of his
compensable disability. Although the worker might have been relieved of his
obligation to perform work pursuant to his
contract of employment during the
period of his incapacity, upon sufficient recovery, he and the employer were
able to vary the still-existing
contract of employment to permit the
performance of duties other than those for which he was initially engaged. A
variation of that
kind can be inferred from the worker's performance of the
clerical duties and the employer's payment of wages for that work. If,
suggested by Mr Saies, the worker was not paid the correct rate for the
clerical work, he may have a separate remedy pursuant
to the contract of
employment, but that does not influence whether he has returned to work for the
purposes of
24 The worker's relevant time and payment records were considered by the Review
Officer who noted that he was paid at his normal
pre-accident equivalent wages,
a rate higher than his income maintenance. He also noted that throughout the
period from September
1994 to June 1995 the worker worked normal hours, and on
occasions took sick leave or annual leave. The Review Officer said that
accepted that the worker "worked full time, that he occasionally had a sick day
and (like all full time employees) took annual
leave" (Supp AB at 33). Mr Saies
suggested that the taking of annual leave for a sizeable period in January 1995
indicated that the
worker had not returned to work; that the period of leave
was disruptive and interfered with an assessment as to whether he had returned
to work. The view taken by the Review Officer, which was open to him and with
which I agree, is that the taking of annual leave is
very persuasive evidence
that the worker was a settled member of the wage-earning workforce taking
advantage of his entitlements
pursuant to his contract of employment.
25 I would conclude that no error has been demonstrated in the reasoning of the
Review Officer, whose decision is confirmed. I dismiss
the appeal.
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are advised that if a party wishes to appeal against any part of this
decision which is appealable pursuant to s 86(1) of
the Act such appeal must be
filed with the Registrar in accordance with Form 11 within 14 days of the
delivery of this decision and
must be served on all parties.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter