URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCA/2025/124.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
S, B v POLICE [2025] SASCA 124 (30 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Court of Appeal: Criminal)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
S, B v POLICE
[2025] SASCA 124
Judgment of the Court of Appeal
(The Honourable Justice Bleby, the Honourable Justice David and
the Honourable Auxiliary Justice Lovell)
30 October 2025
CRIMINAL LAW - APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - APPEAL AGAINST SENTENCE
CRIMINAL LAW - SENTENCE - RELEVANT FACTORS - TIME SPENT IN CUSTODY AND
QUASI-CUSTODY
Appeal against sentence.
The appellant pleaded guilty in the Youth Court to two counts of aggravated
serious criminal trespass contrary to
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) (“CLCA”), two counts of aggravated
theft contrary to
of the CLCA, one count of interfering with a motor
vehicle contrary to
of the CLCA, one count of failure to answer
question contrary to
s 74AB(2)(a)
Summary Offences Act 1953
and one count of failure to comply with bond obligation contrary to
Young Offenders Act 1993
In respect of this offending, the appellant spent nine hours in police cells,
13 days in custody as well as time on home detention
and electronic monitored
curfew bail.
A single sentence of six-months detention was imposed. The appellant was
ordered to serve three months of the sentence in detention,
and the balance of
the sentence was suspended upon the appellant entering into an obligation for a
period of six-months.
The appellant complains that the sentencing Magistrate erred in not
specifically deducting any credit for time spent in custody, on
bail, or on electronic monitored curfew bail.
Held, by the Court, granting the application for an extension of time and
allowing the appeal:
1. The sentence imposed in the Youth Court is set aside.
2. The matter is remitted to the Youth Court for resentence.
3. The driver’s licence disqualification for a period of 12-months is
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Sentencing Act 2017
Summary Offences Act 1953
s 74AB(2)(a)
Young Offenders Act 1993
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[2016] SASCFC
(2018) 131 SASR 416
Zaidi v The Queen
S, B v POLICE
[2025] SASCA 124
Court of Appeal – Criminal: Bleby, David JJA and Lovell
16 January 2025, the appellant was sentenced in the Youth Court having pleaded
guilty to several serious offences. The sentencing
Magistrate, utilising
Sentencing Act
”), convicted the appellant and after allowing a reduction of 30
percent for pleas of guilty imposed a sentence of six-months
detention. The
sentencing Magistrate ordered that the appellant serve three months of the
sentence in detention and suspended the
balance of the sentence upon the
appellant entering into an Obligation for a period of six-months pursuant of
Sentencing Act
appellant appeals on three grounds. It is only necessary for this Court to
consider Ground 1.2 namely that the sentencing Magistrate
erred in not giving
the appellant credit for time spent in custody, on home detention bail or
electronic monitored curfew bail. For
the reasons that follow, we would allow
the appeal and resentence the appellant.
appellant also seeks an extension of time in which to bring the
The circumstances of the offending
the early hours of 29 September 2024, the appellant, along with four others,
entered a home at Goodwood (Aggravated Serious Criminal
Trespass – Count 1
on the Information)
personal items and a Toyota Prado valued at approximately $70,000 (Aggravated
Theft – Count 3 on the
Information).
To steal the
Toyota Prado, a Mini Cooper had to be moved from the driveway (Interfere with a
Motor Vehicle Without Consent –
Count 2 on the
Information).
During this manoeuvre
the Mini Cooper collided with a parked car.
the same evening, the appellant along with others entered a home at Parkside
(Aggravated Serious Criminal Trespass – Count
Information).
electronic items and two motor vehicles namely a 2023 BMW IX and a 2018 Volvo
wagon (Aggravated Theft – Count 5
Information)
approximately $300,000.
approximately 3:25 am, the police located the BMW travelling at speed along
Diment Road. The vehicle failed to stop for police
and a high-speed chase
ensued. The BMW was later located by police, waterlogged and in a badly damaged
condition. The appellant initially
failed to answer questions as to the identity
of the driver, later admitting he was the driver (Failure to Answer Question
Count 6 on the
Information).
The appellant made
admissions to the offending.
above offending breached a four-month supervised Obligation imposed on the
appellant two weeks prior on 12 September 2024 for
the offences of Aggravated
Theft and Basic Assault (Failure to Comply with Bond Obligation – Count 9
Information).
personal circumstances of the appellant
appellant is an Aboriginal child aged 16 years at the time of sentencing. The
appellant, after his arrest, spent nine hours in
the police cells and 13 days in
custody before being granted home detention bail. The appellant spent 56 days on
and 43 days on electronic monitored curfew bail.
his release on home detention bail and before sentencing, the appellant had
engaged well with his Youth Justice Officer and
completed a number of programs.
Reports tendered before the sentencing Magistrate confirmed this compliance with
conditions. He was also working with an Aboriginal elder as
a mentor. Present in court during the sentencing hearing were his mother
aunt and a Youth Justice worker. Apart from the single breach for a positive
drug test (cannabis), he was compliant with bail
conditions.
appellant has sleep difficulties and his GP suggested that he attend a sleep
study. He was attending a FLO program at school.
He does not have a
driver’s licence. He was living with his mother and siblings and had his
mother and aunt’s support.
appellant wrote an apology to the victims. This was read out in court. His aunt
had helped him to write it due to his lack of
for the appellant at the sentencing hearing submitted that the appellant
didn’t find his time in custody “at
all an enjoyable
experience”. Counsel submitted that the appellant’s performance on
that he responded well to supervision.
The sentencing remarks
sentencing Magistrate described the nature and seriousness of the offending.
sentencing the sentencing Magistrate observed:
[Y]ou have completed
a number of programmes and ... you are hoping to obtain employment either in the
building industry or as a mechanic.
was the only reference to the appellant’s personal circumstances.
The sentencing Magistrate took into account the appellant’s
apology. The sentencing Magistrate then again reminded the appellant about
the serious nature of the offending.
sentencing Magistrate stated:
There will be convictions recorded in
relation to each of the offences. I would have given you, without the discount,
Detention of
nine months. I have discounted that by
to reach a sentence of
Detention of six months. Pursuant to
Sentencing Act
, I impose the one penalty in relation to all counts.
I do not consider it is appropriate to suspend all of the sentence of
Detention. In fact, what I am going to order is that you serve
three months
Detention and that the balance will be suspended upon you entering into an
Obligation for a period of six months, pursuant
section 96(4)
Sentencing Act 2017
pronouncing sentence, the sentencing Magistrate made no specific allowance for
the appellant having served time in custody or
on home detention bail and
electronic monitored curfew bail.
his remarks the sentencing Magistrate stated:
You are entitled to a
30% discount because of your guilty pleas to these charges. I have also taken
into account the fact you had
spent some nine hours in police cells when you
were arrested and there was a period of 13 days in custody before you were
on home detention bail. You spent some 56 days on home detention bail
and 43 days on electronic curfew monitored bail.
sentencing Magistrate did not specify how he took those matters into account. It
is unknown whether he gave the appellant full
credit for the 13 days spent in
custody nor is it known what allowance the sentencing Magistrate made for the
restriction on the
appellant’s liberty for the 56 days on home detention
bail or the 43 days restriction due to the electronic monitored curfew
Submissions
appellant, while acknowledging that the sentencing Magistrate stated in his
remarks that he had taken into account the relevant
times in custody and on
bail, submitted that he did not indicate what credit he in fact gave for those
periods. In particular, the
sentencing Magistrate did not state whether he
gave the appellant full credit for time spent in custody.
appellant accepted that what allowance should be made with regard to the
appellant’s time on home detention bail and electronic
monitored curfew
bail is discretionary. However, the appellant submitted that it was incumbent on
the sentencing Magistrate to specify
what allowance he made. The failure to
specify what allowance he made for these periods of time or how he took them
into account
is an error of the type identified in
House v The
sentencing Magistrate did not reduce the sentence that was later imposed in
light of what was a significant period of time for
a youth of 16 years to spend
in custody and subject to stringent bail conditions.
respondent acknowledged that from the sentencing remarks it is impossible to
know what allowance the sentencing Magistrate made
for any of the periods
discussed. The respondent, correctly in our view, conceded that the sentencing
Magistrate’s remarks
on this issue, other than the general remark that he
had taken them into account, were opaque.
allowance for time spent in custody is framed as a discretion, unless there is
some special or unusual feature of the case,
it is usual practice to provide
full credit on a day-to-day
situation in relation to credit for time spent on home detention bail and
electronic monitored curfew bail is different. In
observed (Nicholson and Parker JJ
is not obliged to make a reduction on account of time spent on home detention
although it is a factor that can be taken into
Judge correctly stated that there is no mathematical formula for taking into
account time on home detention bail nor any authority
which mandates a specific
deduction. Much will depend on the circumstances of the matter.
As was stated in
R v Franceschini
At common law, a sentencing judge in this State has a discretion to allow
credit for time spent on home detention bail and to, in
effect, fix a period by
which the sentence otherwise to be ordered is to be reduced thereby. There is no
obligation on a court to
give any such credit. Further, where some allowance is
made, it inevitably will be significantly less than the total amount of time
spent on home detention bail, but there is no accepted formula. It is akin to a
personal circumstance to be taken into account and
the particular facts of each
case will inform whether or not credit is warranted and the extent of any such
credit that is warranted.
Whilst it is a common practice for a sentencing judge to make an allowance
for a period of home detention and deduct that allowance
from the head sentence
and non-parole period a court does not have to approach the problem in that way.
It can be taken into account
as a personal circumstance of the prisoner to which
the judge gives appropriate weight when arriving at a head sentence and
period. This latter approach may lack transparency.
[Footnotes omitted]
Zaidi v The Queen
, Kelly J observed (Kourakis CJ and Bleby J agreeing)
wide as the discretion to give credit for time spent on home detention is, it
remains a judicial one which must be exercised
reasonably and proportionally.
Secondly, it is also one which attracts the obligation to give reasons.
sentencing Magistrate stated that he had “taken into account” the
relevant periods of time. He did not say how he
took them into account nor did
he say, in relation to time spent on home detention bail and electronic
monitored curfew bail, what
allowance he made. The sentencing remarks, as the
respondent acknowledged, are opaque. This Court is unable to say whether the
Magistrate gave the appellant full credit for his time spent in
custody. Nor is this Court able to say that he exercised the discretion
relation to home detention bail and electronic monitored curfew bail, reasonably
and proportionately. The sentencing process lacked
transparency.
time spent in custody should have been specifically accounted for and in the
circumstances of this case what allowance was to
be made for time spent on home
detention and electronic monitored curfew bail also should have been
would allow this ground of appeal. The appellant is to be
resentenced.
Extension of time
considered the merits of the appeal, it is appropriate to return to the
application for an extension of time. The appellant
was sentenced on 16 January
2025. The notice of appeal was not filed until 12 March 2025. The affidavit of
the appellant’s
solicitor in support of the extension of time sets out his
explanation for the delay. The respondent indicated that it would not
extension of time sought. We would allow the application for an extension of
appellant was granted bail on 14 February 2025 after serving approximately 30
days in custody. It will be important on resentence
for the sentencing Court to
have information on how the appellant responded to his time in custody and
further information on how
he responded to his now bail conditions.
the specialist nature of the Youth Court jurisdiction, and in the unusual
circumstances of this case where the appellant served
part of his sentence
before being granted bail, it is appropriate to remit the matters to the Youth
Court for sentencing before a
different judicial officer.
mandatory driver’s licence disqualification of 12-months is set
was no appeal in relation to the sentence for the offence of breach of bail
(file YCCRM-25-000282). The sentence for that offence
application for an extension of time is granted and the appeal is allowed. The
sentence imposed pursuant to
Sentencing Act
is set aside.
The matters are remitted to the Youth Court for sentencing before a
different judicial officer. The driver’s
licence disqualification for a
period of 12-months is also set aside.
Contrary to
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) (“CLCA”).
Contrary to
Contrary to
Contrary to
Contrary to
Contrary to
s 74AB(2)(a)
Summary Offences Act 1953
Contrary to
Young Offenders Act 1993
The discount applied was in
fact 33.33 percent. Such an allowance was not permitted by the
Sentencing Act
(1936) 55 CLR
131 SASR 416
at [85] (Lovell, Doyle and Hinton JJ).
[2016] SASCFC 54
[2020] SASCFC 93
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (364 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter