URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRC/2020/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kronen v Commercial Motor Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota) [2020] SAIRC 1 (24 April 2020)
Kronen v Commercial Motor Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2020] SAIRC 1
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF SOUTH
KRONEN, Horst
COMMERCIAL MOTOR INDUSTRIES
PTY LTD (t/as CMI Toyota)
Industrial Relations Court of South Australia
Fair Work Act 1994
– Monetary claim
4674 of 2005
HEARING DATE:
29 July 2019
His Honour Senior Judge Dolphin
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Employment relationship between
14 April 1998 and 3 November 2000 – 2005 monetary claim application in
IRCSA seeking unpaid
wages and superannuation entitlements – Federal
industrial award – Claim made pursuant to
Workplace Relations
(Cth) – Claim dismissed – Various appeals – 2008
FCAFC judgment conclusively ends
action – Issue: if s 178 of the WR
Act invoked, superannuation entitlements may be recovered, but only if the
imposition of
a penalty was sought for alleged breaches of the Award –
Various litigation ensued – 2013 application made to IRCSA to
‘reopen’ the 2005 application, that application rejected, two
appeals ensue – 2016 application made to IRCSA to
reopen the 2005
application – Later oral application made to ‘amend’ 2005
application so as to include a cause
of action under s 178 of the WR Act to seek
the imposition of a penalty for alleged breaches of the Award – 2016
application
dismissed – Appeal and remittal of proceedings back to IRCSA
– On remittal issues raised with regards to the
Statutes Amendment (South
Australian Employment Tribunal) Act 2016
(SA), IRCSA dissolved – Held,
IRCSA proceedings had not been transferred to the South Australian Employment
Tribunal therefore
the proceedings were at an end – Appeal to FCAFC
– Held, IRCSA still in existence for the purpose of proceedings brought
before it prior to its dissolution – Proceedings returned to IRCSA to hear
and determine the 2016 application to reopen and
amend the 2005 application so
as to include a cause of action under s 178 of the WR Act to seek the imposition
of a penalty for alleged
breaches of the Award – Applicant argues good
reason exist to reopen 2005 application; injustice, misapprehension of fact and
law; mistake as to jurisdiction; unresolved proceedings – Power of IRCSA
to reopen proceedings in s 174 of
Fair Work Act 1994
(SA) – Power of IRCSA
to amend proceedings in s 166 of FW Act and Rule 30 of the Industrial
Proceedings Rules – Equity,
good conscience and the substantial merits of
the matter s 154 of the FW Act – Discretion to reopen and amend –
of finality to litigation, Anshun estoppel and stale litigation
considered - Delay and prejudice to the respondent considered.
good reason exists to reopen and amend the 2016 application – Excessive
delay and prejudice to the respondent – If
proceedings were allowed in
order to hear and determine the reopened and amended 2005 application, so as to
include a cause of action
under s 178 of the WR Act to seek the imposition of a
penalty for alleged breaches of the Award, such proceedings would be over two
decades after the commencement of the employment relationship – In all of
the circumstances of the case the interests of justice
require that the 2016
application be dismissed.
Kronen v Commercial Motor Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
Kronen v Commercial Motor Industries Pty Ltd (CMI Toyota)
[2008] FCAFC
Kronen v Commercial Motor Industries Pty Ltd (CMI Toyota)
[2009] HCASL 25
Kronen v Commissioner of Taxation
[2009] FMCA
Kronen v Commercial Motor Industries Pty Ltd
[2009] FMCA
Kronen v Commercial Motor Industries Pty Ltd
[2009] HCASL
Kronen v Commissioner of Taxation
[2012] FCA 1463
Commissioner of Taxation
[2013] FCA 416
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2013] SAIRC 51
Commercial Motor Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2014] SAIRC
Kronen v Commercial Motor Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2016] SASCFC 8
Kronen v Commercial Motor Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI
[2016] SAIRC 23
Kronen v Commercial Motor Industries Pty Ltd
(t/as CMI Toyota)
[2017] FCA 33
Kronen v Commercial Motor Industries
Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2017] SAET 156
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (trading as CMI Toyota
[2018] FCAFC 136
Industry-Repair, Services and Retail Award 1976
[1979] FCA 8.
[1936] HCA 40
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Agtrack (NT) Pty Ltd v
[2005] HCA 38
Port of Melbourne Authority v Anshun Pty
[1991] HCA 45
(1981) 147 CLR 589
Tomlinson v Ramsey Food
Processing Pty Ltd
[2015] HCA 28
(2015) 256 CLR 507
South Regional Health Authority v Taylor
(1996) 186 CLR 541
(1996) 139 ALR
Weldon v Neal
[1887] UKLawRpKQB 161
(1887) 19 QBD 394
Richards v Little Company
of Mary Health Care
[2018] SAET 186
Director‑General, New South Wales Department of Community Services
[1997] HCA 14
(1997) 190 CLR 207
Ashby v Slipper (No 2)
(2014) 314 ALR 84
Metwally v University of Wollongong
the Ampthill Peerage
[1977] 1 AC
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: In
Respondent: Mr J Warren
Solicitors:
Applicant: In
Respondent: Lynch Meyer
Kronen has been litigating against the respondent, Commercial Motor Industries
Pty Ltd trading as CMI Toyota for many years.
Such litigation has been conducted
in this court, the South Australian Employment Tribunal, the Supreme Court of
South Australia,
the Federal Magistrates Court, the Federal Court of Australia
and the High Court of Australia. Many judgments have been delivered
single judicial officers and by appeal benches. Mr Kronen’s litigation
returns to this reconstituted Industrial Relations
Court of South Australia
(IRCSA) to determine whether he is entitled to reopen and amend his earlier
proceedings so as to prosecute
a claim for the imposition of a penalty and
superannuation entitlements.
Kronen represented himself in these proceedings, as he has since lodging his
initial application in 2005. He is a capable advocate
and is well familiar with
the practices and procedures of courts. The issues that remain to be determined,
and moreover the reasons
they have thus far eluded determination, are circuitous
and complex. For the purpose of properly setting the scene I shall attempt,
others have done before me, to summarise the history of the matter.
14 April 1998, Mr Kronen was employed as a retail new car sales consultant by
CMI Toyota at their Southside premises. Later he
worked as a Business Manager at
the CMI Toyota West Terrace premises. His employment with CMI Toyota ended on 3
November 2000.
The 2005 application and subsequent proceedings
– 2005-2009
Kronen lodged a monetary claim application in the IRCSA on 11 July 2005 (the
2005 application) alleging that CMI Toyota had failed
to honour its obligations
to him under the
Vehicle Industry – Repair, Services and Retail Award
(the Award). His claim, for the period of his employment with CMI
Toyota, was for unpaid overtime wages in the sum of $59,000.00
superannuation in the sum of $6,000.00: total
$65,000.00.
The 2005 application
was filed using a form applicable to the newly renamed
Fair Work Act 1994
(SA) (FW Act), but did not specify the jurisdiction invoked, although it was
apparent that s 14 – of the FW Act provided jurisdiction
to the IRCSA to
hear and determine monetary claims. Up until 15 May 2005, the FW Act was
previously known as the
Industrial and Employee Relations Act 1994
Award was a federal instrument made at the time by the then Australian
Industrial Relations Commission under the then applicable
federal legislation,
Relations Act 1996
(the WR Act). At the time Mr Kronen made the
2005 application, the WR Act defined the term ‘
court of competent
’ to include the IRCSA and vested the IRCSA with
that time, s 179(1) of the WR Act imposed a 6 year limitation period on claims
for the underpayment of award entitlements. By dint
of that section, Mr
Kronen’s potential claim to underpaid sums could go no further back than
11 July 1999. As such, he lodged
further and better particulars on 29 September
2005 to recalculated and recast his superannuation claim to seek payment of
into an approved superannuation fund on his behalf, or to a third
party on his behalf, so that CMI Toyota could fulfil its obligations
to the Australian Tax Office.
key to Mr Kronen’s litigation on his superannuation claim is found here
– the WR Act at that relevant time allowed
for the recovery of
superannuation entitlements, but only indirectly. Pursuant to s 178, a
claimant needed to have first sought the
imposition of a penalty on an
organisation or person said to have breached the terms of an award. If it
appeared to the court concerned
with the imposition of a penalty that an
employer had underpaid superannuation entitlements, that court then had
order that the employer pay an amount
to or in respect of
that person in order to restore them to their rightful position. The time limit
on proceedings for the imposition and recovery of
a penalty in relation to a
breach of an award under s 178 was not later than 6 years after the commission
of the beach.
distinction was thrown into sharp
by the repeal and
replacement of s 179 (with s 720) which explicitly included payment of
amount to a superannuation fund on behalf of an
That amendment, from
Workplace Relations Amendment (Work Choices) Act 2005
Amending Act) took effect from 27 March 2006; being between the hearing of Mr
Kronen’s 2005 application at first instance
by Industrial Magistrate
Ardlie of the IRCSA on 15-17 February 2006 and the publication of his reasons
for decision on 12 May 2006.
there was nothing in the WR Amending Act applying s 720 of the WR Act
retrospectively, and as Mr Kronen had not sought a penalty
to be imposed upon
CMI Toyota for the breaches he alleged (s 178), the IRCSA therefore had no
application to order the payment of
underpaid superannuation
contributions.
the 2005 application, Ardlie IM proceeded on the basis that, even if the IRCSA
had no jurisdiction to award unpaid superannuation
entitlements, it could
interpret the Award in a manner that was binding on the parties. He found that
CMI Toyota had correctly calculated
Mr Kronen’s superannuation
contributions, as such, by implication, that Mr Kronen had no further
entitlements to superannuation
payments. Importantly, Ardlie IM made no order
reflecting his findings on the superannuation issue. With regards to Mr
claim of unpaid overtime, Ardlie IM also dismissed that aspect of
the 2005 application.
Kronen unsuccessfully appealed Ardlie IM’s decision through the IRCSA and
the Supreme Court of South Australia, until in
2008, he was granted an extension
of time and leave to appeal to the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia
FCAFC held that in the absence of any claim for the imposition of a penalty,
pursuant to s 178, Mr Kronen’s 2005 application
had only invoked the
And, due to the apparent
lacuna in the WR Act at the relevant time, the FCAFC held that s 179 had not
conferred jurisdiction on the
IRCSA with regards to superannuation entitlements
derived from federal
instruments.
FCAFC also found that Ardlie IM had erred in providing his interpretation of the
Award, as the IRCSA could only interpret federal
instruments to the extent
necessary to exercise the jurisdiction conferred upon it by the WR Act. The
general interpretation of federal
instruments was otherwise within the exclusive
remit of the Federal Court of Australia (FCA). The FCAFC held that in the
of a claim for superannuation entitlements properly before it, the IRCSA
was therefore bound to dismiss the claim entirely for want
of jurisdiction.
Having failed to do so, no “decision” had been made by the IRCSA on
the question of superannuation entitlements,
leaving nothing to be appealed
against to the FCAFC. The FCAFC could therefore only determine the component of
the 2005 application
that related to the claim for underpaid overtime; which it
did, dismissing that component of appeal.
Alternative Pathways
– 2009-2013
the decision of the FCAFC, in 2009 Mr Kronen twice applied to the High Court for
special leave to appeal, both his applications
Between those
attempts, he also applied to the IRCSA to have his overtime claim, but not his
superannuation claim, ‘reopened’
under s 174 of the FW Act based on
the equity, good conscience and the substantial merits of the matter
considerations at s 154(1)(a)
of same. That application was dismissed by Ardlie
IM in light of the FCAFC
He also lodged two
applications in the Federal Magistrate’s Court seeking an interpretation
of the Award. Both applications
Kronen’s litigation against CMI Toyota fell fallow for a substantial
period, with no further decisions published between
August 2009 and December
Mr Kronen’s own
chronology of events describes ongoing communications with the Commissioner of
Taxation between August 2009
It is apparent that Mr
Kronen had been in some form of dialogue with the Australian Taxation Office
from at least July 2005 until
That he continued to do so
was not disputed, although it is unclear exactly what communications continued
through to 2012.
Ultimately,
Mr Kronen’s pursuit of his superannuation claim through the Commissioner
of Taxation was unsuccessful. Litigation
ensued against the Commissioner. When
dismissing an appeal on the papers, as having no reasonable prospect of
Justice Mansfield of
the FCA commented in
that it was difficult to understand why the
initial claim for unpaid superannuation entitlements remained without
adjudication and
that there should in principle remain some avenue in which the
claim could be finally
determined.
to the IRCSA – the 2013 application
decision of Mansfield J was delivered on 10 May 2013. On 9 September 2013 Mr
Kronen lodged an application for directions (the
2013 application) in the IRCSA
seeking to have his 2005 application reopened for the reconsideration of certain
2013 application was accepted and filed by the IRCSA Registry and was given the
case number of Mr Kronen’s 2005 application:
case number of these proceedings). The 2013 application was then assigned to
Ardlie IM, who on 10 September 2013 caused
a letter to be sent to Mr Kronen
advising that the IRCSA had no jurisdiction to reopen his matter. The 2013
application was accordingly
rejected and returned under Rule 29 of the then
Industrial Proceedings Rules 2010
(the IP Rules). The IRCSA file was
noted as the application having been struck out.
appeal in the IRCSA against the strike out, Judge Hannon ruled that the decision
to do so had been ‘administrative’
in nature rather than
‘judicial’, and as such no appeal lay against
Although it was not
expressly argued, his Honour did consider the effect of reopening the 2005 claim
to include an application for
the imposition of a penalty under s 178 of the WR
Act, but dismissed the prospect of doing so, considering it to be irretrievably
statute-barred given the strict non-extendable 6 year time
Full Court of the IRCSA agreed with Hannon J’s appeal decision on further
Mr Kronen then appealed
that decision to the Full Court of the Supreme Court of South Australia
There, Chief Justice
Kourakis and Justices Blue and Nicholson partially allowed Mr Kronen’s
appeal, reasoning that Ardlie IM’s
decision to strike out his 2013
application had in fact been judicial in nature, not administrative.
SASCFC held that Mr Kronen had initiated interlocutory proceedings in the IRCSA
that raised justiciable questions on which he
was entitled to be
Having been made in the
exercise of federal jurisdiction, the SASCFC reasoned the appeal against the
decision to strike out did not
lie to the IRCSA, but rather exclusively to the
As such, that any appeal on
the merits of the matter to the IRCSA (either single judge or Full Court), or
consequently to the SASCFC,
was therefore incompetent. Importantly however, the
SASCFC noted that as Ardlie IM’s dismissal of Mr Kronen’s
application
was an interlocutory direction only, he was not by that action alone
barred from simply filing another application for directions
for his original
matter to be properly
The 2016 application
29 February 2016, Mr Kronen paid heed to the SASCFC guidance and filed an
application (the 2016 application) in the IRCSA identical
to that filed in 2013:
that is, to reopen his 2005 application. When Ardlie IM heard the 2016
application on 29 April 2016 Mr Kronen,
by oral submissions, expressly sought
leave to ‘amend’ his 2005 application in order to make it explicit
what he argued
ought to have been implicit in his 2005 application; namely the
imposition of a penalty for breach of the
Specifically, he
All in all, I contend that the absence of an explicit request
for the imposition of a penalty for breaching the term of the award
originating application should be bar(sic) this court from dealing with the
superannuation claim under
section 178
Workplace Relations Act
That argument aside, I’m quite prepared to seek the court’s leave
to amend my originating application, and include an
explicit request for the
imposition of a penalty. In fact, if now is the appropriate time to seek such
leave, I do so.
On the question of whether or not your Honour considers it preferable that
the originating application be amended and grants leave
– or grants my
request for leave to do so – is a matter for your Honour to determine as
you see fit. As stated earlier,
it would appear that
section 178
provides the
only means by which the Industrial Relations Court might properly deal with a
claim of underpayment of award superannuation
provisions. It is for this reason
that I express extreme bewilderment at references to 179 of the
Relations Act
in relation to my claim.
Please note that I have at no stage requested that the court deal with this
claim subject to
section 179
Workplace Relations Act
. The respondent,
likewise, has not requested that the court deal with the claim subject to
section 179.
Your Honour certainly did not elect to deal with the claim subject
Workplace Relations Act
; your Honour instead appears to have
attempted to deal with it subject to subsection (14)(c)(i) and section 179 of
the State Act.
above portion of transcript represents the totality of Mr Kronen’s
application to amend made in 2016. There is no document
that sets out in writing
the actual form of the amendments sought.
brief reasons delivered on 10 August 2016, Ardlie IM adopted Hannon J’s
reasoning from his 2013 appeal decision, finding
that an application to
introduce a new cause of action for the imposition of a penalty was by that time
irretrievably statute barred
by the strict 6 year time limit and as such ordered
that it be dismissed without considering the application on its
By this stage, over a
decade had passed since Mr Kronen commenced his 2005 application.
Kronen appealed to the FCA, where Justice White held that, although Mr
Kronen’s s 178 action/superannuation claim would likely
face significant
difficulty even if the 2016 application were allowed, Ardlie IM had erred by
failing to discuss in his reasons,
the principle balancing considerations of the
exercise of his discretion to strike it out. This, White J concluded, was an
of the type described in
House v The
that warranted setting
the decision aside and remitting the decision back to the IRCSA for
reconsideration.
Dissolution
and reconstitution of the IRCSA
on 1 July 2017,
Statutes Amendment (South Australian Employment
Tribunal) Act 2016
(the SAET Amending Act), dissolved the IRCSA and
purported to transfer existing matters before it to the South Australian
Tribunal (SAET).
Kronen’s remitted 2016 application was heard by Auxiliary Judge Clayton
over the course of a number of days in June, July,
August and October
Although those remitted
proceedings were initially heard in the IRCSA, when his Honour handed down his
decision on 27 November 2017
the proceedings were concluded in SAET in Court
His Honour found that
the transitional provisions of the SAET Amending Act had the effect of
transferring proceedings initiated under
the FW Act to SAET, but not proceedings
that had been initiated under the WR Act, as Mr Kronen’s proceedings were.
The result,
his Honour concluded, was that Mr Kronen’s 2016 application
had come to an end with the commencement of the SAET Amending Act
dissolution of the only venue competent to hear it, the IRCSA. As a consequence,
he dismissed Mr Kronen’s 2016
application.
question of the dissolution of the IRCSA was considered on appeal before the
There, the Full Court
observed that under s 16 of the
Acts Interpretation Act 1915
(the AI Act), subject to any apparent contrary intention, a court or tribunal
that would otherwise cease to exist due to the repeal
of its constitutional
legislation, continues in existence for the purpose of continuing legal
proceedings in respect of any right
that existed prior to the
While that contrary
intention was apparent in the transitional provisions of the SAET Amending Act,
their Honours also observed that
s 22A of the AI Act requires that an Act of the
South Australian Parliament be construed with regards to the limits of its
legislative
Being that a
State Parliament cannot confer federal jurisdiction, the transitional provisions
of the SAET Amending Act could not
be interpreted to have vested SAET with
before the IRCSA
under the federal WR
being no other court of competent jurisdiction established, the Full Court
opined that s 16 of the AI Act had the effect of
saving the IRCSA from
dissolution for the purposes of continuing matters that had been commenced in it
under the WR Act, before its
dissolution. The FCAFC dismissed the appeal without
any further order for the remittal of the matter to the IRCSA, its previous
to the same effect never having been carried out and the appeal from SAET
having been incompetent.
being dissolved, the IRCSA was reconstituted on 8 November 2018 by the
Work (Assignment of Judge as Senior Judge) Proclamation
and by other subsequent
similar proclamations.
The present application before the
is in the context of the above history that Mr Kronen’s 2016 application
returns before this Court. The present proceedings
are a reconsideration of the
2016 application as ordered to be remitted to the IRCSA by the
That application was
filed in identical form to the earlier in time 2013 application and also
includes the informal oral application
made before Ardlie IM on 29 April
2016 application is therefore comprised of two issues:
the 2005 application be
pursuant to ss 154 and 174 of the FW Act
as at 29 February 2016 for the
reconsideration of certain questions relating
to the superannuation claim
(a) whether the IRCSA has the capacity to entertain Mr Kronen’s
superannuation claim subject to ss 177A and 178 of the WR
Act [as at 11 July
(b) the quantum of any entitlements under subs (6A), (6B) and (7) of s 178
of the WR Act [as at 11 July 2005]; and
(c) the conduct of CMI Toyota and its agents in relation to compliance with
the terms of the Award concerning the superannuation
entitlements of
2. Should the 2005 application be
pursuant to ss 154 and 174
of the FW Act as at 29 February 2016 and
with retrospective
pursuant to s 166 of the FW Act or r 30 of the IP Rules to include an
explicit request for the imposition of a penalty pursuant to
s 178 of the WR Act
[as at 11 July 2005]?
question is also raised as to whether the relevant date should be 29 February
2016, or more particularly 29 April 2016, or the earlier
in time 2013
application date of 9 September 2013.
S 178 of the WR Act as at
the time of the 2005 application
at 11 July 2005, the WR Act relevantly provided at s 178:
Imposition and recovery of penalties
(1) Where an organisation or person bound by an award, an order of the
Commission (whether under this Act, the Registration and Accountability
Organisations Schedule or otherwise) or a certified agreement breaches a term of
the award, order or agreement, a penalty may
be imposed by the Court or by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(4) The maximum penalty that may be imposed under subsection (1) for a breach
of a term of an award, order or agreement is:
(a) where the penalty is imposed by the Court:
(b) where the penalty is not imposed by the Court—300 penalty units for
a body corporate or 60 penalty units in other cases.
(5) A penalty for a breach of a term of an award or order may be sued for and
recovered by:
(ca) a person:
(i) whose employment is, or at the time of the breach was, subject to the
(ii) who is affected by the breach;
(6) Where, in a proceeding against an employer under this section, it appears
to the court concerned that an employee of the employer
has not been paid an
amount that the employer was required to pay under an award, order or agreement,
the court may order the employer
to pay to the employee the amount of the
underpayment.
(6A) Where, in a proceeding against an employer under this section, it
appears to the court concerned that the employer has not paid
an amount to a
superannuation
fund that the employer was required, under an award, order
or agreement, to pay on behalf of a person, the court may order the employer
make a payment to or in respect of that person for the purpose of restoring the
person, as far as practicable, to the position
that the person would have been
in had the employer not failed to pay the amount to the superannuation fund.
(6B) Without limiting the generality of subsection (6A), the court concerned
may order that the employer pay to the
superannuation
fund referred to in
subsection (6A), or another superannuation fund, an amount equal to the amount
(in this subsection called the
unpaid amount) that the employer failed to pay
together with such additional amount as, in the opinion of the court, represents
return that would have accrued in respect of the unpaid amount had it been
duly paid by the employer.
(7) An order shall not be made under subsection (6) or (6A) in relation to so
much of an underpayment as relates to any period more
6 years before the
commencement of the proceeding
(8) A proceeding under this section in relation to a breach of a term of an
award, order or agreement shall be commenced
not later than 6 years after the
commission of the breach.
... (emphasis added)
The FW as at the time of the 2016 application
relevant sections of the FW Act, as at the time of the 2016 application are set
Also set out is r 30
of the IP Rules at the same time, which also provides a power to
4—General principles about exercise of jurisdiction
154—General
principles affecting exercise of jurisdiction
(1) In exercising its jurisdiction, the Court or the Commission—
(a) is governed in matters of procedure and substance by equity, good
conscience, and the substantial merits of the case, without
technicalities, legal forms or the practice of courts; and
(b) is not bound by evidentiary rules and practices but may, subject to
subsection (2)
inform itself as it thinks appropriate.
(2) The Court and the
Commission must observe the rules of natural justice.
6—Miscellaneous procedural rules
166—Amendment
or rectification of proceedings
(1) The Court or
Commission may—
(a) allow the amendment of an application, notice, submission, report or
other document associated with proceedings; or
(b) correct an error,
defect or irregularity (even though the error, defect or irregularity may be
such as to render the proceedings
(2) If the Court or Commission exercises its power to correct an error,
defect of irregularity under
subsection (1)(b)
the proceedings are as valid and effective as if the error, defect or
irregularity had never happened.
to re-open questions
The Court or the Commission may re-open a question previously decided and
amend or quash an earlier determination.
*(reference to the Court of the Commission means the IRCSA and the Industrial
Relations Commission of South Australia)
(1) The Tribunal may at any stage of a proceeding:-
(a) order the amendment of any document; or
(b) itself amend a document.
(3) An amendment, or order for amendment, may be made on conditions the
Tribunal considers appropriate.
*(reference to the Tribunal means the IRCSA or the Industrial Relations
Commission of South Australia)
Mr Kronen’s Submissions
issues in question begin with Mr Kronen’s argument that there exists good
reason to reopen his 2005 claim – either
to reconsider certain questions,
or to amend the application to include a fresh cause of action. Mr
Kronen’s submissions on
the merits of either of those issues were
variously interwoven through his written and oral
submissions.
Reopen the 2005 application for the reconsideration
of certain questions
Kronen referred to the reasons of White J, in the 2017 decision of the
as providing guidance to
the IRCSA in deciding whether to allow the 2005 application to be
He submitted that
particular consideration should be given to matters such as previous
misapprehensions as to the facts or the law,
matters calling for review and the
need to cure injustice, particularly where that injustice may otherwise be
irremediable
and proposed to
identify how the 2005 application was affected by these considerations so as to
justify its reopening.
Kronen’s primary submission was to the effect that the 2005 application
should be reopened because Ardlie IM twice misapprehended
the relevant facts or
law in his 2006 decision: first, as to whether commission payments should be
included in the basis on which
to calculate superannuation entitlements under
the Award; and second, as to the source of the jurisdiction being exercised by
IRCSA in considering the claim for unpaid
superannuation.
the first suggested error, Mr Kronen submitted that Ardlie IM’s decision
was contrary to an earlier authoritative decision
which he contended
supported his proposition that commissions earned are properly considered part
of the wages received in respect
of ordinary time earnings for the purposes of
the second suggested error, Mr Kronen referred to the comments of the FCAFC in
2008 on the source of the jurisdiction being exercised
He submitted that his Honour
had mistakenly proceeded as though the initial claim was made under the FW Act
(rather than the WR Act).
upon this second suggested error, Mr Kronen submitted that if Ardlie IM had
correctly proceeded as though the claim were
in the exercise of federal
clear rulings on jurisdiction
at the outset of that hearing. Mr Kronen said that
this would have had the result of proceedings necessarily being expanded so as
to allow him to have his superannuation entitlements determined by: amending the
initiating application to include a claim for the
imposition of a penalty under
s 178; or by, filing an additional claim for the same; or by Ardlie IM
beneficially construing the
initial claim as having been brought within the only
those considerations Mr Kronen alleged that Ardlie IM had been wilfully and
unlawfully misled by CMI Toyota and its legal representatives
into making such
alleged errors, and that such behaviour was therefore the sole reason the entire
matter was not concluded in
support of the scale of the injustice alleged, Mr Kronen also submitted his
contention that a large group of employers (of whom
CMI Toyota is one) will, in
the absence of his application, have been allowed to unlawfully amass
substantial financial benefits
by intentionally underpaying award entitlements
on a systemic basis across many years. He asserted that CMI Toyota had sought to
protect its own interests by deliberately misleading and obstructing the Court
in an effort to cover up this
Kronen’s secondary submission was that reopening his 2005 application is
necessary to avert the injustice of leaving unresolved
proceedings before the
He argued that by having
filed an application in the IRCSA, disputing the amount of superannuation to
which he was entitled, he acquired
an enforceable right to have those
entitlements determined.
suggested cumulative effect of the primary errors is that those entitlements
have never been finally determined, and that the
IRCSA has in effect denied him
procedural fairness in either potentially having his claim recognised and
enforced, or appealing an
adverse determination. This injustice, he submitted,
would be irremediable unless the present application was
Kronen submitted that although his 2005 application included no reference to the
imposition of a penalty, that should not be a
bar to his application being
considered to have been made pursuant to s 178 of the WR Act. He relied on the
decision of
Agtrack (NT) Pty Ltd v
in support of this
proposition, citing the reasoning of the High Court generally that it is
unnecessary to show that an applicant
had to mind that they are proceeding under
a particular cause of action, if the only possible cause of action to achieve
sought can be identified in the
In effect, Mr
Kronen’s submission was that the reasoning of the FCAFC in 2008 was
contrary to that principle and that Ardlie
IM in 2006 had in fact effectively
exercised jurisdiction under s 178 to provide a determination of the
superannuation entitlements
reference to the equity, good conscience and the substantial merits of a case
provisions under s 154 of the FW Act, Mr Kronen submitted
that his 2005
application – having referred only to the alleged underpaid superannuation
entitlements and having made no reference
to a penalty sought by s 178 of the WR
Act – should be beneficially construed, his way, to invoke the only
possible jurisdiction
of the IRCSA to determine superannuation entitlements in
the context of his application being that under s 178 of the WR
the conduct of CMI Toyota and its agents, Mr Kronen alleged that the overall
design in answering his claims has been to obfuscate
the unlawful customs and
practices, through which CMI Toyota has unlawfully amassed significant financial
gain, and by its submissions
deliberately misled the courts to protect those
support of that allegation, Mr Kronen submitted that his 2005 claim related to
CMI Toyota’s reliance on a contradictory interpretation
of the word
“wages” for the purpose of determining overtime as against the
determination of superannuation entitlements,
the purpose of which was to
defraud their employees.
he submitted that CMI Toyota knew its interpretation of the word
“wages” to be inconsistent with established authority;
provided him with a list of authorities in late July 2005 that referred to the
abovementioned decision of the
that he said
supported his interpretation of the phrase “ordinary time earnings”
in cl 51 of the Award, consistently with
the use of commission payments in the
calculation of superannuation
entitlements.
reference to the decision that he had submitted to support his interpretation of
Mr Kronen argued that
the absence of reference to that decision in CMI Toyota’s submissions to
the IRCSA in the 2006 proceedings
was evidence that CMI Toyota knew, that to do,
so would expose the contradictory nature of its practices with respect to Award
entitlements.
the 2005 application with retrospective effect
White J’s reasoning,
Kronen highlighted that the new cause of action he sought to introduce arose
from substantially the same facts as the original
cause of action. With that
stated, he submitted that the IRCSA should allow the amendment for largely the
same reasons he submitted
the application should be
Kronen adopted the reasoning expressed by the High Court in
in support of his
submission that the application to amend should be
The gist of that
submission being that if it is accepted that the application to amend is not
barred by the passage of time then
there is no reason why the additional cause
of action should not be brought in for the purpose of more precisely stating the
Out of time and excessive delay
noted above, Mr Kronen submitted that his claim for the imposition of a penalty
arose out of the same facts as the initial 2005
application.
This submission was
seemingly made in support of the proposition that if there is otherwise good
reason to reopen and amend, as argued,
the mere fact that the alternative cause
of action would otherwise be out of time is not by itself reason to refuse the
application.
Kronen rejected the proposition that he had allowed the matter to become stale.
Rather, by reference to the chronology prepared
he submitted that he had
pursued the matter “with commitment, in logical sequence, and without
undue delay or
interruption”,
“vigorously [...] continuously and [...]
creatively”.
He submitted
that following the 2008 FCAFC decision the reason he sought alternative pathways
to resolution though the Federal Magistrates
Court and with the Commissioner of
Taxation was that he had lost confidence in the IRCSA, and Ardlie IM, in its and
his capacity
to adequately answer his superannuation claim; returning only
reluctantly when all other avenues were
Additionally, Mr
Kronen acknowledged that “some of the more cumbersome aspects” of
how he has dealt with the superannuation
claim were the result of his
self-representation. The thrust of that submission was that his need to be
thorough and to give matters
careful study and consideration had resulted in the
measured pace with which he proceeded with his superannuation claim over the
years, but that he had never let the matter become
CMI Toyota’s Submissions
Toyota submitted that the 2016 application to reopen his superannuation claim,
invoking s 178 of the WR Act, was irretrievably
statute-barred insofar as it
sought only to reopen the matter for reconsideration; that is, to reopen was not
enough. The application
for amendment with retrospective effect would also be
required for Mr Kronen to find
And, in that regard,
the amendment would be to correct the error of failing to seek the imposing of a
penalty. In effect, as Auxiliary
Judge Clayton observed in the 2017 SAET
judgement “If Mr Kronen is not given leave to reopen [the 2005
application], any amendment
would be without purpose” and “Unless
the [2005] application was amended to invoke s 178 any application to reopen
be futile because the result would be the
As such, CMI
Toyota’s submissions were principally in two parts: first, whether the
2005 application should be reopened; second,
if so, should the 2005 application
be amended to operate with retrospective effect to correct the error of failing
to seek the imposing
of a penalty.
Reopen the 2005 application
for the reconsideration of certain questions
power was vested in the IRCSA by s 174 of the FW Act, to reopen a question
previously decided and amend, or quash, an earlier
determination, CMI Toyota
submitted that in considering whether that discretionary power should be
exercised, regard should be had
to the failure by Mr Kronen to establish any
good reason for doing so, in the context of the following:
public interest, and the interest of CMI Toyota as a party to the litigation, in
the finality of litigation;
(2) the principle which underpins
which operates to preclude the assertion of a claim, or the raising of an issue
of fact or law, if that claim or issue was
so connected with the subject matter
of an earlier proceeding as to have made it unreasonable for the proposed new
claim not to have
been made, or the issue not to have been raised in that
proceeding;
(3) the public interest in courts not hearing and determining matters that
are stale (which is generally reflected in the Limitations
legislation, but in particular in ss 178 and 179 of the WR Act where the 6 year
time limitation cannot be
(4) the overall delay in the matter;
(5) the costs already expended by CMI Toyota in the many years of Mr
Kronen’s litigation against it;
(6) the relatively small quantum of the alleged underpaid superannuation
contribution sought by Mr Kronen [$4,750.40]; and,
(7) the need for a successful application to be amended with retrospective
effect, which in all the circumstances such application
should not be
that set out, it was submitted that whilst the time limit sets out in s 178(8)
of the WR Act would not necessarily always automatically
operate to foreclose
any application to reopen, the circumstances of any good reason to reopen any
case are likely to be rare. It
was argued that in the circumstances of this
case, discretion should not be exercised to reopen the 2005 application by
s 174 of the FW Act.
support of that, CMI Toyota submitted that the 2005 application had been
conclusively dealt with insofar as it concerned s 179
of the WR Act by the
FCASFC in 2008. That initial application did not concern s 178 of the WR Act.
The fact that it did not was not
the fault or neglect of CMI Toyota, but was the
fault or neglect of Mr Kronen
2005 application with retrospective effect
the amendment issue, CMI Toyota acknowledged that the IRCSA is not bound by the
‘rule of practice’ in
rule preventing a party to litigation to amend their proceedings so as to raise
fresh claims in respect of causes of
action which since the commencement of the
litigation had become statute
However, it submitted
that Mr Kronen had not shown that he made any ‘error’ in the sense
of intending to do one thing,
but doing another to bring his application to
amend within the purview s 166(1)(b) of the FW Act. As such, the relevant power
amend the 2005 proceeding was contained only in r 30 of the IP Rules.
it was argued, that allowing any amendment otherwise would be highly unusual in
the circumstances of this case being; after
the close of evidence, after
judgments at first instance and on appeal and outside of the limitation periods
provided for by the
WR Act. For those reasons and the following reasons, CMI
Toyota submitted that any amendment with retrospective effect should not
(1) permission to amend after judgment will prejudice CMI
Toyota in having to revisit the matter, having already participated in a
trial and full appeal processes, and having regard to the passage of time;
(2) further evidence is likely to be required on the issues of the alleged
breaches of the Award, between 14 April 1998 to 3 November
2000, and on the
quantum of any such amounts, and on the issue of whether any penalty should be
(3) even if all of the requirements for amendment with retrospective effect
are met – which they weren’t in any event
– in the exercise of
discretion, such amendment ought not be allowed for the reasons as to prejudice
as already set out.
to the ability to amend with retrospective effect, CMI Toyota submitted that in
effect nothing turned on the
decision issue, as it did not take
the point that there was no ability to amend with retrospective effect. Only
that in these circumstances,
there should be no exercise of discretion to amend
with retrospective effect.
addition to the above submissions, CMI Toyota also objected to the form and
content of Mr Kronen’s proposed amended claim
document on the basis that
it was irrelevant, scandalous, frivolous and/or vexatious and failed to
adequately set out sufficient
notice of the case to be
Toyota also provided a wholesale denial of Mr Kronen’s allegations of any
misconduct and the effects Mr Kronen attributed
to that alleged misconduct upon
the conduct of the
Out of time and excessive delay
particular CMI Toyota highlighted that the earliest form of Mr Kronen’s
current application to reopen the matter came many
years after it was initially
lodged and almost 5 years after the FCAFC ruled that the absence of a request
for the imposition of
a penalty had caused the default in jurisdiction. Even
then, it submitted, there was a further 2 ½ year delay before the
application
to amend currently before the IRCSA was raised for consideration,
the overall effect of which was that the delay in prosecuting the
elements of the matter is wholly
unreasonable.
Toyota submitted that ordinarily the time limitation provisions of 6 years in s
178(7) & (8) would be fatal to Mr Kronen’s
application to reopen the
2005 application. It was noted that the period for which Mr Kronen alleged
breaches of the Award took place
was 14 April 1998 to 3 November 2000.
Therefore, to cover the entire period of the alleged breaches, the proceedings
should have
been lodged no later than 14 April 2004. And, that to have any
coverage at all, the proceedings would have needed to have been lodged
time before 3 November 2006. CMI Toyota submitted that on accepted objective
facts as set out throughout the history of his
litigation, Mr Kronen was not
able to point to any proceedings lodged that would satisfy either of those
relevant dates.
addition, whilst the time limits were not able to be satisfied, CMI Toyota
submitted that Mr Kronen could have taken action far
sooner than he eventually
did to bring his concerns to the correct court in the proper way. Apropos of
that, it was posited that
Mr Kronen was on notice as early as 12 August 2008,
that his superannuation claim(s)
had been improperly brought. The transcript of the hearing before the FCAFC, as
below, was referred to in that regard:
brought two claims, effectively in the [Federal] Magistrates Court, the second
relating to superannuation. I’m
not convinced that the [Federal]
Magistrates Court has any jurisdiction to hear that.
Mr Kronen: I think, in my submission in reply, I actually acknowledge that
there is a considerable doubt, and that’s why I asked
that the matter be
considered by this court, to remove that doubt.
Well, I think if the [Federal] Magistrate’s Court
doesn’t have jurisdiction to hear it, this court doesn’t either,
and, in those circumstances, you may never get an answer in these proceedings in
relation to your claim for superannuation. You may
have to go somewhere else for
that answer
Mr Kronen: As in apply to the Federal Court in its...
Lander J: Well, maybe – maybe...
Gray J: Or, if it’s the Commissioner for taxation who is the only party
with the capacity to pursue the claim, then it may be
you need to make
representations in that quarter.
Mr Kronen: Your Honour, I’ve actually discussed this matter with the
Taxation Office, and they have indicated that they are
the only party who can
reclaim the account on my behalf. However they are not authorities on the award,
and they need a court to
provide a - interpretation from the award of what the
earnings base should be, on which they will act. So that’s my role in
this, to obtain an award interpretation on which the Taxation Department can
act, on their advice.
What I’m pointing out to you is ... You may, if you were
successful in this appeal, not receive all the satisfaction you –
you’re seeking. You may not get an answer in relation to the second aspect
of your claim
. As to the first aspect of your claim, that is underpayment of
wages, you might receive - obtain an order from this court remitting
same reason, or for the appropriate reasons,
where - if the magistrates who were
to hear the matter on the second occasion reached the conclusion that the
respondent’s
case was right, that you didn’t work the hours you
So if you - if you’re considering your position at this time and
considering the question of mediation, you ought to consider
associated with failing on the claim entirely, even though you might succeed on
the appeal, and, of course mediation requires
parties to give up rights.
Mr Kronen: I understand.
Lander J: You can’t go in there assuming that you’re entitled to
all your claim. Otherwise, there’s no point in
Mr Kronen: I understand. Thank you, your Honour.
Gray J: You mean in relation to the superannuation?
Mr Kronen: The superannuation question. It’s-what my duties were or
what classification I fit it into our not relevant to that
issue at all. I
worked in a number of – two positions. And the impact of the
interpretation would vary dependent on the position.
But the interpretation in
itself is not dependent on the position in which I worked. The question is more
“are commissions
payable to any party to superannuation’s
base?” So – yes.
Branson J: The magistrate [Ardlie IM] made no order about that.
Mr Kronen: No.
And we may take the view his failure to make an order was
appropriate, because of his lack of jurisdiction, irrespective of the reasoning
that led him not to make the order.
Mr Kronen: I – sorry.
And if that was the case, there will be no need to send it
back, because it’s conceded he didn’t – it suggested
didn’t have jurisdiction, because there’s no order to be set
Mr Kronen: I see. Yes. Sorry. I wasn’t following you.
Branson J: And there will be nothing more for him to do about that. But
Mr Kronen: Well, if he doesn’t have - if the court doesn’t have
it back would be
Branson J: Well, he didn’t make an order, so ---
Mr Kronen: No. No, your Honour.
Branson J: And the limit of his jurisdiction could be made plain in reasoning
of this court, and I think it’s very likely if
we were satisfied there was
no jurisdiction anywhere that would – maybe all that would be needed to be
done about that.
Mr Kronen: Thank you.
Toyota submitted that the above exchanges were of significance for two reasons.
Firstly, that it was apparent to Mr Kronen in
August of 2008 that the FCAFC was
considering whether or not the IRCSA had jurisdiction to consider any monetary
claim for underpayment
of superannuation entitlements, and in particular whether
the IRCSA had any jurisdiction to consider that issue in the absence of
of action for the imposition of a penalty pursuant to s 178 of the WR
that if there was any doubt about what the FCAFC may have been saying about his
superannuation claim issue, that doubt was
clarified as a result of the
extensive consideration and commentary by the FCAFC in its judgment delivered on
8 October 2008. In
that regard, the following was said about Mr Kronen’s
superannuation claim:
In his reasons for judgment, the industrial
magistrate acknowledged that the Award is a federal award.
In the absence of
any claim for the imposition of a penalty for a contravention of any term of the
award, the jurisdiction that the
court was exercising was that conferred by
s179(1) of the WR Act
, which provided:
Where an employer is required by an award, order or certified agreement to
pay an amount to an employee, the employee may, not later
than six years after
the employer was required to make the payment to the employee under the award,
order or agreement, sue for the
amount of the payment in the Court or in any
court of competent jurisdiction
As has been recognised by the subsequent amendment, that jurisdiction did
not cover obligations to make payments on behalf of employees
to the trustees of
superannuation funds. Such a payment is not an amount that an employer is
required to pay “to an employee”.
The IRCSA did not have jurisdiction to interpret a federal award, aside from
such interpretation as was necessary to determine a claim
properly before it.
In the present case, it had no jurisdiction to determine the claim for
underpayment of superannuation
The industrial magistrate made no order reflecting the conclusions he had
reached on the superannuation claim. He neither dismissed
the claim (which he
was bound to do, if he came to the conclusion that he had no power to order the
making of the payments) nor made
any purported declaration reflecting the
outcome to which he had come as to the meaning and effect of the provisions of
relating to superannuation. His Honour seems to have thought that the
expression of a conclusion in his reasons for judgment was
sufficient. It was
not. The whole of the application by summons before the court needed to be dealt
Plainly, because the court lacked jurisdiction to deal with the
superannuation claim, that aspect of the application was required
(underlining for emphasis)
the discussions before the FCAFC on 12 August 2008 and the published judgment of
8 October 2008, CMI Toyota submitted that by
at least the latter date, it was
sufficiently clear to Mr Kronen that the IRCSA did not have jurisdiction under s
179 of the WR Act
to hear his claim for unpaid superannuation entitlements. This
was significant, so it was argued, as it was not until the 2013 application
September 2013, that Mr Kronen first raised the prospect of reopening the 2005
application with regards to his superannuation
claim. Notwithstanding, he had
attempted to reopen the 2005 application in March 2009, but only with regards to
s 179, not s 178
of the WR Act. This was also said to be significant as in March
2009, it was apparent to Mr Kronen that a power to reopen existed.
accepting his self-represented status, the delay of action of almost 5 years
between 8 October 2008 and 9 September 2013 was
said by CMI Toyota to be extreme
and prejudicial.
to the relevant date of 9 September 2013 – being the date of the 2013
application – CMI Toyota accepted that that date
would be a relevant
measure to assess and determine the delay of action on behalf of Mr Kronen in
making an application to reopen
the 2005 application, as opposed to the latter
date of 29 February 2016, being the date of the 2016 application. Although, it
not until 29 April 2016 that there was any potential merit in the
application to reopen, when the application to amend the 2005 application
orally made before Ardlie IM.
with regards to the relevant date of 9 September 2013, CMI Toyota submitted that
ordinarily the 2013 application to reopen
the 2005 application would be
irretrievably statute barred by the non-extendable 6 year time limit provided by
s 178 of the WR Act.
Further, that the 2013 application to reopen was itself
doomed to fail as it did no more than seek to re-argue the original 2005
application, which already had been conclusively dealt with by the
and where it had then been
made clear to Mr Kronen, that the form in which that application had been made
and the way it had been
prosecuted did not give a cause of action for
superannuation entitlements as no imposition of a penalty had been sought. As
it was not until over 2 ½ years later when Mr Kronen made the
application to amend on 29 April 2016 – to then seek the
imposition of a
penalty – that there was any potential justiciable cause of action raised
to which the IRCSA could provide
relief. That delay was also said to be extreme
and prejudicial.
delay aspect was highlighted by the fact that if Mr Kronen were to be successful
with his present application, then a further
hearing would ensue with its focus
being the employment relationship as it existed between 14 April 1998 to 3
November 2000; which,
in all probability if it were to occur would be well over
two decades from when the employment relationship began. The difficulties
regards to witnesses, their recollections, relevant documents etc are all too
terms of considering whether any appropriate period of delay would be
permissible, CMI Toyota submitted that if there was such
a time period –
Clayton AuJ postulated a period of 12
– that it would be
considerably shorter than the almost 5 year period from the date of the FCAFC
judgment on 8 October to the
filing of the 2013 application on 9 September 2013.
Toyota also stressed the future costs it would incur, if the application to
reopen and amend with retrospective effect was granted.
That is, that there
would be a further hearing to prepare for and engage in. The significant costs
already expended on Mr Kronen’s
litigation was also pointed
Consideration
Kronen was self-represented in these proceedings, as he has been in his many
earlier proceedings. In that regard, a duty is owed
to him by the court to
assist him so as to balance any disadvantage he may suffer from his lack of
legal representation in order
to ensure that there is a fair hearing in
accordance with the law. As such, an assessment is to be made as to the degree
of assistance
required. However, such assistance is not to be to the
disadvantage of the other party, CMI Toyota. And, the assistance does not
to advising how Mr Kronen should conduct his case, or how he should exercise his
number of procedural hearings were conducted before the hearing of this case
began on 29 July 2019. In those procedural hearings
I was careful to explain to
Mr Kronen the processes that would be followed leading up to and during the
hearing. I explained what
documents would be required to be filed in advance of
the hearing, and allowed ample time for that to occur. I allowed Mr Kronen
prepare and file the Trial Book – which was detailed and comprehensive. I
received written submissions from Mr Kronen, followed
by CMI Toyota’s
written submissions, followed by Mr Kronen’s written submissions in reply.
During the hearing, I first
heard from Mr Kronen, then CMI Toyota, then Mr
Kronen in reply. Mr Kronen’s written submissions, both written and oral,
detailed and comprehensive. Throughout the procedural stages and during the
hearing proper, Mr Kronen presented as a methodical,
detailed and conscientious
man with a great deal of litigation experience and expertise. So much so, that
the casual observer of
the hearing would no doubt have been surprised to learn
that he was not a legal practitioner of some standing. In all of the
circumstances,
if Mr Kronen’s self-represented status was of any
disadvantage to him in how his case was prepared and presented, it would
been slight, if at all.
means for Mr Kronen to reopen his 2005 application is the discretionary power
contained in s 174 of the FW Act. That section operates
within the well accepted
legal principles of: finality to litigation; the principles of the
estoppel; and, the public interest of courts not hearing and determining
claims which are stale, reflected in Limitation of Actions
legislation.
Accordingly, Mr Kronen must establish that a good reason exists for his 2005
application to be reopened. In that regard,
the guiding words of the plurality
De L v Director‑General, New South Wales Department of
Community Services (No 2)
are apt to repeat:
The Court may
[reopen its judgments or orders] if it is convinced that, in its earlier
consideration of the point, it has proceeded
“on a misapprehension as to
the facts or the law”, where “there is some matter calling for
review” or where
“the interests of justice so require”. It
has been said repeatedly that a heavy burden is cast upon the applicant for
reopening to show that such an exceptional course is required “without
fault on his part”, ie without the attribution
of neglect or default to
the party seeking reopening. By such expressions of the power to reopen final
orders, courts seek to recognise
competing objectives of the law. On the one
hand, there is the principle of finality of litigation which reinforces the
respect that
should be shown to orders, final on their face, addressed to the
world at large and upon which conduct may be ordered reliant upon
their binding
authority. On the other hand, courts recognise that accidents and oversights can
sometimes occur which, unrepaired,
will occasion an
(citations omitted)
can be seen above, Mr Kronen carries a heavy burden to show that the exceptional
course of reopening his 2005 application is the
correct course.
regards to the discretion to reopen his 2005 application some of the salient
words of the FCAFC in
Ashby v Slipper (No 2)
The exercise of the discretion to vary or set aside orders
... is a power to be used only sparingly, with great caution and rarely,
regard to the public interest in the finality of litigation ... .
The discretion is exercised to cure injustice, particularly where it would
otherwise be irremediable ... .
As Kenny J stated in
Inspector‑General in Bankruptcy v
[2006] FCA 22
: “[i]n every case the overriding
principle to be applied is whether the interests of justice are better served by
or rejecting the application for leave to re‑open” ...
as White J observed in
Kronen v Commercial Motor Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI
[2017] those principles will be moderated by the effect of the
equity, good conscience and substantial merits maxims of s 154 of the
well as the understanding that in the employment law / industrial law context
the power to reopen may be exercised more flexibly
than in higher courts of
any event, the circumstances where the discretion to reopen a previously decided
upon matter will be exercised is likely to be
rare. In that regard, the High
Metwally v University of Wollongong
made clear that only
exceptional circumstances would enliven the discretion to reopen a case,
It is elementary that a party is bound by the conduct of his
case. Except in most exceptional circumstances, it would be contrary
principle to allow a party, after a case had been decided against him, to raise
a new argument which, whether deliberately or
by inadvertence, he failed to put
during the hearing when he had an opportunity to do so.
public interest in finality to litigation has for centuries been a consideration
for courts. In 1977, the House of Lords in
the Ampthill Peerage case
dealt with that concept, Lord Simon of Glaisdale had the following to
There is a fundamental principle of English law generally
expressed by a Latin maxim (going back to Coke’s Commentary on Littleton,
p. 330) which can be translated: “It is in the interest of society that
there should be some end to litigation.” This
fundamental principle finds
expression in many forms. Parliament has passed statutes (the latest only last
year) limiting the time
within which actions at law must be brought. Truth may
be thus shut out; but society considers that truth may be bought at too high
price, that truth bought at such expense is the negation of
And Lord Wilberforce:
English law, and it is safe to say, all comparable legal systems, place high
in the category of essential principles that which requires
that limits be
placed upon the right of citizens to open or to reopen disputes. The principle
which we find in the Act of 1858 is
the same principle as that which requires
judgments in the courts to be binding, and that which prohibits litigation after
of limitation periods. Any determination of disputable fact may, the
law recognises, be imperfect: the law aims at providing the
best and safest
solution compatible with human fallibility and having reached that solution it
closes the book. The law knows, and
we all know, that sometimes fresh material
may be found, which perhaps might lead to a different result, but, in the
interest of
peace, certainty and security it prevents further inquiry. It is
said that in doing this, the law is preferring justice to truth.
That may be so:
these values cannot always coincide. The law does its best to reduce the gap.
But there are cases where the certainty
of justice prevails over the possibility
of truth (I do not say that this is such a case), and these are cases where the
law insists
on finality. For a policy of closure to be compatible with justice,
it must be attended with safeguards: so the law allows appeals:
so the law,
exceptionally, allows appeals out of time: so the law still more exceptionally
allows judgments to be attacked on the
ground of fraud: so limitation periods
may, exceptionally, be extended. But these are exceptions to a general rule of
high public
importance, and as all the cases show, they are reserved for rare
and limited cases, where the facts justifying them can be strictly
a similar historical vein, the law has long recognised that a person who
institutes proceedings may be reasonably expected to know
the means under which
they proceed and that a party will ordinarily be bound to the case which it
proceeds with
those issues set out, I should be very mindful of the need for the finality of
litigation and that it will only be the exceptional
and rare case where grounds
for reopening a proceeding will be made out. Further, that ordinarily it is to
be expected that if a
litigant has proceeded in a certain way initially, that it
was that litigant’s intention to proceed that way, absence exceptional
circumstances.
potential harshness of strict application of procedural rules and the practices
of courts is recognised in many pieces of legislation
where “equity, good
conscience and substantial merits of the matter” provisions appear. In
this instance such provisions
are located in s 154 of the FW Act. Whilst those
provisions are for consideration here, it cannot be said that by them alone any
defective application can be saved from demise. The discretionary process is to
weigh the competing considerations within the circumstances
of the matter.
simply reopening his 2005 application would not be enough for Mr Kronen to find
success. To order a reopening alone would
merely revive the question previously
determined, being the s 179 action – but not the s 178 imposition of a
penalty action
and superannuation claim. To note again, the s 179 action was
dealt with conclusively by the FCAFC in its 8 October 2008 judgment.
Accordingly, the futility of reopening the 2005 application, on an issue that
has already been conclusively dealt with by the correct
procedure of an appeal
and on an issue that is not the subject matter of the current complaint, is all
too apparent. As such, the
relevant question should be whether the 2005
application should be reopened and then amended with retrospective effect so as
the cause of action for the imposing of a penalty under s 178 of the WR
power to amend the 2005 application is found in s 166 of the FW Act. An
alternative power to amend also exists in r 30 of the
IP Rules. In the 2017 FCA
judgment, White J also said by virtue of r 4(3) of those Rules that the power to
amend was available in
r 54(7) of the
Supreme Court
that established, what then of Mr Kronen’s arguments as to the good reason
why his 2005 application should be reopened
and amended with retrospective
effect? In that regard, Mr Kronen’s case involved a collection of the
following principal complaints:
that Ardlie IM misapprehended relevant facts or
law and mistakenly understood that the 2005 application proceeded under the FW
rather than the WR Act and if Ardlie IM had understood that his
application was pursuant to the WR Act, then the jurisdictional
issues with
regards to penalties and his superannuation claim would have become apparent and
would have been corrected; that Ardlie
IM had been misled by CMI Toyota; that
the injustice of unresolved proceedings before the IRCSA should be corrected;
that Ardlie
IM’s 2006 decision was contrary to established authority on
the interpretation of “ordinary time earnings” for
the purposes of
calculating superannuation entitlements; that his application had been
erroneously read down, where instead it should
have been beneficially construed
to include a claim for the imposition of penalties under s 178; that overall
equity and good conscience
dictate that technical deficiencies in his
application be overlooked; that in failing to finally determine his
superannuation entitlements
the IRCSA has denied Mr Kronen procedural fairness;
that a large group of employers, including CMI Toyota, had unlawfully avoided
liability under the Award and that CMI Toyota knew that was the case; that his
proceedings had never become stale and he had at a
measured pace done all he
could do to bring his issues before the correct court body.
those complaints were made, as CMI Toyota pointed out, aside from tilting at the
suggestion his self-represented status played
some role, Mr Kronen did not
accept any error, default or neglect on his part, but moreover did not present
any evidence of such.
In that regard Mr Kronen’s focus was on the errors
he said Ardlie IM had made. The failure to adduce any evidence that he himself
made an error, or was default or in neglect at the relevant time – in
failing to seek the imposition of a penalty – was
a factor that White J
alluded to in his 2017 judgment. Accordingly, it cannot be said that Mr Kronen
was not aware of that issue.
As to the alleged errors made by Ardlie IM, the correct forum for those to be
addressed was on appeal, not be way of reopening and
amendment. To note again,
the 2008 FCAFC judgment conclusively dealt with the errors that his Honour made.
his 2017 judgment White J interpolated that Mr Kronen had contended his omission
in 2005 to include a claim pursuant to s 178 of
the WR Act constituted an error
of the kind to which s 166(1)(b) refers. His Honour interpreted s 166(1)(b) as
being directed toward
“slip” rule style errors, being amenable to
correcting circumstances where a party has intended to do one thing but has
instead done another. At the time Mr Kronen was found not to have adduced any
evidence that he had made such an
which CMI Toyota
argues continues to be the
is true that there is little in Mr Kronen’s evidence that supports a
finding that he was in error, default or neglect in
the making of his 2005
application. As already said, in that regard Mr Kronen’s focus was on the
errors he said Ardlie IM had
made. Taken at its highest, Mr Kronen’s
argument may be interpreted that in 2005 he intended to lodge an application for
determination of his unpaid superannuation entitlements, but instead lodged
an application that did not invoke any jurisdiction of
the IRCSA to consider
that issue. In fact, that seems to be the only sensible interpretation of the
continuing dispute. He has said
that if it had been made explicit to him at the
time – that his omission of a cause of action for the imposition of a
stood as a bar to his claim for superannuation – that omission
could have been dealt with by applying immediately to amend
his application
pursuant to ss 154(1)(a) and
on the topic of error, in his 2017 judgment White J made the point that s 166(2)
seemed to incorporate a form of statutory relating
back. His Honour was
commenting on the effect of any order under s 166(1)(b) to “correct an
error, defect or irregularity”
so that the proceedings would be “as
valid and effective as if the error, defect or irregularity had never
His Honour,
also observed the statutory relating back could not reasonably be understood as
extending to circumstances in which an
applicant had chosen to pursue one form
of claim, but not another.
the absence of any demonstrable error, CMI Toyota submitted that the only source
of power then to amend the 2005 application would
then be r 30 of the IP Rules.
That may be so, or perhaps s 166(1)(a) may be given a broad reach. But either
way, the exercise of
the power to amend the 2005 application will be
discretionary and all of the relevant considerations are to be balanced.
regards to the totality of Mr Kronen’s submissions, as Clayton AuJ pointed
out, the best that could be said of wide array
of contentions and allegations
was that the most persuasive argument in his favour was that that the merits of
his superannuation
claim have never been
determined.
the failure of that issue to not be the subject of the 2005 litigation was the
failure of Mr Kronen to not seek the imposition
of a penalty pursuant to s 178
of the WR Act. That lack of jurisdiction falls at the feet of Mr Kronen
squarely. It was his forensic
decision to proceed with the case in the way that
he did before the IRCSA. In that regard, the principles of
estoppel are relevant, in that issues that should and could have been the
subject of the litigation were not. Also, it was Mr Kronen’s
action to lodge his series of appeals, ultimately finding his way to the FCAFC.
There on appeal, the Full Bench discussed
with him the deficiencies of his case
and recorded their views on same in their judgment of 8 October 2008. At least
by that date,
Mr Kronen was well on notice that in order to prosecute his
superannuation claim he would need raise the cause of action of the imposition
of a penalty against CMI Toyota for breaches of the Award pursuant to s 178 of
the WR Act. To put that another way, if Mr Kronen
was initially ignorant as to
the way he should have proceeded with regards to his superannuation claim, by
the time of that judgment
of the FCAFC, that misapprehension should have been
of note is that the FCAFC judgment of 8 October 2008 brought to an end his 2005
application insofar as it related to his s 179
of the WR Act. This Court is not
possessed of jurisdiction to review a decision of the FCAFC.
if the 8 October 2008 date is to be accepted as being relevant, which it is,
then the question is what of the delay since that
date, to the next relevant
date. That date being either 9 September 2013, when Mr Kronen lodged his 2013
application to reopen his
2005 application, or 29 February 2016, but more
particularly 29 April 2016 when the oral application to amend was first
before Ardlie IM. The first thing that can be said about the 2013 date
that is that the 2013 application was futile, for the reasons
discussed above,
that as merely reopening the application would have rendered the same result.
Next, that even if that date is accepted
as being the relevant date, it is still
some almost 5 years after the FCAFC judgment, well outside of what would be
considered a
reasonable time period within which to take action. Whilst the 9
September 2013 date may be of relevance in some sense, it was not
until the 2016
application, and particularly Mr Kronen’s submissions before Ardlie IM on
29 April 2016, that there was any
formal suggestion that the 2005 application
should be amended with retrospective effect to raise the cause of action of the
of a penalty against CMI Toyota for breaches of the Award. That date
being some 7 ½ years after the FCAFC judgment.
s 154 in mind and taking a beneficial approach to the question, and accepting
what CMI Toyota had to say in that regard, I accept
that the 9 September 2013
date could have bearing when considering the relevant period of delay. However,
in all of the circumstances
of this case, whether that period be almost 5 years
or 7 ½ years, either way the delay is excessive. That excessive delay is
factor that I must consider.
next point for consideration is the prejudice to the other party to the
litigation, CMI Toyota. If the 2005 application was reopened
and amended with
retrospective effect, then there would be a further hearing of the matter, with
all of the necessary preparation
that would entail and then ultimately judgment.
That hearing would concern itself with the issue of: firstly, whether there were
any contraventions of the Award; and, secondly, if so, what the required penalty
should be. Thereafter, it is conceivable –
given the circumstances of this
litigation – that the losing party, whom ever that may be, would exercise
the relevant rights
of appeal. The future litigation, no matter how far it
ultimately would go, would engender further expenses to be incurred by CMI
Toyota. The incurring of such costs is no doubt prejudicial to CMI Toyota.
such future litigation would require CMI Toyota to set about the task of
preparing its case to defend the allegations of breaches
of the Award for the
period 14 April 1998 to 3 November 2000. For obvious reasons, such preparation
will be prejudice given the passage
of time of almost two decades. The calling
of the required evidence and the court’s ability to rely on whatever
evidence is
called is adversely affected by the excessive delay.
further consideration is Mr Kronen’s allegations that CMI Toyota, and a
wider group of employers, had been intentionally underpaying
award entitlements
on a systematic basis to many employees over a period of many years; the broad
assertion being of acting in concert
and being deliberately misleading. It goes
without saying that such allegations are serious, but it must be said that no
of such has been brought forward. If potential future litigation is to
encompass such allegations – which would be a matter
for the judicial
officer hearing the matter – CMI Toyota would obviously be put to the time
and expense of answering those
allegations.
on the issue of prejudice, CMI Toyota has made out its case that if the
discretion to reopen and amend the 2005 application
with retrospective effect is
exercised, and then proceedings ensue with regards to the imposition of a
penalty, that it will suffer
serious prejudice in answering those proceedings.
Such prejudice is a factor that I must consider.
considering the totality of the circumstances of Mr Kronen’s 2016
application to reopen and amend the 2005 application
with retrospective effect,
I consider that the public interest in the finality of litigation tells heavily
towards the application
being refused. It will only be the exceptional and rare
case where such an application should be granted. Mr Kronen has not established
a good reason why he did not raise a s 178 cause of action for the imposition of
a penalty against CMI Toyota, within the 2005 application.
He has also not
established a good reason why that initial application should be reopened and
amended with retrospective effect.
I take on board that the application(s) were
made well after the initial hearing and judgment and after a series of appeals
finalised. Also, in that regard, that the public interest in not
allowing stale matters to be pursued is enlivened by the excessive
prejudicial delay caused by Mr Kronen bringing his application when, and in the
way that he did. The fact that if there were
to be a future hearing on breaches
of the Award and the resultant penalty issues, that such a hearing would inquire
into evidence
over 20 years old is a strong indicator of how stale this series
of litigation has become.
follows that after balancing all of the relevant principles and factors and
after considering the flexibility of the IRCSA, and
the s 154 issues, that Mr
Kronen has not discharged the heavy burden cast upon him to show that his 2005
application should be reopened
and amended with retrospective effect to raise
the cause of action for the imposition of a penalty against CMI Toyota, pursuant
s 178 of the WR Act. Accordingly, the interests of justice require that his
application to do so should be dismissed. I would so
Trial Book p 7.
Workplace Relations Act
(Cth) s 177A, as at 11 July 2005. As an aside, the WR Act was
subsequently replaced with the
Fair Work Act 2009
confused with the
Fair Work Act 1994
(SA) – the FW Act.
Workplace Relations Act
(1), (6A), (6B), (7) & (8) (as at 11 July 2005).
As observed by Gray, Branson
and Lander JJ in
Kronen v Commercial Motor Industries Pty Ltd (CMI
[2008] FCAFC 171
Workplace Relations
Amendment (Work Choices) Act 2005
; Schedule 1, item 185
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2006] SAIRC 31.
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (CMI Toyota)
[2008] FCAFC 171
[3]-[5] & [34].
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2006] SAIRC 31
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (CMI Toyota)
[2008] FCAFC 171
Ibid [12]-[14], [15] &
Kronen v Commercial Moto
Industries Pty Ltd (CMI Toyota)
[2009] HCASL 25
[2009] HCASL 168.
Unpublished decision
recorded on transcript 24 March 2009 referred to by Hannon J in
Commercial Motor Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2013] SAIRC 51
Kronen v Commissioner of
[2009] FMCA 1019
Kronen v Commercial Motor Industries Pty Ltd
[2009] FMCA 808.
Kronen v Commissioner of
[2012] FCA 1463.
TB pp 83-92 Chronology of
Relevant Events at p 86.
Kronen v Commissioner of
[2012] FCA 1463
[18]; [20]-[25] & [38].
Kronen v Commissioner of
[2013] FCA 416
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2013] SAIRC 51
[35]-[37] & [52],
citing the then-recent decision of
McDonald v State of South Australia
[2013] SASC 101.
Ibid [41]-[45].
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2014] SAIRC 44.
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2016] SASCFC 8.
Tr 29/04/16 12.16-40.
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2017] SAET 156
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2016] SAIRC 23
, [9] & [11].
[1936] HCA 40
(1936) 55 CLR
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2017] FCA 33
[25]-[33] &
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2017] SAET 156.
South Australian
Employment Tribunal Act 2014
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2017] SAET 156
, [66]-[84] &
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (trading as CMI Toyota)
[2018] FCAFC 136.
Ibid [53]-[58].
Ibid [64]-[65].
South Australian Government
Gazette 8 November 2018 Gazette p 3940.
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2017] FCA 33
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2017] SAET 156
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2017] FCA 33
Fair Work Act 1994
—19.11.2015 to 30.6.2017.
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2017] FCA 33
Tr 29/07/19 3.08-11.
Applicant’s Written
Submissions 14 June 2019 [14]-[15]; Tr 29/07/19 3.29-32.
Tr 29/07/19 4.06-10.
Applicant’s Written
Submissions 14 June 2019 [12], [19]-[21], [28] & [36]-[39]; Tr 29/07/19
4.32-35, 5.20-22 & 6.39-41.
Industry-Repair, Services and Retail Award 1976
[1979] FCA 8.
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2008] FCAFC 171
Applicant’s Written
Submissions 14 June 2019 [23], [24], [26], [27], [29] & [35].
Applicant’s Written
Submissions 14 June 2019 [29]; Tr 29/07/19 5.28-38.
Tr 29/07/19 6.26-29.
Applicant’s Written
Submissions 14 June 2019 [6]-[9]; Tr 29/07/19 27.19-22.
Applicant’s Written
Submissions 14 June 2019 [13], [16] & [28]; Tr 29/07/19 4.08-10.
[2005] HCA 38.
Applicant’s Reply to
Respondent’s Outline of Argument 19 July 2019 [3]-[5] & [7]; Tr
29/07/19 24.39-45.
Applicant’s Reply to
Respondent’s Outline of Argument 19 July 2019 [10]-[15].
Applicant’s Written
Submissions 14 June 2019 [20]; Tr 29/04/16 11.11-31; TB 137; Applicant’s
Reply to Respondent’s
Outline of Argument 19 July 2019 [7]-[10] &
[14]-[16]; Tr 29/07/19 25.01-08.
Applicant’s Written
Submissions 14 June 2019 [27] & [29].
Ibid [1]-[3], [17], [18],
[25]-[26] & [28].
Industry-Repair, Services and Retail Award 1976
[1979] FCA 8.
Applicant’s Written
Submissions 14 June 2019 [4]-[5], [17] & [21].
Industry-Repair, Services and Retail Award 1976
[1979] FCA 8.
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (trading as CMI Toyota)
[2017] FCA 33
Applicant’s Written
Submissions 14 June 2019 [31]-[32].
[2005] HCA 38
Applicant’s Reply to
Respondent’s Outline of Argument 19 July 2019 [18]-[19].
Ibid 19 July 2019 [6].
TB pp 81-92.
Applicant’s Written
Submissions 14 June 2019 [32].
Tr 29/07/19 25.17-18.
Tr 29/07/19 25.20-33.
Tr 29/07/19 25.35-39.
Respondent’s Outline
of Argument 5 July 2019 [9].
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2017] SAET 153.
Port of Melbourne
Authority v Anshun Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 45
(1981) 147 CLR 589.
Tomlinson v
Ramsey Food Processing Pty Ltd
[2015] HCA 28
(2015) 256 CLR 507
Brisbane South
Regional Health Authority v Taylor
(1996) 186 CLR 541
(1996) 139 ALR 1
Respondent’s Outline
of Argument 5 July 2019 [10]-[11].
Tr 29/07/19 18.09-15.
Weldon v Neal
[1887] UKLawRpKQB 161
19 QBD 394.
See Clayton AuJ analysis at
[92]-[95] in
Kronen v Commercial Motor Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI
[2017] SAET 153
, citing White J in
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2017] FCA 33
Respondent’s Outline
of Argument 5 July 2019 [12]-[16].
Tr 29/07/19 15.01-15
Respondent’s Outline
of Argument 5 July 2019 [17].
Tr 29/07/19 12.04-15,
18.40-45 & 19.01-20.
Both in the Federal
Magistrates Court and in the IRCSA.
157-161; Tr 12/08/08
9.20-10.27 & 58.01-39.
Tr 27/07/19 10.15-22.
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (CMI Toyota)
[2008] FCAFC 171[3]
, [12]-[14].
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (CMI Toyota)
[2008] FCAFC 171.
Tr 29/07/19 12.30-45,
Kronen v Commercial Motor
Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2017] SAET 156
Richards v Little Company
of Mary Health Care
[2018] SAET 186
[1997] HCA 14
(1997) 190 CLR 207
Toohey, Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ at 215.
[2014] FCAFC 67
Kronen v Commercial
Motor Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2017] FCA 33
(1985) 60 ALR 68 [7].
the Ampthill
[1977] 1 AC 547
Ibid at 569.
Kronen v Commercial
Motor Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2017] FCA 33
[50]-[51]. Mr
Kronen also made reference to the Supreme Court Rules in his written
submissions.
Kronen v Commercial
Motor Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2017] FCA 33
Tr 29/07/19 16.36-45
& 17.01-04.
Tr 29/04/16 11.7-13 &
11.33-38; Applicant’s Written Submissions 14 June 2019 [36]-[37].
Kronen v Commercial
Motor Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2017] FCA 33
Kronen v Commercial
Motor Industries Pty Ltd (t/as CMI Toyota)
[2017] SAET 156
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (475 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter