URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRComm/2016/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nwachukwu v Chief Executive, Department of the Premier and Cabinet (on behalf of the Chief Executive, Department for Health and Ageing) [2016] SAIRComm 10 (7 October 2016)
Nwachukwu v Chief Executive, Department of the Premier and Cabinet (on
behalf of the Chief Executive, Department for Health and Ageing)
SAIRComm 10
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION (SA)
NWACHUKWU, Oliver
CHIEF EXECUTIVE, DEPARTMENT OF THE PREMIER AND CABINET (on behalf of THE
CHIEF EXECUTIVE, DEPARTMENT FOR HEALTH AND AGEING)
S 202 Reference of Question for Determination by the
2467 of 2016
HEARING DATE:
9 September 2016
JUDGEMENT OF:
Deputy President KM Bartel
DELIVERED ON:
7 October 2016
CATCHWORDS:
Notification of dispute - Referral to Commission for determination -
process that is reasonably available - Whether orders sought require an exercise
of judicial power - Ss 3, 7, 26, 77,
194, 201, 202 of the Fair Work Act 1994; S
64 of the Public Sector Management Act 1995; S 194 of the Industrial and
Employee Relations
Act 1994; S 34 of the Health Care Act
Krasowski v Chief Executive, Department of Trade and Economic
Development
[2005] SAIRComm 44
Ambulance Employees Association of
South Australia and Etherington v Chief Executive, Department for Health and
Ageing (SA Ambulance
[2015] SAIRComm 11
Ebner v Official
Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
Laws v Australian
Broadcasting Tribunal
[1990] HCA 31
(1990) 170 CLR 70
Port Pirie Regional Council v
Australian Services Union, SA & NT Branch
[2014] SAIRComm
Department of Education and Children’s Services v Australian
Education Union (SA Branch)
[2007] SAIRComm 3
Ranger Uranium Mines Pty
Ltd; Ex Parte Federated Miscellaneous Workers’ Union of Australia
[1987] HCA 63
(1987) 163 CLR 656
REPRESENTATION:
For Mr Nwachukwu: Mr Rogan McMahon, Australian Nursing and Midwifery
Federation (SA Branch)
For the Chief Executive, Department of the Premier and Cabinet: Mr Ben
Garnaut and Ms Cassie White, Crown Solicitor’s Office
Introduction and background
decision concerns a jurisdictional objection raised by the Chief Executive,
Department of the Premier and Cabinet on behalf of
the Chief Executive,
Department for Health and Ageing (the employer or the respondent). The
objection arises in the context of a
dispute notification filed by the
Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation (SA Branch) (the ANMF) on behalf of
Mr Oliver Nwachukwu
(the applicant).
relevant particulars of the dispute and related facts are as
the applicant is
engaged as a Registered Nurse at the Lyell McEwin Hospital and is employed in
accordance with s 34(1) of the
Health Care Act 2008
(Health Care Act) Human Resources Manual
(the HR Manual) applies to the
applicant’s employment;
applicant’s employment is covered by the
Nurses (SA Public Sector)
Nursing/Midwifery (South Australian Public Sector)
Enterprise Agreement 2013
(the Agreement);
the applicant
was suspended with pay on 8 February 2016 for suspected misconduct. The alleged
misconduct pertained to advice received
by the employer that the applicant was
under police investigation concerning an incident of sexual assault which was
alleged to have
occurred in 2014. No further particulars of the alleged
misconduct have been provided to the applicant;
the employer has
stated that
“Given the nature of the complaint and the active SAPOL investigation, no
disciplinary action can be commenced. This is beyond
management’s
contends that the suspension of the applicant and/or the failure of the employer
to conduct an investigation into the alleged
misconduct is inconsistent with
section 4-7-3-1 of the HR Manual dealing with Investigation of Possible
Misconduct; and
Clause 2.2 of
the Agreement prescribes a grievance and dispute resolution procedure. The
applicant has sought to resolve his grievance
under this clause and to refer the
matter to the Commission for conciliation and arbitration under clause 2.2.8 of
the Agreement.
voluntary conference was convened on 14 June 2016, at the conclusion of which
the matter was referred for compulsory conference
in accordance with s 201 of
Fair Work Act 1994
(the Act). On 11 July 2016, the ANMF filed
the questions for determination by the Industrial Relations Commission of
South Australia
(the Commission) and the orders sought on behalf of the
applicant. The respondent submitted that the questions for determination
relief sought were not within the jurisdiction of the
Commission.
amended document was subsequently filed by the ANMF on 19 August 2016. The
respondent presses its jurisdictional objections in
relation to the amended
questions for determination and relief sought.
The questions for determination and relief sought
amended questions for determination identified by the ANMF are as
“1. Given the purported suspicion of misconduct, does
the employer have an obligation to establish whether a
full investigation
is required per 4-1-7-3 HR Manual?
2. If the answer to one (1) is ‘yes’, has the employer met this
obligation?
3. If the answer to two (2) is ‘no’, has the employer pre-emptively
suspended the Applicant pursuant to Appendix 4-1-7-3
4. Does the employer have an obligation to undertake its own
investigation into the suspected misconduct in a
5. If the answer to four (4) is ‘yes’, has the employer met this
obligation?
6. In suspending the Applicant pursuant to 4-1-7-3-1, has the employer given due
consideration to the
relevant considerations
and/or alternative
per Appendix 4-1-7-3-1: Management Guideline 2.1 HR Manual,
and the weight of the relevant evidence?”
5 The ANMF seeks the
following amended orders:
“1. The Commission order the Respondent to immediately abide by it
industrial obligations pursuant to the HR Manual and:
whether a full investigation is required; and if required,
an internal thorough investigation into the suspected misconduct without further
the Commission recommend that the Applicant’s suspension be lifted
immediately and lost allowances reimbursed, pending
the Respondent’s
determination and compliance with 1(a) (above), and their consideration of
Appendix 4-1-7-3-1.”
The jurisdictional objections
6 The respondent has raised the following
objections:
the Commission
lacks jurisdiction to hear the dispute as there is an impartial grievance
resolution process that is reasonably available
to the applicant
(s 194(2)(b) of the Act);
the amended
questions for determination involve the ascertainment of existing rights and a
determination as to whether the respondent
has exceeded its legal authority in
exercising the power to suspend. Such a determination is beyond the
the Commission enshrined in ss 7 and 26 of the Act;
the amended
order no. 1. is effectively in the nature of mandamus, that is, an order that
the respondent comply with an existing obligation
or duty and this is a judicial
remedy; and
amended order
no. 2. seeks an order in the nature of a “recommendation”. A
“recommendation” does not resolve
and/or determine an industrial
dispute and accordingly, is not within the scope of ss 26 and 202 of the Act.
Consideration
The application of s 194 of the Act
194 of the Act sets out the categories of persons/parties who can commence
proceedings before the Commission, as follows:
“194—Applications
to the Commission
(1) Proceedings before the Commission are commenced by an application made to
the Commission—
(a) if, in the Minister's opinion, it is in the public interest that the
matter be dealt with by the Commission—by the Minister;
(b) by an employer, or group of employers; or
(c) by an employee, or group of employees; or
(d) by a registered association of employers; or
(e) by a registered association of employees; or
(f) by the United Trades and Labor Council.
(2) A natural person may bring an application as of right if the application
is authorised under some other provision of this Act
but otherwise must
establish to the satisfaction of the Commission—
(a) that the claim arises out of a genuine industrial grievance; and
(b) that there is no other impartial grievance resolution process that is (or
has been) reasonably available to the person.”
conditions in sub-sections 194(2)(a) and (b) need to be satisfied in the event
that a “natural person” makes an application
and is not authorised
to bring the application under some other provision of the Act.
have previously observed that there is room for argument as to whether a
“natural person” refers to an employee who
commences proceedings
under s 194(1)(c) of the Act, given the different terminology used. I have now
given further consideration
to the approach to this matter adopted in
Krasowski v Chief Executive, Department of Trade and Economic Development
was decided under the
Industrial and Employee Relations Act
(the I&ER Act), however the terms of s 194(2) of the I&ER Act
are in identical terms to s 194(2) of the Act.
, Deputy President Hampton noted that s 194(2) was introduced
into the I&ER Act at the same time as the definition of industrial
was expanded to include disputes between an individual employee and their
disputes were required to have a ‘collective’ quality. It was held
that the term “natural persons”
is a reference to individuals, as
opposed to corporations, associations and institutions that are also considered
to be (legal) persons.
Deputy President Hampton concluded that s 194(2) is
intended to restrict the right of an employee to lodge an application and
proceedings under s 194(1)(c) of the I&ER
, and the absence of any alternative construction of
the term “natural persons” being advanced, I have concluded that
194(2) of the Act is intended to apply to an individual employee who makes
application to the Commission under s 194(1)(c) of the
Act. Accordingly, s
194(2) applies to the applicant.
is agreed that there is no other provision of the Act that authorises the
present application. That the claim arises out of a genuine
industrial grievance
is agreed. Therefore I am required to consider whether the Grievance Procedure
under the HR Manual is “...
an impartial grievance resolution process that
is (or has been) reasonably available”.
impartiality, or otherwise, of the Grievance Procedure in section 3 of the HR
Manual was recently canvassed in the decision of
Ambulance Employees
Association of South Australia and Etherington v Chief Executive, Department for
Health and Ageing (SA Ambulance
no conclusion on the issue was required, the features of the Grievance Procedure
were set out in paragraph [14] of that decision
and are adopted here:
there is a three
step approach for the resolution of administrative decisions: local level
discussions; referral of the grievance
to the Chief Executive Officer or
delegate for a decision; referral of the matter to the Grievance and
Reclassification Appeal Panel
(the Panel) for determination;
consists of a Chair nominated by the Chief Executive of the Department of Health
and Ageing; a nominee from an area separate
from the area in which the aggrieved
employee is located; and a union or discipline representative nominated by the
aggrieved employee;
the Panel must
have regard to the relevant legislation, the HR Manual, the relevant
Award/Agreement and other employment conditions;
the Panel can
overturn decisions, substitute its own decision, including in respect of
disciplinary matters. Decisions are by majority
vote and minority decisions are
noted within the decision;
the Panel is
required to make its decisions fairly and act impartially and independent of the
interests of the employer or employee.
main argument of the ANMF is that the Panel is weighted to the employer, which
always has majority representation on the Panel
and therefore the Panel is not
my view this feature alone is not sufficient to establish impartiality. In
reaching this view I have had regard to the principles
enunciated by different
tribunals on the issue of apprehended bias. In
Ebner v Official Trustee in
High Court held that the application of the apprehension of bias principle
requires a two-step process:
“First, it requires the identification of what it is said might lead a
judge (or juror) to decide a case other than on its
legal and factual merits.
The second step is no less important. There must be an articulation of the
logical connection between the
matter and the feared deviation from the course
of deciding the case on its merits. The bare assertion that a judge (or juror)
an “interest” in litigation, or an interest in a party to it,
will be of no assistance until the nature of the interest,
and the asserted
connection with the possibility of departure from impartial decision making, is
articulated. Only then can the reasonableness
of the asserted apprehension of
bias be assessed.”
Laws v Australian Broadcasting Tribunal
, Gaudron and McHugh JJ
“When suspected prejudgment of an issue is relied upon to ground the
disqualification of a decision-maker, what must be firmly
established is a
reasonable fear that the decision-maker’s mind is so prejudiced in favour
of a conclusion irrespective of
the evidence or arguments presented to him or
these principles to the present matter, the ANMF would be required to do more
than assert that the inclusion of two members
of the Panel nominated by the
employer will result in a decision other than on its merits. In my view, any
argument that the Panel
is not impartial would require the ANMF to make out an
argument, on the basis of the above approach, that one or both identified
employer nominated representatives on a given Panel are prejudiced in relation
to a particular conclusion.
next issue for consideration is whether the Grievance Procedure in section 3-1-3
of the HR Manual is or was reasonably available
to the applicant. The Grievance
Procedure applies to administrative
states that “An administrative decision is defined as a decision, or a
failure or refusal to make a decision, in the exercise
or purported exercise of
administrative authority by the Hospital/Health Service”. It is agreed
that the decision to suspend
the applicant; the refusal to lift the suspension;
and/or the decision not to conduct an investigation into the alleged misconduct,
are each administrative decisions.
19 Section 3-1-3 then includes
the following provisions:
“Exceptions
Generally any administrative decision that directly affects an employee is
subject to the right of grievance appeal with the following
exceptions:
Where a right of
appeal lies under the relevant Award or Agreement
Where a decision
has been made by the Grievance and Reclassification Appeal Panel
Where the right
of appeal lies under other legislation e.g. Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act.
Tests to be satisfied
Certain tests need to be satisfied for the Panel to undertake a
The employee
must be directly affected by the administrative decision i.e. there has to be a
resultant significant consequence which
is experienced directly.
attempt must have been made to resolve the grievance through conciliation.
The Panel may
only undertake a review relating directly to a decision where no other
appeal/review mechanism exits.”
present dispute has come before the Commission under clause 2.2.8 of the dispute
settling procedure in the Agreement. The relevant
provisions of clause 2.2 are
as follows:
“2.2 GRIEVANCE & DISPUTE SETTLEMENT
Any grievance, industrial dispute or matter likely to create a dispute is to
be dealt with in accordance with the manner set out hereunder:
2.2.1 The parties to the Agreement are obliged to make every endeavour to
facilitate the effective functioning of these procedures.
2.2.2 The parties or their representative(s) will make themselves available
for consultation as required under these procedures.
2.2.3 The employee or employee representative should discuss any matter
affecting an employee with the supervisor in charge of the
section or sections
in which the grievance, dispute or likely dispute exists.
2.2.4 If the matter is not resolved at this level the employee or employee
representative should ask for it to be referred to an
appropriate manager who
will arrange a conference to discuss the matter.
2.2.5 The consultation process as described in 2.2.4 will be commenced
within 24 hours of the grievance, dispute or likely dispute
having been
indicated, or within such longer or shorter time as may be agreed by the
2.2.6 If a matter cannot be resolved using the above procedures, the parties
should enter into consultation at a higher level on
both sides, as the parties
consider appropriate. At this level of consultation officers of the DHA or DCSI,
and Public Sector Workforce
Relations as appropriate, may be involved.
2.2.7 At any stage in the procedures after consultation between the parties
has taken place in accordance with the procedure, either
party may request and
be entitled to receive a response to its representations within a reasonable
time as may be agreed upon by
the parties.
2.2.8 If the grievance, dispute or likely dispute is not resolved in
accordance with these procedures either party may refer the
matter to the IRCSA
for conciliation or in the event that conciliation fails to fully resolve the
matter for determination, the IRCSA
(a) Arbitrate the dispute; and
(b) Make a determination that is binding on the parties to the dispute.
: If the IRCSA arbitrates a dispute, it may also use the powers
that are available to it under the
Fair Work Act 1994
A decision that the IRCSA makes when arbitrating a dispute is agreed by the
parties as being a determination for the purpose of Division
4 of Part 3 of
Chapter 5 of the
Fair Work Act 1994
(SA). Therefore, an appeal may be
made against that decision.
2.2.13 ...”
applicant and the ANMF are parties to the Agreement and have an obligation to
facilitate the effective functioning of the dispute
procedure in accordance with
clause 2.2.1 of the Agreement. The inclusion of a dispute settling procedure in
an enterprise agreement
is a mandatory requirement under s 77(1)(c) of the
objects of the Act in s 3 include the following
provisions:
“(h) to provide a means for settling industrial
disputes that cannot be resolved by amicable agreement as expeditiously as
and with a minimum of legal formality and technicality; and
(i) to ensure compliance with agreements and awards made for the prevention
or settlement of industrial disputes, and to ensure
compliance with any
obligations arising under this Act; and
(j) to provide employees with an avenue for expressing employment-related
grievances and having them considered and remedied including
provisions for a
right to the review of harsh, unjust or unreasonable dismissals—
(i) directed towards giving effect to the
Termination of Employment
(ii) ensuring industrial fair play; and...”.
the issue was whether the employee, having exhausted the
grievance process available to him under s 64 of the
Public Sector Management
(the PSM Act), could come to the Commission with a dispute in
relation to the same grievance. After considering relevant decisions
principles of statutory construction, Deputy President Hampton concluded that
the PSM Act was an exclusive code for dealing
with public sector employee
grievances concerning administrative decisions. He also concluded that, in any
event, there was no jurisdiction
for the Commission to deal with the
employee’s grievance as an impartial grievance procedure was reasonably
available to him
within the meaning of s 194(2)(b) of the I & ER Act.
present matter is distinguished from
, in several respects. In
the Commission was considering grievance procedures potentially
available to the employee under two statutes, the I & ER Act
and the PSM
Act. The Disciplinary Appeals Procedure prescribed under the PSM Act did not
contain exceptions and limitations of the
the Grievance Procedure. The only exclusions from the Disciplinary Appeals
Procedure of the
PSM Act were employees who had a right of appeal under some
other provision of the PSM Act or who were of a class excluded by
regulation.
HR Manual applies to employees covered by the
Health Care Act 2008
decision was taken by the authors of the HR Manual to subsume the operation of
the Grievance Procedure where Awards, Enterprise
Agreements or “other
appeal/review mechanisms” provide a right of appeal against an
administrative decision. The terms
“appeal” and “review”
appear to be interchangeable in the Grievance Procedure. I am satisfied that the
procedure does not apply where the employee has an alternative forum
within which to challenge an administrative decision.
Gaurnot argued that the applicant could only access the Commission if the Panel
held that it could not deal with his grievance.
This argument is unsustainable
in my view as it contemplates that the Panel would effectively determine the
scope of the dispute
settling jurisdiction of the Commission under the Act.
the applicant sought to utilise the Grievance Procedure, the Panel would not be
able to deal with his grievance on the correct
construction of its scope. In
these circumstances, the Grievance Procedure is not, and was not, reasonably
available to the applicant.
Are the questions for determination and relief sought within the
Commission’s jurisdiction?
amended questions for determination concern the employer’s obligations
under, and compliance with section 4-1-7-3 and Appendix
4-1-7-3 of the HR
Manual. It is not necessary to set out these provisions in full. It is
sufficient to note that section 4-1-7-3
covers the employer’s
responsibilities and obligations in relation to the investigation of alleged or
possible misconduct;
suspension with pay; and making a decision. Further
information on the procedural requirements of the investigation is set out in
Appendix 4-1-7-3.
Sub-sections
7(2) and (3) of the Act sets out the nature of the jurisdiction exercised by the
Industrial Relations Court and Commission,
and s 26 sets out the specific
“7—Industrial
authorities
(2) The Court is a judicial authority with the jurisdiction conferred by this
Act to adjudicate on rights and liabilities arising
out of employment.
(3) The Commission is an industrial authority with the jurisdiction conferred
by this Act to regulate industrial matters and to prevent
and settle industrial
“26—Jurisdiction
of Commission
The Commission has—
(a) jurisdiction to approve enterprise agreements regulating remuneration and
other industrial matters; and
(b) jurisdiction to make awards regulating remuneration and other industrial
matters; and
(c) jurisdiction to resolve industrial disputes; and
(d) jurisdiction to hear and determine any matter or thing arising from or
relating to an industrial matter; and
(e) any other jurisdiction conferred by this or any other Act (including on
account of a referral of a matter or an application under
and Skills Development Act 2008
nature of the arbitral approach was recently considered by this Commission in
Port Pirie Regional Council v Australian Services Union, SA & NT
. The Full Commission held that the Commission can form an opinion as
to the existing legal rights and obligations of the parties,
so long as it does
so only as a step in arriving at the conclusion as to what their future
regulation ought to
Department of Education and Children’s Services v Australian Education
Full Commission was considering an argument as to whether the position advanced
by the Union involved the impermissible exercise
of judicial power by the
Commission. The decision helpfully sets out a number of relevant principles
which characterise an exercise
of power as arbitral or judicial, as follows
(citations deleted):
that judicial
power involves making an adjudication upon disputes as to rights and obligations
arising from the operation of law upon
past events and conduct, and involves a
binding declaration of right;
exercise of arbitral power sometimes cannot be discharged without a tribunal
forming an opinion on the interpretation of
laws, and does not in itself amount
to usurpation of judicial power;
exercising arbitral power a tribunal may find it necessary to form an opinion as
to the existing legal rights of the parties
as a step in arriving at the
ultimate conclusions on which the tribunal bases the making of an award intended
to regulate the future
rights of the parties;
formation of such an opinion does not bind the parties and cannot operate as a
binding declaration of right;
exercise of arbitral power concerns the creation of legal rights and obligation
even if the function is performed in settlement
of a dispute relating to past
transactions, events and conduct;
that judicial or
arbitral power takes its character from the purpose of the inquiry and
determination; if its object is to ascertain
what rights and obligations should
exist it is properly characterised as an arbitral function when performed by a
body charged with
the resolution of disputes by arbitration;
that functions
may be classified as arbitral or judicial according to the way they are
amended questions for determination by the Commission go to matters upon which
the Commission would be required to form an opinion.
The Commission’s role
is to determine what is right and fair in relation to a particular dispute, and
it is difficult to envisage
how this could be achieved without forming an
opinion on whether there is a legitimate basis for the actions (or in this case,
of the employer, which are the subject of the dispute. I consider
that the amended questions address a legitimate enquiry by the
Commission.
the ANMF has identified that the purpose for which the enquiry is made is a
resultant order that the employer immediately
abide by its existing industrial
obligations. The dispute notification filed by the ANMF is couched in
similarly restrictive terms.
The relief sought involves an exercise of judicial
Other matters
155(1) of the Act provides that the Commission is not bound to give effect to
the relief sought by any of the parties and
can give any form of relief that is
deemed appropriate. The ANMF relied on this section in its argument that the
Commission could
essentially circumvent any jurisdictional impediments in the
relief it sought.
the context of the Commission’s dispute settling powers, s 155B enables
the Commission to determine the nature of the future
rights and obligations that
should be put in place, if any, to resolve the dispute, irrespective of the
relief sought by the parties.
However, the present proceedings have been framed
only by reference to a determination of the industrial rights and obligations of
the parties arising under section 4-1-7-3 of the HR Manual and the
enforcement of same. It is not open to the Commission to determine
alternative relief in these circumstances.
order no. 2 calls for the Commission to make a recommendation. This is beyond
the power of the Commission under s 202 of
the Act for the reasons advanced
by the employer.
the reasons set out above, I conclude that the Commission does not have
by the ANMF.
am satisfied, and it is not contested that the dispute notification concerns an
industrial matter. The dispute is properly brought
before the Commission
pursuant to s.194 of the Act on the basis that the Grievance Procedure in the HR
Manual is not, and has not
been reasonably available to the applicant.
dispute notification will be referred back to compulsory conference. The ANMF is
to advise the Commission how it wishes to proceed.
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
It is the practice of
this Commission to publish its reasons for decision in full on the Internet. If
any party or person contends
that these reasons for decision should not be
published in full the party or person must make an application within seven days
the delivery of these reasons. The application shall be by an Application for
Directions with a supporting affidavit and should be
addressed to the presiding
member(s). If no such application is lodged within the time specified these
reasons will be published
in accordance with the Commission’s usual
Taken from the
“Particulars of the Dispute” and the attachments to the Application
dated 2 June 2016 and the Statement
of Agreed Facts filed by the respondent on 2
September 2016.
Letter to Mr
McMahon from Mr Towers dated 26 April
Letter from
Ms White of the Crown Solicitor’s Office to the Commission, dated 26 July
Respondent’s Particulars of Jurisdictional Objections, filed 2 September
SAIRComm 44.
Industrial Law Reform (Fair Work) Act 2005
, at paragraphs 40, 42 and 48.
[2015] SAIRComm
[2000] HCA 63
[1990] HCA 31
(1990) 170 CLR 70
administrative decisions are excluded from the grievance process in section
3-1-3, none of which apply in the present
circumstances.
Section 64(5) of the PSM
at paragraph
SAIRComm 3.
, at paragraph 23.
Ranger Uranium Mines Pty Ltd ; Ex Parte Federated Miscellaneous
Workers’ Union of Australia
[1987] HCA 63
(1987) 163 CLR 656
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (249 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter