URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAERDC/2025/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:57:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
EMANUELE v CITY OF CHARLES STURT ASSESSMENT PANEL [2025] SAERDC 2 (13 February 2025)
ENVIRONMENT, RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT COURT OF SOUTH
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
In the Matter of AN APPLICATION FOR JOINDER
EMANUELE v CITY OF CHARLES STURT ASSESSMENT PANEL
[2025] SAERDC 2
Judgment of Commissioner Dawson
13 February 2025
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING - ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING - DEVELOPMENT CONTROL -
APPLICATIONS
Application to join proceedings by a third party – proposed four storey
detached dwelling in the Waterfront Neighbourhood Zone
at Tennyson refused by
Council Assessment Panel - applicant for joinder an adjoining landowner –
consideration of applicant’s
interest in the matter under appeal –
applicant has sufficient interest but will adduce expert evidence that will be
assistance to the Court – consideration of the contribution of
the applicant and the resultant impact or delay on the resolution
proceedings.
Held: application for joinder dismissed.
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
Environment, Resources and Development Court Act 1993
Development and Infrastructure (General) Regulations 2017
(SA), referred
Pitt & Ors v Environment Resources and Development Court & Ors
(1995) 66 SASR 274
O’Neill &Anor v Kimhi & Ors
[2008] SASC
Moloney v 21-25 South Esplanade Pty Ltd & Ors
[2024] SASCA 58
considered.
EMANUELE v CITY OF CHARLES STURT ASSESSMENT PANEL
[2025] SAERDC 2
THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING JUDGMENT:
Introduction
Tony Emanuele (
) sought development approval for the
construction of a four storey detached dwelling at 2 Bucknall Court, Tennyson
On 17 July 2024, the
City of Charles Sturt Assessment Panel (
refused to grant development approval to the application. The proposal was
refused on account of the proposed height of the dwelling,
the extent and impact
of the side and rear setbacks, potential for overlooking and overshadowing and
the extent of earthworks proposed.
Appellant lodged an appeal against that refusal on 12 September
4 October 2024, the owners of the adjoining dwelling to the south of the Land (4
Bucknall Court, Tennyson), Ms Megan Dansie and
Mr Tony Stankiewicz (
), filed an application to be joined to these proceedings, along
with a supportive affidavit.
Appellant opposes the application for joinder, with the CAP raising no
hearing from the parties and considering the material before me I have formed
the view that the Joinder Applicants have a
interest in the matter under appeal. I am not satisfied however that it is in
the interest of justice that they be joined
as I am unconvinced that they will
make a useful contribution to the resolution of the issues before the Court.
the following reasons, I exercise my discretion to not join Ms Dansie and Mr
Stankiewicz to these proceedings.
Land is a vacant, irregular shaped allotment of approximately 713 square metres
in area, located within the Waterfront Neighbourhood
Zone of the Planning and
Design Code (
Land is located on the western side of Bucknall Court, at the northern end of a
row of eight dwellings all with rear access
to, and views of, the adjoining Open
Space Zone, comprised of the Wara Wayingga -Tennyson Dunes Conservation Reserve
and Tennyson
Land is one of the last undeveloped allotments on Bucknall Court, created by a
subdivision approved around 1999 and subject to
a Land Management Agreement
) with the Council. The LMA seeks to control the height, density and
setbacks of residential development upon the Land and adjoining
within Bucknall Court. The LMA contains design guidelines which designates
building envelopes and maximum building heights
for each allotment, with the
Land and adjoining allotments on the western side of Bucknall Court subject to a
building prohibition
or setback line restricting the extent of development
fronting the coast.
application for the construction of a four storey detached dwelling with
associated retaining walls and swimming pool was lodged
in 2022. The proposal
falls within the category of code assessed
development
and within this,
performance assessed development
be assessed on its merits against the Code. The proposal was publicly notified
by the Respondent in accordance with
Planning, Development and
Infrastructure Act 2016
CAP refused the proposal, citing eight reasons within the decision notification
which can be summarised as
building height
exceeds 2 levels and 8.5 metres;
impact of side
setback on suburban character and adjoining dwelling (access to natural light
and ventilation);
impact of rear
setback on adjoining neighbours, views from the waterfront, suburban character
and ability to provide soft landscaping;
unacceptable
degree of overlooking from upper-level windows and balconies;
driveway does
not provide safe and convenient access; and
the proposal
does not minimise the need for earthworks.
Appellant subsequently lodged an appeal against the decision of the CAP. The
application for joinder was lodged prior to a conciliation
conference being held
pursuant to
Environment, Resources and Development Court Act 1993
ERD Court Act
). The conference between the parties is yet to
parties confirmed that a compromise proposal has been put to the CAP for
consideration. The outcome of that process is unknown
with no details of any
potential amendments submitted to the Court.
application
Dansie and Mr Stankiewicz own the adjoining allotment and dwelling abutting the
southern boundary of the Land at 4 Bucknall Court,
They engaged legal
counsel and a planning consultant to prepare and submit a representation on
their behalf opposing the development.
The representation raised concerns in
relation to the height of the building, the rear setback, overshadowing of their
solar panels
and solar hot water, overshadowing of their north facing windows
and potential impacts from the extent of excavation proposed along
boundary. They also appeared before the CAP in support of their
representation.
additional concern was raised regarding the requirements of the LMA and the
failure of the proposal to adhere to the building
prohibition line which seeks
to set a consistent rear setback for all the allotments adjoining the coastal
joined to the appeal the Joinder Applicants propose to provide the Court with
their own lay evidence and allow the Court to view
the Land and locality from their dwelling and private yard. They indicated that
they would adduce expert evidence as to the impact upon their solar panels and
expressed a readiness to call planning evidence but
acknowledged that such
evidence is likely to already be before the
The potential provision
of structural engineering evidence was also
for Joinder
17 of the ERD Court Act confers a general power and a discretion on this Court
to join a person as a party to any proceedings.
Section 205(2)(c) of the Act
sets out the following statutory test for determining joinder
applications:
(c) the Court may, in dealing with an application from a person to be joined as
a party to the proceedings (other than the Crown,
a relevant authority applying
under section 122, or a person who was entitled to be given notice of a decision
in prescribed circumstances
(if relevant)), determine not to grant the
application—
(i) on the ground that the Court is not satisfied that the person has a special
interest in the subject-matter of the application;
(ii) on the ground that, whatever the interest of the person may be, the Court
is not satisfied that the interests of justice require
that the person be joined
as a party; or
(iii) on any other ground determined to be appropriate by the Court.
decisions of the Supreme Court of South Australia in
long set out the approach to be taken in determining the merits of an
application for joinder.
Doyle CJ outlined that approach in
in the following terms:
The power of making an order for joinder
under s 17 involves making a judgment in the light of the facts of the case
before the ERD
Court. Important factors in any such case will be the nature and
strength of the interest of the applicant for joinder in the decision
appeal, the contribution which the applicant for joinder is likely to be able to
make to a proper resolution of the issues
before the ERD Court and whether the
interests which the applicant for joinder represents and the material to be
advanced by that
person will be adequately dealt with by the parties already
before the ERD Court. It will also be appropriate for the ERD Court
to consider
the impact upon the proceedings of the joinder. The Court can and should
consider the interests of the parties before
it as of right in the public
interest in the prompt and efficient dispatch of proceedings. In addition, of
course, there will in
each case be other factors particular to the
more recent Court of Appeal decision in
Moloney v 21-25 South Esplanade Pty
), held that the approach taken in
continues to apply to the consideration of joinder
applications. I have followed the approach outlined above and assessed the
and strength of the interest held by the Joinder Applicants, the
contribution that they are likely to make to a proper resolution
of the issues
before the Court, whether their interests will be adequately dealt with by the
parties already before the Court, and
the impact that the joinder may have on
proceedings and
the interests of the parties in the
prompt and efficient dispatch of proceedings.
Consideration
Nature and strength of interest
Joinder Applicants own the adjoining dwelling to the south of the Land. In
it was held that “
the special interest of an adjoining
owner will be readily demonstrated where the proposed development is likely to
have a materially
deleterious, and not merely trivial, impact on the amenity and
value of the adjoining owner’s
consider that the siting and scale of the proposed dwelling is such that it is
likely to have an impact upon the Joinder Applicants’
enjoyment of their
land and dwelling, to a degree which satisfies the special interest test. These
impacts, as identified within
the Council planning staff report to the
and the CAP’s reasons
for refusal,
predominately arise
from the overall bulk and scale of the proposed dwelling and the proposed
rear/western setback forward of the
adjoining dwellings to the south.
is noted that counsel for the Appellant conceded that the Joinder Applicants do
indeed have a ‘
relevant interest
the reasons given I find that the Joinder Applicants have a special interest in
the matter under appeal.
Contribution to be made and
whether interests will be adequately dealt with
found that the Joinder Applicants have a special interest in the matter,
consideration is given to the contribution they are
likely to make to a proper
resolution of the issues before the ERD Court and whether
their interests and the material to be advanced by
them will be adequately dealt with by the parties already before the
application for joinder identified that the Joinder Applicants’ intend to
call both planning and engineering
During the hearing of
the application counsel for the Joinder Applicants confirmed a preparedness to
call planning and engineering
evidence, acknowledging that planning expertise is
likely to already be before the Court. Regarding the engineering evidence this
would be provided ‘
in the absence of engineering evidence provided or a
dilapidation report
’ being submitted by the Appellant to ensure the
stability of the adjoining dwelling was not
the hearing the Joinder Applicants also indicated that they would provide their
own lay evidence and adduce expert evidence
as to the overshadowing impact of
the proposed dwelling upon their solar
The exact nature and
form of this evidence and who it would be provided by was unclear in the
submissions made to the Court. The
Joinder Applicants would also make their
dwelling and private yard available for the Court to view.
CAP do not oppose the joinder application, noting that they would be calling
planning evidence should the matter progress to
Appellant opposes the joinder application, questioning the value that the
Joinder Applicants will bring in assisting the resolution
of the matter before
the Court. It was argued that the issues of building height, setback,
overlooking and overshadowing raised
by the Joinder Applicants within their
submission to the CAP are planning issues that were considered by Council
planning staff and
the CAP in determining the matter. It was submitted by the
Appellant that these matters are capable of being determined by the Court
specialist planning court informed by its own expertise as well as that provided
by the parties already before it as of right.
The Joinder Applicants conceded
in their submission that they anticipated that planning expertise ‘
be provided by the court and the appellant
previously stated the CAP intend to call planning evidence to assist the Court.
on the submissions and my experience of how similar matters have proceeded
through this Court I accept the argument advanced
by the Appellant that the
issues of building height, bulk, scale, setback, overlooking and overshadowing
raised by the Joinder Applicants
are planning issues that can be adequately
considered by the Court, informed by the planning evidence brought by the
parties already
before it. Whilst the Joinder Applicants are genuinely
concerned about the potential impacts of the proposal upon their land, the
impacts are not unique to this matter and are routinely considered in instances
where a multistorey building is proposed alongside
existing dwellings. The
relatively narrow width and east/west orientation of the allotments are such
that some degree of overshadowing
and visual impact will arise from the
construction of a dwelling upon the Land in compliance with the LMA design
guidelines and the
policies of the Code. This is evident in the existing
shadowing and impacts which occur between the established dwellings within
locality. The extent to which the proposal may impact the Joinder Applicants
will be considered by the Court when it undertakes
an assessment of the
relation to the overshadowing of the Joinder Applicants’ solar panels and
solar hot water system I accept the Appellant’s
submission that it is a
planning matter that can be adequately dealt with by the Court and the planning
experts before it. Submissions
were made regarding the accuracy of the
overshadowing plans provided within the development application documents in
respect to the
extent of the solar panels depicted on the Joinder
Applicants’ roof. It is clear from the aerial images that the lower row
of solar panels has been omitted from the shadow diagrams. No concerns were
raised as to the accuracy of the depiction of the shadow
cast or the overall
location/siting of the adjoining dwelling and proposed dwelling.
this basis it is reasonable to use the aerial images to locate the missing
panels upon the overshadowing diagrams when assessing
the potential shadowing of
the solar system, as was done by the Council planner in their assessment report
to the CAP.
The exact nature
and expertise of the evidence to be brought by the Joinder Applicants in
relation to this issue is unclear. I
am not convinced that additional
assistance over and above that which could be provided by the Court or planning
expert would be
of benefit to the resolution of the appeal.
Joinder Applicants intimated that they would call engineering advice in the
absence of any engineering or dilapidation reports
being provided by the
Appellant. It was argued that this advice would inform the Court’s
consideration of the potential impact
of the proposed earthworks and
construction of the dwelling upon the stability and structural integrity of the
Joinder Applicants’
the Joinder Applicants’ concerns as to the potential impacts arising from
the proposed basement excavations are noted,
I accept the Appellant’s
argument that these considerations will be dealt with under s139 of the Act. No
arguments were advanced
that the specifics of the Land or the development were
such that it was impossible to find an engineering solution that would
address the concerns. Indeed, it is noted that the Joinder
Applicants’ dwelling has a part basement constructed close to an
139 of the Act and
Regulations 64(3)
Planning, Development and Infrastructure
(General) Regulations 2017
require the Appellant to engage a
professional
the proposal and detail any works required to ‘
shore up any excavation
or to underpin, stabilise or otherwise strengthen the foundations of any
matters such as this are commonly resolved after the grant of Planning Consent,
following the detailed design of a project
where engineering advice is used to
inform the building design and construction methods. The process of
notification and review
required under s139 of the Act is to be undertaken prior
to the commencement of construction and is considered an appropriate way
addressing that matter in this instance.
offer from the Joinder Applicants to provide lay evidence and make their
property available to the Court during the view is noted.
Given the nature of
the matters in dispute and the Land being an unfenced, cleared allotment I do
not consider that either offer
would be of any meaningful assistance to the
Debelle J held that whilst the ability of an applicant for
joinder to call evidence and make submissions is a relevant factor in
determining
the joinder application it is not necessarily a sufficient basis on
which to order joinder, with each case turning on its own facts
circumstances.
considered the evidence, both lay and expert, proposed to be adduced by the
Joinder Applicants. I have formed the view that
their interests and the material
to be advanced will be adequately dealt with by the parties already before the
Court or throught
other mechanisms mentioned above within the Act.
Impact on proceedings and the
interests of the parties
Consideration
of the potential impacts that an order for joinder will have on proceedings and
the interests of the parties already
before the Court is a relevant factor when
applying the discretion conferred upon this Court to join a
Appellant submitted that an order for joinder would unduly extend the appeal
process and lead to additional costs to the parties,
particularly the calling of
engineering evidence.
Joinder Applicants and CAP did not make any submissions on this aspect of the
Court’s consideration of the joinder application.
the potential impact on proceedings is not a reason for taking a narrow view on
an application for joinder, in this instance
I consider that an order for
joinder would unreasonably impact on
proceedings.
As noted above the
engineering issues raised can be adequately dealt with under the Act, outside of
the appeal process. Engineering
evidence will result in additional cost and
time to all parties, an impact which is unreasonable in this instance.
Similarly, the
planning matters raised, including the impact upon the solar
panels and hot water system, are capable of being addressed by the expertise
the Court and evidence from the other parties. Additional submissions and
evidence would, in this instance, unreasonably draw
out the proceedings.
consider that the inclusion of the Joinder Applicants would unduly impact on the
interests of the parties in the prompt and efficient
dispatch of the
proceedings.
Joinder Applicants have sought to represent their interest in the matter through
the engagement of legal counsel and planning
expertise in the preparation of the
two submissions made to Council. They are concerned about the potential impacts
of the proposal
upon their land as an adjoining owner, being the closest
dwelling to the Land and proposed development. They have a special interest
the matter as an adjoining owner whose amenity and enjoyment of their land will
likely be impacted upon by the proposal.
the Joinder Applicants indicated that they would provide lay evidence and call
evidence in relation to the impact upon their
solar panels and potentially
structural engineering evidence it will be of limited assistance given the
expertise of the Court and
the evidence to be provided by the parties already
determining an application for joinder consideration must be given to the impact
that the joining of a third party will have
upon the interests of the parties
before the Court as of right. I have concluded that the joinder of this
would unreasonably impact and delay the
resolution of the proceedings.
the reasons given, whilst I am satisfied that the Joinder Applicants have a
special interest in the matter, I am not satisfied
that the interests of justice
require them to be joined as a party to these proceedings.
therefore exercise my discretion in dismissing the application of Ms Dansie and
Mr Stankiewicz to be joined as a party to the appeal
and will make an order
accordingly.
Allotment 26 in Deposited Plan
53344 as detailed within Certificate of Title Volume 5714 Folio 314.
7 - Book of Documents at [725-727].
FDN 1 – Originating
Exhibit JA 1 – Affidavit
of Ms Felicity Niemann dated 4 October, 2024.
Relevant version of the Code
for the assessment of the application is 12 May 2022 – version 2022.8.
Planning, Development and
Infrastructure Act 2016
7 - Book of Documents at [725-727].
Allotment 741 in Deposited Plan
68218 as described within Certificate of Title Volume 5950 Folio 499.
T5 lines 11 to 13.
T6 lines 4 to 9.
Pitt & Ors v
Environment Resources and Development Court & Ors
(1995) 66 SASR 274
O’Neill &Anor v
Kimhi & Ors
[2008] SASC 109
66 SASR 274
[2024] SASCA 58.
Ibid, [177].
FDN 7 - Book of Documents at
Ibid at [725-727].
T8 line 11.
(1995) 66 SASR 274
FDN 4 – Interlocutory
application to be joined at [2].
T6 lines 4-9.
T5 lines 13–21.
T14 lines 8-10.
T5 lines 11 to 13.
FDN 7 - Book of Documents at
As defined within the
Planning, Development and Infrastructure (General) Regulations 2017
Ibid, r64(3).
[2008] SASC 109
(1995) 66 SASR 274
T9 lines 7 to 9.
(1995) 66 SASR 274
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (367 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter