URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCT/2015/64.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kviesitis v Return to Work SA (Pellenc Australia Pty Ltd) [2015] SAWCT 64 (18 December 2015)
Kviesitis v Return to Work SA (Pellenc Australia Pty Ltd)
WORKERS COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL (SA)
Jeffrey John
Judicial Determination
2646 of 2015
HEARING DATES:
7 and 8 December
JUDGMENT OF:
His Honour Deputy President Judge BP
DELIVERED ON:
18 December
CATCHWORDS:
Judicial determination - Worker has a
pre-existing shoulder injury that occurred in compensable circumstances - Worker
suffers a knee
injury when lifting a motor bike that had fallen on his wife -
Whether there is a causal relationship between the knee injury and
the earlier
shoulder injury -
that the factual basis to support that assertion
has not been made out - Determination rejecting the worker’s claim
- Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986.
[2015] SAWCT 48
March v Stramare (E & MH) Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 12
(1991) 171 CLR
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Dr P
Respondent: Mr R Harms
Solicitors:
Applicant: Paul Alvaro and
Respondent: Minter Ellison
Kviesitis has had a variety of jobs over the course of his working life. In more
recent years he was employed by Pellenc Australia
Pty Ltd as a fitter.
2010 whilst he was carrying out his employment duties with Pellenc he hurt his
right shoulder and he has had shoulder problems
ever since.
respect of these he sought and obtained compensation under the
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
the afternoon of 2 November 2014 Mr Kviesitis’ wife, Jennifer, rode her
1200cc BMW motor bike to the local shops to buy some
milk. When she returned
were on her driveway. She
lost her balance and she and the motor bike fell to
the ground. Mrs Kviesitis’ lower left body was underneath the motor bike
and she was lying on the ground. Her right leg was on the right hand side of the
bike. She managed to switch the bike off and focussed
on keeping her right leg
away from the exhaust pipe to avoid her leg being burned.
motor bike has large solid parcel bags at the rear and a protruding motor at the
front. Following the fall the left parcel bag
was in contact with the ground. So
too was the motor. As such, although Mrs Kviesitis was trapped she was not
bearing the weight
of the bike.
she fell Mrs Kviesitis screamed. Mr Kviesitis, who was inside their house,
responded. Although Mrs Kviesitis was not in any
immediate danger, Mr Kviesitis
felt the need to lift the motor bike so that Mrs Kviesitis could slide out
from under it. It would
have made more sense for Mr Kviesitis to lift the front
of the motor bike because it was lower to the ground than the rear. However,
that was not the approach that he took. He resolved to focus on the rear of the
motor bike. He was mindful that he could not use
his right arm because of his
shoulder injury. He approached the motor bike facing it with his rear, with a
view to using his buttocks
to assist with the lift. He placed his left hand on
the parcel rack at the rear. He assumed a squatting position with his right knee
in bent position slightly forward of his left leg. Using his buttocks and left
hand he lifted the motor bike. As he did so he felt
a popping sensation in his
right knee. In the hours that followed he developed pain in his knee. Some days
later he went to the surgery
of his general practitioner to seek some advice.
Sometime later again he raised the issue with the Mr Crowley, the orthopaedic
who was treating him for his shoulder. He had surgery on his right knee
and eventually had a knee reconstruction.
Kviesitis contends that the issues that he has with his right knee are causally
related to his right shoulder problems and are
compensable under the Act.
Kviesitis’ case is based on the following:
alternative but to help his wife and lift the motor bike;
because he had
an injured right shoulder he was forced to adopt an unusual means of lifting the
motor bike;
that unusual
means of lifting placed a strain on his right knee;
that strain
caused his knee injury.
motor bike weighs in excess of 200kg. It follows that considerable effort was
required to lift it. Mr Crowley was in no doubt
that the lift contributed to the
occurrence of a meniscal tear that he found when he operated on Mr Kviestis on
14 November 2014.
surgery also revealed that Mr Kviestis had pre-existing fairly advanced
osteoarthritic degeneration in his right knee. Given
Mr Kviesitis’
that is hardly
surprising.
giving his evidence Mr Kviestis explained how he would have lifted the motor
bike had he not injured his shoulder. He reconstructed
this and had a photograph
taken that was tendered in evidence
to show how he would have done it. He would have stood next to the bike, bent
his knees, grabbed the handle bars with his left hand
and the parcel carrier
with his right hand and effected the lift.
this method would have put some strain on Mr Kviesitis’ right knee. Dr
Crowley was asked about this in cross examination.
It led to the following
“What I’m asking you is this: there’s
no way of telling – let’s assume he didn’t have a bad shoulder
and he lifted it the way it’s shown in C8, with his knees bent and then
straining the knees as he lifts the bike. There’s
no way of telling
whether the incident would have occurred - the knee injury - doing it that way,
as opposed to the way he did it,
is there?---True.
So the issue is not so much the way he did it but the fact that he put strain on
the knee on that occasion and that caused the problem?---Yes.
And whatever way he lifted the bike, he couldn’t have avoided putting
some strain on the right knee. Correct?---Yes.
If in fact he had his right leg out in front of the left leg and had most - was
holding his weight with the left leg, there would
have in fact been more strain
on the left leg than the right leg, wouldn’t there?---You would think so.
So if he adopted a manner of lifting which put equal strain on the right leg and
the left leg you would think the right leg be more
likely to have been caused
injury in that circumstance?---In that circumstance,
Kviesitis general practitioner, Dr Ekanayake, agreed that even if
Mr Kviesitis had lifted the motor bike normally he could have
right knee.
issues of causation can be difficult.
the cases have cautioned against drawing fine distinctions and attempting to
define or characterise what is causally related
and what is not. Instead they
have simply urged a common sense evaluation of the
is sufficient to refer to some citations referred to by the learned President in
Wade v SA Water.
Kooragang Cement Pty Ltd v Bates
P explained the process follows-
‘The result of the cases is that each case where causation is an issue
in a workers compensation claim, must be determined on
its own facts. Whether
death or incapacity results from a relevant work injury is a question of fact.
The importation of notions
of proximate cause by the use of the phrase
‘results from’, is not now accepted. By the same token, the mere
certain events occurred which predisposed a worker to such injury or
death, will not, of itself, be sufficient to establish that
such incapacity or
death ‘results from’ a work injury. What is required is a common
sense evaluation of the causal chain.
As the early cases demonstrate, the mere
passage of time between a work incident and subsequent incapacity or death, is
not determinative
of the entitlement to compensation. In each case, the question
whether the incapacity or death ‘results from’ the impugned
injury (or in the event of a disease, the relevant aggravation of the disease),
is a question of fact to be determined on the
basis of the evidence, including,
where applicable, expert opinions. Applying the second principle which Hart and
Honore´ identify,
a point will sometimes be reached where the link in the
chain of causation becomes so attenuated that, for legal purposes, it will
held that the causative connection has been snapped. This may be explained in
terms of the happening of a novus actus. Or it may
be explained in terms of want
of sufficient connection. But in each case, a judge deciding the matter, will do
well to return, as
McHugh JA advised, to the statutory formula and to ask the
question whether the disputed incapacity or death ‘resulted from’
work injury which is impugned.’
As Mason CJ noted in
March v Stramare (E & MH)
that in turn involves ‘the making of value judgments and the
infusion of policy considerations’. Kirby P said as much
. He said that as the statutory test of causation is contained within
a compensation statute it should not be construed narrowly.
‘By the same token, the statute may not be construed unrealistically so
as to stretch unreasonably the burdens imposed upon
employers and their
insurers. Those burdens require a relevant employment connection, as defined in
the statutes, before compensation
will be held payable.’”
(footnotes omitted)
useful staring point in determining issues of causation is the ‘but
for’ test. It is not, however, the sole criterion
by which issues of
causation are to be resolved. As Mason CJ noted in
March v Stramare (E &
MH) Pty Ltd
it is particularly problematic in cases where there are two or
more acts or events which would each be sufficient to bring about
the injury.
That is so because its application as a sole criterion can lead to absurd
results that defy common sense.
real utility is in its application as a negative criterion of
If the alleged
connection does not meet the ‘but for’ test, without more, it would
normally follow that causation, for
legal purposes, has not been
established.
this case the medical evidence does not support a finding that
Mr Kviesitis’ adoption of the method of lifting was any more
to have caused the injury to his right knee than what would have been the case
had he attempted the lift unaffected by an
injury to his right shoulder.
follows that the ‘but for’ test has not been made out. On that basis
alone I would find against Mr Kviesitis.
if the position were otherwise I would reach the same conclusion.
Mrs Kviesitis did not own a motor bike, did not decide to go to the shop to buy
milk or did not slip on gum nuts Mr Kviesitis would
not have found it necessary
to lift the bike when he did and therefore would not have injured his right knee
when he did. In that
sense there is a connection between the knee injury, the
motor bike, the milk and the gum nuts. But it would defy common sense to
that these were causes of the injury to Mr Kviesitis’ right
It would defy common sense
because there is not a sufficiency of a connection to say, for legal purposes,
that they are causally
my view, it would similarly defy common sense to conclude that a work relate
shoulder injury in 2010 has a sufficient connection,
for legal purposes, to a
meniscal tear to the right knee when lifting a motor bike at home some four
years later.
common sense evaluation of the facts leads to the conclusion that in a relevant
sense, there is no connection between the right
shoulder injury and the right
knee injury.
follows that Return to Work SA was right to have rejected
Mr Kviesitis’ claim in respect of his right knee. Its determination
is therefore confirmed.
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are advised that if a party wishes to appeal against any part of this
decision which is appealable pursuant to s 86(1) of
the Act such appeal must be
filed with the Registrar in accordance with the form titled Notice of Appeal
within 14 days of the delivery
of this decision and must be served on all
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
practice of this Tribunal to publish its reasons for decision in full on the
Internet. If any party or person contends that
these reasons for decision should
not be published in full the party or person must make an application within
seven days of the
delivery of these reasons. The application shall be by an
Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should be addressed
to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within the time
specified these reasons will be published in accordance
Tribunal’s usual practice.
He was born in 1958
He weighs over 150kg
WorkCover Corporation v
Full Supreme Court, Judgment No S5831,at 11 per Lander J.
[2015] SAWCT 48
March v Stramare (E &
MH) Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 12
(1991) 171 CLR 506
at para 22 per Mason CJ.
March v Stramare (E &
MH) Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 12
(1991) 171 CLR 506
at para 20 per Mason CJ.
During opening submissions
it was faintly suggested that an alleged failure by Return to Work SA to
promptly engage home help that
allegedly would have seen the removal of the gum
nuts was an operative cause of Mr Kviestis’ knee injury. In light of Mrs
evidence that not long before her fall she had swept the
driveway but the gum nuts had returned because of recent winds this argument
not pursued.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (117 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter