URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAEOT/2015/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:56:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
RAGLESS v STOKES [2015] SAEOT 1 (12 March 2015)
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
(District Court Administrative and
Disciplinary Division)
to comply with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting
publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person
using material in the judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed
to the Registry of the Court in which it was generated.
[2015] SAEOT
Judgment of His
Honour Judge Costello
HUMAN RIGHTS -
DISCRIMINATION
Proceedings instituted pursuant to Whistleblowers Protection Act (WPA) and
Equal Opportunity Act claiming victimisation by the respondent
complainant alleging victimisation consequent upon his appropriate disclosure of
public interest information – disclosure
concerned details of an incident
at complainant’s shooting club between himself and the Secretary of his
club – respondent
was the club's Assistant Secretary – complainant's
report of the details of the incident did not constitute an appropriate
disclosure of public interest information within the meaning of the WPA –
Complaint otherwise within time and arguably disclosing
possible acts of
victimisation by the respondent - application by respondent for dismissal of the
HELD: Complaint dismissed.
Whistleblowers Protection Act 1993
Opportunity Act 1984
, referred to.
Stokes v Ragless
[2014] SASC 56
Rodgers v Revenue SA, Department
of Treasury and Finance (State of South Australia)
[2014] SASCFC 2
considered.
[2015] SAEOT 1
Introduction
these proceedings the respondent has applied for an order dismissing the
Complaint. In the alternative he seeks an order striking
out the Complaint.
He makes his application upon two bases, namely that:
It is lacking in
substance; and
It is out of
Background to the Complaint
his Complaint to the Equal Opportunity Commission, the complainant asserted that
he had been victimised by the respondent because
he had made an
‘appropriate disclosure of public interest information’ within the
meaning of the
Whistleblowers Protection Act 1993
relevantly provides:
5—Immunity for appropriate disclosures of
public interest information
(1) A person who makes an appropriate disclosure of public interest information
incurs no civil or criminal liability by doing so...
(2) A person makes an appropriate disclosure of public interest information for
the purposes of this Act if, and only if—
(i) believes on reasonable grounds that the information is true; or
(ii) is not in a position to form a belief on reasonable grounds about the
truth of the information but believes on reasonable grounds
that the information
may be true and is of sufficient significance to justify its disclosure so that
its truth may be investigated;
(b) the disclosure is made to a person to whom it is, in the circumstances of
the case, reasonable and appropriate to make the disclosure.
(3) A disclosure is taken to have been made to a person to whom it is, in the
circumstances of the case, reasonable and appropriate
to make the disclosure if
it is made to an appropriate authority (but this is not intended to suggest that
an appropriate authority
is the only person to whom a disclosure of public
interest information may be reasonably and appropriately made).
(4) For the purposes of subsection (3), a disclosure of public interest
information is made to an appropriate authority if it is made
to a Minister of
the Crown or—
(a) where the information relates to an illegal activity—to a member of
the police force...
relevantly provides:
4—Interpretation
public interest information
means information that tends to
(a) that an adult person (whether or not a public officer), body corporate or
government agency is or has been involved...—
illegal activity; or
irregular and unauthorised use of public money; or
substantial mismanagement of public resources; or
(iv) in conduct
that causes a substantial risk to public health or safety, or to the
environment; or
(b) that a public officer is guilty of maladministration in or in relation to
the performance ... of official functions.
public officer
(a) a person appointed to public office by the Governor; or
(b) a member of Parliament; or
(c) a person employed in the Public Service of the State; or
(d) a member of the police force; or
(e) any other officer or employee of the Crown; or
(f) a member, officer or employee of—
(i) an agency or instrumentality of the Crown; or
(ii) a body that is subject to control or direction by a Minister, agency or
instrumentality of the Crown; or
(iii) a body whose members, or a majority of whose members, are appointed by the
Governor or a Minister, agency or instrumentality
of the Crown; or
(g) a member of a local government body or an officer or employee of a local
government body.
relevantly provides:
9—Victimisation
(1) A person who causes detriment to another on the ground, or substantially on
the ground, that the other person ... has made or
intends to make an appropriate
disclosure of public interest information commits an act of victimisation.
(2) An act of victimisation under this Act may be dealt with—
(a) as a tort; or
(b) as if it were an act of victimisation under the
Equal Opportunity Act
but, if the victim commences proceedings in a court seeking a remedy in
tort, he or she cannot subsequently lodge a complaint under
Opportunity Act 1984
and, conversely, if the victim lodges a complaint under
that Act, he or she cannot subsequently commence proceedings in a court seeking
a remedy in tort.
(4) In this section—
(a) injury, damage or loss; or
(b) intimidation or harassment; or
(d) threats of reprisal.
Equal Opportunity Act
act of victimisation under the WPA may be dealt with as if it were an act of
victimisation under the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
the purposes of this application the EOA relevantly provides:
93—Making of complaints
(1) A complaint alleging that a person has acted in contravention of this Act
may be made—
(a) by a person aggrieved by the act;
(1c) A complaint—
(a) must be in writing and set out the details of the alleged contravention;
(b) must be lodged with the Commissioner.
(2) A complaint must be lodged—
(a) if the alleged contravention is constituted of a series of acts—within
12 months of the last of those acts;
(b) in any other case—within 12 months of the date on which the
contravention is alleged to have been committed.
(2a) The Commissioner may, on application, extend the time for lodging a
complaint, even if the time for lodging the complaint has
expired, if the
Commissioner is satisfied—
(a) that there is good reason why the complaint was not made within the
stipulated time period; and
(b) that in all the circumstances it is just and equitable to do
95B—Referral of complaints to Tribunal
If, in respect of a complaint, the Commissioner—
(a) is of the opinion that the matter cannot be resolved by conciliation; or
(b) has attempted to resolve the matter by conciliation but has not been
successful in that attempt; or
(c) has declined to recognise the complaint as one on which action should be
taken and the complainant has, within 3 months of being
notified of the
Commissioner's decision, by notice in writing, required the Commissioner to
refer the complaint to the Tribunal,
the Commissioner must refer the matter to
the Tribunal for hearing and determination.
96—Power of Tribunal to make certain orders
(1) The Tribunal may, on determining that the respondent in proceedings under
this Part has acted in contravention of this Act, make
one or more of the
following orders:
(a) subject to this section, an order requiring the respondent to pay
compensation (of such amount as the Tribunal thinks fit) to
a person for loss or
damage arising from the contravention;
(2) The Tribunal may, at any stage of proceedings under this Part—
(a) make an interim order to prevent prejudice to a person affected by the
proceedings;
(b) make an order dismissing the proceedings.
Public Interest Information
public interest information which the complainant asserts that he disclosed (and
for which he has been victimised) arises out
of and comprises an incident which
occurred on the firearms range at his local gun club (the South Australia Field
& Game Association
Southern Branch) between himself and the club secretary,
Mr Peter Perry. After he reported the incident to the club President in
accordance with the club’s Constitution he asserts that club officials,
including the respondent (the then Assistant Secretary)
‘cover-up’ the incident and victimise him by
attempting to paint him as being mentally unstable. The complainant set out
the incident in detail in a letter dated 11 October 2012
to the Secretary of the
South Australian Field and Game Association and that detailed incident forms
part of his Further and Better
Particulars of Complaint which he filed on
7 October 2014. The letter recording the incident relevantly
I wish to lodge a formal complaint regarding an incident
at the Southern Branch at a two day shoot on 19/9/12.
The incident highlights abusive language and un-save (sic) practice by Secretary
of the branch and unfair and unreasonable treatment
by the President.
I was in a squad with the following shooting order.
Colin Smith, Peter Perry, Ross Bryant, Allen Marden, Mark Della-Zoppa and
It was the inaugural shotgun start and we were on stand two about twenty minutes
There were plenty of jokes about starting before the season opened and Mark
commented that the score card showed Peter had not paid
and questioned Peter. He
was told to mind his own business.
I mentioned to Peter that the format had been rejected by Federation some years
ago and was answered by some derogatory comments
‘we will do what we want’ attitude.
(sic) opened about three minutes early for at least one
squad but we played by the rules and waited.
Things went OK until I was in the stand. I shot at the C and B target and after
shooting the A target and preparing for the pair,
Peter stopped me as he felt
that due to a sudden increase in wind the target has shifted and there was a
safety concern on stand
He moved the safety bollard to restrict gun travel but at this point squad one
had arrived and Pat decided in the light of the wind
shift the targets required
He changed target A and B but target B was now directly in front of the power
I was told by Peter to continue shooting and I refused until target B was
I did not have to shoot B again but every other squad had to and the cost to the
club in the event of power line or insulator damage
could exceed $20,000.
This upset Peter who commented that we shoot at the power line all the time and
‘just get on with it’.
My insistence resulted in Peter yelling to Pat ‘You will have to shift it;
fucking Ragless won’t shoot unless you do’.
The problem was fixed and I got ready to shoot. Target A had now been shifted
to re shoot my third
Two shots at my single target resulted in a Lost and Lost from Peter and I
insisted he had got it wrong. Under sufferance he allowed
me to shoot the pair
and we proceeded to stand three.
I was standing about four metres North West of the stand and in a quiet
conversation with Mark on rule interpretation interrupted
by a very loud,
‘STEVE, SHUT THE FUCK UP’.
I looked up and Peter had turned in the stand, appeared noticeable (sic)
agitated and angry and repeated, ‘JUST SHUT THE FUCK
I approached Peter and asked him to remove his shells from the gun, he turned to
face the stand and I repeated my request. He replied
that he was going to
When he left the stand I approached him and he said he did not want talk and
would discuss it in the clubhouse.
I insisted and made the following comment, ‘PETER, IF YOU TALK DOWN TO ME
OR ATTEMPT TO BELITTLE ME ONE MORE TIME, YOU WILL
NOT ENJOY YOUR DAY’.
Peter replied, ‘IS THAT A THREAT’? I repeated, ‘PETER, IF YOU
TALK DOWN TO ME OR ATTEMPT
TO BELITTLE ME ONE MORE TIME, YOU WILL NOT ENJOY YOUR
DAY’. Peter asked ARE YOU THREATENING ME?
I do not remember this but Ross said that I replied something like ‘If
that’s the way you take it then I am threatening
We then moved on to station four without incident and on the way to five Peter
wanted to get his hat and wanted us to start without
Allan was first up and on sighting the targets a branch that had been shot at
was obscuring the view of the tower target. Allen shot
the A target and put his
second barrel at the branch which fell a couple of feet. I commented that now it
obscured my view.
When Mark was in the stand he shot his first target and put his second shot into
the branch which fell. Peter commented, ‘AS
SECRETARY OF THIS CLUB AND
SQUAD REFEREE IT IS MY DUTY TO INFORM YOU, IF THERE IS ANOTHER INCEDENT (sic)
LIKE THAT I WILL REMOVE
YOU FROM THE SQUAD AND YOU WILL NOT SHOOT AT THIS CLUB
I shot the rest of the day and the last round on Sunday with Peter without
further incident but I am sorry to say that in twenty
three years of shooting
Sporting Clays Peter is only the second person I will never shoot, or associate
with again.
I was at the club from Friday night until about 4.30pm on Sunday and apart from
a very short comment stating he would get the story
from other members of the
squad I had no action taken by the President to what I consider a very serious
incident on a shooting range.
As I have stated the President did not ask for my
version or suggest I lodge a complaint even after hearing a version of the
from at least two other squad members.
An incident report lodged with the President resulted in written confirmation of
my version of the event from two of the squad members
and a statement that the
weekend was over and we all have to move on.
I believe there is no excuse for the treatment I received by both the President
and Secretary of this club.
this statutory and factual background I now turn to consider whether the
complaint is lacking in substance and/or out of time.
Lacking in Substance
may be seen from the legislative scheme referred to above that in order for
there to be a valid complaint under the EOA, arising
from alleged acts of
victimisation within the meaning of the WPA, there must first be a disclosure of
public interest information
leading to one person causing detriment to
there was a level of animosity between the complainant and Mr Perry which
ultimately led to Mr Perry threatening to remove
the complainant from the squad
and precluding him from shooting at the club should such an incident ever arise
question which falls for consideration in an application such as this is
whether, in the context of the definition of ‘public
information’ in the WPA, it can be said that the incident so described
constitutes:
activity; or
conduct that
causes a substantial risk to public health or
it is possible to categorise Mr Perry’s conduct as rude and liable to
cause an affront, there is nothing about it, in
my view, to suggest that it is
have set out in detail the material which the complainant asserts to be public
interest information which he sought to disclose.
Mr Perry spoke in this way he was approached by the complainant with a request
that he unload his gun whereupon Mr Perry simply
replied that he was going to
take his turn and shoot.
finishing shooting he declined to talk to the complainant. There then followed
comments from the complainant to Mr Perry which
the complainant accepted could
be taken to be a threat, not by Mr Perry but by the complainant to Mr
is equally noteworthy in this respect to observe that after the words were
uttered by Mr Perry and after the apparent threat was
made by the complainant,
both men moved on to shoot further ‘rounds’ together on that day and
the following day in circumstances
which the complainant described as
‘without further incident’. As I have already observed, whilst the
conduct of Mr Perry
and the language he used was robust, arguably rude and
certainly capable of giving affront to the person to whom it is directed,
was certainly nothing illegal about either in my view.
do I regard such behaviour as being such as to cause a risk to public safety let
alone a substantial one.
there was an initial robust exchange between two men carrying guns (which in the
circumstances one might prefer didn’t
occur on a shooting range) the
incident did not rise above that level. In my view, there can be no suggestion,
in the entire incident,
that either man used or even contemplated (let alone
seriously considered) the use of his weapon in such a way as to pose the
(in terms of
of the WPA) ‘substantial risk to public
when one subjects the entire incident to proper scrutiny the complainant’s
real grievance appears not to be the incident
itself but rather the dismissive
attitude of Club Officials to his report.
am therefore quite satisfied that the language and conduct of Mr Perry, however
categorised, fell well short of either illegal activity
or conduct that caused a
substantial risk to public safety.
the event that I am wrong as to whether the reporting of this incident is
capable of amounting to a disclosure of public interest
information, I will now
consider whether or not the complainant has demonstrated that the respondent
committed an act of victimisation,
namely whether he has caused detriment to the
complainant on the ground or substantially on the ground of his disclosure of
the information.
complainant identified four potential acts of victimisation which he attributed
to the respondent, namely:
Notifications
to the Registrar of Firearms dated 12 October 2012 asserting grounds to suspect
the complainant was suffering a mental
illness, such that it was not safe for
him to possess a firearm. The complainant asserts that the notification was
deliberately false
and made to smear him to ‘cover up’ the incident
and thwart his bid for election in forthcoming club elections;
subsequent removal of his licence in 2012;
respondent’s alleged defamatory email sent on 23 October 2012;
commencement of Supreme Court proceedings by the respondent against him for
defamation in October 2013.
is difficult to see how the removal of his licence by the Firearms Branch could
be an act of victimisation by the respondent.
the notifications to the Registrar of Firearms were not signed by the
respondent, he was a member of the Committee of the Club
and I would not be
prepared to conclude that he played no part in the decision to notify the
Registrar. The notifications
of amounting to
an act of victimisation.
my view, the alleged defamatory email
is also capable
of being an act of
victimisation.
there is the institution of the defamation proceedings against the complainant
in October 2013.
this aspect, I was referred to an interlocutory decision of his Honour Parker J
in the defamation proceedings
which his Honour granted the respondent a mandatory injunction restraining the
complainant from publishing certain words suggesting,
amongst other things, that
Mr Stokes is a liar, a cheat or a corrupt individual.
was submitted that, in the face of such a decision and the nature of the
findings favourable to the respondent, it was not reasonably
arguable that the
institution of such proceedings
amount to an act of victimisation.
I do not agree.
decision by Parker J is an interlocutory decision. If, at the trial of these
proceedings, the respondent was to fail and if, as
the complainant asserts to be
the case, the Supreme Court was to find that the defamation action was
instituted for an improper purpose
i.e. for the purposes of attempting to
silence the complainant from speaking out, it is arguable (and I put it no
higher) that this
amount to an act of victimisation.
Accordingly,
I am satisfied that if public interest information had been disclosed there are
grounds to conclude that the complainant
could succeed on the act of
victimisation issue.
I am satisfied that the disclosure of this incident by the complainant does not
constitute an appropriate disclosure of public
interest information within the
meaning of the WPA. Accordingly, as there has been no relevant disclosure within
the meaning of the
WPA I am satisfied that ‘it is not reasonably arguable
that the complainant could succeed on the issues upon which he would
succeed at the trial’.
is sufficient to dispose of the Complaint. However, the respondent also
submitted that the Complaint was out of time.
Complaint was lodged on 20 November 2013. In his Complaint and the various
Particulars supplied in amplification and support of
it, the complainant
identified the series of actions, to which I earlier referred, which may be said
to evidence the acts of victimisation
of him (potentially involving the
respondent) consequent upon his reporting of the incident.
allegations involving conduct which occurred in 2012 occurred more than 12
months prior to the institution of the Complaint and
are outside the
12 month time limit.
institution of the Supreme Court proceedings is an ‘act’ which
occurred within 12 months of the institution of the
Complaint and is therefore
‘within time’.
as it may be necessary, I was invited by the complainant to exercise my
discretion and extend the time within which to institute
the proceedings, as
they relate to the other alleged acts of victimisation.
is apparent from the material supplied in support of the Complaint that after
the complainant reported the incident he became engaged
in a series of
protracted and distracting interchanges with other authorities.
my view, there are proper grounds to explain his delay in instituting the
Complaint. In the circumstances, I would have been prepared
to exercise my
discretion to make an order extending the time within which to institute the
proceedings, as they relate to the alleged
acts which are out of time.
for the reasons expressed, any such extension would be an exercise in futility
because I am satisfied that, as there was
no appropriate disclosure of public
interest information within the meaning of the WPA by the complainant, it is not
reasonably arguable
that the complainant could succeed at trial.
Accordingly,
the Complaint is
‘conduct’ identified in the definition is
of the WPA relates to
conduct which does not arise here.
Stokes v Ragless
The relevant test was
formulated in this way in
Rodgers v Revenue SA, Department of Treasury and
Finance (State of South Australia)
[2014] SASCFC 2
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (190 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter