URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACAT/2025/64.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:53:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rennison & Anor v Conroy [2025] SACAT 64 (21 July 2025)
Amanda Conroy
NEUTRAL CITATION
Rennison & Anor v Conroy
[2025] SACAT 64
Deputy President Johns
21 July 2025
HEARING DATES
16 July 2025
SACAT FILE NO.
2025/SIR000174
ON REVIEW FROM
Member Harvey (30 June 2025, 2025/SH006481)
The applicant landlords sought the internal review of a decision of the
Tribunal to dismiss their application for vacant possession.
The dismissal was
made on the basis that the Form 9 notice of termination served by the landlords
was invalid pursuant to section
91(1)(e) of the
Residential Tenancies Act
The landlords served the notice of termination under Section 83A RTA on one
of the grounds contained in
regulation 16(1)
Residential Tenancies
Regulations 2010
. The ground is contained in paragraph (i) and states that a
landlord may serve a Form 9 notice of termination at the end of a fixed
tenancy where the landlord has previously served two notices of breach for the
same breach, and is in a position to serve a
further notice of
termination.
The landlords’ agent had ticked the relevant box on the Form 9 notice
of termination, but did not include any further particulars
of the ground. The
landlords’ agent argued that in a case of this kind, further particulars
should not be required because
they were self-evident.
The Tribunal found that while only ticking the relevant box on a Form 9
notice of termination may on occasion, be adequate for the
purposes of the
particulars of the ground required by section 91(e) RTA, it would usually be
prudent for a landlord to include further
particulars.
The Tribunal found that the landlords were not entitled to rely on the
particular ground nominated on the Form 9 notice of termination
earlier notice of termination served for rent arrears was ineffectual, and
therefore could not be relied on for this notice
of termination and there was no
other basis on which the notice of termination could be served.
The Tribunal discussed the difference between the requirements of Section
91(1)(e) RTA and the requirements of section 91(1)(ea) RTA.
The Tribunal stated that the correct approach in deciding whether or not a
notice of termination served under section 83A RTA (ie
a Form 9) is valid, is to
Whether or not
the landlord is entitled to rely on the ground identified; and
Whether the
notice of termination complies with the requirements of the RTA.
Internal review – Residential tenancy – Landlord application -
Termination and vacant possession – Prescribed ground
– Notice of
termination – Validity – Expiry of fixed term tenancy
LEGISLATION CONSIDERED
Legislation Interpretation Act 2021
Residential Tenancies Act 1995
Residential Tenancies Regulations 2010
regs 14, 15, 16
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
REPRESENTATION
Ms Levesque, Raine & Horne Gawler, appeared for the applicants
The respondent did not appear
REASONS FOR DECISION
The application
is an application for the internal review of an order made by the Tribunal on 30
June 2025 in matter number 2025/SH006481 (the
original Order).
the original Order, the Tribunal dealt with an application by the applicant
landlords seeking an order for vacant possession of
the property at Munno Para
West (the property), due to the expiry of the fixed term tenancy on 30 May
Tribunal dismissed the application on the basis that the notice of termination
(the Form 9) served by the landlords did not comply
with the requirements of the
Residential Tenancies Act 1995
applicants disagree with the original Order and they have sought a review.
application for internal review is dealt with under
Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(the SACAT Act).
Section 70 SACAT Act requires that on review, the Tribunal must make the correct
or preferable decision taking into
account the evidence available to the
Tribunal at the original hearing, giving appropriate weight to the original
Order, and taking
into account any other evidence the Tribunal considers is
relevant and appropriate to take into account in the course of the review.
application for internal review necessarily includes an application for
Procedural issues
tried to phone the respondent tenant Ms Conroy, twice at the outset of the
hearing, and I left a message on her voice mail after
the first call. She did
not answer on either occasion and she has not contacted the Tribunal. I am
satisfied she was served with
notice of the hearing. I proceeded in her
applicants were represented by their agent, Ms Levesque, in these proceedings.
Ms Levesque has provided further documentary evidence
in the course of the
review. I consider that evidence is useful to me in making my decision and so I
will exercise my discretion
under section 70(4) SACAT Act to accept the
tenancy was for a fixed term of one year. The fixed term was due to expire on 30
landlords have served multiple notices of breach during the tenancy:
A Form 5 served
on 30 August 2024 for an outstanding water invoice of $209.29. The notice
required payment of the invoice by 6 September
2024 or vacant possession by 13
September 2024.
A Form 5 served
on 18 November 2024 for an outstanding water invoice of $209.29. The notice
required payment of the invoice by 26
November 2024 or vacant possession by 4
December 2024.
A Form 5 served
on 20 November 2024 for rent claiming an amount of $1,044.95 to be paid by 28
November 2024 or vacant possession by
29 November 2024.
A Form 5 served
on 5 December 2024 for unrestrained dogs when an inspection was to occur.
A Form 5 served
on 10 December 2024 for rent claiming an amount of $1,045.94 to be paid by 18
December 2024 or vacant possession by
19 December 2024.
A Form 5 served
on 20 March 2025 for unpaid water invoices being a total of $807.35 to be paid
by 28 March 2025 or vacant possession
by 4 April 2025.
5 December 2024 the landlords made an application to the Tribunal for vacant
possession on the basis of rent arrears. The Tribunal
conducted a hearing on 24
December 2024, and at the request of the landlords’ agent, made an order
allowing the tenant to remain
in the property provided she made
The basis of the
application to the Tribunal was the Form 5 served for rent on 20 November 2024.
The Tribunal found that Form 5 notice
of breach, to be valid.
Tribunal conducted two further hearings in relation to rent because the tenant
failed to adhere to the payment plans contained
in Tribunal
26 March 2025, the landlord served a Form 9 notice of termination giving the
tenant 60 days’ notice that the tenancy would
not be renewed.
following box was ticked on the notice of termination:
“You have been given 2 notices for breaching the residential tenancy
agreement for the same or substantially similar breach,
and you have breached
the agreement a third time in the same or substantially similar manner as set
out in the first 2 notices.”
further particulars of the ground of termination were given in the notice of
termination. The landlords then sought an order for
vacant possession on the
basis of the notice of termination.
the original Order, the Tribunal found that the tenancy had not been terminated
by the Form 9 notice of termination, because the
notice of termination did not
provide reasonable particulars of the ground of termination as required by
section 91(1)(e) RTA, and
the landlords were not entitled to rely on the
tenant’s breach for rent because the first notice of breach about rent,
ineffectual.
83A RTA states that a landlord may by notice of termination, terminate a tenancy
for a fixed term at the end of the fixed
term on any of the grounds prescribed
by the regulations, but 60 days’ notice must be given.
16(1) of the regulations made under the RTA, sets out 16 grounds for termination
of a fixed term tenancy under section
83A RTA. The relevant ground for this
application is:
(i) the tenant –
(i) has been given 2 notices under section 80 of the Act which both specified
the same or substantially similar breach by the tenant;
(ii) has breached the residential tenancy agreement on a third occasion in the
same or substantially similar manner as specified
in the 2 notices.
91(1) RTA states the requirements for a notice of termination served under the
RTA by a landlord. They are that the notice
(a) be in writing and in the prescribed form; and
(b) be signed by the landlord or agent; and
(c) state the address of the premises subject to the tenancy; and
(d) state the day on which the tenant is required to give up vacant possession
of the premises; and
(e) specify and give reasonable particulars of the ground of termination; and
(ea) in the case of a notice given on a ground prescribed by the regulations
for the purposes of this paragraph, be accompanied
by written evidence, as
approved by the Commissioner from time to time, which supports the ground for
giving the notice; and
(f) include any further information required by regulation.
Commissioner has published a fact sheet entitled
Terminating a Tenancy.
That fact sheet sets out the written evidence to be provided for the purposes of
section 91(1)(ea) RTA, where a notice of termination
is served for any of the
following reasons:
possession is
required for demolition;
possession is
required to carry out repairs or renovations that cannot be carried out
conveniently while the tenant remains in the
possession is
required for occupation by the landlord, their spouse, child, parent or the
spouse of a child or parent;
a contract for
sale of the premises has been entered into under which the landlord needs to
give vacant possession to the new owner.
The fact sheet
does not contain any information about the requirement for a Form 9 notice of
termination to include reasonable particulars
of a ground of termination (ie the
requirement contained in section 91(1)(e) RTA).
Form 9 notice of termination contains a box on the second page which may be
completed by the landlord, and which refers to particulars
of the ground of
termination.
Findings of the Tribunal
The evidence and submissions of the applicants
Levesque made the following submissions on behalf of the landlords:
particular ground of termination, it is unreasonable to require a landlord to
provide any further particulars of the ground
of termination as the statement
adjacent to the ticked box is self-explanatory.
should be well aware of the particulars of the ground relied on for the notice
of termination because the notices of breach
have all been served on her, there
is no dispute that she has received the notices of breach; and the notices about
rent arrears,
and the debt for water invoices, have been referred to in the
various Tribunal orders (which have also been served on her).
The fact sheet
published by the Commissioner is misleading because the fact sheet does not make
it clear that the requirement for
reasonable particulars of the ground to be
included in the notice of termination applies to all grounds, and there is no
in the form as to what information would satisfy the requirement. The
fact sheet implies that a landlord only needs to provide the
information
contained in it in relation to those grounds referred to in paragraph 19
The training
that has been provided to property managers about this did not make the
situation clear either.
While she agrees
now that the first notice of breach for rent is ineffectual, this occurred
because Ms Conroy made a payment which
was received into their ledger after the
Form 5 notice of breach had been issued, and they were unaware of this issue
until Member
Harvey identified it in the hearing he conducted on 30 June
The Tribunal
should take into account that the Tribunal itself previously (ie in another
hearing, before the hearing conducted by
Member Harvey) found that the first
notice of breach for rent was valid (in matter number 2024/SH011519) and so she
submitted that
it was reasonable for the landlords to proceed as they
My analysis
will determine whether or not the original Order is the correct or preferable
order, by considering the following questions:
a) Is the Form 9
notice of termination valid?
b) Should the Tribunal make an order for vacant possession?
Question 1: Is the Form 9 notice of termination
will approach this question by considering two issues:
landlords entitled to rely on the ground of termination identified in the Form 9
notice of termination?
Does the Form 9
notice of termination comply with the requirements of section 91(1)
Issue 1: Are the landlords entitled to rely on the ground of
termination identified in the Form 9 notice of termination?
ground on which the landlords sought to rely in their notice of termination, was
the service of two previous notices of breach
and the landlord being in a
position to issue a third notice of breach. The landlords did not specify in the
Form 9 notice of termination,
whether they were relying on the notices about
rent or the notices about outstanding water invoices.
Termination on the basis of a breach for rent
the original Order, Member Harvey found that the landlords were not entitled to
rely on the breach for rent because the first notice
of breach served on 20
November 2024 was ineffectual. This is the correct approach. A notice of breach
will be ineffectual if rent
is not two weeks in arrears when the notice is
served. This means that at the point when the notice was served, the landlords
not actually entitled to serve the notice of breach. Accordingly, that
notice should not be relied on in any proceedings brought
against the tenant
concerning rent arrears.
approach is consistent with the approach for section 87(1a) RTA which, in
summary, allows a landlord to make an application to
the Tribunal seeking an
order for termination without first serving a notice of termination where the
landlord has previously served
two notices of breach for rent in the last 12
months, neither notice was ineffectual, and the landlord is in a position where
are entitled to serve a third notice of breach for rent.
I do not consider that the landlords were entitled to issue the notice of
termination under regulation 16(1)(i) on the
basis of the breach for rent.
that ground is not limited to a breach for rent, and allows a landlord to rely
on other breaches (which is different from
the situation under section 87(1a)
RTA). The only other breach on which the landlords could have relied in this
matter, is the breach
for outstanding water invoices, and so I will consider
that in the context of regulation 16(1)(i).
Termination on the basis of outstanding water invoices
landlords served two notices of breach for the same outstanding water invoice of
$209.29. Those notices were issued on 30 August
2024 and 18 November 2024.
the review hearing, Ms Levesque said that there had been a water invoice issued
in between those two invoices, which had been paid
by the tenant. In this
situation, the landlords should have applied the amount paid by the tenant
towards the first outstanding invoice
of 30 August 2024. Any funds remaining
from the payment of that invoice should then have been applied to the next
invoice. A notice
of breach could then have been issued for any amount
outstanding for the next invoice. In these circumstances, I do not consider
landlord can rely on the first two notices of breach for water invoices for the
purposes of the notice of termination.
further notice of breach for outstanding water invoices was issued on 20 March
2025. The landlords would have been able to rely
on this notice, and the first
notice of breach for water for the purposes of regulation 16(1)(i) except that
there was insufficient
time after the invoice issued on 20 March 2025, for the
landlords to be in a position to issue another notice of breach, before they
served the Form 9 notice of termination.
I do not consider that the landlords were entitled to issue the notice of
termination under regulation 16(1)(i) on the
basis of the breach for water
I have concluded that the landlords were not entitled to rely on the ground
identified in the Form 9 notice of termination.
On that basis, I would find that
the notice of termination is invalid. Even so, I will consider the second issue
in any event.
Issue 2: Does the Form 9 notice of termination comply with the
requirements of section 91(1) RTA?
relevant requirements in section 91(1) RTA for the purposes of this matter are:
a) Section 91(1)(e) RTA, which requires that all Form 9 notices of termination,
must include reasonable particulars of the ground
of termination.
b) Section 91(1)(ea) RTA, which requires that Form 9 notices of termination
which rely on any of the grounds contained in regulation
16(1)(a) – (d)
(which are the grounds referred to in paragraph 19 above), must include the
information specified by the Commissioner.
That information is contained on
pages two and three in the Commissioner’s fact sheet entitled
Terminating a tenancy.
accept Ms Levesque’s submission that the manner in which the requirements
of section 91(1)(e) and section 91(1)(ea) RTA have
been dealt with, is
confusing. That confusion arises for the following reasons:
fact sheet:
only addresses
the requirements of Section 91(1)(ea) RTA;
does not contain
any information about the reasonable particulars of the ground of termination,
which are required by section 91(1)(e)
does not explain
the difference between the requirements of section 91(1)(ea) RTA and section
91(1)(e) RTA.
b) The Form 9 notice of termination does not contain any explanation that even
if a landlord is
relying on one of the grounds referred to in
paragraph 19 above, they must still include reasonable particulars of the ground
are relying on.
What is meant by the requirement for “reasonable
particulars of the ground of termination”?
suggest that a sensible approach is: the landlord must include such particulars
as are necessary to provide a reasonable explanation
of the ground of
termination on which they rely.
deciding what is adequate to meet this requirement, it may be useful for a
landlord to bear in mind who will be reading and relying
on that information.
This will be the tenant – and so the information should be enough for the
tenant to understand why their
tenancy is being terminated, (which then allows
the tenant an opportunity to respond, if the notice is disputed). It will also
the Tribunal – should an application to the Tribunal be necessary, then
the Tribunal will review that information to determine
whether the requirements
of section 91(1) RTA have been met, and if so, whether an order for vacant
possession should be made.
Unfortunately,
the space which is provided on the form for those particulars is small, which
tends to imply that one or two sentences
will be adequate. There will be matters
in which that is clearly not the case. If there is inadequate space on the form,
landlord should use an annexure.
accept Ms Leveque’s submission that merely because section 91(1)(e) RTA
requires reasonable particulars of the ground on which
the landlord relies, this
does not necessarily mean that by ticking a particular box on the form, which
has an explanation of the
ground beside it, the form will not comply with the
requirement of reasonable particulars in section 91(1)(e) RTA.
I suggest that it would be prudent to include particulars of the ground on which
the landlord relies. This does not necessarily
have to be a lengthy explanation.
For example, if a landlord is relying on the ground contained in regulation
16(1)(i) concerning
a breach for rent, I consider that a statement in the Form 9
notice of termination to the following effect would be adequate:
Two notices of breach have been served for rent arrears (see annexed notices)
and rent is currently more than 2 weeks in arrears
(see annexed rent record).
Provided that the notices of breach and the rent record were
annexed to the notice of termination.
to the confusing circumstances of the notices of breach in this particular
matter, I consider it was necessary for further information
to be provided in
the Form 9 notice of termination, in order for the requirement in section
91(1)(e) RTA to be satisfied.
these reasons, I agree with the decision in the original Order, that the notice
of termination is invalid.
Question 2: Even so, should the Tribunal make an order for
vacant possession?
the original Order, the Tribunal found that because the notice of termination
was invalid, the application should be dismissed.
this issue was not raised in the original hearing, I will make some observations
with strict compliance with the
requirements of the RTA.
requirements in section 91(1) RTA apply to all notices of termination issued by
a landlord under the RTA, not only notices of
termination under section 83A
Regulation 14 of the
regulations under the RTA states that a landlord must use particular forms for
particular notices of termination.
Tribunal has the power to dispense with strict compliance with the requirements
for a notice of termination, under
Legislation
Interpretation Act 2021
, which provides:
If a form is prescribed or approved by or for the purposes of an Act or a
legislative instrument, a form to the same effect is sufficient
provided that
deviations from the prescribed or approved form are not calculated to mislead.
And also under section 83 SACAT Act which grants the Tribunal power
to “cure irregularities”.
the Tribunal should exercise any such power with caution. In my view, where the
Tribunal is dealing with a matter in which
a notice of termination does not
comply with the strict requirements of the RTA, in deciding whether or not to
dispense with compliance
with the requirements of the RTA, even if the Tribunal
considers that the error in the notice was not intended to mislead, the Tribunal
should consider:
non-compliance impact on the substantial issue being dealt with in the notice
(eg whether or not the tenant is in breach);
is it likely
that the non-compliance will have resulted in a denial of procedural fairness to
the tenant;
the significance
of the consequences for the tenant if non-compliance is waived.
is not uncommon for the Tribunal to receive a notice of termination under
section 80 RTA which is non-compliant for one reason
or another, and for the
Tribunal to exercise its power to waive strict compliance. This is because it is
often the case that the
error is minor (eg an error about dates), and so the
Tribunal will proceed to deal with the application anyway – because the
error was unintentional; the tenant will have received the Form 5 notice of
breach and the details of the breach will be contained
in the Form 5 notice of
breach; and the error has not impacted on the issue in dispute in any material
has been far less common for the Tribunal to receive a non-compliant notice of
termination under section 83A RTA (or section 81
or 83 RTA). It would be unusual
for the Tribunal to dispense with strict compliance if the notice of termination
did not comply with
the requirements of the RTA in these circumstances because
the significance of the consequences for the tenant if that is waived,
significant (they will be required to move out – this is often not a case
where the notice is issued under section
80 RTA for example, for a breach for
rent because the landlord may be seeking a payment plan only).
this matter I do not consider it would be appropriate to waive strict compliance
with the RTA and regulations, (and make an order
for vacant possession),
I have found
that the landlords were not entitled to rely either on the breach for rent or
the breach for outstanding water invoices;
The notice did
not contain reasonable particulars of the breach.
the review hearing, Ms Levesque expressed concern about the consequences of this
approach, which are that the tenancy becomes
and the grounds for
terminating a periodic tenancy are particularly limited.
is self-evident that the grounds for terminating a periodic tenancy are
This is a matter of
government policy. However, in such a situation, the landlords should consider
all other options available to
all of the above reasons, I will affirm the decision under review.
Orders of the Tribunal
Tribunal grants leave to apply for internal review.
Tribunal affirms the decision under review.
This is matter number
2024/SH011519.
The two subsequent orders were
made in matter number 2025/SH000262.
Section 80(2)(a) RTA and this
is to be distinguished from a situation where a notice of termination is merely
invalid – in
that case, the invalidity will have arisen due to some
relatively minor procedural error which does not affect the fundamental issue
the tenant’s breach. In that scenario, a landlord could still rely on the
notice of breach for these purposes.
But it is likely that any
landlord who was relying on any of the grounds contained in regulation 16(1)(a)
– (d), who provided
the information stated in the Commissioner’s
fact sheet, would have provided adequate particulars for the purposes of section
91(1)(e) RTA.
For the purposes of this
decision, I have referred to such a notice as a notice of breach – to
distinguish between a notice
of termination served for a breach as opposed to a
notice of termination served to terminate the tenancy at the end of its term,
but the RTA refers to all such notices as notices of termination.
Section 79A RTA.
See: Section 83 RTA and
regulation 15.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.28 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter