URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWC/2009/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:08:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
THE DIRECTOR OF MINES v WENDY ALICE CLARKE [2009] SAWC 5 (20 November 2008)
WARDENS COURT OF SOUTH
(District Court Administrative and
Disciplinary Division)
to comply with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting
publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person
using material in the judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed
to the Registry of the Court in which it was generated.
DIRECTOR OF MINES v WENDY ALICE CLARKE
[2009] SAWC
Reasons of Warden
20 November
PRESCIOUS STONES CLAIM
Breach of labour using claim as a residence, Mining operations.
DIRECTOR OF MINES v WENDY ALICE
[2009] SAWC
This Plaint relates to
Precious Stones Claim registered number 76953 situated at German Gully Diggings
at Andamooka. The Plaint before
the court relates to an alleged non-compliance
with working conditions. This claim is outside the major working area and
the claim holder or somebody on her behalf must pursuant to the
regulations, work the claim not less than 20 hours per week. There
additional concern with the Department with respect to this claim, namely that
it gives the appearance that the claim is inhabited
and there is a reasonable
risk that other members of the community may take that view.
Compliance Officer Powell attended at the
claim on 7th October. He saw no evidence of recent work and he made
observations consistent
with the claim being set up for habitation and he took a
series of photographs. Those photographs are now exhibit P1. The photographs
of course speak for themselves but show a number of items of furniture and other
personal effects and chattels, they also show the
area is carpeted.
A further inspection of this claim was
carried out by Compliance Officer Kelly on 23rd October 08. He also observed no
sign of any
mining activity and he observed what he described as definite signs
of habitation. He took further photographs on that day 23rd
October and they
are marked exhibit P2. As a consequence of those observations the Department
forwarded to the claim holder a letter
now marked P3 to which the claim holder
responded by her own letter dated 22nd October now P4.
I heard evidence from Ms Clarke who told me
that it was necessary for her to travel to Whyalla for a period of time which
the same time as the second inspection and that she had been absent
for some time earlier than that. She told me that she was mining
the claim, she
described two holes that she dug and showed the court photographs taken on her
mobile phone which have been described
in evidence.
She says that she has a hammer drill and a
generator. She says that she was also in possession of various other drills and
a noodling machine, apparently to be placed on the claim at some future
date. When asked about work of a mining nature that she
had done, she described
the erection of a structure across the front of the drive in the cut, that is
depicted as what appears to
be a corrugated iron wall with a door. This she
says is for security purposes that she does not want any of her mining equipment
stolen from the claim. However she acknowledged at one point in evidence she
was taking the equipment to and from the claim in her
car and the nature of her
mining equipment clearly is such that it could be easily transported and does
not need to be stored on
the claim. She maintains that she is mining the claim
in accordance with her obligations under the regulations. I have considerable
doubt about that I must say.
With respect
to the various items shown in the photographs that give the impression of
habitation she says that they are there for
the purposes of resting. She is not
in good health, tires easily and takes long rest breaks. She says that she is
also capable
of producing other documentation that would support the fact that
she is mining the claim and not residing there. She says in fact
residing in accommodation opposite the hotel in Andamooka that is being paid for
by her partner.
I make some general
observations for the assistance of the Warden who might hear further evidence
with respect to this matter. The
Opal Mining Act of 1995 and the Regulations
thereunder proscribe a code by which opal mining in this State can be lawfully
undertaken.
S7 of the Act provides the means by which a person can obtain a
Precious Stones prospecting permit. "Special Stones" are defined
in S3 of the
Act to be opal and other minerals declared by regulation to be precious stones.
S10 (1) authorises the holder of a
precious stones prospecting permit to
prospect for precious stones and to peg out an area for a precious stones
tenement. Subsection
2 limits the authority conferred by subsection 1 as
proscribed by the Act. "Prospecting" is defined in section 3.
The actual pegging process is controlled by
S12, 13 and 14. S15 (1) of the Act confers upon the holder of a precious stones
permit who lawfully pegs a claim within a precious stones field;
(a) an exclusive right to conduct mining
operations, for the recovery of precious stones and to sell, use, or dispose of
stones recovered in the course of those operations; and
(b) an exclusive right to apply for registration of the claim within 14
To this point the legislation
effectively provides for two preliminary steps to be undertaken before the
benefits conferred by S15
person must acquire a precious stones prospecting permit;
2) that person must lawfully peg a claim and it is only then that an
exclusive right to conduct mining operations arises.
The benefit conferred is
however limited to the conduct of
mining operations
on that claim and the
disposal or otherwise of precious stones recovered.
"Mining operations" are defined in S3.
"Means operations carried out in the course of prospecting or mining for
precious stones, or rehabilitation operations but does not
include fossicking".
The Act confers
no other rights or benefits. For example there would be no
- to erect a structure not reasonably
used for the conduct of mining operations
- to keep or store equipment or chattels, not reasonably used for the conduct
of mining operations
- to carry out any other use or activity of or associated with the claim that
is not reasonably necessary to conduct mining operations
- to permit any person to use or carry out an activity that is not reasonably
necessary for the conduct of mining operations.
This list is by way of
example and not exhaustive.
In my view,
any use of or activity of this kind is not an authorised use or activity of the
My view in this regard is
strengthened by consideration of the regulations that require a claim holder to
carry out mining operations
for not less than 20 hours a week or risk forfeiture
of the claim, see regulation 14(2). The following will be taken to be within
the concept of diligently working the claim
(a) the performance of mining operations on the
(b) work associated with the extraction of or making merchantable, precious
stones located on the claim where that work is carried
out on the claim
(c) the preparation, erection or maintenance of machinery or equipment used
in connection with mining operations where that work
is carried out on the
In my view, what was intended
by Parliament, especially in the case of a proscribed precious stones claim
field was to make available
land that could be appropriately controlled for
mining of precious stones.
If Parliament
intended that land be for another use, then Parliament would have said so.
Any other use in my view contravenes the
provisions of the Act.
Pursuant to S72
"The Wardens court has jurisdiction to determine, in the manner it thinks just,
all suits concerning a right claimed
in, under, or in relation to a tenement, or
a purported tenement, or a precious stones prospecting permit or otherwise
arising under
S75 allows the
court to order forfeiture of a tenement if a requirement of the Act has not be
complied with in a material respect
and the matter is of sufficient gravity to
justify the cancellation of the tenement.
my view these provisions should be widely interpreted to give effect to
Parliament's intentions.
In my view, for
example, to take up residence on a claim is an unauthorised use of the claim and
is not reasonably necessary to conduct
mining operations. Of itself it is not a
mining operation.
The Act confers no
rights of occupancy and to have claim holders living on their claims as their
place of residence to the exclusion
of others or otherwise, in my view results
in the claim being liable for
forfeiture.
Having said that, I have
explained carefully to Ms Clarke that there are a number of options. She either
conducts mining operations
in accordance with the regulations and works the
claim personally or somebody else works her claim on her behalf, for at least 20
hours per week or she will lose the claim. In addition, if she wishes to keep
the claim, she must clean up the appearance of the
claim that gives rise or
might give rise to a conclusion the claim is being inhabited. It is perfectly
acceptable to have some minor
items of furniture, for the purpose of rest, but
it is not acceptable to store goods on the property nor is it acceptable to live
on the property or give the appearance that somebody might be.
I have explained to her if she wants to
keep her claim she must remove the structure erected, namely the doorway to the
wall and remove all of the property not reasonably necessary for rest
after mining. Claims are for mining, they are not for resting
or any other
She has asked me to adjourn
further consideration of this Plaint. I have agreed to that on the basis that
she can have the opportunity
to make good the claim which will be inspected I
imagine on a number of occasions between now and the next circuit. It is also
clear to her if these requirements are not met it is almost certain the
Warden who hears this application will make an order of forfeiture
of her claim
and she will lose it.
Adjourned further
consideration to 28th May 2009 at 11 am in Andamooka.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (90.8 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter