URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWLRP/2012/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Taking Care of Trees v WorkCover [2012] SAWLRP 3 (2 March 2012)
[2012] SAWLRP 3
WORKCOVER LEVY REVIEW PANEL
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
BOTTEN PTY LTD t/as
TAKING CARE OF TREES
(Employer No. E21080109 — File Reference 200096136)
(Applicant)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
Member P.G. Eblen
Member T.M.
Member R. Donnelly
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED 2 MARCH
Application for review — employer believing levy assessed
unreasonably — previously in receipt of significant remissions
— closure of bonus/penalty scheme — exercise of statutory
discretions — discretion to be exercised fairly
and honestly in accordance
with statutory purposes — whether decision reviewable — examination
of circumstances of employer
— to justify remission of levy, circumstances
should be demonstrated that take employer out of the ordinary —
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Cases referred to:
D&V Services v. WorkCover
[2006] SAWLRP 8
Johnson Steel Fabricators v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP
SouthLink v. WorkCover
[2009] SASC 175
(2009) 104 SASR
(2009) 184 IR 72
Chiropractors Association & Perry v. WorkCover
Corporation
[1999] SASC 470
Quark Technologies and Hocking v. WorkCover Corporation
[1997] SASC 6367
(1997) 70 SASR 153
194 LSJS 299
Appearances:
Mr R.J. Botten with Ms S. Hodgetts for the applicant
Mr C.M. Beames of counsel, with him Ms A.M. Rogers, for the
respondent WorkCover.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1. This is the determination of an application,
dated 10 June 2010, seeking a review pursuant to section 72 of the
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
(“the Act”) of a levy
assessed by the WorkCover Corporation of South Australia
(“WorkCover”) dated 4 June
2. Section 72, at the relevant time, provided as follows (so far as is
(1) Where an employer considers that a decision of the Corporation as
(aa) the estimate of remuneration that is to be used for the calculation of a
(a) the fixing or assessment of a levy; or
(b) the imposition of penalty interest or a fine; or
(c) the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead to the
imposition of a supplementary levy,
is unreasonable, the board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a levy,
penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined
by the board, by the board itself, or by a committee or
person to whom the board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the board has an
absolute discretion as to whether
it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the board may—
(aa) alter an estimate;
(a) alter a levy or an assessment;
(b) quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
(c) direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
(d) quash or vary a
condition imposed by the Corporation. …
3. This Panel is the Board’s delegate under section 72: see the
WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002
, as amended (for the current
version, see
South Australian Government Gazette
, 29 October 2009,
4. Section 67 of the Act, on which the case has
been focused, at the relevant time provided (again, so far as is relevant):
67—Adjustment
of levy in relation to individual employers
(1) The Corporation may, in relation to a particular employer, having regard
to all or any of the following matters—
(a) the adequacy or inadequacy of measures taken by the employer to reduce
the incidence of work related traumas;
(b) the incidence or costs of claims for compensable disabilities suffered by
the employer's workers (disregarding claims of a class
excluded from the ambit
of this paragraph by regulation);
(c) the rehabilitation facilities or services for disabled workers provided
by the employer, or the absence or inadequacy of such
facilities or services
provided by the employer;
(ca) the employer's practices and procedures in connection with the
appointment and work of a rehabilitation and return to work co‑ordinator
under Part 3 (including with respect to compliance with any relevant guidelines
published by the Corporation for the purposes of
section 28D);
(d) the employer's practices as to the retention, employment or re-employment
of disabled workers (and, in particular, any failure
on the employer's part to
provide, in accordance with this Act, employment to a worker who has suffered a
compensable disability
in the employer's employment);
(e) such other matters (whether similar or dissimilar to those referred to
above) as the Corporation considers relevant,
grant to the employer a
remission of the levy that would be otherwise payable or impose on the employer
a supplementary levy (as the
case may require). …
5. The Board of WorkCover has been setting out
parameters for the exercise of discretions under section 67 by its officers
early days of the scheme. The version that was current at the time of
the subject reviewable decision was the Levy Adjustment Scheme
determination set out in the
South Australian Government Gazette
August 2009, at p.3712 (“LAS09”).
The employer’s application
6. The application for review simply sought a review of the levy rate
assessed for the 2010-11 year, stated in the application to
have been 8.299% of
remuneration (as defined). The application stated that the rate for the 2009-10
year had been 6.47%. An examination
of the levy rate notices reveals that the
percentages stated by the employer include the Commonwealth’s Goods and
Tax and the Occupational Health, Safety and Welfare fee added under the
Occupational Health, Safety and Welfare Act 1986
. The actual WorkCover
levy for the two years were 7.5% and 5.85% respectively. It has to be understood
that this Panel has no authority,
under section 72 of the Act, to review GST or
the OHS&W fee, although as each is a percentage of the WorkCover levy, any
of the levy will affect their calculation.
7. Examination of the levy notices shows that in 2009-10 the base levy for
the employer’s category of employment (
936406 Domestic Services on a
Contract or Fee Basis
) was 7.5%, as it was in 2010-11. However, in 2009-10
the employer enjoyed a 22% adjustment under section 67(1)(b), reducing the base
levy by 1.65% to 5.85% as already described, in accordance with Element A2
(together with Element A1, comprising the so-called “bonus/penalty
scheme”) under LAS09.
8. LAS09 provided that remissions or supplements under the bonus/penalty
scheme “shall not be granted to an employer [or imposed
on an employer] in
respect of any financial year commencing on or after 1 July 2010” (see
LAS09, at p.3713 and 3714). In accordance
with that provision, neither the
applicant nor any other employer in the state received a remission of levy in
accordance with Element
A2 (or received the imposition of a supplement in
accordance with Element A1) for the 2010-11 year.
9. The Panel has acknowledged on previous
occasions the apparent harshness of the result when a significant remission of
lost in a single year, particularly when replaced by a supplement under
the former bonus/penalty scheme. For example, in
D&V Services v.
[2006] SAWLRP 8
, at [50]–[51]:
“As the Panel said in the recent case of
Tiger Crane v.
[2006] SAWLRP 5
, the dollar levy actually payable can vary
widely from one year to another if claims experience results in a significant
being lost and a supplementary levy being added (or
). On the other hand, remissions, when applicable, can significantly
ameliorate the burden of the levy payable and, as such, offer
a considerable
benefit to the containment of the costs of the individual employer. The aim of
the so-called ‘Bonus/Penalty
Scheme’ is to be revenue neutral in
terms of the revenue needed by the Compensation Fund each year to discharge
WorkCover’s
responsibilities. The only way supplementary levies could be
made smaller would be to make remissions correspondingly smaller.
“Certainly, when a remission of 17% as the employer enjoyed in
2005–6 is lost and replaced by a supplementary levy of
2006–7, a dramatic effect is observed. We appreciate that such a large
turnaround can seem to an individual employer
as negating the objective,
referred to in section 2(1)
(v) of the Act, of establishing a scheme
that ensures employers’ costs are contained within reasonable limits so
that the impact
of employment-related disabilities on South Australian
businesses is minimised, but the significance of the use of the plural in
objective should not be overlooked. The focus is on the containment of the costs
of employers generally, rather than the costs
of each individual employer. The
only way of eliminating swings from year to year of the kind experienced by this
employer would
be for WorkCover to refrain from exercising the discretions
conferred by section 67 altogether — which can hardly have been
intention of Parliament, given that the conferral of the discretion is plainly a
part of the Act. Indeed, it may be thought that
the prospect of such swings is a
central part of the incentive to take steps to reduce the incidence of
industrial injuries that
section 67 is aimed at providing.”
10. We acknowledged in
Johnson Steel
Fabricators v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP 10
, at [10], that, in a no-fault
scheme such as that created by the Act, individual employers would sometimes
perceive that a claim
that led to the loss of a remission, let alone a
supplement being applied, was not one that any useful steps could have been
to prevent. Indeed, this very anomaly may have been among the factors that
led WorkCover to abandon the bonus/penalty scheme at the
end of June 2010.
Although we appreciate that it will not seem a satisfactory response from the
point of view of employers experiencing
such swings, we can only reiterate what
the Panel said above. Such swings were inherent in that scheme. An employer who
has had the
benefit of remissions in the past must accept that this was funded
from a pool contributed to by other employers upon whom supplements
imposed. The starting point in each year must be the base levy, easy as it is to
overlook that when accustomed to the cash
flow benefit of repeated
remissions.
11. Because the bonus/penalty scheme has been abolished in its entirety,
there is no question of the remission previously enjoyed
by the applicant
employer having been replaced by a supplementary levy. It has simply returned to
the base levy, unadjusted. However,
in its circumstances, the mere removal of
the remission previously enjoyed has produced a situation where its actual levy
seems subjectively
to the employer to have increased substantially through no
fault of its own.
The employer’s case
12. The facts asserted by each of the parties were not disputed by the other.
Therefore, we may find accordingly.
13. Documents provided by WorkCover show that the employer was registered as
an employer under the Act on 8 February 2006. A copy
of the original certificate
of registration is before us, as is the application for registration that
preceded it. That application
indicates that the business was purchased as a
going concern from another company on 31 January 2006 and that the primary
was the cutting down and pruning of trees: “tall big trees with
extension ladders & rising platforms”. At that time,
two managers and
four full-time and four part-time labourers were employed.
14. For the remainder of the 2005-2006 financial year, the levy rate was
stated on the schedule to the certificate of registration
to be 5.925%, that is,
the industry rate of 7.5%, less a remission of levy of 1.575% (21% of the
industry rate), which presumably
was inherited from the previous owner of the
business. The rate was the same in 2006-2007. In 2007-2008, the remission of
levy (“bonus/penalty
adjustment”) fell slightly to 1.5% (20% of the
industry rate), giving a levy rate of 6%. In 2008-2009, the remission fell
to 1.2% (16% of the industry rate), resulting in a levy rate of 6.3%.
In 2009-2010, the remission rose to 1.65% (22% of the industry
rate), resulting
in a levy rate of 5.85%.
15. As we have already noted, WorkCover did not grant any remissions in
2010-2011, and the levy rate reverted to the industry rate
16. At the hearing of the application for review, we were handed a schedule
comparing these levy rates with the claims lodged by the
workers in each year. This showed single claims in 2004-2005 and 2005-2006, two
claims in 2006-2007, five claims
in each of 2007-2008 and 2008-2009, eight
claims in 2009-2010, and four claims in the first half of the 2010-2011 year.
The largest
claim had costs of $10,428.32 in 2008-2009; several claims had costs
of nil or nominal amounts. Only eight of the 26 claims incurred
costs above
17. While taking this schedule into account, we note that under the formula
used for the former bonus/penalty scheme, the claims “window”
each financial year’s calculations was the previous two financial years;
that is to say, for 2008-2009 (for example), costs
accruing to 31 December 2007
relating to claims arising between 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2007 were taken into
18. Mr Botten related that his business had undergone a period of strong
growth. He had engaged new staff, new equipment, and apprentices.
implemented “huge” changes in management practices, closely
integrating safety. This was reflected in the Management
Manual, a copy of which
was before us. It was said to have been created and compiled with the assistance
of consultants described
as “Australia’s leader in management
systems consulting for more than 20 years, specialising in quality assurance,
environmental
management, OHS and food safety”. It was put in place
specifically to ensure the employer complied with occupational health
requirements of the arboricultural industry and is qualified to conduct work on
behalf of government and commercial clients.
Certificates were produced showing
the company had been independently audited and complied with relevant standards.
19. In response to questions from the Panel, Mr Botten said staff was now
around 20, with two in the office and 18 in the field. We
are not sure how many
of these are part-time, or whether those numbers represent full-time
equivalents, but it certainly represents
significant growth since the 2006
registration. About 20-30% of the business was servicing local government, with
the rest involving
businesses and private clients. He agreed that the nature of
the industry was seasonal, with less activity in the winter months.
20. He argued that the removal of the bonus/penalty scheme had impacted
significantly on the business, with the elimination of the
bonuses it had always
enjoyed causing it to pay significantly more. He said that all WorkCover’s
literature had indicated employers
would be better off. Instead, it had had the
opposite effect. He was asking for the levy to be reviewed and bought back to
had been. He said he would like to keep growing the staff in his growing
21. When asked how he distinguished his business from others in the industry,
Mr Botten expressly disavowed any wish to do so. He
said he was merely taking
WorkCover to task on its assertions that employers would be better off; he said
that his business was substantially
worse off. The Panel endeavoured to explain
to him that in declining to distinguish his business from others in the
industry, he
was missing the point of section 67, which is about adjustments for
employers, and necessarily involves comparisons. However, he
maintained his position. He said he was not seeking to be an exception;
seeking “fairness”. He emphasised that the difference was in the
order of $17-18,000, which he said was a good
proportion of a young
trainee’s wage. He said the increase restricted the business’s
growth plan.
WorkCover’s case
22. Mr Beames, for WorkCover, accepted that the employer had experienced a
large increase in its levy and that it was the result of
the removal of the
bonus/penalty scheme. He noted, however, that the underlying industry levy rate
had not changed.
23. Mr Beames argued that there was no decision capable of review, a point we
thought we had dealt with in the case of
Johnson Steel
Fabricators
. He said that the employer was complaining of its levy
because an “automatic” grant of remission in the past had been
discontinued. He said WorkCover had fixed the levy in the ordinary way by
reference to the industry levy rate, which was nothing
to do with section 67. It
was not a decision to raise the rate above the norm. The “norm” was
the industry levy rate.
He said this distinguished the present case from the
: section 67 was explicitly involved in that case,
whereas here, WorkCover had not turned its mind to section 67, because there was
no reason to do so. It was therefore open to the Panel to conclude that there
was no reviewable decision in this case.
24. Mr Beames went on to argue that WorkCover’s decision to abolish the
existing bonus/penalty scheme was reasonable. He referred
to the objects of the
Act (section 2), and in particular the objective of “efficient and
effective administration of the scheme”
(section 2(1)(b)). He argued that
the scheme provided for the setting of industry levy rates through 500 different
classes, which
he said ameliorated the obligation to look more deeply. He
referred to the objective of ensuring “that employers’ costs
contained within reasonable limits so that the impact of employment-related
disabilities on South Australian businesses is minimised”
2(1)(a)(v)), and emphasised the use of the plural to assert that the objective
related to employers in the aggregate, not
each individual employer.
25. He also referred to the objective of ensuring “that the scheme is
fully funded on a fair basis” (section 2(1)(d)),
arguing it would be
inappropriate to grant
remissions when there no supplements were
being imposed.
26. Additionally, Mr Beames referred to the objectives of providing
“for the effective rehabilitation of disabled workers and
their early
of employment-related accidents and disabilities”
(section 2(1)(e)),
asserting that the evidence suggests that the system of bonuses and penalties
simply had not worked in those terms.
27. He said it was reasonable not to grant remissions in the context of
50,000 registered employers. WorkCover could not be expected
to conduct routine
investigations into the circumstances and eligibility of 50,000 individual
employers. His contention was that,
if this was to happen at all, the onus was
on the employer to put evidence before the Panel to show good reason why it
treated differently. He said on the information available to
WorkCover, it had not concluded that the applicant was a bad employer;
had not reached any level that would be required for the exercise of any
discretion to grant a remission of levy.
28. Finally, Mr Beames said that, on the formula that had applied under the
former bonus/penalty scheme, the employer would not have
received a remission
(bonus) for the 2010-2011 or 2011-2012 years in any event. For 2010-2011, it
would have received a 2% supplement
(penalty) on the basis of claims experience
within the relevant window period, and for 2011-2012, the supplement imposed
been at least 5%, depending on how the costs of the relevant claims
continued to accumulate and whether there was any movement in
the industry levy
rate. In other words, the applicant employer was actually one of the employers
that were better off with the abolition
of the bonus/penalty scheme.
29. It is fair to say that this revelation took the employer, and the Panel,
somewhat by surprise. Mr Botten, not unreasonably, said
he would like to verify
the calculations handed up by Mr Beames. At the end, we invited him to lodge a
supplementary submission in
writing if he wished; a few weeks later, a message
was received at the registry seeking more time to do so, which was allowed.
no such submission has subsequently come to our notice. We think we are
bound to accept the assertion made by WorkCover as to the
levy position the
applicant employer would have been in for 2010-2011 and 2011-2012 had the
bonus/penalty scheme continued.
Reviewable decision?
30. We adhere to the views we expressed in
Johnson Steel
relation to the reviewability of the employer’s levy in this case. In that
case, WorkCover had imposed a supplement under
the bonus/penalty scheme but, in
the view of the employer, had failed to have regard to other placita of section
67(1) that might
have led to a more favourable result. It was suggested by
WorkCover in that case that this did not amount to a reviewable situation.
31. As we said in that case, the circumstance under section 72 that activates
an employer’s right to lodge an application for
review is the
employer’s belief that a decision of the Corporation as to the fixing or
assessment of a levy (etc.) is unreasonable.
In forming this belief, an employer
(especially a relatively small employer like the present applicant) is not
expected to have an
intricate knowledge of the provisions of the Act relating to
the assessment of levies, or the myriad subsidiary documents appearing
Government Gazette
or posted on WorkCover’s website. Nor is the
employer expected necessarily to go to the expense of obtaining detailed
professional
legal advice on these matters. If the employer considers the
assessment it has received to be unreasonable, as the employer in the
case certainly does, Parliament has declared it will be entitled to a review by
the Board or its delegate. The exercise or
non-exercise of the discretions
conferred on WorkCover by section 67 is simply one component of the framework by
which an assessment
is arrived at — but often an important one. In the
scheme of the Act, it is difficult to see how the way in which section 67
been applied or not applied in a particular case could sensibly be divorced from
a review of the final assessment of a levy.
SouthLink v.
[2009] SASC 175
(2009) 104 SASR 172
(2009) 184 IR 72
Kourakis J described sections 66 and 67 as “complementary” (at
[277]). It seems to us, with respect, that they are complementary
in the sense
that section 66 sets out the procedure for assessing levy rates in relation to
classes of industry as a whole, while
section 67 sets out the method for
adjusting that industry rate to the circumstances of the individual
32. In our respectful opinion, it is only tenable to say that there is no
reviewable decision if the employer has not in fact been
sent a levy assessment
at all. The plain intent of section 72 is that any levy assessment must be
reviewed on the request of the
relevant employer if that employer declares a
belief the assessment is unreasonable. Parliament has no doubt chosen to express
this way because the prevalence of small businesses in this state makes
simplicity imperative.
33. In the present case, Mr Beames says that WorkCover did not “turn
its mind” to section 67 at all. We make no comment
on whether it should
Johnson Steel
, at [18], we made reference to the cases of
Chiropractors Association & Perry v. WorkCover Corporation
[1999] SASC 470
Quark Technologies and Hocking v. WorkCover
Corporation
[1997] SASC 6367
(1997) 70 SASR 153
194 LSJS 299
indicate, firstly, that in a high-volume decision-making environment, where a
designated decision-maker such as WorkCover
necessarily acts through servants
and agents, policy guidelines for the exercise of a discretion may be necessary,
provided that
the ultimate decision is the result of a fair and honest
assessment of all relevant circumstances and not the uncritical application
policy, and, secondly, that there is no room for blanket policies that a
particular discretion will not be exercised at all.
34. However, both of these cases were decided in circumstances where
WorkCover had explicit applications before it to exercise the
discretions, which it refused to consider. In the present case,
WorkCover’s levy assessments were unilateral in nature,
and individual
consideration for an adjustment under section 67 had not been sought (although
it had been given, unilaterally, under
the bonus/penalty scheme, the year
before). It is probably only when consideration is explicitly requested that the
obligation on
WorkCover to give genuine consideration arises, and given the very
high volume of assessments to be made, it is probably reasonable
to expect an
employer seeking consideration under section 67 to substantiate the grounds of
any such request. As we said in
Johnson Steel
“… if an employer makes known to WorkCover that it
considers itself entitled to a remission (or a lower supplement) on
the basis of
any of the matters set out in section 67(1), WorkCover, or on review, this
Panel, must give fair and honest consideration
to that submission. Refusing to
consider the matter at all, or considering only selected criteria, is not an
option. We do not think,
however, that WorkCover, or this Panel, is required by
procedural fairness to go digging for such matters ‘on spec’,
were, just in case they exist. Procedural fairness requires fair and honest
consideration of matters known or put to the Corporation,
not matters unknown to
it. It is not unreasonable to expect an employer which believes itself entitled
to consideration … to
bring to the attention of WorkCover the matters it
thinks ought to be considered.”
35. In this case, it is probably fair to say that the employer never has
requested from WorkCover consideration under section 67.
Its application under
section 72 seeks a review of the assessment of its levy, and the duty delegated
to this Panel is what, in our
opinion, requires full and fair consideration
— by the Panel — of any matters that could have a bearing on the
assessment,
including not just matters arising under section 66 but also the
“complementary” section 67.
Consideration
36. It will be apparent to the employer by now that this Panel is not
entitled simply to make up a levy rate to fit some hypothetical
fairness. The Panel is constrained by the law of the land — indeed, the
Panel is established under the law of the
land — and must confine the
review it conducts within the bounds of the law. In this case, the relevant law
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
and the relevant
sections are
sections 66
37. As we have said, section 66 of the Act, broadly, sets out how businesses
employing workers throughout the state are to be divided
into industry classes
with individual levy rates, broadly reflecting the risk of injury in each
classification. The cap of 7.5% ensures
a degree of cross-subsidisation, and
ensures affordability for the highest risk industries. Once the appropriate
industry levy rate
is assessed for each employer, adjustment for individual
circumstances is possible under section 67, the text of which we have set
]. Six matters may be taken
into account, the last of which is extremely broad.
38. Contrary to Mr Botten’s wishes, it is inescapable that adjustments
under section 67 involve comparisons between employers.
“Above-average” employers may be granted remissions of levy, while
“below-average” employers may have supplementary
levies imposed on
them. The bonus/penalty scheme provided a formula, for many years, of
automatically granting remissions and imposing
supplements in terms of section
67(1)(b): the incidence or costs of claims for compensable disabilities suffered
by an employer’s
workers. It was designed to provide a pool of funds from
supplements imposed on the below-average performers from which remissions
be granted to the above-average performers, although in practice the cost of
remissions granted greatly exceeded the pool provided
from the supplements.
That, and the other matters mentioned by Mr Beames in his submissions, and
perhaps the matters mentioned by
] above, led the WorkCover Board in 2009
to announce the closure of the bonus/penalty scheme from 1 July 2010 pending the
development
of a new, hopefully more effective, scheme, which required
amendments to the Act that have now been passed and are due to come into
on 1 July 2012.
39. In the meantime, WorkCover’s closure of the bonus/penalty scheme
did not have the effect of altering the Act, and section
67 remained in effect.
However, its operation is no longer automatic, and there is no longer a pool of
funds from supplements out
of which any remissions may be paid. Any remission
granted would now have to be funded out of the Compensation Fund itself, to the
detriment of the funding position of the WorkCover scheme as a whole, affecting
all employers and workers. Nevertheless, the fair
and honest consideration we
have referred to above must be given to any application for a remission under
section 67 (we perceive
that no employer is likely to apply for a supplement to
be imposed), and on review, this Panel must give that fair and honest
consideration.
40. Mr Beames said WorkCover had not concluded that the applicant was a bad
employer. We would go further, and say that we consider
the applicant to be a
good employer. We do not doubt Mr Botten’s sincerity when he says he is
committed to occupational health
and safety. The safety documentation produced
by him is impressive, although we must observe that the practical results, in
times, have been, perhaps, somewhat less so.
41. As we said in
Johnson Steel
, at [36], an employer seeking a
remission of levy should aim to show more than simple compliance with the
requirements of the
Occupational Health, Safety and Welfare Act 1986
applicable regulations. That is a legal requirement of that legislation, to be
complied with for that reason. Such compliance
is good to see, and to be
encouraged. But it is not something to be specially rewarded by the granting of
a remission of levy under
section 67.
42. It is to be remembered that the ordinary position under section 66 of the
Act is that an employer pays the base levy applicable
to its industry
classification. Anything that an employer contends should be rewarded by the
Panel by the granting of a remission
should reasonably be expected to be, and be
demonstrated to be, out of the ordinary, in excess of what the average employer
and warranting the special recognition of a remission under section
43. How the applicant’s safety programmes compare with legal
requirements was not explained, and we cannot assume that they
exceed legal
requirements. The certificates shown to us only refer to compliance with certain
standards. There is nothing before
us to indicate the standards themselves
exceed legal requirements.
Conclusions
44. As we have said, we consider the applicant to be a good employer.
However, nothing before us suggests to us anything out of the
ordinary that
would merit a discretionary remission of levy under section 67.
45. The application for review must be dismissed.
Determination
46. For these reasons, pursuant to our powers delegated under section 72 of
the Act, we confirm the reviewable decision of 4 June
Trudy Minett
Bob Donnelly
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (69.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter