URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAEOT/2016/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:56:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
RAGLESS v SOUTH AUSTRALIA POLICE (No 2) [2016] SAEOT 4 (3 May 2016)
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
(District Court Administrative and
Disciplinary Division)
to comply with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting
publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person
using material in the judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed
to the Registry of the Court in which it was generated.
v SOUTH AUSTRALIA POLICE (No 2)
[2016] SAEOT
Judgment of His
Honour Judge Costello, Member Ms A Bachmann and Member Mr R Altman
HUMAN RIGHTS -
DISCRIMINATION - GROUNDS OF DISCRIMINATION - DISABILITY OR IMPAIRMENT
Complaint issued against South Australia Police pursuant to the provisions of
the Whistleblowers Act 1993 - complainant alleged that
the Firearms Branch
colluded with members of the South Australian Field and Game Association to
victimise him by having his firearms
licence removed.
HELD: Complainant has not demonstrated that the respondent committed an act
of victimisation against him substantially on the ground
of his disclosure of
public interest information. Complaint dismissed.
Whistleblowers Protection Act 1993
Equal Opportunity
Firearms Act 1977
referred to.
King v SA Psychological Board
(1998) SASC 6621
, considered.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
POLICE (No 2)
Introduction
is a Complaint by Stephen Ragless against South Australia Police pursuant to the
provisions of the
Whistleblowers Protection Act 1993
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
The Complaint
20 November 2013 the complainant, Mr Ragless, lodged a Complaint in the Equal
Opportunities Commission, which he summarised in
the following terms:
I have action in place with the EOC on discrimination
These issues have surfaced due to my actions to exposed [sic] a dangerous
incident on a Firearms Range. Individuals, the club involved
the Firearms
have colluded to victimize me and damage my credibility to hide these
issues. Recent threatening and obscene text messages, unwarranted
police action
and the timing of civil action by one of the clubs officials has caused me to
call for any protection the Whistleblowers
Act can offer. (our
his Complaint Mr Ragless stated that his motivation for lodging the Complaint
was ‘ongoing action to conceal corruption and
collusion to avert the
course of justice’.
Background to the Complaint
September 2012 Mr Ragless was a member of the Southern Branch of the South
Australian Field and Game Association (‘SAFGA’).
At that time he was
involved in an incident on a shooting range with a member of the Committee of
its Southern Branch. He subsequently
reported the incident to the President of
the Southern Branch.
Ragless formed the view that his concerns were not being treated seriously. He
decided to stand for a position on the Southern
Branch Committee and publicly
announced his intention to do so.
Ragless says that in an effort to thwart him, the then State Secretary of SAFGA,
Darian Stringer contacted Mr Pippos at the Firearms
Branch on 9 October
2012 and persuaded him to initiate action to have the complainant’s
firearms licence removed.
Ragless asserted that on 12 October 2012 Mr Stringer filed a Notification with
South Australia Police asserting that Mr Ragless
was unfit to hold a licence on
mental health grounds and that when he made that assertion he knew that it was
false. On 12 October
2012 South Australia Police issued a Notice of Suspension
of Firearms Licence to Mr Ragless. Mr Ragless asserts that members of the
Firearms Branch knew that the suspension was based on the alleged deliberately
false report of Mr Stringer.
response to the Notice of Suspension Mr Ragless made a complaint to the Firearms
Branch on 15 October 2012 stating that members
of the executive of the Southern
Branch were conspiring against him and that the Notification was their
latest ploy to have my licence removed as an attempt to water down a
dangerous and alarming
again wrote to the Firearms Branch on 29 October 2012. He complained that he had
heard nothing from the Firearms Branch since his
initial complaint of
15 October 2012 and said:
... This issue highlights corruption at a firearms club.
The committee includes the founder of the world wide franchise group Cartridge
World who is using his power to influence and intimidate my supporters with the
threat of legal action. The secretary of the State
body is an ex policeman with
friends in the
firearms branch
and I wonder if his influence may have
some bearing on my treatment.
If you consider my safety issues should not be taken seriously because of a
false statement questioning my mental stability by person
prescribed by the
Firearms Act
you are in the wrong department. (our emphasis)
Ragless alleged that the Firearms Branch then colluded with officials at SAFGA,
including Mr Stringer, to ensure that his licence
was not returned.
His licence was not in fact restored to him until early 2013.
that background it is convenient to set out the legislative scheme pursuant to
which the Complaint was instituted.
The Statutory Scheme
Whistleblowers Protection Act 1993
of the WPA relevantly provides:
5—Immunity for appropriate disclosures of
public interest information
(1) A person who makes an appropriate disclosure of public interest information
incurs no civil or criminal liability by doing so.
(2) A person makes an appropriate disclosure of public interest information for
the purposes of this Act if, and only if—
(a) the person—
(i) believes on reasonable grounds that the information is true; or
(ii) is not in a position to form a belief on reasonable grounds about the truth
of the information but believes on reasonable grounds
that the information may
be true and is of sufficient significance to justify its disclosure so that its
truth may be investigated;
(b) the disclosure is made to a person to whom it is, in the circumstances of
the case, reasonable and appropriate to make the disclosure.
(3) A disclosure is taken to have been made to a person to whom it is, in the
circumstances of the case, reasonable and appropriate
to make the disclosure if
it is made to an appropriate authority (but this is not intended to suggest that
an appropriate authority
is the only person to whom a disclosure of public
interest information may be reasonably and appropriately made).
(4) For the purposes of subsection (3), a disclosure of public interest
information is made to an appropriate authority if it is
made to a Minister of
the Crown or—
(a) where the information relates to an illegal activity—to a member of
the police force;
(b) where the information relates to a member of the police force—to the
Police Ombudsman;
(c) where the information relates to the irregular or unauthorised use of public
money—to the Auditor-General;
(d) where the information relates to a public sector employee—to the
Commissioner for Public Sector Employment;
(e) where the information relates to a member of the judiciary—to the
Chief Justice;
(f) where the information relates to a member of Parliament—to the
Presiding Officer of the House of Parliament to which the
member belongs;
(g) where the information relates to a public officer (other than a member of
the police force or a member of the judiciary)—to
the Ombudsman;
(h) where the information relates to a matter falling within the sphere of
responsibility of an instrumentality, agency, department
or administrative unit
of government—to a responsible officer of that instrumentality, agency,
department or administrative
(i) where the information relates to a matter falling within the sphere of
responsibility of a local Government body—to a responsible
officer of that
(j) where the information relates to a person or a matter of a prescribed
class—to an authority declared by the regulations
to be an appropriate
authority in relation to such information.
(5) If a disclosure of information relating to fraud or corruption is made, the
person to whom the disclosure is made must pass the
information on as soon as
practicable to—
(a) in the case of information implicating a member of the police force in fraud
or corruption—the Police Ombudsman;
(b) in any other case—the Anti-Corruption Branch of the police
4(1) relevantly provides:
4—Interpretation
public interest information
means information that tends to
(a) that an adult person (whether or not a public officer), body corporate or
government agency is or has been involved...—
illegal activity; or
irregular and unauthorised use of public money; or
substantial mismanagement of public resources; or
(iv) in conduct
that causes a substantial risk to public health or safety, or to the
environment; or
(b) that a public officer is guilty of maladministration in or in relation to
the performance ... of official functions.
public officer
(a) a person appointed to public office by the Governor; or
(b) a member of Parliament; or
(c) a person employed in the Public Service of the State; or
(d) a member of the police force; or
(e) any other officer or employee of the Crown; or
(f) a member, officer or employee of—
(i) an agency or instrumentality of the Crown; or
(ii) a body that is subject to control or direction by a Minister, agency or
instrumentality of the Crown; or
(iii) a body whose members, or a majority of whose members, are appointed by the
Governor or a Minister, agency or instrumentality
of the Crown; or
(g) a member of a local government body or an officer or employee of a local
government body.
9 relevantly provides:
9—Victimisation
(1) A person who causes detriment to another on the ground, or substantially on
the ground, that the other person ... has made or
intends to make an appropriate
disclosure of public interest information commits an act of victimisation.
(2) An act of victimisation under this Act may be dealt with—
(a) as a tort; or
(b) as if it were an act of victimisation under the
Equal Opportunity Act
but, if the victim commences proceedings in a court seeking a remedy in
tort, he or she cannot subsequently lodge a complaint under
Opportunity Act 1984
and, conversely, if the victim lodges a complaint under
that Act, he or she cannot subsequently commence proceedings in a court seeking
a remedy in tort.
(4) In this section—
(a) injury, damage or loss; or
(b) intimidation or harassment; or
(d) threats of reprisal.
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
of the WPA provides than an act of victimisation under the WPA may be dealt
with as if it were an act of victimisation under the
the purposes of this application
of the EOA relevantly provides:
86—Victimisation is unlawful
(1) It is unlawful for a person to commit an act of victimisation.
(2) For the purposes of this section, a person commits an act of victimisation
against another person (the
) if he or she treats the victim
unfavourably on the ground that the victim has—
(a) brought proceedings under this Act against a person; or
(b) given evidence or information in proceedings under this Act; or
(c) made allegations that the victim or some other person has been the subject
of an act that contravenes this Act; or
(d) reasonably asserted the victim's right or the right of some other person to
lodge a complaint or take other proceedings under
this Act; or
(e) otherwise done anything under or by reference to this Act,
or on the ground that he or she knows that the victim intends to do any of those
things, or suspects that the victim has done, or
intends to do, any of those
(3) Unfavourable treatment on the ground that a person—
(a) has made a false allegation; or
(b) has not acted in good faith,
does not constitute an act of victimisation.
6 relevantly provides:
6—Interpretative provisions
(1) For the purposes of this Act, the holder of a public or statutory office
will, in carrying out official duties, be taken to be
acting in the course of
employment.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, a person acts on a particular ground referred
to in this Act if the person in fact acts on a number
of grounds, one of which
is the ground so referred to, and that ground is a substantial reason for the
(3) For the purposes of this Act, a person (the
discriminator
another unfavourably on the basis of a particular attribute or circumstance if
the discriminator treats that other person
less favourably than in identical or
similar circumstances the discriminator treats, or would treat, a person who
does not have that
attribute or is not affected by that circumstance.
93 relevantly provides:
93—Making of complaints
(1) A complaint alleging that a person has acted in contravention of this Act
may be made—
(a) by a person aggrieved by the act;
(1c) A complaint—
(a) must be in writing and set out the details of the alleged contravention;
(b) must be lodged with the Commissioner.
(2) A complaint must be lodged—
(a) if the alleged contravention is constituted of a series of acts—within
12 months of the last of those acts;
(b) in any other case—within 12 months of the date on which the
contravention is alleged to have been committed.
(2a) The Commissioner may, on application, extend the time for lodging a
complaint, even if the time for lodging the complaint has
expired, if the
Commissioner is satisfied—
(a) that there is good reason why the complaint was not made within the
stipulated time period; and
(b) that in all the circumstances it is just and equitable to do
95B relevantly provides:
95B—Referral of complaints to Tribunal
If, in respect of a complaint, the Commissioner—
(a) is of the opinion that the matter cannot be resolved by conciliation; or
(b) has attempted to resolve the matter by conciliation but has not been
successful in that attempt; or
(c) has declined to recognise the complaint as one on which action should be
taken and the complainant has, within 3 months of being
notified of the
Commissioner's decision, by notice in writing, required the Commissioner to
refer the complaint to the Tribunal,
the Commissioner must refer the matter to
the Tribunal for hearing and determination.
96 relevantly provides:
96—Power of Tribunal to make certain
(1) The Tribunal may, on determining that the respondent in proceedings under
this Part has acted in contravention of this Act, make
one or more of the
following orders:
(a) subject to this section, an order requiring the respondent to pay
compensation (of such amount as the Tribunal thinks fit) to
a person for loss or
damage arising from the contravention;
(2) The Tribunal may, at any stage of proceedings under this Part—
(a) make an interim order to prevent prejudice to a person affected by the
proceedings;
(b) make an order dismissing the proceedings.
Notification by Mr Stringer, which led to the suspension of
Mr Ragless’ licence, was made pursuant to the
Firearms Act 1977
(‘the FA’).
21I of the FA relevantly provides:
21I—Obligation to report
(1) If the controlling body of a recognised firearms club has reasonable cause
to suspect in relation to a member of the club that
the member is suffering from
a physical or mental illness or condition, or that other circumstances exist,
such that there is a threat
to the member's own safety or the safety of another
associated with the member's possession or use of a firearm, the club must, as
soon as practicable after the suspicion is formed, make a report to the
Registrar including—
(a) the name and address of the person the subject of the suspicion; and
(b) the suspected threat to safety and circumstances giving rise to the threat
(including the nature of any physical or mental illness
or condition
contributing to the threat).
(2) If a member of a recognised firearms club or a person employed or engaged at
the grounds of a recognised firearms club has reasonable
cause to suspect that a
person to whom a firearms prohibition order applies has gained or attempted to
gain access to the grounds
of the club, the member or person must, as soon as
practicable after the suspicion is formed, report the matter to a police
(3) If a commercial range operator or a person employed or engaged at the range
of a commercial range operator has reasonable cause
to suspect that a person to
whom a firearms prohibition order applies has gained or attempted to gain access
to the range of the
operator, the operator or person must, as soon as
practicable after the suspicion is formed, report the matter to a police
(4) A person incurs no civil or criminal liability in making a report in good
faith in compliance, or purported compliance, with
27A of the FA relevantly provides:
27A—Obligation to report unsafe situations
associated with firearms
(1) If a medical practitioner, or other person prescribed for the purposes of
this subsection, has reasonable cause to suspect in
relation to a person whom he
or she has seen in his or her professional capacity—
(a) that the person is suffering from a physical or mental illness or condition,
or that other circumstances exist, such that there
is a threat to the person's
own safety or the safety of another associated with the person's possession or
use of a firearm; and
(b) that the person has, or might be intending to acquire, a firearm,
the medical practitioner or other prescribed person must make a report to the
Registrar under this section.
(2) If an employer has reasonable cause to suspect in relation to an employee
whose work with the employer involves the possession
or use of a firearm that
the employee is suffering from a physical or mental illness or condition, or
that other circumstances exist,
such that there is a threat to the employee's
own safety or the safety of another associated with the employee's possession or
of a firearm, the employer must make a report to the Registrar under this
(3) A report under this section—
(a) must be made as soon as practicable after the suspicion is formed; and
(b) must include—
(i) the name and address of the person the subject of the suspicion; and
(ii) the suspected threat to safety and circumstances giving rise to the threat
(including the nature of any physical or mental illness
or condition
contributing to the threat).
(4) A person incurs no civil or criminal liability in taking action in good
faith in compliance, or purported compliance, with this
28 of the FA relevantly provides:
28—False information
(1) A person who provides information to the Registrar or any other person under
this Act that is false or misleading in a material
particular is guilty of an
Maximum penalty: $10 000 or imprisonment for two years.
(2) It is a defence to a charge under subsection (1) to prove that the defendant
believed upon reasonable grounds that the information
The Hearing
view of the fact that Mr Ragless was representing himself, Mr White, counsel for
the respondent, volunteered to present the respondent’s
called the following witnesses:
Evangelos Pippos
is a now retired police officer but in 2012 he was the Operations Senior
Sergeant at the Firearms Branch. He had little actual
recall of the events
surrounding Mr Ragless and was, to a significant extent, reliant on documents
recovered from police files.
noted the contents of an email from Mr Stringer dated 9 October 2012 in which Mr
Stringer, in his capacity as State Secretary of
SAFGA, raised concerns regarding
the mental health of one of SAFGA’s members and queried whether his
firearms could be removed
pending a medical assessment.
Pippos said that although he did not now recall receiving such an email, in the
normal course he would have advised Mr Stringer
to lodge a formal Notification
pursuant to the FA raising his concerns.
Pippos said that he was unaware at that time of any allegation by
Mr Ragless that Mr Stringer had lodged a false Notification but
if there had been any evidence to support such an allegation, it would have been
investigated.
went on to say that if the Firearms Branch receives an apparently genuine
Notification of concerns as to a firearms licence holder’s
fitness to hold
a licence, the Branch would, in the normal course, take action to suspend that
person’s licence pending a medical
assessment.
said that on its face the Notification appeared to be genuine and that he
understood the Notification from Mr Stringer to have
been treated as being
the circumstances, he said that the Registrar of Firearms subsequently suspended
his licence and required Mr Ragless to supply
medical evidence to indicate that
he was considered fit to hold a licence.
cross-examination he said that apart from his dealings with Mr Stringer, in his
capacity as an official of a gun club, he had had
no dealings with him.
He said he was not a good friend of Mr Stringer.
also noted that the Suspension Notice made reference to some of the same grounds
for concern, regarding the complainant’s
fitness to hold a firearms
licence, that were identified by Mr Stringer in his Notification.
accept Mr Pippos as a truthful and reliable witness.
Mays is a Senior Adjudicator with the Firearms Branch whose role it is to deal
with Notifications and other issues generally arising
with respect to the
suitability of individual members to hold a firearms licence under the FA.
She occupied that role in 2012 and
understood that Mr Ragless is asserting that Mr Stringer had made a deliberately
false Notification. She said that there was nothing
which would have alerted her
that the Notification was deliberately false and, as such, an offence against
the FA. If she had entertained
any such suspicion (which she did not), she would
have referred the Notification to senior officers in the Branch.
said that she also saw a report from a psychiatrist, Dr Minkiewicz, dated 5
November 2012. In that report Dr Minkiewicz recommended
Mr Ragless’ licence remain suspended for the immediate future. Ms
Mays said that she saw nothing in that report to alert
her that Mr
Stringer’s report was false.
understood that one of the concerns expressed by Mr Ragless was that he was not
able to speak to anyone at the Firearms Branch
for some weeks after the
suspension of his licence.
offered a possible explanation as to why Mr Ragless was not offered an interview
by police. She said that in cases such as this,
the Branch preferred to have
things put in writing in the interests of overall transparency and in the event
that a matter subsequently
went to an appeal.
accept Ms Mays as a truthful and reliable witness.
Constable Stuart Anderson
2008-2012 he was a member of the Firearms Legislative Advisory group. Mr
Stringer was a member of that group and it was only
in that capacity that
Constable Anderson knew him. He was not a personal friend of Mr Stringer.
in 2012 Mr Stringer contacted him concerning Mr Ragless. He said that he was
concerned about his mental condition and sought
some guidance as to
SAFGA’s obligations with respect to making a Notification.
Anderson reviewed the website of Mr Ragless and agreed that Mr Stringer may have
some cause to make a Notification. He described
the material on his website as
‘fixated’ and ‘ranting’. He was never aware of any
information to suggest
that Mr Stringer’s Notification may have been
cross-examination he said that the priority in issues surrounding the lodgement
of Notifications and in turn, suspension of licences,
was public safety and that
the usual response of the police was to act first (to remove a licence) and
investigate later.
said that, as far as he was concerned, he would have been happy to talk to a
licence holder whose licence had been suspended if
he felt that he could help
that person.
also said that the Branch did get suspicious Notifications occasionally and that
in such cases the Notification was referred to
senior officers for
consideration. There was, in his view, no occasion to do so in the case of the
Notification concerning Mr Ragless.
accept that Constable Anderson was an honest and reliable witness.
Sergeant Riach
2012 he was an Operations Sergeant in the Firearms Branch.
In October 2012 Mr Ragless telephoned him in relation to an incident
on the shooting range of his gun club. He asked Mr Ragless to put something in
writing and in response he received an email from
him dated 29 October
that email Mr Ragless said that allegations regarding his mental state were
false. In view of the fact that the email did not directly
name Mr Stringer, he
did not interpret it to be a reflection on Mr Stringer personally, but rather
was more of a complaint about
members of the executive of his local club.
agreed that the email did identify concerns that Mr Ragless had about an
incident on his shooting range. As a result Sergeant Riach
said that an
investigation was carried out into the incident in the course of which police
officers inspected the range facility.
said that Mr Stringer had telephoned him in relation to his concerns about Mr
Ragless’ behaviour and that he, in turn, had
given him ‘fairly
general advice’ about his obligations under the Act.
said that after receiving the email from Mr Ragless he passed it onto
Mr Pippos who was handling the matter generally.
cross-examination he denied having a discussion with Mr Ragless about fellow
members making false reports about his mental health.
accept that Sergeant Riach was an honest and reliable witness.
The Complainant’s Case
Ragless gave evidence. He tendered two
, together with a series
of exhibits which formed the basis of his evidence-in-chief.
cross-examination he acknowledged that in June 2008 he had been admitted to the
Noarlunga Hospital with what he described as a
depression.
He said that after his
discharge from hospital he was treated by a psychiatrist who prescribed anti
depressive medication which he
took for the next three-and-a-half years. He
finally ceased taking his medication in around May 2012.
agreed that the following statements in Mr Stringer’s Notification were
accurate, namely that Mr Ragless:
had been under
medical care and ceased his medication
had previously
surrendered his firearms licence
had reported his
previous mental illness in a National Magazine.
agreed that a number of the statements in a second Notification by his then Club
President, Mr Dawes, were also correct.
agreed that if these Notifications were accepted, at face value, by assessing
officers of the Firearms Branch, there was nothing
in them which would suggest
the Notifications were false.
agreed that based upon the information in the Notifications, it was quite
appropriate for the Firearms Branch to take the action
it did to suspend his
firearms licence.
said that he was ‘
quite comfortable with them taking my guns
because he believed that someone from ‘
the Firearms
Branch and the police would sort this issue out but they
also agreed that on 12 October 2012 (in the Notice of Suspension) he was given
an opportunity to provide a response to the suspension.
He said that he
did provide a response and they [the police] ignored
said that on many occasions he asked the Firearms Branch to listen to his story
but that they didn’t.
agreed that on 14 November 2012 he emailed Mr Pippos saying that he had been
ignored for the past eight weeks but that he would
be in the Angas
Street Police Station at 1 pm with someone else you can try to
agreed that on that day he had had an interview with two officers from the
Firearms Branch which lasted 50 minutes. He agreed that,
at the time of the
interview, the police were in possession of Dr Minkiewicz’s report and
that there was again nothing in her
report which should have suggested to police
that Mr Stringer had told lies in his
Notification.
he agreed that, in the interview, he had been given an opportunity to discuss
his concerns about what was happening in relation
to his firearms licence.
re-examination he described the Minkiewicz report as both accurate and fair,
including her recommendation that his licence continue
Ragless also tendered a bundle of medical reports including a report from Dr
Minkiewicz dated 22 January 2013, wherein she recommended
to the Delegate of the
Registrar of Firearms that Mr Ragless have his licence
accept that Mr Ragless was an honest witness and that he truly believed that a
deliberately false report had been lodged by Mr
Stringer. We accept that he also
truly believed that the police knew the report to be false and colluded with Mr
Stringer in the
removal of his licence.
of the genuineness of his beliefs, one of the issues which we must determine is
whether he has provided evidence to demonstrate
that the police knowingly
colluded in this way.
Carter was a friend of Mr Ragless whose firearms licence was suspended in late
2014 following a report from the then secretary
(not Mr Stringer) of
our view, this evidence was not relevant to the issues we were asked to
determine and we declined to receive oral evidence from
Mr Clive Ragless
is one of the complainant’s brothers. He told the Tribunal about the
impact that the events surrounding his licence suspension
had had on Mr Ragless.
We accept that Mr Clive Ragless was both honest and reliable in giving his
we said at the outset, Mr Ragless asserted that his firearms licence had been
suspended by the Registrar of Firearms after a Notification
by Mr Stringer.
Ragless asserts that subsequent to the suspension of his licence, on
15 October 2012, he informed the police that the Notification,
using as it
did his mental health as a basis for the suspension, was simply a ploy to, in
effect, silence him.
further asserted that in an email on 29 October 2012 he informed police that
there was ‘
corruption at a firearms club
’ and that Mr
Stringer was an ex policeman with friends in the Firearms Branch and
’ whether his influence was having some bearing on
his treatment.
went on to say in that email that if officers in the Firearms Branch thought his
assertions that safety issues shouldn’t
be taken seriously because of his
mental illness, they were ‘
in the wrong department
his Complaint Mr Ragless sought to invoke the provisions of the WPA.
our view, in order for Mr Ragless to succeed in a Complaint involving the WPA he
needs to demonstrate that:
he has made a
disclosure of
public interest information
his disclosure
of such information was an
appropriate disclosure
the respondent
committed an act of
victimisation
against him in that it caused him
the detriment
was caused to him on the ground or
substantially on the ground
has made an
appropriate disclosure of public interest
information
Public Interest Information
Interest Information, for the purposes of s 4 of the WPA, includes illegal
activity. Mr Ragless has asserted that Mr Stringer
made a knowingly false
statement to the police.
28 of the FA makes it an offence to make a false Notification and, as such, we
accept that a disclosure that someone had made
a deliberately false Notification
is capable of constituting public interest information. The next question is
whether it amounts
appropriate disclosure
information.
Appropriate Disclosure
appropriate disclosure
of such information if a person, in the
position of Mr Ragless, either:
believes on
reasonable grounds that the information is true; or
believes on
reasonable grounds that the information may have been true and is of sufficient
significance to justify its disclosure.
have no doubt that Mr Ragless believes that Mr Stringer made a deliberately
false report. We are not persuaded that there were
reasonable grounds for Mr
Ragless to entertain such a belief. Mr Ragless may have doubted the accuracy of
the Notification, but there
was no reasonable basis, in our view, for him to
harbour a belief that it
that Mr Stringer had made a
deliberately false Notification.
next question is whether he believed on reasonable grounds that it
Ragless says that the evidence, for his belief on reasonable grounds that it may
have been true, is to be found in the following:
The fact that Mr
Stringer had tried to contact officers in the Firearms Branch before
9 October 2012 and said so in his email to Mr
Pippos of 9 October
The fact that
he, Mr Ragless, had heard (from a Mr Pash, a fellow gun club member) that Mr
Stringer was going to take his licence
away before it happened;
An email of 12
October 2012, which he sent to Mr Stringer where he, Mr Ragless, tells Mr
Stringer that moves are afoot to have him
assessed ‘for his
The fact that
the police agreed that at the time his firearms were actually removed he was
upset but compliant, which meant that he
had no instability issues;
Stringer’s email of 9 October 2012 to Mr Pippos raising concerns about his
mental instability;
The fact that
the Notification was made by Mr Stringer without medical evidence;
A psychological
report prepared on 7 November 2012, which contained allegations about Mr
Ragless, the contents of which were altered
in a latter version;
The absence of
the original Notification from Mr Stringer in the police files; and
The fact that Mr
Ragless was not asked to discuss the suspension with anybody until his interview
with police on 14 November 2012.
our view, these pieces of information, neither individually nor collectively,
are sufficient to lead Mr Ragless to believe on reasonable
grounds that the
information
may have been
true. It is therefore strictly speaking
unnecessary to consider whether the information was of sufficient significance
it disclosure. If we had reached a different conclusion on this
issue, we would regard the information as being of sufficient significance.
However, in the event that we are wrong on this issue, we propose to consider
the other requirements which Mr Ragless needs to demonstrate.
next issue is whether the respondent caused him detriment.
question of what constitutes a detriment for the purposes of the WPA was
considered by Bleby J in
King v SA Psychological
where his Honour
It is not necessary in these proceedings to determine
the full extent of the definition of ‘detriment’ contained in
Whistleblowers Protection Act 1993
. I am prepared to
assume, for present purposes, that it is wide enough to cover loss of reputation
and some forms of stress disorder,
although I doubt whether it covers
discrimination at large, given the limitation contained in paragraph (c) of the
definition requiring,
in the case of discrimination, relationship to a
person’s employment. I am also prepared to assume the allegations in the
of Complaint and Further Particulars of Victimisation and Detriment are
wide enough to include allegations of some form of stress
disorder and loss of
reputation. However, I should not be taken as conceding that the definition of
‘detriment’ is sufficiently
wide to cover the appellant’s
allegations. If, for example, the evidence were to show that he merely had some
grievance that
the respondent had not performed its statutory duty, I doubt
whether the appellant could be shown to have suffered ‘injury,
loss’, being the normal meaning of the word ‘detriment’ or
whether he could be shown to have suffered
detriment in the extended meanings
contained in the other paragraphs of the definition. However, for present
purposes I must assume
the most favourable case possible from the
appellant’s point of view, and I therefore assume that he has suffered a
Ragless spoke of his humiliation, hurt feelings and distress. We accept that
such outcomes can constitute detriment for the purposes
of the Act.
final question which arises is whether Mr Ragless has demonstrated that the
respondent has caused him detriment
on the ground or
substantially on
the ground of his disclosure
to this issue Bleby J in
The appellant must then allege that that detriment was
caused by the respondent and on the ground, or substantially on the ground,
he made the disclosure. In my opinion, that means that the respondent must have
caused the detriment by virtue, or substantially
by virtue, of the fact of the
disclosure in itself. In other words, it must be shown that because the
appellant made a disclosure
of public interest information to the Board, the
Board caused him some detriment. In effect, it must be some form of reprisal for
the fact of making the disclosure.
the present proceedings the respondent, after receiving an initial email from Mr
Ragless on 15 October 2012, did not respond.
actions of the respondent and its failure to respond need to be viewed against
the background of the fact that it had given him
a Notice of Suspension, which
called for a psychiatric report. The respondent’s failure to respond is
perfectly explicable
in that light. There is no evidence to suggest that it
determined not to contact him as some form of reprisal for him disclosing
possible offence or corrupt practice by the members of the committee of his
club, let alone colluded to cover up a possible offence
or to corruptly silence
on 29 October 2012 Mr Ragless forwarded a second email to the police.
In that email he reiterated his concerns about false
reporting and/or
corruption. Some fortnight or so later (albeit after a threatening email which
was designed to get attention according
to Mr Ragless’ evidence) he was
given the opportunity to have a long interview with police, during which he also
accepted he
was given an opportunity to tell his story.
is, in our view, again no evidence to support his assertion that he has been
victimised for his disclosure. On the contrary,
within two weeks of his second
email he was given an opportunity to put his version of events.
this interview police discussed with him the report of Dr Minkiewicz, which
he agreed did not contradict Mr Stringer’s
Notification. The police also
told him that they were planning to inspect the shooting range and check for
safety issues, which they
subsequently did.
summary, armed with a psychiatric report which vindicated the
‘Stringer Notification’ and having agreed to carry out
inspection of the range, we are of the view that, there was little else that the
respondent should have done. There was absolutely
pointing towards an offence by Mr Stringer or corruption at his club let alone
corruption by members of the Firearms Branch. Far
from victimising Mr Ragless,
in our view, the respondent actually carried out its job while responding
(perhaps somewhat belatedly)
to his concerns.
is no evidence of ‘reprisal’ by the respondent in the sense adverted
to by Bleby J in
summary, in the face of an apparently valid Notification, the police acted
appropriately to remove his firearms. Thereafter, they
received a psychiatric
report which supported a continuation of the suspension. Then, in response to
some intentionally provocative
behaviour on his part, police interviewed him for
nearly an hour.
police officers inspected the range where the incident took place. It is
difficult to understand what more was to be expected
of the respondent in the
circumstances.
our view, the response of the respondent was appropriate even if, as we have
said, a little belated.
is no evidence to support the complainant’s assertion that the respondent
failed to act on his Complaint because of his
assertions that Mr Stringer
falsified the Notification, or that in some way the Firearms Branch were
colluding in unlawfully removing
his firearms.
respondent did not commit an act of victimisation against the complainant
substantially on the ground of that disclosure of public
information.
Complaint is therefore
We understand this to be a
reference to other Complaints which Mr Ragless had filed in the Commission
against other entities and
individuals.
The incident referred to was
the incident on the shooting range.
The Notice of Suspension
stated that the Delegate of the Registrar had received a Notification from a
prescribed person pursuant
to s 27A of the FA. Mr Stringer was not a prescribed
person pursuant to that section. Nevertheless, we accept that as the Secretary
of the SAFGA he was a person who was obliged to lodge a Notification if he
genuinely believed circumstances existed whereby a firearms
licence holder was
suffering from a mental illness which may make him a threat to the safety of
himself or others. In our view, the
incorrect reference to s 27A did not
invalidate the Notice of Suspension. Also see ss 20(5) and 21I of the FA.
Exhibits C3 and C4.
After his admission to
hospital Mr Ragless volunteered to hand over his firearms and his firearms
licence was suspended.
T134. He said that he used
this language because he intended to get some attention from the Firearms
We understand that this
licence was reinstated in February 2013, following a report from Constable
Holland, Firearms Investigator
to Ms Mays.
(1998) SASC 6621.
Ibid at p 6.
Ibid at pp 6-7.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (251 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter