URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCAT/2003/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:08:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Murphy v SGIC [2003] SAWCAT 2 (3 October 2003)
Murphy v SGIC
WORKERS COMPENSATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL (SA)
MURPHY, Thomas
SGIC GENERAL INSURANCE LIMITED AS ADMINISTRATOR OF THE STATUTORY RESERVE FUND
FOR TF MABBITT AND SONS PTY LTD (DEREGISTERED)
1929 of 2002
HEARING DATES:
28 and 29 April 2003
JUDGMENT OF:
Her Honour Deputy President Judge HW Parsons
DELIVERED ON:
3 October 2003
CATCHWORDS:
Appeal pursuant to s 118 of the
Workers Compensation Act 1971
- Causation - Whether worker's exposure to carcinogens during
employment contributed to his development of renal adenocarcinoma -
international peer review literature relating certain occupational exposures to
increased risk of renal adenocarcinoma -
Whether epidemiological evidence of a
link between occupation and cancer applicable to the worker - Determination
confirmed - Appeal
dismissed - S 8, s 9 Workers Compensation Act 1971
(repealed) -
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
(Transitional
provisions)
Seltsam Pty Ltd v McGuiness; James Hardie & Co Pty Ltd v McGuiness
(2000) NSWCA 29
Fernandez v Tubemakers of Australia Ltd
(1975) 2 NSWLR 190
Caswell v Powell Duffryn Associated Collieries Ltd
(1940) AC 152
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr A Meegan
Respondent: Mr T Forrest
Solicitors:
Applicant: Hume Taylor & Co
Respondent: Rowell Forrest & Co
Introduction
1 This is an appeal pursuant to s 118(d) of the
Workers Compensation Act
(repealed) which, by virtue of cl 5 of Sch 1 (Transitional Provisions)
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
remains in force with modifications.
2 The appeal concerns the determination of SGIC General Insurance Limited
administering the Statutory Reserve Fund, by which it
rejected the claim of
Thomas Murphy ("the worker") that he developed renal cancer which he asserted
was caused in the course of his
employment with TF Mabbitt and/or TF Mabbitt
and Sons Pty Ltd deregistered ("the employer") between 1968 and 1982.
3 The worker filed an appeal against that determination. In accordance with cl
5(2)(e) of Sch 1, on appeal the Tribunal has the
power to review all aspects of
the determination.
The Pleadings
4 The determination is dated 5 March 2002. (Trial Book
determines that
the worker was employed by the employer between 1968 and 1982 and that he was
employed as a painter. Pars 2-4 determine
the worker's entitlement to make a
claim against the Statutory Reserve Fund. Par 5 determines that in August 1996
the worker was
diagnosed with left renal cell adenocarcinoma requiring removal
of the left kidney and that as a consequence the worker was totally
incapacitated for work for the period 14 August 1996 to 26 October 1996.
contains the workers assertion that in the course of his employment
with the employer he was exposed to carcinogens present in paints
and solvents
which gave rise to the left renal adenocarcinoma.
determines that the worker did not sustain that carcinoma as a
consequence of his employment by the employer, and par 7.2 determines
worker's carcinoma was not caused or contributed to by his employment with the
7 As a consequence par 8 disallows the worker's claim on the basis that the
left renal adenocarcinoma was not caused or contributed
to by his employment
with the employer.
8 The appeal dated 21 March 2002 seeks an Order that the determination be set
aside and findings that the worker is entitled to
weekly payments between 14
August 1996 and 26 October 1996, medical expenses, and a
on the ground that the worker was employed as a painter with the employer
between 1962 and 1982, that during that time
he was exposed to carcinogens and
that such exposure contributed to the development of the renal
adenocarcinoma.
The Hearing
9 The pleadings identify that causation is the fundamental issue. This was
further elucidated by the parties' statement of issues
in the following
1. "Was the worker exposed to hydrocarbon solvents, lead, cadmium or coal-tar
pitch based materials ("the products") during the
course of his employment with
the respondent?
2. Did exposure to any of the products cause, within the meaning of the Workers
Compensation Act 1971, injury to the worker namely
renal cell carcinoma?"
10 At the hearing it was agreed the subsequent issues of entitlement and
quantum would await the outcome of the causation issue.
11 A Trial Book was tendered at the hearing (Exhibit A1) which contained
documents going to both these issues. Documents relevant
to the issue of
exposure to the alleged products included a statement of the worker and records
of interview taken by a loss adjuster
* Mr Tom Mabbitt, one of the employer's former proprietors;
* Mr Michael Mabbitt, a former employee and later a proprietor of the employer;
* Mr Terrence Mabbitt, another former employee and proprietor of the employer.
* Mr John McCormack, one of the worker's subsequent employers;
* Mr Peter McCormack, another of the worker's subsequent employers;
* The worker.
12 Documents relevant to the issue of a causal connection between the worker's
employment and the renal cell carcinoma ("RCC") included
the medical report of
Dr Fong, the worker's general practitioner, which set out the worker's history
on presentation in August 1996,
and the subsequent diagnosis and treatment for
RCC. There were also medical reports of Dr Dundas, a specialist in occupational
together with a number of scientific studies upon which he relied in
providing his opinion of a causal link, and a medical report
of Dr Pugsley, a
nephrologist who expressed the contrary opinion. At the hearing additional
scientific publications were tendered.
13 Oral evidence at the hearing going to the issue of exposure to certain
substances was given by the worker and Messrs Michael
and Terrence Mabbitt, and
on the issue of a causal link between that exposure and the cancer by Drs
Dundas and Pugsley. As it transpired,
the major focus of the evidence was upon
the worker's exposure to coal-tar epoxy and the relationship, if any, between
that exposure
and the diagnosis of RCC in 1996.
The relevant statutory provisions
14 S 9(1) of the Workers Compensation Act 1971 provides that:-
"If in any employment personal injury arising out of or in the course of the
employment is caused to a worker, his employer shall,
except as provided in
this Act, be liable to pay compensation in accordance with this Act."
15 S 8(1) of the Act defines "injury" as any physical or mental injury and
without limiting the generality of the foregoing includes:-
"(a) a disease contracted by the worker in the course of his employment whether
at or away from his place of employment and to which
the employment was a
contributing factor;
(b) the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation, deterioration or recurrence,
of any pre-existing injury or disease not being coronary
heart disease where
the employment was a contributing factor to that aggravation, acceleration,
exacerbation, deterioration or recurrence;
(c) the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation, deterioration or recurrence of
any pre-existing coronary heart disease,
and for the purposes of this definition the employment of a worker shall be
taken to include any journey, attendance or temporary
absence referred to in
subsection (2) of section 9 of this Act."
16 S 8(1) of the Act defines "disease" as including:-
"any physical or mental ailment, disorder, defect or morbid condition whether
of sudden or gradual development and also includes
aggravation, acceleration,
exacerbation, deterioration or recurrence of such an ailment, disorder, defect
or condition."
17 S 94 of the Act deems certain diseases to be due to the nature of employment
unless the employer proves the contrary. The disease
alleged here is not
subject to that evidentiary presumption (second Schedule of the Act).
18 As the claim has been brought against one employer only, s 90 which deals
with contribution in relation to diseases is of no
19 As the allegation of injury relates to the contraction of a disease, s 8(4)
provides a deemed date of injury. In this instance
that date is the:-
"day upon which the worker became totally or partially physically or mentally
incapacitated by reason of that injury."
There does not appear to be any dispute between parties that the worker was
certified totally incapacitated for work on 14 August
20 There is no dispute between the parties that RCC is a disease in respect of
which the worker must establish on the balance of
probabilities that the
employment was a contributing factor.
Findings of Fact
21 The worker was born on 16 June 1951 and is now aged 52 years. He was 45
years old when diagnosed with left RCC which resulted
in the surgical removal
of his left kidney.
22 Up until that time he had been in good health. However he was a smoker for
23 years (from 1968 when he was 17 years of age until
1991 when he was 40 years
old). During that time he smoked 20-25 cigarettes per day. His mother died of
urinary bladder cancer at
the age of 59 years but that family history bears no
relationship to the worker's development of RCC (Dr Dundas tr 108; TB 106).
23 The respondent's business involved industrial gritblasting and painting.
24 The respondent undertook such activities at industrial sites including
Torrens Island Power Station, ICI Osborne, Port Stanvac
Oil Refinery, Moomba
Gas Fields and at sites in Whyalla. The work involved preparing and coating
metal structures such as buildings,
wharf pylons, steel sections of a jetty,
tanks, and pipes. Such structures were gritblasted to remove existing coating
or to clean
in preparation for painting and then spray painted with substances
having protective qualities.
25 The worker commenced employment with the respondent in about 1968 when he
was about 16-17 years of age. He remained in that employment
until 1982. At
that time he was 31 years old. He was employed as a trade spraypainter and
26 In that capacity the worker was engaged at a number of sites, including the
respondent's yard, ICI Osborne, the Torrens Island
Power Station, and Port
Stanvac. Sometimes work at a particular site was carried out over a lengthy
period of time. An example being
Port Stanvac where the respondent maintained
plant generally (TB 15) and where work on the jetty was spread over about three
27 The major focus of the evidence of the worker and Terrence and Michael
Mabbitt was the extent to which the worker performed gritblasting
spraypainting, the manner in which gritblasting and spraypainting was
performed, and the products used to undertake such work
and to which the worker
may have been exposed. In giving this evidence the witnesses were relying on
their memories of events, and
working methods used more than 20 years ago.
Nonetheless there was a reasonable measure of consistency in their evidence.
One particular
area of uncertainty was the extent to which the worker undertook
painting compared with blasting. This was a significant issue as
primarily in his role as a painter that the worker alleged that he came into
harmful products.
28 It was the worker's evidence that the two jobs went hand in hand. "If you
blast, you have to paint, otherwise your steel goes
rusty again" (tr 13). He
described working in a team where interchangeably he was the blaster and the
painter (tr 16). In addition,
he said that even when he was the nominated
blaster he would also help the painter by mixing up his paints and moving his
that in that role he was also exposed to the vapours of the products
being sprayed (tr 27-28).
29 Terrence Mabbitt, who was employed as a supervisor at various sites for much
of the worker's employment with the respondent but
did not always supervise the
worker, initially gave an estimate that the worker spent 80 per cent of
his time sand blasting or abrasive
blasting (tr 131). However he agreed that
the worker would have a better idea of how he spent his time (tr 131) and he
also stated
that the worker was one of a few key people in long term employment
with the respondent whereas many other employees were transient.
He was a key
person because he could do both spraying and blasting (tr 138).
30 Michael Mabbitt, who initially worked as a spraypainter, spent most of the
period of the worker's employment undertaking maintenance
in the yard or
administrative duties. Therefore he had little knowledge of the worker's
activities and agreed that the worker would
have a better idea of what work he
was performing (tr 144).
31 Whilst I recognise that the worker may have some motive to exaggerate the
extent of his spraypainting duties, I am inclined to
accept his evidence that
he undertook both tasks interchangeably. Neither of the Mabbitts had a long
term direct working relationship
with him and were not really in a position to
dispute his evidence, and Terrence Mabbitt's evidence that the worker was a key
term employee because he could paint and blast suggests that he performed
them both routinely. I therefore reject the estimate that
he spent 80 per cent
or most of his time gritblasting and find that throughout the period of
employment he performed both functions
interchangeably.
32 I also accept the worker's evidence that he worked on some sites for
extensive periods of time. He worked at the Torrens Island
Power Station
blasting and spraying for approximately eight months. His evidence that he
worked at Port Stanvac "for years" was consistent
with Terrence Mabbitt's
evidence that the jetty work took three years and that the respondent had an
ongoing responsibility for painting
maintenance at that site.
33 On the topic of the products used in gritblasting and spraypainting, and the
circumstances in which such work was performed,
the worker said in his
statement (TB 8) that at the Torrens Island Power Station he was involved in
continuously blasting tar off
steel and then coating the steel in tar epoxy.
That he applied the tar epoxy with a conventional spray gun and did not have
of protection such that he breathed in the fumes from overspray. On
the upgrade of the Port Stanvac wharf and on maintenance of pylons,
blasting residue he sprayed zinc and then two-pack epoxy polyurethane without
any protection, and that again he breathed in
vapours in the overspray. At ICI
he used inorganic zinc as a primer and used "durawear" and polyurethane as a
34 In his oral evidence the worker elaborated that when blasting the pylons at
Torrens Island he came into contact with tar because
he was blasting tar off
the pylons (tr 25), and that at Port Stanvac he blasted red lead off the pipes
of the wharf and recoated
with zinc (tr 25-26) and used coal-tar epoxy
particularly in relation to a crude tank, the inside of which was blasted and
sprayed (tr 60-63). He reiterated at tr 31 that at ICI he used inorganic
zinc as a primer followed by a topcoat of urethane. He was
aware of the types
of products being used because he recalled reading the labels (tr 31) which he
was required to do because different
products had different spraying
requirements (tr 32). He painted coal-tar epoxy at Port Stanvac refurbishing
the wharf (tr 37). He
also used it at Torrens Island extensively. All the
structural steel on one building at Torrens Island was done in tar and later
touched up (tr 42).
35 As to the working procedures adopted, he said that when blasting he wore an
airfed blasting helmet which allowed the operator
to breathe and protected
against the grit. The material blasted off fell to the ground in powder form
and when blasting tar he was
exposed to it in powdered form (tr 25). In
relation to spraying coal-tar and other products he did not wear a respirator
either when
he was performing the spraying or when assisting other painters. He
did wear a spray hood to protect his clothing from overspray
but this did not
prevent the inhalation of vapours in the overspray.
36 He also gave evidence that he used a considerable amount of solvents in the
course of his work as a painter. He gave varying
estimates of the amount of
solvents used on a daily basis. The usual solvents were xylene and methyl ethyl
ketone. These solvents
were used to clean the spraypainting equipment and to
thin down paints (tr 44-45).
37 The worker also gave evidence that he used the products referred to
generally in his evidence in subsequent employment as a painter,
but said that
in later times he used a respirator when spraypainting.
38 In his evidence Terrence Mabbitt agreed that coal-tar epoxy was used for
spraypainting (tr 139). He also referred to the use
of epoxies generally,
polyurethanes and inorganic zinc silicates (tr 133). He said that respirators
were provided but agreed that
"The majority of us didn't wear them, no" (tr
132). He agreed that when spraying, vapours of the products being sprayed would
inhaled (tr 133). He also agreed that when spraying was in progress people
other than the painter would also breathe in epoxy (tr
136). He agreed
that there were a lot of fumes around on the various jobs including coal-tar
epoxy (tr 139). He said that only about
ten litres of solvent would be used per
day (tr 138). In his record of interview, aspects of which were put to the
worker in his
crossexamination (tr 58-59), Terrence Mabbitt confirmed that the
worker would have used coal-tar epoxies. He said that this product
was sprayed
and was a two pack material with a base coat and a hardener which was mixed and
sprayed on (TB 40). He also said that
the worker would have used inorganic zinc
silicate as a primer (TB 41) followed by an epoxy or polyurethane topcoat (TB
43). He was
not specific as to where these products were used. He agreed that
the worker used solvents but disputed the amounts used and the
brands referred
to by the worker.
39 Michael Mabbitt confirmed that the worker would have worked at sites where
coal-tar epoxy was used (tr 142). This was also referred
to in his record of
interview (TB 20) where he said that the worker would have been exposed to zinc
sprays and tar epoxies. He said
tar epoxy was a paint comprising a liquid and a
hardener which were mixed together and sprayed (TB 21). Mr Mabbitt said that if
sprayed coal-tar he (Mabbitt) sometimes wore a mask (tr 143), and that
sometimes when spraypainting you would breathe in the spray
(tr 144). He also
said that the person assisting a painter could breathe in coal-tar epoxy. He
was aware that coal-tar could burn
your skin (tr 145).
40 I make the following findings of fact on the basis of the evidence of these
three witnesses which, apart from the extent and
kind of solvents used for
thinning and cleaning, was reasonably consistent. On that topic I prefer the
evidence of Terrence Mabbitt
that daily use was about ten litres and that the
product used was methyl ethyl ketone. In addition, I find that:-
* The products, coal-tar epoxy, polyurethane, inorganic zinc silica and
solvents were used frequently in the respondent's business
between 1968 and
* The worker used these products throughout the period of his employment with
the respondent, and whilst spraypainting or assisting
other spraypainters he
did not use approved respiratory protection and was thus exposed to the vapour
of overspray of these products.
* I accept the worker's evidence that in subsequent employment he wore a
respirator when spraypainting.
* There was no relevant exposure specifically associated with the activity of
blasting. The residue from blasting was a powder not
* As the worker undertook spraypainting and blasting interchangeably for the 14
years of his employment and commonly used these
products when spraypainting or
assisting other painters, his exposure to the vapour of the various products
was a common feature
of his work.
* I specifically find that the worker was exposed to the vapour of coal-tar
epoxy at various sites and occasions over the period
of the employment. He was
exposed to this vapour in the overspray when he was spraying without a
respirator and when assisting other
spraypainters.
* The worker used solvents when cleaning his spraypainting equipment and for
thinning certain paints within the usual amounts commonly
used by spraypainters
working with the respondent.
* There is insufficient evidence that the worker was exposed to lead or
41 Given the passage of time since the employment, and the fact that the worker
and Terrence and Michael Mabbitt had no cause to
take any interest in the
nature of the products being used until after the worker was diagnosed with
cancer and made a claim for
compensation, it is understandable that the
evidence as to use of these products and the extent of any consequent exposure
the most general of terms. In relation to coal-tar epoxy, although in
general terms I am satisfied that the worker's use of this
product was probably
frequent, I am left in considerable doubt as to the nature and extent of his
exposure to its vapour. There is
no evidence which allows any particular
exposure, or the cumulative exposure, to be measured, and there is no evidence
of the total
number of occasions when exposure occurred. There is insufficient
evidence as to whether the use, and therefore any resultant exposure,
consistent throughout the period of employment, or episodic. If episodic, there
is insufficient evidence to identify when, in
the span of years, any exposure
may have occurred. It must also be borne in mind that this was only one of
several products which
he used during the period of employment.
The expert evidence
42 Dr Dundas is an occupational physician with a particular interest in
occupational cancer.
43 When asked by the worker's legal advisers to give an opinion as to the
possibility of a connection between the worker's employment
and the subsequent
diagnosis of RCC, Dr Dundas interviewed the worker and then undertook a study
of international peer review literature
relating certain occupational exposures
to an increased risk of cancer of the kidney. His purpose was to investigate
whether there
was epidemiological evidence of a link between occupation and
cancer, and then to apply that information to the worker's situation.
done so, he expressed the view that work was a contributing factor in the
development of the worker's RCC. The focus of that
opinion was the worker's
exposure to coal-tar epoxy. Although he commented about the worker's exposure
to solvents and other chemicals
he did not base his conclusion on that exposure
44 Dr Dundas noted that RCC is a relatively rare cancer and that the worker was
in the youngest ten per cent of such male cancers
for 1996 (TB 106). He noted
certain nonoccupational risk factors for the disease such as cigarette smoking,
obesity, phenacitin,
analgesia and certain hereditary factors. Given the
worker's history of smoking, Dr Dundas commented upon that risk factor, in
to which he said there were a number of studies which found an
increased risk of RCC in smokers.
45 In his report (TB 106) Dr Dundas explained that increased risk:-
"Many studies find an increased risk for Renal Cell Carcinoma in smokers. This
is usually expressed as an odds ratio or relative
risk in which the standard
population risk for (in this case) non smokers is expressed as 1.0, a relative
risk of 1.5 is a 50% increase
in risk to smokers, and a relative risk of 2 is a
doubling of risk and so on. McLaughlin has published widely in this field,
an odds ratio of 1.6 to 1.8 for continuous smokers. A Finnish study
found an odds ratio of 1.3 for `ever smokers'. In addition to
the studies of
McLaughlin and Partanen, I.A.R.C. considers many other published references.
The relative risks for smoking varied
from 1.1 to 5.1, although most studies
involving acceptable numbers of cases, and published relatively recently, would
suggest that
the relative risk fell in the range 1.4-2.0."
In his evidence Dr Dundas explained that although there may be a doubling of
risk of developing RCC in lifelong or continuous smokers,
that only explains 20
to 25 per cent of RCCs (tr 71).
46 Although he was aware that the worker smoked 20 to 25 cigarettes per day
from 1968 to 1991 and that potentially that might put
the worker in that
increased risk group, he said his examination of the literature demonstrated a
much higher relative risk of developing
RCC in people with heavy occupational
exposure to polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons ("PAHs") (tr 82), which in view
of the nature
of the worker's employment, Dr Dundas regarded as relevant (tr
47 Dr Dundas proceeded on the basis that PAHs are contained in products made
from coal including pitch and tar, and that the coal-tar
epoxy which the worker
used is a coal-tar pitch based material containing PAHs making a number of
studies relevant to the worker's
occupational exposure to that product.
48 Dr Dundas referred to these studies, the first being a study by Sharpe CR et
al "Case-Control Study of Hydrocarbon Exposures
in Patients with Renal Cell
Carcinoma" Canadian Medical Association Journal (1989) Vol 140 1309-1318.
This was a retrospective case
study which tested the hypothesis that exposure
to hydrocarbon combustion products is associated with the development of RCC. A
of 164 cases and 161 controls responded to a mailed questionnaire
and telephone interviewing. Dr Dundas drew from this study that
there was an
odds ratio of 9.29 for the patients in the study who were exposed to tar and
pitch (Table V). He said although this
study involved only a small number of
cases there was a high odds ratio within the 20 to 30 year normal latency
period for a solid
cancer (tr 83). He referred to the passage at p 1312 of the
"Exposure to tar or pitch
The association between exposure to tar or pitch or both and the development of
renal cell carcinoma should be investigated further
by means of prospective
study. The issues of dose-response relations and temporal aspects of exposure
require larger numbers of exposed
subjects to permit meaningful analyses."
and said this passage confirmed that an association was found between
occupational exposure to tar and pitch and RCC; that such
exposure was
associated with an increased relative risk of RCC (tr 84).
49 The second study to which he made reference was written by McLaughlin J
"Risk Factors from a Population-based Case-control Study
of Renal Cancer"
(publication not provided). This case study analysed the results of 495 cases
of RCC, 74 cases of cancer of the
renal pelvis, and 697 controls. The results
were obtained by interview of subjects or their next of kin. The abstract of
identified exposure to petroleum, tar and pitch products as risk
factors for RCC. In particular, the report stated:-
"A detailed occupational history was obtained from the study subjects for every
full and part-time job held since 16 years of age.
A number of analyses were
performed including one for the industry of usual employment (Table VI). There
were no significantly elevated
ORs [Odds Ratio] associated with any particular
usual industry of employment. Ever being employed in 28 occupational activities
industries associated in prior studies with an increased risk of urinary
tract cancer was assessed, and there were no significantly
increased ORs. At
the conclusion of the occupational history section of the interview, the cases
and controls were given a card that
listed 25 materials previously linked to
urinary tract cancer and were asked whether they were ever exposed to any of
these materials
while employed (Table VII). Only exposure to petroleum, tar,
and pitch products was found to be associated with a significantly (p
elevated OR (1.7; 1.0-2.9). The risk was greater for those exposed to these
products 20 or more years (OR = 2.6; 1.2-5.7)
than for those exposed less than
20 years (OR = 1.1; 0.5-2.5). Among females, exposure to petroleum, tar, and
pitch products was
reported for three cases and one control (OR = 4.6;
0.4-125.3). Controlling for interview status made no appreciable difference in
the results." (TB 177)
50 Dr Dundas placed considerable significance on this passage. In his view
those odds ratios of (1.2-5.7) and (0.5-2.5) are equal
to or greater than the
odds ratios found for continuous smoking (tr 88), making occupational exposure
to petroleum tar and pitch
products a significant increased risk factor for
51 He did not regard a subsequent study by McLaughlin J "Occupational Risks for
Renal Cancer in Sweden" published in the British
Journal of Industrial Medicine
1987 pp 119-123 (TB 187) as detracting from the proposition that tar and pitch
have a high odds ratio
demonstrating an increased risk factor for RCC. He said
that was a general study looking at cancer outcomes in all occupations without
reference to duration of employment or non-occupational factors.
52 He also placed significance on a study of Partanen T et al "Renal Cell
Cancer and Occupational Exposure to Chemical Agents" (publication
provided). This was a case-referent study designed to study the risk of
contracting RCC in relation to industrial categories,
occupational titles, and
occupation of exposures amongst Finnish residents ever engaged in worklife.
There were 672 patients newly
diagnosed with RCC. The study found that
occupational exposure to gasoline was significantly associated with the risk of
that in blue collar occupations there was an odds ratio of 4.4% for
PAHs (tr 103; TB 160).
53 The next study of significance, World Health Organisation International
Agency for Research on Cancer, International Agency for
Research on Cancer,
"IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans - Some
Organic Solvents Resin Monomers and
Related Compounds Pigments and Occupational
Exposure in Paint Manufacture and Painting" Vol 47, 1989 (TB 134), contains
information
that "Operators working in eight plants where coal-tar enamel
protective coating was applied to pipelines with heat were exposed
levels of coal-tar pitch volatiles at up to 24mg/m3 of benzene-soluble matter
(full-shift samples)." (TB 135) Dr Dundas said
that the current exposure limit
stands at 0.2 milligrams per cubic metre, so that this result, where the
overall respirable concentration
of benzpyrene averaged 133 micrograms per
cubic metre, represents one hundred fold the currently accepted exposure
standard (tr 96).
In addition, Dr Dundas made reference to another IARC study,
relating to "Polynuclear Aromatic Compounds, Part IV, Bitumens, Coal-tars
Derived Products, Shale-Oils and Soots" Vol 35 1985 (Addendum to TB) which
refers to pitch workers on roofing sites and metal
product plant touch up
spraypainters using coal-tar paints who were exposed to benxene extractables at
a time-weighted average concentration
of .48 milligrams per cubic metre as an
average through the working day which Dr Dundas said gives an exposure more
than double current
acceptable exposure standards (tr p 97).
54 It was his evidence that even though no measurements of PAH exposure were
available in relation to the worker's exposure "you
don't need to measure
everything to have a reasonable case" (tr 98).
55 He said:-
"In this case I would say it's highly likely to be representative of the other
data because the occupational activity, the task
- the occupational task - is
unusual. It's a primitive one - that is to say, it's a high-pressure spraying
thing with complex chemical
constituents, but you bung it in and pressure spray
it and you stand there and you do it for hours and hours, and days and days and
weeks and weeks on end, and I would say that in IARC there are multiple
references to marine spraying, to pipeline spraying to coal-tar
pitch on roofs
- applying as well as removing - and I have found none that show average values
of less than point 2 of the current
exposure limit, so I think there's an
exposure of real nature." (tr 99)
56 Dr Dundas relied particularly on the two IARC studies to demonstrate the
real likelihood that the worker was exposed to high
levels of PAHs. He drew an
analogy between the level of PAH exposure of operators applying coal-tar enamel
protective coating with
heat to pipelines, pitch workers on roofing sites, and
metal product plant touch-up spraypainters, and the worker's PAH exposure
using coal-tar epoxy as a spraypainter. He used these reports to draw this
analogy notwithstanding that both IARC reports found
no relationship between
PAH exposure and this specific form of cancer. It was Dr Dundas' view that the
worker's young age, his unusual
exposure to coal-tar epoxy and the latency
period upwards of ten years led to the conclusion that he was at increased risk
of developing
RCC as a result of the work exposure, and that he did indeed
develop that condition because of his work exposure to coal-tar epoxy.
opinion was summarised in his second report dated 17 October 2001 (TB 113) as
"Mr Murphy's job was unusual and represented an unusual and in my opinion
intense exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons which
are accepted as
human carcinogens, but in relation to which the specific association with renal
cancer is less clear. The International
Agency for Research on Cancer touches
on this in several publications on polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and has
some exposure data
in relation to coal tar pitch exposures.
Overall, as indicated, I consider Mr Murphy's exposures to be unusual, and the
clinical circumstances (age, smoking history) to
be sufficiently different from
the usual profile to strengthen my suspicions.
I naturally acknowledge Dr Pugsley's extensive experience in the diagnosis and
treatment of renal conditions, but in this circumstance
I can only reassert my
feelings that the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon exposure, in amounts
substantially exceeding current exposure
standards in my view, is relevant."
57 Dr Pugsley, a physician specialising in diseases of the kidney, was asked to
comment upon Dr Dundas' reports and the various
scientific studies upon which
58 Dr Pugsley agreed with Dr Dundas' general description of the significance of
the odds ratio in analysing the results of the various
studies (TB 114).
59 However, Dr Pugsley questioned the scientific reliability of the various
studies relied upon by Dr Dundas. He pointed to the
rarity of RCC and the
difficulty this presents for the statistical reliability of the studies.
Prospective cohort studies have been
impractical. The studies undertaken are
case-control studies looking back retrospectively on exposures comparing a
group of patients
with a control group in circumstances where the results can
be confounded by other issues and are not as reliable as a prospective
study. He does not accept that the studies provide any firm conclusion or
general belief about the relationship. He says
the main difference between Dr
Dundas' conclusion of a probable connection and his own is that Dr Dundas "sets
the bar a bit too
low" (tr 114).
60 Although he accepted that there was a possibility that the worker's RCC was
caused by his work with the respondent in disagreeing
with Dr Dundas'
conclusion that the worker probably developed RCC as a result of exposure to
coal-tar epoxy he said:-
"I think the general thread of the argument is something that I would find
agreement with but I don't believe that the evidence
that has been sought by a
great many people in this field over the last, mainly, 20 years, but clearly
from times before that, stacks
up in a way that Dr Dundas can draw the
conclusion that he has. That's the difference that I have. I mean, he has
referred to a number
of authors throughout this time. In fact, he has referred,
in particular, I think, Sharpe, who was one of the few studies that found
evidence of this. There are a great deal of - many contradictions in this area.
He referred to Partanen. In fact, the latest work
from McLaughlin, who is
probably the most widely quoted author in this whole area, in fact regards
Partanen as a negative factor
and not as a positive support for the theory
McLaughlin generally, through his writings and I think most
particularly in the latest writings - and I have, your Honour, a reference
from I think 2002, a large American textbook on public health where,
unsurprisingly, McLaughlin is the senior authority - where
I think he generally
reflects a conservative approach to the assessment of the evidence that has
been found by a great many people
over the years. I find that pretty
convincing." (tr 121-122)
61 He then referred to a text book extract from McLaughlin J "Renal Cancer"
(publication not provided) (Exhibit R1) in which McLaughlin
"Virtually all information on risk factors for renal cell cancer has come from
case-control studies." (p 1144) He further
said "Although results from case
control studies are not entirely consistent, a convincing relation between
cigarette smoking and
renal cell cancer has emerged." (p 1144) The extract made
reference to the role of occupation indicating that "renal cell cancer
generally considered an occupationally associated tumor". As to polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons the extract states:-
"Coke-oven workers exposed to high levels of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
have been reported to be at increased risk for kidney
cancer (Redmond et al,
1972), although this finding is based on small numbers (eight deaths), with no
clear evidence of a dose-response
or duration-of-employment effect (Redmond,
1983). Two recent case-control studies observed little excess risk for
coke-oven workers
(McCredie and Stewart, 1993; Mellemgaard et al, 1994c). More
general exposure to hydrocarbons was linked to renal cell cancer in
case-control studies (Sharpe et al, 1989, Kadamani et al, 1989), but was not
associated with risk in a large case-control
study in Finland (Partanen et al,
1991). (p 1147)
The conclusions to be drawn from the evidence
62 The epidemiological studies to which Drs Dundas and Pugsley referred in
forming their respective opinions are to be approached
on the basis described
by Spigelman CJ in
Seltsam Pty Ltd v McGuiness; James Hardie & Co Pty
Ltd v McGuiness
(2000) NSWCA 29
(par 60) that they may provide evidence of
"general causation" that is, whether there is an association between specific
exposure and the risk of disease in groups of individuals. That
evidence is not of itself directed to the circumstances of an individual
63 The epidemiological evidence is to be approached in the following way:-
"For the purpose of determining whether exposure to a particular substance is
the legal cause of a particular disease, epidemiology
only provides evidence of
possibility."
"Evidence of possibility, including expert evidence of possibility expressed in
opinion form and evidence of possibility from epidemiological
research or other
statistical indicators, is admissible and must be weighed in the balance with
other factors, when determining whether
or not, on the balance of
probabilities, an inference of causation in a specific case could or should be
drawn. Where, however, the
whole of the evidence does not rise above the level
of possibility, either alone or cumulatively, such an inference is not open to
be drawn" (Seltsam (supra) pars 78-79).
64 The possibility of an association between the exposure to coal-tar epoxy and
RCC in this instance was partly founded upon the
IARC monogram vol 35 which
concluded as follows:-
"Evaluation
There is sufficient evidence for the carcinogenicity in experimental animals of
coal-tars, creosotes, creosote oils, anthracene
oils and coal-tar pitches.
There is sufficient evidence that occupational exposure to coal-tars as it
occurs during the destructive distillation of coal is
causally associated with
the occurrence of skin cancer in humans (IARC, 1984a). The findings of the few
studies available on other
occupational exposures to coal-tars are consistent
with that evaluation.
There is sufficient evidence that coal-tar pitches are carcinogenic in
There is limited evidence that coal-tar-derived creosotes are carcinogenic in
Taken together, the data indicate that coal-tars and coal-tar pitches are
causally associated with cancer in humans and that creosotes
derived from
coal-tars are probably carcinogenic in humans" (IARC vol 35 p 140) (Addendum to
Exhibit A1).
65 The possibility was also partly founded in the Sharpe study "Case Control
Study of Hydrocarbon Exposures in Patients with Renal
Cell Carcinoma" (Addendum
to Exhibit A1) which concluded:-
"Exposure to Tar and Pitch
The association between exposure to tar or pitch or both and the development of
renal cell carcinoma should be investigated further
by means of prospective
study. The issues of dose-response relations and temporal aspects of exposure
require larger numbers of exposed
subjects to permit meaningful analyses"
66 And the McLaughlin study which concluded:-
"Overall, there were few positive findings in the occupational analysis for
renal cell carcinoma. The only statistically significant
finding was the
increased risk for exposure to petroleum, tar, and pitch products, with the
suggestion of a duration effect. Although
this is not as specific a finding as
one would prefer, it is noteworthy given the context of this conference on the
effects of petroleum
exposures on the kidney. Clearly, however, more refined
results are needed. To achieve this we are currently developing a petroleum
exposure index based on the occupational histories obtained in this study. The
elevated risks of cancer of the renal pelvis associated
with exposure to
high-risk materials should be seen as hypothesis generating only." (TB
Reference was also made to the Partanen study.
67 Although Dr Pugsley took a much more conservative view of the studies than
Dr Dundas, his evidence was consistent with the proposition
that there is a
possibility of causal connection between exposure to PAHs and the development
68 However, the test to be applied to this issue of causation is the balance of
probabilities, and that will not be satisfied if
all that the worker
establishes is that the RCC might have been caused by the exposure to PAHs in
coal-tar epoxy.
69 What is required is that the whole of the evidence justifies an inference of
probable connection (
Fernandez v Tubemakers of Australia Ltd
2 NSWLR 190
70 There is, however, a distinction between permissible inference, which will
satisfy the onus, and conjecture, which will not.
) Spigelman CJ referred to
Caswell v Powell Duffryn Associated
Collieries Ltd
(1940) AC 152
at 169-170 in which Lord Wright said
concerning this distinction "There can be no inference unless there are
objective facts from
which to infer the other facts which it is sought to
establish." Lord Wright stated that an inference cannot be drawn in the absence
of "positive proved facts." (par 87) From this passage quoted from
, Spigelman CJ concluded "The test is whether, on the basis of
the primary facts, it is reasonable to draw the inference" (par 88).
71 In this context Spigelman CJ stated:-
"In my opinion, evidence of possibility, including epidemiological studies,
should be regarded as circumstantial evidence which
may, alone or in
combination with other evidence, establish causation in a specific case." (par
72 In this instance Dr Dundas' conclusion that the worker's PAH exposure in
coal-tar epoxy probably caused the development of RCC
relies substantially upon
studies in respect of which the authors expressed markedly qualified
conclusions as to the association
between exposure to coal-tar and pitch, and
the development of RCC. I am inclined to the view that Dr Dundas placed more
significance
on the results of these studies than was warranted given the
reservations contained in the conclusions. This is consistent with
Pugsley's opinion.
73 Dr Dundas' reliance on the IARC conclusion (report vol 35) that coal-tar
pitches are carcinogenic to humans, is also insufficient
to establish the
necessary causal connection in relation to those products and this specific
cancer type. That document does not
find any such association.
74 And although Dr Dundas makes reference to what he described as the
excessively high PAH exposure documented in that report, and
in IARC report 47
concerning pipeworkers, roof workers and metal product plant painters, some of
whom, he said, experienced exposure
to PAHs one hundred fold the recognised
exposure limit, and others at more than double that standard, there was
insufficient evidence
upon which he could draw the analogy that he did between
those exposures and the worker's exposure. His opinion that the worker's
exposure was comparable was not supported by sufficient evidence that the
product to which the worker was exposed, coal-tar epoxy,
was chemically
comparable with the various products used by the pipeworkers, roof workers and
metal plant painters. There was insufficient
evidence as to whether the method
of application and the environmental setting was comparable, and furthermore
there was insufficient
evidence to enable a comparison to be made between any
specific or cumulative dose.
75 Dr Dundas' comparison of these occupations and the worker was based on his
view that the worker had an unusual occupational activity,
and that he had PAH
exposure "substantially exceeding current exposure standards" (par 56), but as
I have indicated, when making
the factual findings about the nature of the
worker's duties (par 41), it is not possible on the evidence available, to
find the extent to which the worker was exposed to the vapour of
coal-tar epoxy. In the light of that uncertainty and the inadequacies
comparison referred to above (par 74) there is no reasonable basis upon
which to infer that the worker's exposure to PAHs
in coal-tar epoxy
substantially exceeded current exposure standards, was unusual, or was
comparable with the pipeworkers, roof workers
and metal plant painters,
referred to in IARC volumes 35 and 47.
76 In those circumstances, Dr Dundas' opinion of a probable connection becomes
much less cogent. It is true that Dr Dundas also
took into account the worker's
early age of onset of this relatively rare cancer, and that the latency period
for the development
of a solid organ cancer was consistent with the period of
employment. However those matters, although relevant, have limited significance
in the absence of reliable findings as to the nature and extent of exposure,
particularly in the context of such limited and qualified
general evidence of
association.
77 On the whole of the evidence I am unable to draw an inference of probable
connection between the worker's exposure during the
relevant employment to the
vapours of coal-tar expoxy, and his subsequent development of RCC. The issue is
left in the realms of
conjecture. Reference has also been made to the evidence
of association between cigarette smoking and RCC, and the worker's smoking
history. Mr Forrest, counsel for the respondent, suggested that this was a more
likely cause of the worker's RCC. However, as I am
not required to find an
alternative cause, I do not intend to comment further on that evidence.
78 The appeal is dismissed.
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are advised that if a party wishes to appeal against any part of this
decision which is appealable pursuant to Section 86(1)
of the Act such appeal
must be filed with the Registrar in accordance with Form 11 within 14 days of
the delivery of this decision
and must be served on all parties.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter