URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAOmbFOI/2023/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:02:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Electoral Commission of South Australia 2023/02857 [2023] SAOmbFOI 8 (14 September 2023)
Determination
External review - section 39
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Mr Michael Brown MP
Electoral Commission of South Australia
Ombudsman reference:
Agency reference:
Determination:
The determination of the agency is
Date of Ombudsman’s determination:
14 September 2023
Issues considered:
Whether disclosure of documents would reveal information about an elector
not recorded on the electoral roll
Whether disclosure of documents relating
to the personal affairs of any person unreasonable
Exemption clauses relied upon:
Legislation considered:
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Application for access
application under the
Freedom of Information Act 1991
) the applicant requested access from the agency to:
I request copies of those documents designated as Form RO44A, held by ECSA
relating to the non-party candidates for the Districts
of Florey and Newland
from the 2022 State Election.”
ease of reference, procedural steps relating to the application and the external
review are set out in Appendix 1.
external review is within the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman as a relevant review
authority under section 39 of the FOI Act.
Provisional
determination
provided my tentative view about the agency’s determination to the
parties, by my provisional determination dated 21 August
2023. I informed the
parties that subject to my receipt and consideration of submissions from the
parties I proposed to confirm
the agency’s determination.
party provided a submission in response to the provisional determination,
accordingly this determination is issued in the
same terms.
Documents in issue
agency identified 2 documents within the scope of the application, to which
partial access was provided.
Issues in this
regard to the agency’s submissions and the exemption clauses provided in
Schedule 1 of the FOI Act, it is for me to determine
whether to confirm, vary or
reverse the agency’s determination in regard to the documents in issue in
this external review.
Consideration
6A is a rarely used exemption. It provides that information ‘about an
elector obtained in the course of the administration
Electoral Act
Local Government (Elections) Act 1999
but not recorded
on an electoral roll (as defined in that Act)’, is
it does not contain a public interest balancing exercise, akin to clause 9(1),
and there is no question of whether it would
be reasonable or unreasonable to
disclose the information, akin to clause 6(1). It is therefore my view that
parliament has taken
the view that the class of information which clause 6A
exempts, is a unique species of information within the FOI Act.
its internal review determination, the agency advised:
The form R044A is the form approved by the Electoral Commissioner for the
purposes of a nomination under section 53A of the EA. Section
53A requires in
the case of a nomination for election as a member of the House of Assembly that
the nomination form be signed by
at least 20 electors for the relevant
Schedule 1, Clause 6A of the FOI Act provides that documents are exempt where
the information is obtained through the course of the
administration of the EA,
but is not contained on the electoral roll. While the relevant elector details
contained on the R044A forms
subject of your request are contained on the
electoral roll, the information that they have supported a particular
candidate's nomination
for election is not. Given the context of the R044A
forms, these two pieces of information cannot be separated.
agree with the agency. While the personal details of each of the electors are
recorded on the electoral roll, disclosing their information
is simultaneously
disclosing information that is
recorded on the electoral roll.
Accordingly, I am of the view that the information is exempt pursuant to clause
6A of the FOI Act.
Clause 6(1)
the alternative, the agency has applied clause 6(1) to the redacted information.
a document to be exempt pursuant to clause 6(1):
it must contain
information concerning the personal affairs of any person (not including the
applicant); and
the disclosure
of that information would be unreasonable.
term ‘personal affairs’ is defined inclusively in section 4(1) of
the FOI Act. Among other things, it provides that
‘personal qualities or
attributes’ are a person’s personal affairs. The term has also been
held to involve ‘matters
of private concern to an
individual’
‘composite collection of activities personal to the individual
concerned’.
am satisfied that the names and addresses of third parties appearing on the RO44
form relate to the personal affairs of those named,
particularly in light of the
fact that the context in which they appear relates to their support of a
candidate for election.
second step in ascertaining whether clause 6(1) applies is whether disclosure
would be unreasonable.
the matter of
the District
Court considered the following factors as relevant in determining whether
disclosure of information concerning the personal
affairs of any person would be
unreasonable:
the sensitivity
(past or present) of the personal information;
any view about
the disclosure expressed by the person to whom the personal information
the relationship
between the personal information and any other information in the
how the personal
information was obtained by the agency (whether voluntarily or involuntarily and
whether or not in confidence);
whether and to
what extent the personal information was already known to the applicant;
the nature of
any interest which the applicant can demonstrate in
information in the document other than the personal information; or
personal information.
following dicta from
Page v Metropolitan Transit
was referred
to by the District Court in support of the above
a balancing of interests: the right to personal privacy of an individual
whose personal affairs may be unreasonably disclosed by granting
access to the
information and the object of the Act to extend as far as possible the right of
the community to have access to information
in the possession of the Government
or Agencies. More particularly, this balancing exercise requires a consideration
of all the circumstances,
including the interest that the applicant has in the
information in question, the nature of the information that would be disclosed,
the circumstances in which the information was obtained, the likelihood of the
information being information that the person concerned
would not wish to have
disclosed without consent, and whether the information has any current
arriving at the conclusion that the release of the redacted details would be
unreasonable, the agency determined:
Where the SACAT decision in Martin v Electoral Commissioner & Anor
makes reference to section 54 of the EA it does so in relation to the
voluntary nomination of a candidate. The information provided
at the declaration
of nominations under section 54 also varies in relation to a candidate and those
elector details provided on the
R044A form. While the R044A form is required to
be produced, it is only the candidate's name and address which much be declared,
and not the electors who have signed their nomination form under section 53A of
There is in my view a significant difference between the situation being
dealt with in this SACAT decision, and the one currently
before me. The decision
of SACAT related to a candidate's personal information. The position of a
candidate in voluntarily providing
their information to nominate themselves is
one where they have made a decision to open their lives to public comment and
and thus there will necessarily be a different reasonableness test
applied when discussing the public interest elements of disclosure.
The electors signing the R044A form have not made such a decision. They have
assisted a candidate in meeting their nomination requirements,
however have made
no such decision to open their lives to public scrutiny or participate in public
office. As such, those same arguments
cannot be applied in this instance merely
because the details are provided on a nomination form.
I can see no public interest in providing this information beyond
transparency that a candidate has met nomination requirements, which
addressed by the form being available at the declaration of nominations. In
fact, I view the release as being against the public
interest by virtue that it
may have the effect of discouraging electors from supporting independent
candidates and diluting the pool
of nominations for elections.
agree with the agency; the case of
Martin v Electoral Commissioner &
[2021] SACAT 86
, is distinguishable because it relates to the personal
affairs of a candidate and not an elector. The weight that the agency gives
the position that the electors have not chosen to open up their lives to public
scrutiny, like the candidate, is a fair and appropriate
addition, I am of the view that it would be unreasonable to disclose the
information because:
the relationship
between the personal details and the form is such that disclosure may undermine
the secrecy of a vote
in my view the
information would have been obtained with an expectation of confidence
the information
is not known to the applicant
it is unclear
why the applicant seeks to uncover the information, save for vetting the
credibility/authenticity of the electors, which
is the role of the Electoral
Commission and not the applicant
Accordingly,
I am of the view that the information is exempt pursuant to clause 6(1) as the
information relates to the personal affairs
of third parties not known to the
applicant, and because disclosure of that information to the applicant would be
unreasonable for
the reasons given above.
Determination
light of my views above, I confirm the agency’s determination.
Wayne Lines
SA OMBUDSMAN
14 September
Procedural steps
6 March 2023
The agency received the FOI application dated 6 March 2023.
13 April 2023
The agency determined the application.
17 April 2023
The agency received the internal review application dated 17 April 2023
27 April 2023
The agency confirmed the determination.
26 May 2023
The Ombudsman received the applicant’s request for external review
dated 26 May 2023.
31 May 2023
The Ombudsman advised the agency of the external review and requested
submissions and documentation.
9 June 2023
The agency provided the Ombudsman with its submissions and
documentation.
21 August 2023
The Ombudsman issued his provisional determination and invited submissions
from the parties.
Commissioner of Police v
District Court of New South Wales
(1993) 31 NSWLR 606, 625 citing
Williams and Registrar of Federal Court of Australia
[1985] AATA 226
(1985) 8 ALD 219
Young v Wicks
[1986] FCA 169
(1986) 13 FCR 85
Commissioner of Police v
District Court of New South Wales
(1993) 31 NSWLR 606, 625.
Hall v SA Police
Hall v SA Police
Page v Metropolitan Transit
(1988) 2 VAR 243.
Page v Metropolitan Transit
(1988) 2 VAR 243
[246] quoted in
Hall v SA Police
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (998 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter