URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCRP/1995/183.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:09:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Knight v WorkCover (Jam Factory) (No.2) [1995] SAWCRP 183 (7 April 1995)
[1995] SAWCRP 183
Review Officer
Catchwords:
Incapacity — further period of
incapacity arising after employment terminated and worker moved interstate
— credibility
of worker — medical evidence — decision to
reject claim set aside.
RE: KNIGHT AND WORKCOVER CORPORATION (JAM FACTORY WORKSHOPS
(1995) 8 WCRP Determination 95-0183
See further,
WorkCover v. Knight
[1996] SAWCAT 119 (Hardy
Determination No. 95-0183
Workers’ Compensation Review
KNIGHT AND WORKCOVER CORPORATION (JAM FACTORY WORKSHOPS
(05389244/04/01)
Determination of Review Officer made
on 7 April 1995
(Hearings 14th November 1994, and 6th & 24th
February 1995)
Review Officer Lieschke
This is the determination of an application for review lodged by Mr.
Knight on 29th March 1994 with the Workers Compensation Review
application seeks a review pursuant to
Workers' Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act, 1986
") of a decision made by WorkCover on 7th March
1994 to reject the worker's claim for compensation.
The worker lodged a
claim for weekly payments of compensation, dated 24th January 1994, alleging
that he had suffered another period
of incapacity as a result of a recurrent
back pain initially sustained at work with the Jam Factory in December 1992.
The worker's
claim is for weekly payments of compensation based upon a partial
incapacity, to be deemed total, dating from his retrenchment from
Factory in February 1993 and continuing to present, barring a one month period
in September-October 1993 when he was in employment.
WorkCover has
rejected the claim on the grounds that the worker had recovered from the
previously accepted work-related disability,
at the time of his retrenchment,
and therefore any condition he now suffers from is not related to the
compensable disability. Secondly
it argues, and in the alternative to its
primary argument, that the worker is somehow barred from having this claim
considered as
he has already had an issue of incapacity decided by a Review
Officer, and that he cannot now bring this further claim.
Additionally,
and in the alternative to the second argument, WorkCover submits that the
worker's claim was lodged outside of the prescribed
time limit of six months,
and that it is substantially prejudiced in determining the claim, and secondly
that the worker was neither
ignorant of his rights to bring such a claim nor was
there any other reasonable explanation for the delay.
The background is
that the worker commenced employment with the Jam Factory as a maintenance or
handy person under a Job Start Scheme,
having relocated from Mt Gambier to take
up the employment. In December 1992 he suffered an injury to his back and as a
some time off work. WorkCover initially accepted that he suffered a
disability to his back, but rejected his claim for incapacity.
That issue was
taken to Review by the worker. The period in dispute was from 16th December
until 15th January 1993 when he returned
to work. By a published decision, No.
[1993] SAWCRP 317
, Review Officer Pope found that the worker was
incapacitated throughout that period as a result of the compensable disability.
that hearing, no issue was raised by any party as to ongoing partial
incapacity beyond the worker's return to employment and subsequent
retrenchment,
although the hearing took place in April 1993, some two months after the worker
had been retrenched.
The worker was unemployed from February until
September when he obtained a position as a cabinet maker in Gladstone,
Queensland, again
through the CES. When he was terminated from that employment
in October he remained living in Queensland seeking work. He suffered
worsening of his back problem in December 1993, and sought medical treatment
from the Gladstone Hospital. This eventually led
to referral to an orthopaedic
specialist based in Brisbane, Dr J Curtis.
In addition to oral evidence
from Dr Curtis, the other medical evidence is found in various letters from a
Queensland general practitioner,
Dr Baartz, a second orthopaedic specialist in
Brisbane, Dr Peter McCombe and a referral note from the Gladstone Hospital.
is also evidence in the form of medico-legal reports, transcript of an
interview with, and clinical notes from the worker's treating
practitioner in Adelaide at the time of the initial disability, Dr Chan. There
was also a report, a transcript of an interview
with and clinical notes from the
worker's treating physiotherapist, Mr A Aish, in addition to his oral evidence.
The worker also
gave oral evidence, which I have considered together with a
brief statement obtained from him on 9th September 1994. The transcript
previous hearing before Review Officer Pope taken on 22nd April 1993 and the
contents of a letter sent by the worker to WorkCover
on or about 10th January
1994 were also before me.
Finally, there is a statement from Mr
Duncan-Kemp, taken on 12th September 1994, the owner of the cabinet making
business that employed
Mr Knight in September 1993.
The worker's evidence
is that he is aged thirty six years. He obtained a trade qualification as a
cabinet maker at Bedford Industries
where he worked for about five years, having
commenced employment when he was about fifteen. He left Salisbury North High
after completing the first year. In addition to working as a cabinet
maker he has held various other jobs, mostly in the transport
He commenced employment at the Jam Factory workshop in March
1992 on a full-time basis carrying out maintenance and carpentry work.
described the circumstances of his injury in some detail, including the way he
fell, which involved a twisting falling motion
with his hand holding onto a
trolley he was pushing at the time.
He said that when he fell he felt a
very sharp pain at the bottom of his back, two or three inches laterally at
He said it was a very sharp pain, very severe. It was the
only pain he felt at the time. He went to the workshop where he sat
fifteen to twenty minutes before going on with his work. Because he was still
in a lot of pain, he reported it to the office.
He said he thought he pulled a
muscle in his back, a belief that was maintained by advice that he received from
Dr Chan. He said
he was sore from the bottom of his back to about eight inches
above the belt line. He managed to continue working the rest of the
although his back was very sore with the whole back aching. He also worked the
following day, and then went on Christmas holidays.
A few days later he saw a
Dr Chan. At that time his whole back was sore. He said he was asked where his
back was the worst, and
he said at that time that the worst pain was "going up"
the back. This extended up to between the shoulder blades where the pain
came on a few days after the accident. The pain in the upper back was clearly
worse than in his lower back at that stage.
He understood that he had suffered
only a "pulled muscle".
He was referred to a physiotherapist, Andrew
Aish, and had six or seven treatments. He told the physiotherapist that the
pain was the worst, although he still had a throbbing pain in his low
back. He said the physiotherapy treatment seemed to ease the
pain down but it
never took it totally away.
He was told by Dr Chan that it would take
several months to settle down. Dr Chan did not have any x-rays or other
investigations
undertaken. With the physiotherapy treatment he said there was
gradual improvement, and his condition was reasonable if not 100%
comfortable.
He went back to work on about 16th January although he felt that he was
not yet ready to do so.
He said that once he returned to work and
started doing heavier work again his back started playing up. He said he didn't
was improving after his physiotherapy ceased. At work he was taking it
a bit slower, and was guarding his back. He said he was
being careful. He
would have aching and pain up his back at the end of the day.
was retrenched in February he phoned Dr Chan and complained that his back was
still not right. Dr Chan told him that it
would still take time and that he
should take the prescribed tablets as required.
On about 2nd March he
returned to the Clinic and saw either Dr Chan or a partner Dr Tan, and requested
an x-ray of his back. Subsequently
an x-ray of the thoracic spine was obtained
and this apparently showed normal structures.
After he had ceased work in
February his back was still not settling like Dr Chan said it would, and so he
kept taking tablets on
His back started to subside down but he
still had occasional symptoms of pain. Over the rest of that year, on ten or
twelve occasions
he had bouts of two to four days at a time of suffering a lot
of pain. Generally, however, he was not in severe pain like at those
those occasions he said the pain was more in his lower back, but also shooting
up the back.
He continued looking for work and obtained a position as a
cabinet maker in Gladstone Queensland through the CES. He relocated to
Queensland, travelling on a bus. He started working a couple of days after he
reached Queensland. He said that once he started
working he noticed pain and
discomfort in his back. He initially put this down to a lack of fitness due to
not working for some
time. He thought that he would quickly become fit and
those pains would go. However that was not the case and instead he found
himself getting sorer and sorer. He found lifting heavy objects such as
cupboards or large sheets of material to be aggravating.
He also found constant
bending difficult. He did not tell the employer of this problem. He put up
with it because he had a new
job, in a new state, and wanted to make the most of
it. He said he was dismissed on 18th October after the employer told him he
too slow working and that he did not get on. At one stage he had two or three
days off work due to a sore back. He said he
had a personality clash with the
employer and there were disagreements over safety issues. The worker denies
that he was dismissed
as a result of breaching any of the employer's safety
requirements.
After he left that employment, the soreness in his back
subsided slowly although he had some continuing pain until about December
he couldn't get out of bed one morning due to a severe aggravation of his pain.
He said he could not work out what was going
on that day because when he went to
bed he was okay, but when he woke he was in a lot of pain. The pain on that
occasion was in
his whole back including his low back. As a result he sought
medical treatment, which led to the referral to Dr Curtis in Brisbane.
Dr Curtis undertook a facet block injection after carrying out a CT scan
which identified a damaged L3-4 facet joint. Following the
facet block
injection, the worker reported having no pain at all about twenty-four hours
later. At that point the suggestion of
an operation to remove the apparently
troublesome facet joint, was made to him.
A second opinion from Dr
McCombe, another orthopaedic surgeon, confirmed Dr Curtis's
Currently he said his back feels like "its been kicked by a mule",
in that he suffers constant pain to his back from the top of his
shoulder blade
area down the whole of his back. He is sore at the bottom but more up his back.
He said it fans out as it goes up
his back. He regularly takes Panadeine Forte
for the pain. More recently he has been taking Ducane. The pain varies from
very little or none to being at an extreme level. Many activities
aggravate it, from walking up slight slopes to vacuuming, or any
physical activity.
He has had no other incident or injury that could
account for these problems. At the time of the previous hearing in April 1993
had no idea that he had a possible entitlement to claim compensation beyond
the date of his retrenchment. Despite mentioning to
his union representative at
that stage that he still had some ongoing problems with his back, he was never
informed of any potential
right to make a claim. Consistent with this, he
believed that after he was retrenched or had returned to work he had no further
entitlement to seek physiotherapy treatment as part of that claim. He also had
no idea then that he would have an ongoing problem.
aggravation in December 1993 he sought some legal advice, and as a result of
that advice he wrote to WorkCover on 10th January
asking it to re-open his
claim. Within two weeks he lodged a fresh claim for compensation with
The worker was cross-examined about his activities when he
returned to work and it was put to him that on 22nd January he was involved
moving a heavy container bin that had become embedded in asphalt. The worker
said that the task took some three hours, and other
people performed the heavy
work, such as using crowbars to lever the bin out. He said he did not perform
any heavy work on that
The brief statement taken from the
worker on 9th September 1994 deals mostly with the Queensland employment. He
confirms in that
statement that he did not tell the employer about his back
condition, although he suffered from back pain whilst there, and felt
work was slower and that had he not been dismissed, he would not have been able
to go on much longer.
The letter of 10th January to WorkCover includes
reference to the fact that he saw a doctor on 30th December 1993 because he had
a lot of pain when he got up. He said that the pain was the same then
as it had been about one year previously. He said that since
the December 1992
accident, on several occasions he had had trouble but only for a few days at a
time. He said on this occasion,
that is since 30th December 1993 it had caused
pain every day.
The statement of Duncan-Kemp says that the worker was
dismissed because he had a "bad attitude to safety", although his work was
satisfactory
as a cabinet maker.
With respect to the medical evidence,
there are three reports from Dr Chan. The first is dated 4th February 1993. It
records that
he first saw Knight on 26th December when the worker was
experiencing pain in the whole of his thoracic spine. The doctor notes
examination he was tender from T4 to T12, with the worse tenderness at T4 to T6.
He noted that flexion and extension were
limited. On the next occasion, three
days later, he noted that the worker was "as before", but that the pains were
lower down.
This time Dr Chan recorded T8 to T12. He referred him for
physiotherapy. He next notes that the worker returned to work on 15th
when he had very minimal ache. He gave him light duties for one week, and at
that stage thought the worker should fully
On 18th March 1993
Dr Chan responded to information provided by WorkCover, and said that based upon
an "eye witness report" to the
effect that the worker was seen lifting his wife
out of the water in January while at the beach, he said that the worker would
been capable of light duties at that time.
Finally, on 3rd February
1994 Dr Chan recorded that the worker had recovered when he last saw him on 15th
January 1993. He adds that
he had made a diagnosis of musculo ligamentous
Dr Chan provided a statement to a WorkCover investigator dated
12th September 1994. This statement repeats the information contained
reports. Dr Chan added that he last saw the worker in March 1993 in relation to
a sore throat, and the worker had made no
mention of a back problem on that
occasion. In a report from the interviewer of Dr Chan, the additional
information is recorded
that Dr Chan could not remember the worker in person.
Dr Chan's clinical notes record the same information that is contained
in the reports referred to above. However they also include
an entry for 2nd
February that records an equivocal comment relating to the back, with a downward
arrow next to the word "backache".
The next entry on 2nd March records the
worker's request for an x-ray of his back.
The physiotherapist Andrew
Aish provided a report of 10th November 1994. He notes that the worker
complained of pain in both the
thoracic and lumbar spines when he was first
consulted on 30th December. He records the worker's complaint of suffering pain
sitting for long periods or at the end of the day. Aish records that the
worker had complained of low back pain but that most pain
was in the thoracic
spine. He also says that by the end of January the worker had a pain-free range
of movement. The physio's clinical
notes record, on the first consultation, a
complaint of "constant pain" in both the thoracic and lumbar spines.
Aish's statement of 12th September 1994 he confirms that the referral letter
from Dr Chan only referred to pain from T4-T12. He
also says that on the last
occasion he saw the worker he was pain-free with a very good active range of
In his oral evidence, Aish said that it was common for people
to present with diffuse pain or for low back problems to go up the back.
said he never really pursued the lumbar spine, and so it would be very difficult
for him to comment upon it in this case. Despite
that, he did confirm that the
worker complained of constant lumbar and thoracic pain, and that he had palpable
tenderness that was
greater in the lumbar spine than the thoracic spine on 30th
December. He said that on 3rd January, the second visit, there was no
significant change and the worker was still significantly tender. On the next
occasion two days later, the worker was still generally
tender. On 6th January
there is a note regarding the L5-S1 level which is said to have been the same as
it had always been, ie:
still tender. On 7th and 8th January, an improvement is
noted and the worker said that he is only in pain if he goes off the tablets.
The next visit was 22nd January, where the worker was noted to be good, that he
was better and required treatment only as needed.
Aish also recalls that the
worker rang him on 2nd February seeking a letter from him regarding swimming at
the beach, and in that
conversation he recalls that the worker said he was still
having ongoing problems with his back. In relation to his clinical notes
said that his shading on the body diagram was not necessarily an accurate or
reliable representation of the sites of pain.
The next lot of medical
evidence relates to the period dating from the end of 1993 onwards. There is a
referral letter from Gladstone
Hospital to Dr Curtis dated 2nd March 1994. It
records that the worker injured his back in a fall at work in December 1992, and
that he has had recurrent exacerbations since then and that these have been
worse since December 1993. The note says that the worker
suffered pain in his
lower thoracic/upper lumbar vertebrae.
Next there is a letter from Dr J
Baartz of Queensland dated 12th October 1994. Dr Baartz merely notes that the
worker had suffered
an L3-L4 disc injury whilst at work.
McCombe, orthopaedic surgeon, provided a report of 28th August 1994. Dr McCombe
says that a CT scan revealed a left L3-4
facet joint as being markedly
degenerate, and that following confirmation of this from a facet block injection
the worker had been
placed on a public patient waiting list for an L3-4 excision
and fusion.
Dr J Curtis, the worker's treating orthopaedic surgeon has
provided two reports. The first dated 23rd March 1994 sets out a history
suffering severe low back pain, and an injury to the lumbar spine. Dr Curtis
says that the worker was then suffering low back
pain in the mid line of the
lumbar spine extending up to the thoracolumbar region. He said the pain was
constant and was aggravated
by activity. He said the CT showed a marked
deformity at the L3-L4 facet joint that he had the appearance of probably being
post-traumatic.
He said this would have occurred either at the time of injury,
or alternatively was a quiescent condition that had been aggravated
In September 1994 he wrote that a diagnostic facet block
undertaken in May 1994 confirmed the left sided L3-4 facet as being the source
of the worker's problems. In relation to causation, Dr Curtis could not comment
as he then noted the difference in the history he
had been given of lumbar spine
problems with that apparently given to Dr Chan and Mr Aish which he believed was
of thoracic spine
problems only.
In giving oral evidence there was
primary focus upon the history of pain that he had obtained from the worker.
There is no dispute
that the worker has a left L3-4 facet problem. The issue is
whether or not that was related to the incident in December 1992.
Curtis said that the history he was given by the worker was of immediately being
aware of severe pain in the lower lumbar region
of his spine upon the incident
occurring. This subsequently radiated to the region described by Dr Curtis as
the thoracolumbar region,
which he said was just above the belt line and
extended to perhaps the lowest thoracic vertebrae at about T12. Initially Dr
gave the opinion, having read the material provided by Mr Aish and Dr
Chan, that his present symptoms are a separate disorder altogether
from what he
suffered at work. He said that this belief was based upon the fact that the
initial complaints to Dr Chan and his treating
physiotherapist were to pain
exclusively within the thoracic spine (see page 6 of transcript). When it was
put to Dr Curtis that
the physiotherapist had recorded at the initial
presentation constant pain in both the thoracic and lumbar spines, Dr Curtis
to place more importance upon the shaded illustration on the
physiotherapy notes, which indicated a higher distribution of
Additionally Dr Curtis said that he would not expect the worker to
suffer pain higher up the back than perhaps at the level of the
upper lumbar
vertebrae stemming from a L3-4 facet joint problem. Despite this, he said that
pain could be referred up the back through
the mechanism of muscle spasm.
However if this was the case he would also expect severe pain and tenderness at
the site of the facet
joint trouble at the same time.
When the worker's
evidence was put to Dr Curtis as to the symptoms he suffered in December 1992
and his subsequent progress, Dr Curtis
said that the worker's evidence is
consistent with aggravation of a pre-existing facet disorder at the L3-4 level,
but, in his view,
was inconsistent with other information provided by the
treating general practitioner and physiotherapist.
Dr Curtis also said
that the worker had not made any complaints to him of pain in the thoracic
spine. On further questioning, Dr
Curtis says it was not the case that the
worker denied those problems, and he certainly was not aware of any reluctance
on the worker's
part to disclose further extension of pain beyond the lumbar
level, but rather that he didn't volunteer complaints in the thoracic
any event Dr Curtis said he had confined his radiological examinations to the
lower lumbar region and as far as he was
aware when he saw Mr Knight the
thoracic spine did not enter into it at all (see page 21). This is strangely at
odds with the worker's
consistent evidence of pain "going up his back" to the
shoulder blade level, even at present.
Dr Curtis gave a possible scenario
of the worker suffering some strain in his thoracic spine from which he had
recovered wholly, and
at that stage there was no involvement at all of the
lumbar spine problem, and that the worker subsequently began to experience pain
from his pre-existing facetal disorder in the lumbar spine which arose either
spontaneously or as a consequence of some further unrelated
Alternatively he said if symptoms of pain in the mid lumbar
region occurred at the time of the original incident and persisted in
rest and conservative treatment, he would presume that more extensive injury
occurred - that is, an aggravation of the pre-existing
disorder in the facet
It was submitted for WorkCover that the worker's evidence given in
this hearing was significantly different to that given at the previous
and sufficiently so in order to warrant findings that the worker's evidence was
exaggerated and was therefore not reliable,
especially in relation to the
question of complaints of lumbar pain at the time of the original incident, and
the continuity of those
complaints. It was submitted that the record of the
worker's evidence in the previous hearing at page 14, where he said that he
that he had "pulled his back", and that it was "very sore", was inconsistent
with the evidence he gave in this hearing which
was to the effect that he
suffered a "very sharp pain at the bottom of his back" at the time of the
incident, and that after sitting
a while and going on with his work he reported
At page 27 of the previous transcript he described that when he
returned to work at the Jam Factory after being off work, his back
ached for the
first couple of days and then seemed to come okay. There was no further
questioning in that hearing of how his condition
was after that time or indeed
how it was after he left work. In this hearing the worker explained that this
comment related to the
first couple of days on his return to work only, but
re-affirmed his evidence that he still suffered problems, and these seemed to
worse with heavier work, and that until he ceased that employment he still
tended to guard himself. In relation to the alleged
inconsistency between the
two versions given of the initial onset of pain, it is my view that no direct
inconsistency is established
despite the use of different language by the
worker. Taking into account the obvious lack of sophistication and ability to
express himself, and taking into account the full context of both
versions, it is my view that a very sore pulling sensation in the
back is not an
inconsistent description with a very sharp pain at the bottom of the back.
Additionally, the problem on both versions
was sufficiently significant for the
worker to report the incident. Furthermore, on the version given to me, the
fact that he said
he returned to work before reporting it is an indication that
perhaps the problem may not have been as severe as one that required
report the incident before he returned back of his normal duties, which was the
version he gave in the previous hearing.
In relation to the submitted
conflict in the worker's evidence, a further factor is the recorded request to
Dr Chan on 2nd March,
some two weeks after he was retrenched, requesting an
x-ray as his back was still not right. That is not consistent with the recovery
scenario put forward by WorkCover. Nor I note, is it consistent with Dr Chan's
statement. Furthermore the clinical note of some
reduced or decreased backache
on 2nd February contained in Dr Chan's notes is also not inconsistent with the
worker's evidence.
On that same day, 2nd February, the physiotherapist also
recalls the worker referring to ongoing back problems. The question can
asked, why didn't the worker seek more treatment if he still had a back problem
at that stage. The worker's response was
that because he had returned to work
and had been retrenched he thought he had no further entitlement to claim
workers' compensation.
It was suggested that the worker's activities at
work up until his retrenchment were inconsistent with continuity of his
Specifically, general reference was made to him assisting in the
removal of the container bin as being inconsistent with his claimed
However there was no evidence called that could contradict the worker, from any
of the other people present on that occasion,
or from an offsider of the worker,
to whom the worker said he mentioned on a couple of occasions that his back was
still sore. In
relation to the container bin, the worker said that he did not
take an active part in the heavy aspects of that work.
The question also
arises as to why the worker did not mention in the previous hearing that his
back was sore up until the retrenchment
and beyond. The worker says he did
mention to his representative that he was still having problems with his back
from time to time.
Also, clearly there was no focus in the hearing on the
question as to his condition after he returned to work, and it was also clear
from the transcript that his representative at the hearing had little idea about
the process.
Next it was submitted that the contents of the worker's
letter dated 10th January was inconsistent with the evidence he gave in this
hearing as to his condition throughout 1993 and also his condition whilst
working at Gladstone. In his letter he said several times
he had had trouble,
but only for a few days at a time, until the further aggravation in December
The next major issue is the evidence from Dr Chan that makes no
reference whatsoever to the lumbar spine. Although Dr Chan could
not give oral
evidence, his comments to WorkCover's investigator that he did not remember the
worker make it highly probable that
any oral evidence from him would not shed
any further light on the matter. On the face of it the information from Dr Chan
consistent with what Dr Curtis has been told by the worker. On the other
hand, Dr Chan's notes are extremely brief. Secondly, his
statement is not
accurate to the extent that he says that the worker made no further mention of
his back after he returned to work.
That is not consistent with the request for
an x-ray on 2nd March. Dr Chan also appears to have been influenced, not in
to note taking, but in relation to his opinion by some unsubstantiated
information provided to him from WorkCover relating to an
alleged eye witness
However, more importantly the physiotherapist, who first saw
the worker within a few days of Dr Chan, records on the first interview,
complaints of pain in the lumbar spine. Importantly the physiotherapist also
found significant tenderness in the lumbar spine on
that examination. It is
apparent therefore that the physiotherapist is recording a different history and
different complaints to
that recorded by Dr Chan. Whilst Dr Chan makes no
mention of the lumbar spine, the physiotherapist records not only those initial
complaints, but also problems with the low back over the next three visits,
including a comment on 6th January that the low back
is the same as it has
always been, ie. still tender. The conclusion is that either the worker is
telling a different version to
the physiotherapist and the doctor at that time,
which is highly unlikely in my view, or alternatively his complaints have been
in a different manner. In this regard the worker's evidence was of Dr
Chan asking for the most painful site of pain on the first
visit, an explanation
consistent with the notes recorded by Dr Chan. In resolving this difficulty I
also place significant weight
on the physiotherapist's finding of tenderness at
the lower lumbar level and his direction of treatment to that level on at least
one occasion.
In my view, the appropriate finding on the balance of
probabilities is that the worker did experience significant pain in both the
thoracic and lower lumbar spine in December 1992 and that he made complaints of
this to both the physiotherapist and Dr Chan but
that Dr Chan did not record
those problems because at the time the initial histories were taken the thoracic
spine was more painful.
In my view it would not be an appropriate finding to
say that the worker did not suffer or complain of significant pain in his lower
lumbar spine at the time of the initial incident. I also find, based upon the
worker's evidence and the physiotherapist's evidence,
that the lower lumbar
spine problems continued to cause trouble at least until the latter part of the
physiotherapy treatment.
The next issue is the extent of the worker's
recovery at or about the time he returned to work. In this regard the worker
he initially came good, but that as he did more work and especially
heavy work, the problem recurred. The physiotherapist effectively
says that the
worker had made a good recovery by 22nd January. There seems to be some
conflict between the physiotherapist's opinion
of Knight's condition at that
time and the worker's evidence of his condition. However the physiotherapist
did not see him again
after 22nd January, which was still in the first week of
his return to work, at a time when he previously said that he had seemed
"come good".
Dr Chan's written opinion was of a recovery when he last
saw the worker on 15th January. However that is not in itself consistent
the subsequent request for an x-ray. That opinion also is not consistent with
the worker's version of being told by Dr Chan
that he could still expect some
further time to recover, at the time he returned to work. Dr Chan's opinion may
well have been influenced
by the unsubstantiated information provided to him by
WorkCover, which the doctor appeared to have accepted at face value, at least
his letter of 18th March 1993.
The other evidence for consideration is
that the worker obviously felt well enough, notwithstanding his disquiet over
his condition
and request for further investigation on 2nd March, to relocate to
Queensland in September in order to take up other employment.
The worker says
that after the Jam Factory his condition settled down and would trouble him only
after strenuous activity prior
to moving to Queensland. His letter of 10th
January also indicates that he was largely well apart from a number of
intermittent
aggravations lasting a few days each.
In my view the
appropriate finding on the balance of probabilities is that at the time the
worker was retrenched from his employment
at the Jam Factory, he was still
vulnerable to aggravations of his back pain, and that he would experience back
pain after performing
heavy work. I also find that after he ceased that work
his condition settled further, but was still vulnerable to aggravation through
heavy or strenuous activity. However, his condition was largely quiescent at
that stage.
In relation to his Queensland employment and the question of
his termination from that employment, there is simply insufficient evidence
which to make any adverse findings in relation to the reasons for the
termination. In any event, it is my view that that issue
is a red herring.
Having generally rejected the attacks upon the worker's credibility mounted by
WorkCover, I accept that the worker
suffered increased back pain as he continued
with his cabinet making work, especially as a result of the heavier aspects of
employment. I also find that after that employment ceased, his condition
again settled, to the condition it had been prior to moving
Queensland.
I also find that as of December 1993 the condition was again
aggravated and has remained at a more serious level of pain and disability
Although the disability appears to have been worse in the sense of
being more persistent since the incident of waking with increased
December 1993, I find with the benefit of hindsight, that the worker was not fit
for the cabinet making work he performed
in September and October 1993, although
at the time he took it up it appeared that the work was suitable.
made these findings, I now return to Dr Curtis' opinion. Firstly, the opinion
Dr Curtis gave that the worker's current condition
is not related to the work
injury, on the basis that his initial injury was exclusively located in the
thoracic spine, cannot be
accepted. It is clear that the initial injury was not
exclusively based on the thoracic spine, but located in both the thoracic
lumbar spine. It is also clear, from the physiotherapist's evidence, that the
shading he used on his clinical notes was not
necessarily accurate, and
accordingly, the significance placed upon that shading by Dr Curtis is
subsequently erroneous. The more
difficult aspects of his opinion are that the
worker apparently made no complaints to him of pain in the thoracic spine.
the worker had not denied any such complaints, they were not volunteered,
and in any event the matter was not pursued by Dr Curtis
as he thought the whole
problem was located in the lumbar spine. This is slightly at odds with the
referral letter from Gladstone
Hospital to Dr Curtis which notes that the worker
was having problems in the upper lumbar and lower thoracic. Yet Dr Curtis says
that there was never any complaint of problems in any of the thoracic spine.
The worker said he did complain of pains going up his
back including into the
thoracic. Dr Curtis' view was strengthened by his opinion that the worker would
not expect to suffer pain
higher than the L1 or T12 level from his facet
problem, although the pain could go higher if there was a concurrent severe
in the low back. Yet this contrasts with the physiotherapist's evidence
that he said it was not uncommon for low back problems to
go up the back through
the mechanism of muscle spasm. Dr Curtis has no difficulty with the history of
pain extending up the back
to the thoracolumbar region, but not as high as the
The result, with Dr Curtis' opinion, is that whilst the
primary basis for him rejecting a causal link has been rejected by these
there is some remaining doubt as to the location of the complaints.
On the other hand Dr Curtis says that the history of the worker's
intermittent
low back problems and the aggravation of the facet joint, are all consistent
with the nature of the initial work injury.
In relation to the December
1993 apparent worsening, Dr Curtis was aware of that incident from the history
given to him, but attached
no particular significance to it.
In my view,
the appropriate finding, on the balance of probabilities, (and whilst still
leaving open some area of doubt), is that
the worker did indeed make complaints
of pain going up his back to the thoracic region, as stated by the worker and as
by the Gladstone Hospital referral letter, and by the
physiotherapist's evidence. I also find, again on the balance of probabilities,
that there is demonstrated continuity between the worker's complaints to Dr
Curtis and the problems he experienced as a result of
the incident in December
1992 and I accordingly find that the worker's demonstrated left L3-4 facet joint
problem is directly related
to the disability sustained in December
On the question of incapacity, my finding is that the worker has
been partially incapacitated by reason of this disability, which
has been of a
fluctuating nature, since the date of his termination of employment with the jam
Turning now to the issue of the worker's ability to make this
claim, I find that there is no reason, based on Review Officer Pope's
why the worker cannot bring this claim for compensation, as it relates to a
period of incapacity that occurred subsequent
to the period of incapacity that
was in question in the previous hearing. Furthermore, there was no question in
the previous hearing
of any issue related to any period beyond the closed period
in question.
In relation to WorkCover's next submission relating to the
claim being barred by reason of the provisions of
, I find that
the worker has established that his failure to give the notice or to make the
claim within the six month period, was
occasioned by his ignorance of his right
to do so. In this regard I accept the worker's evidence that he did not become
he had the ability to bring such a claim until after he sought legal
advice in late December or early January 1994, and that within
a short period of
doing so the claim was lodged. I also accept his evidence that he was not given
any advice by the person who represented
him at the previous hearing of any
possible entitlement to a claim beyond the date of the retrenchment.
relation to WorkCover's alternative submission that it has been substantially
prejudiced in the proper determination of the claim,
it is not necessary to make
a finding on that having found that the delay was occasioned by ignorance of the
worker. In any event,
WorkCover's submission in this regard is that it was
substantially prejudiced in its ability to attempt to minimise its liability.
It has not submitted that it has been prejudiced in its ability to properly
determine the claim as a result of the extra six month
delay. As the Tribunal
has pointed out in its recent decision of
Novello v WorkCover
Print A.23/1995;
[1995] SAWCAT 23
, a consideration of substantial prejudice
in the proper determination of a claim does not include concerns regarding the
any resulting liability. In my view, I do not accept WorkCover's
submission that it has been substantially prejudiced in the proper
determination
of the claim.
From all of the above, it follows that the worker's claim
for compensation is successful. I substitute a decision accepting that
worker is entitled to weekly payments of compensation from his date of
retrenchment being 12th February 1993 until present and
continuing, on the basis
of a partial incapacity that is to be deemed total, with the exception that his
earnings as a cabinet maker
in Gladstone in September and October 1993 are to be
The worker is also entitled to have paid, all reasonable
medical expenses associated with treatment.
I reserve to the parties the
questions of notional weekly earnings, but will hear them further if that matter
cannot be agreed.
I certify that the applicant was represented at the
hearings by legal counsel and is entitled to the limited legal costs available
Any appeal against this determination must be lodged with
the Workers' Compensation Appeal Tribunal within one month of the receipt
this determination. Enquiries about appeals may be directed to the Registrar of
the Tribunal, Riverside Centre, North Terrace,
Adelaide (Phone: 207 0960), and
forms for appeal are available from the same address.
Review Officer
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (90.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter