URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAHPT/2019/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Medical Board of Australia v Todd [2019] SAHPT 2 (15 January 2019)
Medical Board of Australia v Todd
[2019] SAHPT
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL OF SOUTH
MEDICAL BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
Health Practitioners
1582 of 2017
HEARING DATE:
November 2018
DECISION OF SA HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL:
constituted by: President M Ardlie
REASONS FOR DECISION PUBLISHED ON:
15 January 2019
CATCHWORDS:
Application that a
suppression order should be made - subject of the proposed order is the wife of
the respondent and her two children
- basis of application is to prevent undue
hardship to ‘a witness in civil proceedings who is not a party to those
proceedings’
- to prevent undue hardship to children – s
69A(1)(b)(ii), (iii) -
Evidence Act 1929
- Application
refused - no special circumstances giving rise to undue hardship exist –
Evidence Act 1929
Director of Public Prosecutions v C, KL
[2008] SASC 275
Packer v Police
[2007] SASC 98
G v The Queen
(1984) 35 SASR 349
R v Francis
[2007] SASC
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant: Mr S
Respondent: Mr M Barnett
Solicitors:
Complainant: Piper
Alderman Lawyers
Respondent: Avant Law
is an application made pursuant to
Evidence Act 1929
parts of that section relevant to the application are:
Suppression orders
(1) Where a court is satisfied that a suppression order should be made
(b) to prevent undue hardship –
(ii) to a witness or potential witness in civil or criminal proceedings who
is not a party to those proceedings; or
(iii) to a child,
the court may, subject to this section, make such an order.
(2) If a court is considering whether to make a suppression order (other than an
interim suppression order), the court –
recognise that a primary objective in the administration of justice is to
safeguard the public interest in open justice and
the consequential right of the
news media to publish information relating to court proceedings; and
(b) may only
make a suppression order if satisfied that special circumstances exist giving
rise to a sufficiently serious threat of
prejudice to the proper administration
of justice, or undue hardship, to justify the making of the order in the
particular case.
in support of the application for a suppression order on behalf of the wife of
the respondent and her two children referred
A(2)(b). He said special
circumstances exist giving rise to a sufficiently serious threat of prejudice to
the proper administration
of justice or undue hardship.
respondent’s wife is a former patient of the respondent. She is the former
spouse of the notifier. The two children are
former patients of the respondent.
The children are under the care of the respondent and the respondent’s
wife as well as the
notifier from time to time. The two children attend school
with other students who, along with their parents, are patients of the
respondent as well as patients generally of the practice.
undue hardship that the respondent’s wife might suffer, in the event that
her name and image and matters tending to identify
her are not suppressed, is
the fact that her patient records, including records in respect of personal
intimate gynaecological matters,
might be exposed. As a witness to the
proceedings she is entitled to keep such matters confidential. If her name is
not suppressed
she loses that confidentiality.
to how that might arise counsel said in the absence of an order for suppression
all of the allegations that are the subject of
the complaint, and the evidence
in support of those allegations including the intimate clinical records, would
be exposed.
the time she consulted with the respondent she was relevantly a vulnerable
person, and those things that made her vulnerable are
the very things that are
at risk of being publicly exposed if there is no suppression of her
referred to
Director of Public Prosecutions v C,
However, the
answer is not to prevent publication of the accused’s name. The principles
of open justice to which I referred
Channel 7 Adelaide Pty Ltd v An
Advertiser Newspapers Pty Ltd v An Accused
and to which
Gray J referred in
R v Francis
, coupled with the amendments to the
Evidence Act
now reflected in
and the clear policy behind
designed to limit the circumstances in which suppression orders should be made,
all require that there should be no order suppressing
publication of the
accused’s identity.
The answer to this appeal is therefore not to impose a suppression order in
respect of the accused. It is to make more effective the
order as it relates to
the children. Suppression from publication of their names and of their images
is, in the circumstances inadequate.
The order needs to go further and to
prohibit publication of anything that may tend to identify them. That may well
have the effect
of severely restricting or even, in some cases, of prohibiting
the publication of the name of the accused. However, if there are
circumstances
in which the accused’s name may be published without identifying the
children, it is not for the court to place
an unnecessary restriction on that
publication. Whether that can be done is something which those wishing to
publish will need to
consider and on which they may need to take advice in the
particular circumstances.
indicated that if orders were made in respect of the respondent’s wife and
the children suppressing their name, their
image and anything which might
directly or indirectly identify them, rather than in respect of the respondent
they would be content
allegations contained in the complaint refer to a large number of email
communications of a private and intimate nature between
the respondent and the
respondent’s wife to which the respondent’s wife has a right to keep
confidential. Likewise, the
same applies to her patient records. There should be
an order that protects her from undue hardship by reason of public scrutiny
those matters.
children are former patients of the respondent and they enjoy the special status
of being children, and they do not consent, nor
should the Tribunal take away
their rights, to have their patient records kept secret and confidential.
Tribunal has, by appropriately identifying her in the reasons with her initials,
recognised the importance of patient confidentiality
as regards her records as
well as her right to privacy. If that is to be defeated because of the
publication of the respondent’s
name which in turn identifies her then it
creates an inherently contradictory position.
agreed that if the suppression order was made as requested then the reasons for
decision as they stand could not be published
as that would defeat the purpose
of putting in place the suppression order or deidentification.
for the complainant provided written submissions and spoke to those submissions.
He made reference to Rule 11(4) of the
South Australian Health Practitioners
Tribunal Rules 2010
which state that except as provided for in the
no person shall have access to
the Tribunal’s records without the consent of the presiding member or
where the presiding member
is not available, the President.
said the application was opposed. He pointed out that the Tribunal cannot make a
suppression order unless s 69A is satisfied. It
is bound by the terms of the
section and it can only make the order once the Tribunal is satisfied, not only
that an order should
be made to relevantly prevent undue hardship to a witness
who is not a party to the within proceedings but also, in recognition of
paramount consideration (primary objective) of the public interest in open
justice and the media’s right to publish information
proceedings, that special circumstances exist giving rise to sufficient undue
hardship to justify the order of suppression.
contended that the Tribunal cannot come to the required level of satisfaction on
all of the matters set out in s 69A. If there
is any hardship to be suffered by
the respondent’s wife if her name is published, it is not undue.
referred to a decision of the then Chief Justice Doyle namely
where he found that
undue hardship means hardship that is ‘unwarranted, excessive or too
great’ (adoption of that definition
Macquarie Dictionary
ed), 2005).
Justice Doyle also agreed with King CJ’s comments in
G v The Queen
where he said
the use of the
adjective ‘undue’ to qualify ‘hardship’ in the section,
indicates something more than that
ordinary degree of hardship is required...
Moreover, it seems to me that the circumstances must be very rare in which
hardship in
the form of distress or physical or mental harm to others could be
shown to be the likely result of publication of an accused person’s
name... Cases must be rare in which the added factor of media publicity would
cause significantly additional stress or physical or
made mention that Doyle C J in
did not consider that there was any
extenuating circumstance to consider the claimed hardship as undue.
was decided before the amendment to s 69A, which in its present
form has made the test for making a suppression order even more demanding.
respondent’s wife will suffer embarrassment and some odium in the school
community as she associates with parents and other
school children but as in
this does not amount to undue hardship.
respondent’s wife was involved together with the respondent in misleading
the investigators as regards the true nature of
the relationship.
decision relied upon by counsel, namely
DPP v C, KL
, is different in that
all parties agreed there was undue hardship to the children. The complainant
maintains there is no undue hardship
in this matter. Nothing has been put to
suggest that exceptional embarrassment or any other exceptional condition might
flow leading
to undue hardship if the order is not made.
222-225 of the National Law require the complainant to publish details of a
practitioner’s disciplinary history on
the register including details of a
reprimand, suspension and conditions. It is clear that the legislation expects
full disclosure
of information about practitioners even though it will be
embarrassing to them. If the order sought herein is granted in the way
for by counsel the intent of sections 222225 is frustrated.
the Tribunal can make an order, not only does it have to give effect to the
safeguarding of the public’s right to know
and the media’s right to
publish, but also special circumstances have to exist which give rise to a
sufficiently serious threat
of undue hardship to the respondent’s wife so
as to justify the making of an order. As Gray J said in
evident that Parliament, in introducing the 2006 amendments to the
, sought to further limit the circumstances in which suppression orders
could be made to afford greater public scrutiny of the judicial
is no valid basis when
is taken into consideration for her name to be
suppressed and the application should be refused.
Consideration-Order
is a strong public interest in the publication of the reasons, and the possible
hardship that may follow if the application
is refused, does not override the
fact ‘that a primary objective in the administration of justice is to
safeguard the public
interest in open justice and the consequential right of the
news media to publish information relating to court proceedings’.
why a court may only make a suppression order if it is satisfied that special
circumstances exist giving rise to undue hardship
to justify the making of the
order in the particular case.
there may be some embarrassment, odium and related hardship, what has been put
to the Tribunal does not satisfy me that the
hardship ‘is unwarranted,
excessive or too great’, adopting the dictionary definition referred to by
Doyle CJ in
application is refused.
will hear further from the parties as to any further orders to be
or statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registrar of the Health Practitioners
[2008] SASC 275
(Bleby J)] (
DPP v C, KL
) (footnotes omitted).
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (South Australia) Act 2010
(National Law).
[2007] SASC 98.
(1984) 35 SASR 349
[2007] SASC 364
Section 69A(2)(a) and (b).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (147 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter