URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACorC/2025/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:54:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
PANELLA, SKEFFINGTON, JESSETT; Panella, Anna Vincenza and Skeffington, Bernard Anthony and Jessett, Graham Henry ([2025] SACC 21) [2025] SACorC 21 (31 July 2025)
CORONERS COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
INQUEST INTO THE DEATHS OF
ANNA VINCENZA
PANELLA, BERNARD ANTHONY SKEFFINGTON AND GRAHAM HENRY JESSETT
[2025] SACC 21
Inquest Findings of his Honour Deputy State Coroner
31 July 2025
CORONIAL INQUEST
Examination of the cause and circumstances of the deaths of three South
Australians following extended periods of waiting in the care
of paramedics
outside metropolitan hospitals. The Inquest examined the interactions between
the South Australian Ambulance Service
and metropolitan hospitals, in
particular their Emergency Departments.
Vincenza Panella, aged 76 years of Payneham, died at the Royal Adelaide Hospital
on 28 April 2019 as a result of pulmonary thromboembolism
due to a left-calf
deep vein thrombosis.
Anthony Skeffington, aged 89 years of North Plympton, died at the Royal Adelaide
Hospital on 30 September 2021 as a result
of aspiration pneumonia secondary to
small bowel obstruction.
Henry Jessett, aged 64 years of Morphett Vale, died at the Flinders Medical
Centre on 22 March 2022 as a result of ischaemic
heart disease with
cardiomegaly contributed to by hyperkalaemia.
Circumstances
of death as set out in these findings.
Recommendations made.
INQUEST INTO THE DEATHS OF
ANNA VINCENZA
PANELLA, BERNARD ANTHONY SKEFFINGTON
AND GRAHAM HENRY JESSETT
[2025] SACC 21
Table of Contents
INQUEST INTO THE DEATHS OF
ANNA VINCENZA
PANELLA, BERNARD ANTHONY SKEFFINGTON
AND GRAHAM HENRY JESSETT
[2025] SACC 21
The tragic deaths of three South Australians
Inquest examined the deaths of three South Australians following periods of time
waiting on the ramp outside major metropolitan
hospitals. The tragedy lies in
being so close to the help needed, but being unable to access it. Clinicians
involved, as well as
leaders of the South Australian health system, gave
evidence. A pre-eminent emergency physician, Professor Anne-Maree Kelly,
each patient’s case and provided her independent expert opinion
to assist me to understand what went wrong for each death.
Mrs Panella
Panella was born on 2 January 1943. She migrated from Italy to Australia at
15 years of age and learnt
She was given employment
at San Remo, a South Australian company which supported young migrants. She met
her husband, married,
moved to Payneham and had a daughter.
Mrs Panella
took a job working at a private hospital in St Peters. Her dedication and
compassion were noted and she was offered a
career as a nurse. While initially
hesitant because of her English skills at the time, she was able to obtain the
necessary qualifications
and commence her nursing career which lasted 42
Mrs Panella’s
husband of 45 years passed away unexpectedly in 2007. She struggled to manage
her grief but proved to be resilient.
In 2015, Mrs Panella became an
Australian citizen and returned to visit Italy. In 2019, she was 76 years old.
She remained a strong
and caring woman. She was a grandmother. She enjoyed
cooking, meeting new people, attending exercise classes and celebrating her
faith and family.
She suffered
from hypertension, reflux disease and benign paroxysmal positional
but was of generally good
health. She is one of the many great success stories of immigration in
the early afternoon of Saturday, 27 April 2019, Mrs Panella’s
sister-in-law, Nicoletta Delre, visited. Mrs Panella said
she thought she
had a little virus but would be
Later that afternoon a
friend of Mrs Panella’s visited Ms Delre and told her that she
was worried about Mrs Panella because
she had been having dizzy spells.
The two returned to Mrs Panella’s house to check on her.
they arrived, after 4:30pm, Mrs Panella said that she was feeling cold and
was having dizzy spells.
appeared pale. At about 5:30pm Ms Delre called the National Home Doctor
Service and requested a doctor.
was feeling better and Ms Delre confirmed that she looked
better than she
had earlier.
Dr Lagiseti
asked about chest pain, heart palpitations, cough and fever. Mrs Panella
said she had none of those symptoms. Dr Lagiseti
took the usual vital sign
observations.
Her medical
presentation was normal with mild anxiousness. Dr Lagiseti reached a
working differential diagnoses of a panic episode
in the context of ongoing
grief for her husband, or otherwise transient
arrhythmia.
Dr Lagiseti
advised Mrs Panella to see her usual GP on Monday and to monitor herself in
the meantime. He advised her to call an
ambulance if there was a
recurrence of symptoms and confirmed that she had a medic alert button.
Professor Kelly had no criticism
of what Dr Lagiseti did given
Mrs Panella’s presentation at that
and I find that there is
no criticism to be made.
Dr Lagiseti left, Mrs Panella asked Ms Delre to stay a little
longer as she still felt dizzy and wanted the company. As Mrs
walked into the kitchen, she again said she was dizzy and then
She did not lose
consciousness. Ms Delre pressed the medic alert pendant. Mrs Panella
said that she felt fine again, but Ms Delre
told her to stay on the floor
and wait for the ambulance. She was nauseous and vomited three times.
The ambulance
request came through at 9:15pm. It was assigned Priority
The SA Ambulance
has target timeframes
for dealing with cases in metropolitan Adelaide. For Priority 1, it is that in
60% of cases an ambulance arrives
within eight minutes. For Priority 2, it
is that in 90% of cases an ambulance arrives within 16 minutes. I made
observations about
those targets in the Inquest of
which I do not repeat
here. Data published by the government on SA Health website dashboards, shows
that the Priority 1 target is
currently being met, and surpassed. The Priority
2 target is on a trend towards being met, after fluctuations.
Mrs Panella’s case, a single paramedic response, or
paramedic, Graham
Hambling, was dispatched immediately at 9:15pm, arriving at 9:30pm.
Mr Hambling took a history and made vital
sign observations which were
largely normal.
Mrs Panella’s oxygen saturation was 98% on room
Mr Hambling thought
that an ECG showed atrial fibrillation. Mr Hambling affirmed the need for
an ambulance crew and Mrs Panella’s
ambulance priority was
upgraded from 3 to 2.
meantime, an ambulance had been tasked at 9:18pm, leaving at 9:37pm and
arriving at 9:45pm.
dispatched were Darren McInerney and Kristen
At the time of
dispatch, these paramedics had worked continuously since 2pm without a
The ambulance
paramedics received a handover from the SPRINT
Mrs Panella’s medical history and recent events were noted.
Mr McInerney took Mrs Panella’s vital signs again and spoke
her about her symptoms.
vital signs were taken 12 minutes after Mr Hambling’s initial
observations. Mrs Panella’s oxygen saturation was
now 86% on room
She was provided oxygen at
two litres per minute and her saturation increased to 93%. Her blood pressure
and heart rate were a
little high. Her heart was in sinus rhythm, but
tachycardic.
The ambulance
left the house at 10:18pm, arriving at the Royal Adelaide Hospital Emergency
Mrs Panella’s case was reconsidered by paramedics and graded back to
Priority 3, which is commonly done when lights and sirens
are considered
unnecessary for transport.
before they left the house, Mrs Panella’s oxygen supply was increased
from two litres per minute to four, although she
was not displaying any
increased work of breathing or respiratory
Mrs Panella was
sensitive to light and so the ambulance lights were
Health data shows that in the hours leading up to and including
Mrs Panella’s arrival, the Royal Adelaide Hospital received
13, 13, 13 and 13 new patients
cumulatively.
Of these, 44
patients arrived by ambulance. Given the timeframes involved in triaging,
this represents an almost continuous task
of triaging one patient to the next.
For the majority of the day, the Department occupancy had been well in excess of
its capacity.
At 10:40pm specifically, there were 87 patients registered in the
Department,
against a capacity
of 69 patient spaces and eight resuscitation
arrival, Mr McInerney entered the hospital alone. He queued to wait for a
triage nurse for about seven
He then provided
Mrs Panella’s information to the triage nurse, Jenese
Ms Heywood did
not sight Mrs Panella, which is usual practice during busy
although formal policies
mandate patient visualisation.
I will return to the topic of patient visualisation later in these Findings.
For now, I will just note that Professor Kelly and
all other witnesses who
commented on this topic clearly accepted best practice is for the triage nurse
to see the patient. Mrs Panella’s
vital signs at that point were a
slightly raised respiratory rate, a slightly raised blood pressure (reduced from
previous observations),
and a slightly raised heart rate (also reduced from
previous observations). Her oxygen saturation was at 94%, but only with a high
level of oxygen supplied.
10:40pm, Mrs Panella was assigned Category 3 with a target of treatment
commencing within
30 minutes.
Kelly reviewed Mrs Panella’s treatment by paramedics and by the
hospital. There were facts recorded in the triage
note identified during the
evidence which were not in keeping with Mr McInerney’s notes.
Neither witness could recall exactly
the content of the handover.
Ms Heywood’s evidence was less than certain about what was handed
over. She said her practice
was that she would not always record oxygen
saturations when handed over.
In contrast, Mr McInerney was certain that he would always provide oxygen
saturation status during
Mr McInerney was
described by his colleague as having ‘Rain Man’-like qualities,
which I took to be a reference to his
precision and
thoroughness.
I find that, on
the balance of probabilities, Mr McInerney handed over
Mrs Panella’s oxygen saturation status and that Ms
either misheard or did not appreciate the significance of the figures (i.e.,
hypoxia) and hence did not record it. This
is explicable, given that
Mrs Panella’s actual saturation level itself (absent consideration of
the level of supplied oxygen
required to maintain the sufficient level) was
satisfactory at 94% and that Ms Heywood had focussed her mind on a
neurological presentation
oxygen saturation would be less relevant. Professor Kelly’s opinion was
that Mrs Panella’s condition was under-appreciated
and that hypoxia should
have been identified on the information
In her oral
evidence, without conceding that she was advised of the hypoxia, Ms Heywood
conceded that on the basis of the information
that I have now found was
presented to her, Mrs Panella should properly have been assigned
Category 2.
State of South Australia urged me not to make any findings about whether
information about hypoxia was handed over or
This was submitted on the
basis that improvements to the process of handing over clinical data between
paramedics and triage nurses
are being made. In my view, that is not a proper
basis to refrain from assessing and weighing the evidence presented in order to
reach a conclusion about particular circumstances in the lead up to
Mrs Panella’s death. Whether a systemic issue was at play,
whether improvements are likely to ensure the circumstance does not arise again,
are not factors which carry any weight in assessing
what was established by the
find that on the information handed over Mrs Panella ought to have been
assigned Category 2. It is unknown what the practical effect
of a higher
Category would have been, except that higher priority patients are generally
brought in earlier. In any event, Mrs Panella
waited on the ramp.
Mr McInerney took another set of observations upon returning to
the ambulance after triage. Throughout the
wait, Mrs Panella
continued to indicate that she was not short of
Professor Kelly’s
opinion was that the concerning part about Mrs Panella’s condition
during this time was the increasing
need for oxygen in order to maintain
satisfactory saturation.
around 11:10pm, Mr McInerney took a further set of vital sign
observations.
He noted that
Mrs Panella’s condition had suddenly begun to rapidly deteriorate.
Her breathing became worse. Her skin became
clammy. Mr McInerney asked
Ms Carter to notify triage and to request immediate access to the
Department while he remained alone
Mrs Panella.
Ms Heywood was brought to the ambulance by Ms Carter at
She observed
Mrs Panella for about 30
noting her to be
relaxing. This was the first occasion anyone from the hospital had seen
Mrs Panella personally. At 11:16pm, Mrs
Panella’s condition
deteriorated. Ms Carter went inside but struggled to find Ms Heywood
who was outside visiting another
patient on the
She was found and
returned to the ambulance to visit Mrs Panella again at 11:18pm. In the
meantime, Mr McInerney increased Mrs
Panella’s oxygen and began
to sit her upright. As he was doing this, Mrs Panella said she could not
breathe. Mr McInerney
noted that her work of breathing had increased and
her saturation had decreased to 89%, still with four litres per minute of oxygen
being supplied. Ms Heywood said that her view of Mrs Panella was
obstructed and the lights were off, but she could see that she
had an increased
rate of breathing with increased effort and was
directed the paramedics to bring Mrs Panella inside and upgraded
Mrs Panella’s triage Category to
The offload process saw
Mrs Panella wheeled into the Department at
Ms Heywood called
a ‘medical resus’ which had the effect of immediately assembling a
team of medical professionals to
Mrs Panella.
registrar on duty, Dr Sean Jolly, received Mrs Panella at 11:30pm in
Resuscitation, 50 minutes after she had arrived at hospital.
He described
her as being ‘in respiratory extremis’ at that
Mrs Panella suffered a respiratory, then cardiac,
Ms Heywood called
for assistance over the PA
A Medical Emergency
assembled, consisting of an
Emergency Department Consultant, a circulation doctor and an airway
Another doctor and
consultant also assisted.
Mrs Panella’s
oxygen saturation had now dropped to 75%. She was given high flow oxygen with
CPAP. CPR was commenced at 11:42pm
following the loss of cardiac output. At
11:47pm, a shockable rhythm was found and Mrs Panella was delivered a
She had a return of
spontaneous circulation at 11:50pm and was intubated by the airway doctor at
11:55pm. She then became bradycardic
with her heart rate dropping to 15 beats
per minute. She was given adrenaline but lost cardiac output again. CPR was
recommenced
and she had another return of spontaneous circulation at two minutes
past midnight.
the next 40 minutes, Mrs Panella went in and out of cardiac
She was given
adrenaline and noradrenaline. She had a final cardiac arrest at 12:38am. At
this point, given her condition and
the lack of response to efforts, CPR was not
recommenced. Mrs Panella was pronounced life extinct at 12:39am on 28
April 2019.
Kelly’s view was that, with the exception of the under-appreciation at
triage, both paramedics and hospital staff
gave Mrs Panella adequate care
in the circumstances they faced,
putting aside the obvious unsatisfactory delay which was out of their hands.
post-mortem examination by forensic pathologist, Dr Karen Heath of Forensic
Science SA,
revealed that
Mrs Panella had extensive bilateral pulmonary emboli and a left-calf deep
vein thrombosis. In Dr Heath’s opinion,
Mrs Panella therefore
died of pulmonary thromboembolism due to left calf deep vein
thrombosis.
conducted a reflective review in respect of the
A formal adverse incident
review was conducted by SA Health into Mrs Panella’s
None of the clinicians
who provided care to Mrs Panella were involved in this
said that treatment for pulmonary embolism must be commenced as soon as
Professor Kelly
concluded that Mrs Panella’s death was not preventable in the
circumstances in which it
That is, even if
Mrs Panella had been directly admitted to the Department upon arrival, the
usual timeframes involved in testing
and detecting her condition, then
commencing treatment, would not have seen her treatment actually commence before
her deterioration
Time was likely to have been needed to reach a diagnosis, particularly in light
of the fact that Mrs Panella’s presentation
In accordance with
Professor Kelly’s explanation of the clinical scenario, I find that
Mrs Panella’s death was not preventable.
The delay in
Mrs Panella’s entry to hospital did not bring about her death.
However, Professor Kelly pointed out that this
outcome would not necessarily be
inevitable in another case for another patient whose condition is not so
I observe that while
her death was not preventable, the circumstances in which it occurred were far
less dignified than Mrs Panella
find that Mrs Panella’s death was caused by pulmonary thromboembolism
due to left calf deep vein thrombosis.
Mr Skeffington
Skeffington was born on 3 May 1932. He migrated from Ireland at 18 years of
He worked across Western
Australia in the mining industry until he was injured in an explosion and was
brought to Adelaide for treatment.
He met his wife and remained in South
Australia. He was employed at General Motors Holden and worked his way up in
the company.
After retiring, he particularly enjoyed spending time with his
children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren. In 2021, he was
89 years old.
He lived in a retirement village at North Plympton with his wife. He suffered
from ischaemic heart disease and had
previously had a heart attack resulting in
a stent insertion. He had atrial fibrillation which was managed with
medication. He
was independent; he had his driver’s licence. He assisted
with charity work and even put bins out for his elderly neighbours.
another successful immigrant to Australia.
9:53am on Saturday 25 September 2021, Mr Skeffington’s wife called
an ambulance.
She reported
that Mr Skeffington had stomach pain and was vomiting. She said that he
had previously had a twisted bowel. The request
was initially categorised as
Priority 5 but was very quickly reviewed internally and upgraded to Priority
An ambulance was
dispatched from Port Adelaide at 10:04 am, but that did not make it to
Mr Skeffington before it was called away
to a case of a suspected
An Extended
Care Paramedic called Mrs Skeffington back at 10:31am to review the case
and determine whether the priority assigned remained
appropriate.
Mrs Skeffington said that Mr Skeffington had taken an anti-nausea
tablet at 8:30am and that his vomiting was now starting to ease.
She provided
further information that his twisted bowel was about two years earlier, and that
Mr Skeffington had opened his bowels
that morning with no issue.
12:06pm, a dispatcher asked the computer system to recommend an ambulance
for callout.
presented 13 options, the nearest being 2.6 km away and the furthest being 8.1
km away. An ambulance was dispatched
from Parkside, but that also did not
make it before being called away to a patient who was threatening
Extended Care Paramedic called Mrs Skeffington at 12:29pm to review
Mr Skeffington’s condition. They advised that the wait
time was now
90 minutes. At 12:39pm, another ambulance was dispatched from Fulham
which also did not make it to Mr Skeffington before
being called away to a
patient who was unconscious or had
During a call to
Mrs Skeffington at this time, she said that Mr Skeffington had not
vomited for a while and that he was
She said he was
tolerating small sips of fluid.
1:25pm an ambulance was dispatched from the Ashford Hospital which reached
Mr Skeffington at 1:36pm, three hours and 43 minutes
after being requested
by Mrs Skeffington.
paramedics were Stacey White and Erin Pankoke. When they arrived,
Mr Skeffington was alert and in
He reported pain below the
umbilicus, travelling across toward the flanks. His abdomen was noted to be
Physiological
observations were taken at the house, and again on departure in
the ambulance.
Mr Skeffington was given medication for his nausea which eased his dry
retching and his pain level.
was able to walk to the stretcher at the end of the path with paramedic
paramedics thought that Mr Skeffington required treatment at hospital, they
did not consider lights and sirens were necessary
and he was transported
without, in line with the Priority 3
I make no criticism of
this decision. Mr Skeffington was talkative en
The ambulance left
Mr Skeffington’s home at 2:02pm and arrived at the Royal Adelaide
Hospital at 2:18pm.
Health records show that in the hours leading up to and including
Mr Skeffington’s arrival, the Royal Adelaide Hospital received
7, 20, 14 and 13 cumulative new
Of those, 34 arrived
by ambulance and the Department went over capacity in the hour of
Mr Skeffington’s arrival. Dr Katrina
Romualdez, Co-Director of
the Royal Adelaide Hospital Emergency Department, accessed other data which she
considered was more accurate.
In that data, 20 presentations were recorded in the same hour
Mr Skeffington presented. There were 20 presentations in the hour
preceding that, and 22 presentations in the hour previous to that. This
represents almost the entire capacity of the Department
arriving seeking help in
just three hours. Dr Romualdez said that this would challenge any
Department and the only possible outcome
would be waiting. Triage nurse Sally
Araki said that data showing 11 ambulance arrivals in the hour leading up
to Mr Skeffington’s
arrival would practically mean she would be able
to do nothing but triage one patient after
it remains unknown, had Mr Skeffington not had to wait so long for
ambulance transport to hospital, Dr Romualdez said that
he may have been ahead
of this crushing demand and may have been seen
The service was
obviously busy that day and I do not make any criticism for ambulances being
diverted to cases that presented more
concerning scenarios. An earlier
ambulance appeared to be practically impossible in the circumstances as they
existed on the day,
evidenced by the multiple attempts at sending one to
Mr Skeffington. Although it worked against Mr Skeffington, the
continual reassessment
of the appropriate use of resources is an important part
of the ambulance service. Notwithstanding that, the State of South Australia
acknowledged that Mr Skeffington’s wait for an ambulance was
unacceptable.
the ambulance did arrive, it had to be parked far away from the Department
entrance due to busyness.
2:24pm, Mr Skeffington was assigned triage
Category 4,
time for treatment being 60 minutes. Professor Kelly said that Category 3
would have been more
appropriate.
the triage nurse who conducted Mr Skeffington’s triage, explained the
reasoning behind the assignment of Category
4 and the comforting factors
that were weighed against the concerning
In light of the
content of the Australasian Triage Education Kit, Ms Araki conceded that
Mr Skeffington had features which meant
that Category 3 would have been a
better classification.
actual triage of him was limited by the pressures of her workload at the time.
Ms Araki explained that she does not necessarily
visualise patients being
triaged externally unless she has clinical concerns. She considered this normal
I find that Mr
Skeffington ought to have been assigned triage Category 3 and that
Ms Araki’s assessment was hampered by the
lack of patient
visualisation. It will remain unknown whether Mr Skeffington would have
been brought into the Department sooner
if he had been assigned Category 3,
given that the Department was extremely busy.
triage, Ms White inferred that Mr Skeffington had been assigned a
lower triage Category and conveyed her concern about him
in an effort to
‘bump up’ his assigned
She said that she
did not feel her concern was taken into
Ms Araki said
that she had been reassured by the fact that Mr Skeffington was
haemodynamically stable and that he had been given
medication.
discussed Mr Skeffington’s case with another triage nurse, Clarkton
Fernandez, during the change of
note was made on the triage record which stated:
Emergency Department is currently overcrowded and unsafe. Capacity for clinical
assessment and care delivery is compromised
as a direct consequence of this and
may affect this patient. Hospital Executive are aware of the situation.’
Evidence was given that this was an ‘acronym expansion’ designed
to record that the triage had occurred in difficult
circumstances.
who at the relevant time was head of the Royal Adelaide Hospital Emergency
Department, gave evidence that, at the time,
the Royal Adelaide Hospital was
effectively running two Departments; a COVID one and a non-COVID
There were usually a
significant proportion of cubicles occupied by patients who were required to be
there because of the inability
of anywhere else to provide care to
COVID-positive patients, such as patients within quarantine periods who required
complex nursing
was unfortunate, but necessary in extremely unusual
with only 47.1% of the
adult population vaccinated by this
waiting, Mr Skeffington was fluctuating between comfortable and
distressed.
said that in those episodes, he appeared to be in more distress than his
physiological observations
A second dose of
anti-nausea medication was administered at
Ms Pankoke went
into the Department to speak to the triage nurse about Mr Skeffington
looking uncomfortable and becoming increasingly
Mr Fernandez
came outside to see Mr Skeffington. At this time, Mr Skeffington had
settled and was sitting upright, with his hand
across his abdomen, and
although he was
Mr Fernandez
could only see Mr Skeffington from behind and to the
Mr Fernandez said
he would try to bring Mr Skeffington in, but also said that if there was
another deterioration, to draw his attention
Mr Fernandez
returned to the hospital to check whether there was any available space in the
Department or whether there were any
pending discharges. There were
Mr Skeffington
continued to wait. As a result of Mr Fernandez’s visit,
Mr Skeffington’s triage was upgraded to Category
2, processed
later at 3:45pm.
should note here that, after receiving various pieces of evidence on the topic,
I find that while waiting in the ambulance outside
Mr Skeffington was either not seat belted to the barouche or the seatbelts
were loosened.
situation, this was not a contributing factor to his cause of death. This was
appropriate. There were periods when he
was noticeably less chatty than he had
been previously.
waiting, Mr Skeffington began vomiting again. By this time he was having
no periods of being settled.
Ms Pankoke said that she thought she was watching him deteriorate in front
of her eyes.
Ms Pankoke again went inside to advise of the situation and escalate the
process while Ms White stayed with Mr Skeffington
This was an
appropriate step to take in the circumstances as they existed at that time.
Ms Pankoke’s intention was to have
Mr Skeffington admitted but
needed the triage nurse’s permission to bring him
the ambulance, Mr Skeffington was given more anti-nausea medication
which did not assist. Paramedics were not able to give
Mr Skeffington any
further antiemesis treatment within their scope of practice at the
Mr Fernandez says
that Ms Pankoke rushed into the Department and that he told her to bring
Mr Skeffington in.
Ms White was alone with Mr Skeffington, he had an explosive vomit,
which she thought to be faecal
unresponsive and rigid. He became bradycardic. Ms White struggled to sit
him forward to prevent
aspiration.
She could not
feel a radial pulse but found a carotid
struggled to reach the radio to contact Ms Pankoke. She sought help by
banging on the ambulance
She gave harrowing
evidence about the impact this experience had on her. After hearing this
evidence, I formed a strong view that
measures must be taken to minimise the
risk of this situation happening again. A paramedic from
another ambulance, also waiting
on the ramp, came to assist. They began
unloading Mr Skeffington to take him
Ms Pankoke was
exiting the Department when she encountered Ms White bringing
Mr Skeffington in.
Mr Skeffington
was taken into the Department at 3:48pm after an unload process of a couple of
Transfer of care
was achieved at 4:01pm; one hour and 43 minutes after arriving at hospital. By
that time, he was noted to have
a blue/grey
appearance.
The paramedics
advised that they were confident Mr Skeffington had aspirated. His oxygen
saturation was at 70% and his pulse was
weak. He was now in peri-arrest. He
was taken directly to the resuscitation
Mr Skeffington
was given oxygen at 15 litres per minute. His colour improved over the next
30 minutes, but he deteriorated when the
After he had been
stabilised, he experienced another episode of vomiting and a nasogastric tube
was inserted to drain the contents
Mr Skeffington
was diagnosed with a small bowel obstruction, however his primary issue became
the aspiration consequent upon vomiting.
A CT scan revealed bilateral pulmonary
infiltrates.
The following
day, Mr Skeffington developed a strong cough. His breathing was wheezy.
He continued on high-flow
By the morning of
27 September 2021, Mr Skeffington’s small bowel obstruction had
His respiratory
issues continued. His airways began to suffer trauma from coughing. During the
night of 29 September 2021, Mr
Skeffington had worsening respiratory
failure and needed 90% supplied oxygen at 50 litres per minute at
On 30 September 2021,
Mr Skeffington reached the maximum level of respiratory support. Medical
staff had a conversation with him,
advising him that if he worsened from that
point, it would indicate he was
This was particularly
upsetting for Mr Skeffington’s
Mr Skeffington
said he would ‘push on’.
early afternoon he was recorded to have continued to deteriorate. Later in the
afternoon he reported feeling exhausted. He was
tachypneic and uncomfortable.
He decided to transition to comfort
He was transitioned to
medications to alleviate his distress and died within a couple of
pathology review by Dr Alexandra Yuill of FSSA concluded that
Mr Skeffington’s death was brought about by aspiration pneumonia
secondary to small bowel
obstruction.
I accept Dr
Yuill’s conclusion and make a finding acordingly.
adverse incident review was conducted into Mr Skeffington’s death at
the program-level, involving multiple
specialities.
documents, as well as evidence from most clinicians, established that none of
the clinicians who directly provided care
to Mr Skeffington were involved
in the review,
although they
may have been ‘debriefed’ by those actually involved in the review.
Dr Brooks requested that a cluster
event be declared in order to better
understand the systemic issues involved in Mr Skeffington’s death
alongside others who
had died after being
This was declined by
the then-management of the Central Adelaide Local Health Network which
administers the Royal Adelaide Hospital.
It is unclear what this might have
specifically achieved given that the review conducted did span multiple cases,
although a formal
‘cluster review’ would have drawn in the Safety
and Quality Unit of the Department for Health and
Kelly’s opinion was that the care provided to Mr Skeffington,
including the way in which his aspiration event was
managed, was the best that
could be achieved in the
circumstances.
Kelly’s opinion was that, had Mr Skeffington had measures to reduce
his risk of aspiration such as the timely insertion
of a nasogastric tube to
remove potential aspiration material, his death would likely have been
She said that
Mr Skeffington’s condition was not life-threatening prior to the
aspiration event. Dr Eve Hopping, who treated
Mr Skeffington,
She said that
conservative management would have been
and that intensive
care would not have been required if Mr Skeffington had not
cautioned that it is not possible to be absolutely certain of avoiding that,
given that a person with a bowel obstruction
can vomit at any point. She
pointed out that a number of assessments would ideally have been conducted prior
to the insertion of
a nasogastric
Inquest explored the appropriateness of the insertion of a nasogastric tube
early in the care of a patient in Mr Skeffington’s
condition. The
clear evidence of the clinicians was that there are risks with the procedure,
and the insertion of a nasogastric
tube on a conscious patient is best left for
doctors rather than
paramedics.
evidence, I do not propose to advance a variation for paramedics to be permitted
to do this as a realistic proposal for
SA Health to consider.
Kelly’s assessment of the medical care provided by the paramedics was that
it was appropriate.
Professor Kelly made no criticism of the care Mr Skeffington was afforded
once he was able to enter the
Department.
I find that
there is no criticism to be made of the care actually provided to
Mr Skeffington by the paramedics and hospital staff.
circumstances where the evidence is that Mr Skeffington’s condition
was not life‑threatening until the aspiration event,
that there was a
delay in his assessment by doctors, and that a treatment to reduce the risk of
aspiration was available, I find
on the balance of probabilities that
Mr Skeffington’s death, caused by aspiration pneumonia secondary to
small bowel obstruction,
was preventable. I make that assessment based on the
timeline of events as I have found that they occurred, including that
Mr Skeffington’s
aspiration event occurred about one hour and 21
minutes after he was triaged. The fact that Mr Skeffington was in the back of
ambulance did not itself bring about his aspiration event, but the fact that
he was made to wait without any hospital assessment
other than triage allowed it
to happen before any treatment was commenced.
Skeffington’s age and ability of his body to recover from an aspiration
event is not relevant to an assessment of whether
the aspiration event itself
could have been prevented. It is of no moment to observe that a younger
healthier patient may have survived
notwithstanding experiencing an aspiration
consider that it is not speculative to suggest that a nasogastric tube could
have been inserted earlier. I consider that if Mr
Skeffington had been
fully assessed earlier, he would have had the device inserted earlier. I
consider that the scenario of Mr Skeffington
being taken into the
Department, assessed and having a nasogastric tube inserted prior to his
aspiration event is not a theoretical
possibility, it is a scenario that was
open and, if occurred, would likely have prevented his death.
Jessett was born on 20 September 1957. He lived at Morphett Vale with his wife.
He was Type 1 diabetic and had previously
had two heart attacks with an
AICD implant fitted. He had hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, renal impairment and
gout. He had coronary
artery disease, congestive cardiac failure, ischaemic
heart disease and ischaemic cardiomyopathy. He suffered from chronic pulmonary
obstructive disease. Mr Jessett’s mother had a history of heart
disease and Mr Jessett’s brother passed away after a
sudden cardiac
event. In 2022, Mr Jessett was 64 years old.
mid-February 2022, Mr Jessett was diagnosed with shingles. On 11 March
2022 he tested positive for COVID-19 with a PCR test, which
I will discuss in
more detail shortly. He had a week of feeling unwell and lethargic, with
intermittent nausea and coughing. On
19 March 2022 he was not sure why he was
still unwell, and given his complex medical history, his wife called
an ambulance. Paramedics
had Mr Jessett perform some sit/stand tests
and found his respiration rate raised then lowered appropriately afterwards.
saturation dropped to 97% and then returned to 99% within 30 seconds.
told Mr Jessett to take paracetamol, drink fluids and to rest. They said
he should see his GP to obtain antiemetics for
the nausea. They said if there
was a worsening of his symptoms, then he should see a GP after 10 days had
passed since his COVID
test, or otherwise call an ambulance.
10:48am on Tuesday 22 March 2022, Mr Jessett’s wife rang triple zero.
She reported that he was full of fluid, was not very
lucid, that he looked bad,
had chest pain, was pale and clammy, lethargic and not breathing normally. She
said that he had previously
had a heart attack and had taken his usual
medications that day. It was recorded that he had tested positive for COVID in
14 days but had been cleared by SA
He was assigned a
Priority 2 response.
An ambulance
was dispatched from Morphett Vale at 10:57am and arrived at 11:01am. The crew
consisted of paramedic Caitlin Wegener
and then-intern paramedic Stuart
read the dispatch information and immediately became concerned that
Mr Jessett may have been experiencing a potentially
serious cardiac-related
Upon arrival,
Ms Wegener recorded the history ‘Has been lethargic [with nausea and
vomiting]. Last 2 [days, patient] has
had worsening
She noted a
distended abdomen and mild shortness of breath when Mr Jessett was sitting up.
Mr Jessett was able to move himself
to the stretcher without any apparent
difficulty.
He reported
being uncomfortable rather than being in
In contrast to records
held by SA Health, Mr Jessett reported that he had tested COVID-positive by
Rapid Antigen Test 10 days prior
and did not appear to mention any PCR test, nor
the significance of the SA Health
formed an impression that Mr Jessett may have been experiencing
exacerbation of his congestive cardiac failure due to
the recent COVID
The ambulance left at 11:30am and arrived at Flinders Medical Centre at
Health data shows that in the hours leading up to and including
Mr Jessett’s arrival, the Flinders Medical Centre received
15 and 17 cumulative newly arriving
Of these, 22
arrived by ambulance. Of all arrivals in those hours, at least
16 were assigned triage Category 2, requiring admission
The Department
exceeded its capacity in the hour prior to Mr Jessett arriving. At 1:46pm,
a ‘Code Yellow’ was declared,
which records an internal disaster, on
this occasion due to the inability to cope with demand which is putting patients
Acting Nursing
Director Steven Peck described the data as demonstrating the Department
operating at ‘absolute
the Flinders Medical Centre Emergency Department, Dr Matthew Wright, said
that his review of the data established that
38 of the 67 treatment spaces in
the Department were occupied that day by admitted patients waiting for a bed on
Dr Wright said
that the Department was exceptionally busy on this
Flinders Medical Centre was operating within a health system that was dealing
with 26,431 active cases of COVID on that
recalled having to wait to speak to a triage nurse for about 12
which Dr Wright said
suggested that the triage area was
11:58am, Mr Jessett’s case was assigned triage Category 3, that is
the 30-minute category. He waited in the ambulance outside
the hospital.
A COVID assessment indicated ‘no’ to all symptoms except
It recorded an
onset date of 13 March 2022 and noted ‘COVID Day 9’. The triage
nurse, Mariah Crowther, noted the history
of congestive cardiac failure and of
his symptoms. She noted that Mr Jessett’s observations were within
normal ranges. Ms
Crowther was not able to visit Mr Jessett in
the ambulance.
Mr Jessett’s details were entered onto an ‘offload log’
which was used to monitor the number of patients on the
Ms Crowther
checked with the shift coordinator, Mr Peck, about Mr Jessett’s
isolation requirement and this was
manner in which Mr Jessett’s COVID condition was dealt with was
unfortunate. The ambulance dispatch system recorded that
had been cleared by SA Health in relation to
The significance of
this is unclear. It is also unclear whether this text would have appeared on
the mobile data terminal in the
ambulance. In any event, the paramedics did not
see it and they acted on what Mr Jessett said
Given that it
cannot clearly be said that they were presented this fact, I do not criticise
them for acting on what Mr Jessett told
them, nor for not querying his
self-reported test date further. I accept that it is not their role to
double-check everything they
are told by a patient. In any event, the
self-reported date of his positive test was then relayed by the paramedic to the
nurse. This was again taken at face
It was wrong. I am
satisfied it was wrong because clear medical records of a specialist COVID
clinic establish the date of Mr Jessett’s
COVID test by PCR. These
are precisely the details that I would expect a COVID clinic to record reliably;
it was their very role
at the time and I observe the seriousness with which
COVID clinicians carried out their roles. It also fits with the fact that SA
Health issued some form of ‘clearance’, indicating the passage of a
critical timeframe, such as an isolation period which
was in force from time to
time during the pandemic. I note Professor Kelly’s evidence that
confusion was a symptom Mr Jessett
experienced.
I am therefore
faced with an official record of a specialist clinic on the one hand and the
self-report of a man experiencing confusion
(who provided a date which is
repeated in multiple places, but coming from the same source) on the other. I
am prepared to rely
upon the clinic record as an accurate reflection of Mr
Jessett’s test date and method of testing. The unfortunate aspect is
therefore that if a simple search of Mr Jessett’s medical history,
held electronically by SA Health, had been conducted, it
would have revealed his
attendance at the Flinders Medical Centre’s COVID Care Clinic on 14 March
2022 where it was recorded
that he had a positive PCR test on 11 March
This information was
readily available on the Sunrise system used by the
Department.
There was a
practice of looking at recent COVID test results, but only
how busy a triage nurse is, I do not criticise the triage nurse for not
conducting a search of Mr Jessett’s history to
verify the clear
information that had been handed over. It is for this reason that I have
concluded that the manner in which the
COVID condition was dealt with was
unfortunate for Mr Jessett and not anything more serious. It was
unfortunate, for example, that
he had not been more vague or uncertain about his
test date which might have brought about further investigation and potentially
revealed the earlier date, prompting further enquiry. My finding that this
circumstance was unfortunate is a reflection of the manner
in which the scenario
played out, not a reflection on the decisions of those involved or the reasons
for their actions. I consider
that a series of events can be within protocols
and procedures and nonetheless unfortunate. That is where this circumstance
Court heard evidence about differing ways of calculating COVID timeframes. It
can be charted as
11 March 2022
Positive PCR
this chart makes clear, if Mr Jessett’s true COVID PCR result date
was known, he might not have been earmarked as requiring
COVID positive
precautions, which as I will explain below, only applied within 10 days. The
result being that there would have been
more options for his admission to the
Department, instead of, in effect, only one appropriate cubicle potentially
being available
that could accommodate him. This might have seen him enter the
Department earlier,
at least have presented more options to be considered for his placement. Mr
Peck conceded that there was a possibility
that earlier entry might have been
facilitated.
It might have
had no impact at all, and I heard evidence of the opinions of the clinicians
involved that Mr Jessett’s COVID
status did not actually deny him earlier
entry. I have merely observed that more options may or may not have been
beneficial. Knowing
that he was further along in his COVID journey, or that SA
Health had issued him a ‘clearance’, might have had the potential
for the Department not to have been so strict about him requiring isolation. It
will never be known what shuffles might have been
considered appropriate if
isolation was not considered mandatory.
was suggested in evidence and submissions that COVID measures at the time might
have been applied only within a period of 14 days,
however that evidence was
given with hesitation,
without any specific supporting
documentation.
contrary to the effect of the clear note made on the offload log. There was
criticism of that note because the author of
it is unidentified. In my view,
the author of the note is less important than the clear import of it, combined
with the fact that
a person saw fit to specifically record that he was within
that period. That is what Ms Crowther who was using the offload log on
that day interpreted the note to mean in her
procedural documents tendered were not of direct application to patients
arriving at the Department.
In respect of the other, it provided no isolation timeframe and the evidence was
it was not followed in any
I observe that COVID
procedures changed often. It is therefore unsurprising that a formal document
may not have been drafted for
a specific timeframe within which to deal with
COVID positive patients in the Department. I observe that isolation timeframes
over time through the pandemic and that Mr Jessett’s
presentation was about two years after a biosecurity emergency was declared
the Australian Government,
and only seven months before all isolation requirements were removed
the Chief Public Health Officer’s report dated June 2022, Professor
Spurrier explained that when the Omicron wave commenced
in January/February
2022, the eastern states moved to a seven day isolation period with South
Australia ‘...continuing with
a 10 day isolation
period...’.
gave evidence that the Department was essentially following the State’s
the end, I consider that the clear picture of what regime was in place emerges
from a combination of all of the evidence. This
includes the Chief Public
Health Officer’s report, the handwritten note on the offload
which a staff member
with access to the offload log has gone to the effort to record, combined with
the fact that SA Health had issued
some form of COVID ‘clearance’
which, whatever its full nature was, fits neatly with the end of a mandatory
period having been reached, as well as the fact that the paramedics
who initially visited Mr Jessett on 19 March 2022 advised him
to visit his GP 10
days after testing.
consider that, on the balance of probabilities, the health system was operating
on a 10 day isolation regime at the time of Mr
presentation. If that was not the case, what cause would a person have for
writing ‘Day 9 COVID ISO’
and ‘Reason: In High Risk 10
days’ on the offload log? What reason would SA Health have to issue a
COVID clearance?
Why would paramedics advise Mr Jessett to visit his GP 10
days following his test? Evidence of general COVID practices which changed
time was not sufficient to persuade me that the clear handwritten note was based
on a regime that was not in force at the time.
Once again, this is not
something for any person to be criticised for, it is simply part of the
unfortunate circumstances that Mr
Jessett found himself in on that day.
unfortunate event was that Ms Wegener was not advised that Mr Jessett
had been marked as requiring a negative pressure
If that had been
advised, it might have prompted further thought about the cause of the delay and
potentially prompted further enquiries
of Mr Jessett himself about his
actual test date. Again, this may not have had any impact on his entry to the
hospital and is not
something that I criticise any individual clinician for in
the circumstances.
triage nurse who assessed Mr Jessett’s case, Ms Crowther, was
new to the triage role.
was being supervised by, and ran her assessment of Mr Jessett past, Nurse
Educator Jessica Toohey, who was supporting her through
reviewed Mr Jessett’s records in preparation for the Inquest. Her
opinion was that it would have been prudent for
Ms Crowther to have made a
record of Mr Jessett’s diabetic status in the triage note, and that
he suffered from chronic obstructive
pulmonary disorder, but that these things
would not have altered the appropriate triage score for his
It is unclear
whether these conditions were conveyed to Ms Crowther. Ms Wegener believes
Kelly’s view was that Ms Crowther should have undertaken an in-person
assessment of Mr Jessett, then regular reassessments
where indicated, but
that the triage score assigned was
reasonable.
Ms Crowther
assessed records of Mr Jessett’s actual health status while giving
evidence and said that she could not recall
being advised that he had Type 1
diabetes, that he had had a prior heart attack and that he suffered chronic
obstructive pulmonary
disorder, although she accepted that it was possible that
some of these things were told to
It is possible that she
may not have appreciated the combined significance of these conditions which led
to her not recording them.
I find that, on the balance of probabilities, Mr
Jessett’s diabetic status and his chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder
were handed over to her but not recorded. She said on the basis of an
assessment of the complete picture (without the pressures
of the Department that
were occurring on the day) she would have assigned Mr Jessett triage
Category 2.
said that Ms Crowther was largely operating on her own. I do not consider it
likely that Ms Toohey would have disagreed
with an assignment of Category 2 if
the full circumstances were known to both Ms Crowther and Ms Toohey. That is, I
consider it
unlikely that she would have ‘downgraded’ Ms
Crowther’s assessment if it had been made in that manner in the first
place when Ms Crowther had progressed to an independent
I find that
Mr Jessett should have been assigned triage Category 2. It is unclear
whether this would have made any practical difference,
Mr Jessett had been identified as requiring isolation, something hard to
achieve at the Flinders Medical Centre. It was
a requirement that was not
flexible depending on
Indeed, it might
have made no practical difference. A resuscitation room might have been
considered appropriate,
although capacity is required to be kept available in this area because of the
Flinders Medical Centre’s designation as a Level
In any event,
consideration of these potential options was not made because
Mr Jessett’s true COVID test date was not known
to anyone involved in
waiting on the ramp, Mr Jessett had a sudden onset of epigastric
He was able to get
some relief by sitting up and
left Mr Jessett in Mr Gallagher’s care and entered the hospital
to report this to the triage nurse on shift at
the time, Danielle
Ms Weston did
not visit Mr Jessett,
but noted on his record that the ECG continued to be
given paracetamol at 1pm and did not complain of any further pain.
3pm, Ms Wegener recorded a further set of physiological observations which
were generally normal.
Ms Wegener then turned the cardiac monitor off as Mr Jessett had been
stable for three and a half hours and she wanted to allow
him to be more
comfortable on the stretcher.
In the circumstances, I find that this was a reasonable action.
waiting, one patient also on the ramp was transferred to the waiting
No other patient was
taken from the ramp into the
Department.
I have said above, there was only one cubicle in the entire Flinders Medical
Centre Emergency Department that was suitable and
likely to become available to
accommodate Mr Jessett upon his arrival due to his COVID-positive status;
cubicle South-16.
South‑16 was occupied at the commencement of Mr Jessett’s wait
by a patient who had died and was waiting for family
Shortly after
Mr Jessett’s arrival, a patient was placed in the cubicle who had
sudden onset shortness of breath with crackles
audible and a fast respiratory
rate of 36 with a low oxygen saturation level, requiring eight litres of oxygen
per minute using CPAP.
Over the hours that Mr Jessett waited, this patient
was able to be weaned to nasal specs and was moved to a ward (via another
Department.
Another space
which would potentially have been appropriate, South-01, had been occupied since
11am by a suspected COVID-positive
patient who had a fever and shortness of
breath with low oxygen
saturation.
the face of the respective conditions as they were known at the time, these
other patients appeared to be more urgent than Mr Jessett.
I find that no
criticism can be made of treating those patients while Mr Jessett waited.
the Department.
They wheeled
him from the ambulance into the
Department.
They asked him
whether he would be comfortable taking a few steps himself to get onto the
hospital bed and he agreed.
Mr Jessett was transferring, he became
When he sat down,
he collapsed onto the bed and went into cardiac arrest. CPR was commenced
immediately. Mr Jessett was transferred
into a negative pressure room at
4:50pm and CPR continued. A Medical Emergency Team was assembled.
Mr Jessett had a return of spontaneous
circulation after two minutes. He
was intubated at 5:05pm. At 5:22pm, Mr Jessett’s oxygen saturation
worsened and he was
found to have no carotid pulse. CPR was recommenced. He
was given seven shots of adrenaline along with amiodarone while CPR continued
for more than 45 minutes. Dr Joel Xiao, who participated in the
resuscitation effort, said that Mr Jessett’s comorbidities
resuscitation more difficult because he had a lower baseline
functioning.
6pm Mr Jessett was found to have non-shockable rhythm and the decision was
made to cease resuscitation efforts. He was then declared
Roger Byard AC of FSSA conducted a post-mortem examination and concluded that
Mr Jessett’s death had resulted from
ischaemic heart disease with
cardiomegaly.
He found that
there had been a narrowing of all three major epicardial coronary arteries.
Professor Kelly gave evidence that hyperkalaemia
played a role in
Mr Jessett’s
Professor Byard
explained that hyperkalaemia is not something that is detected during
post-mortem procedures, but he agreed that
Mr Jessett’s blood test
results in the Department suggest he was in a state of hyperkalaemia. Professor
Byard was prepared
to modify his medical advice about Mr Jessett’s
cause of death to include hyperkalaemia as a contributing
role of Mr Jessett’s diabetes was explored during the Inquest.
Professor Kelly explained that a person with poorly managed
diabetes will be at
increased risk of diabetic
ketoacidosis.
This occurs
because of the use of fat cells for energy rather than glucose, causing the
production of ketones which make the blood
acidic. If insulin is administered,
it moves sugar inside the body’s cells and takes potassium with it, which
can reduce hyperkalaemia,
hence reducing the risk of arrhythmia. Dr Xiao said that Mr Jessett
had an abnormally high potassium reading which was potentially
the result of
Mr Jessett’s underlying kidney
impairment.
Professor Kelly
agreed that it is unknown whether Mr Jessett’s abnormal blood results
were the consequence of diabetic ketoacidosis,
or merely an exacerbation of
diabetes due to illness and worsening renal function but without diabetic
ketoacidosis. Professor Kelly
also explained that confusion is caused by
diabetic ketoacidosis which would have confounded the proper self-administration
of insulin.
Ultimately,
Professor Kelly’s opinion was that if Mr Jessett’s insulin
level was appropriate on the basis he had taken
or been administered a
correct amount of insulin for his state, it would have slightly decreased
his potassium level which would
have put him at lesser risk of arrhythmia due to
hyperkalaemia, but it was unlikely to have made enough of a difference to have
from Mr Lemmer established that paramedics are trained to ask patients
Professor Kelly
considered that the administration of insulin to patients who are unwell carries
with it significant risks which
can only really be weighed and assessed by a
doctor who has a full suite of blood
recommendation was made that paramedics be trained in administering insulin,
there is a risk of causing deaths unintentionally.
On the basis of that, while
diabetes may have played a role in Mr Jessett’s death, I will not
make any recommendations regarding
adverse incident review was conducted into Mr Jessett’s death. None
of the clinicians who provided care to Mr Jessett were
involved in the
although again they
may have been ‘debriefed’. Ms Toohey was involved. The review
queried Mr Jessett’s venous
blood gas results on the basis that they
may have been haemolysed. A corrected potassium level was calculated. A review
of Mr Jessett’s
results shows that there was a blood sample that was
haemolysed, but others that were not, with consistent potassium levels across
tests, suggesting that the concerning results were
Professor Kelly
said that the conclusion in the report was ‘ill
there was no basis for calculating a corrected potassium level.
further review was conducted by the Clinical Review Committee, with
recommendations for improvement being made on 1 September
The recommendations
a protocol to govern the frequency of physiological observations to be performed
by paramedics;
point-of-care testing to be used by the ambulance service;
visualisation as part of triage;
the use of resources to reduce ramping and improve flow; and
with the ambulance service to front load care for selected patients.
The State of South Australia indicated that many of the
recommendations were, or are still being,
Kelly’s assessment was that the care provided to Mr Jessett by
paramedics on the ramp was reasonable and consistent
with their scope of
She considered
that the care provided to Mr Jessett once he was inside the hospital was
reasonable and appropriate.
I find that there is no criticism to be made of the medical care actually
afforded to Mr Jessett by paramedics and hospital staff.
Kelly’s view was that Mr Jessett’s death would potentially have
been prevented if his hyperkalaemia had been
Dr Wright agreed
that Mr Jessett’s hyperkalaemia could have been
Professor Kelly
pointed out that hyperkalaemia is rarely associated with symptoms, but can lead
to cardiac rhythm disturbances which
Dr Xiao gave
evidence of treatments available in the hospital that would have reversed
Mr Jessett’s hyperkalaemia, some which
were actually given, but too
late to be effective.
Professor Kelly explained how hyperkalaemia can be reversed in minutes and how
the heart can be protected from arrhythmias during
suggested that these treatments are not available until the underlying cause of
the hyperkalaemia is known and so I am
not required to be certain of that cause
in order to conclude that treatment would have assisted him to avoid death.
find that Mr Jessett’s cause of death was ischaemic heart disease
with cardiomegaly complicated by hyperkalaemia. It was
potentially preventable.
I am not limited to making findings of preventability only where things could be
done within present practices
or policies. I consider that it is not appropriate
to conclude that Mr Jessett’s death was not preventable because, for
there was no policy in place at the time to take blood samples from a
patient on the ramp or other practices and procedures in place
which might have
identified the seriousness of his condition sooner, or that resourcing and
infrastructure did not allow for more
patients to be taken into the Department
that day. This Court frequently explores issues of policies which, while
correctly followed,
lead to death. The Court is not bound to find these deaths
not preventable because a policy did not facilitate the steps required.
is that I am not bound to find that Mr Jessett’s death was not
preventable because there was no isolation space available
in the Department, or
because there was no policy of taking blood samples early in a patient’s
I am not introducing innovative or novel approaches to medicine which did not
exist at the time; I am confronted with the
possibility of a simple blood test
being used to detect a serious health issue invisible to observers. I
acknowledge that Mr Jessett
faced a number of difficulties with his health and
that the picture of his prognosis is not perfectly clear. However, I consider
that removal of a key factor which is known to contribute to arrhythmia and
cardiac arrest
would at least
potentially have prevented his death. I am not required to be satisfied that Mr
Jessett was guaranteed to survive
in order to make a finding of this nature.
The Inquest
Court heard a broad and comprehensive body of evidence which explored the depth
of the ramping issue. An enquiry of that depth
was necessary in order to ensure
that I had a full grasp of the factors at play and to ensure that any avenues
which might present
a simple fix could be revealed. There were no such avenues
identified. In fact, the scope of the ramping issue presented as much
complex and wide-ranging than appears to be commonly understood in the
order to have proper regard to the coronial jurisdiction, I must use the broad
evidence I heard to identify the cause and circumstances
of the deaths
investigated and whether there are any recommendations which might assist to
prevent future deaths. With due respect
to others who may think otherwise, I
believe an aspirational recommendation to end ramping would be unhelpful and do
little to comfort
the families of Mrs Panella, Mr Skeffington and
Mr Jessett, not to mention the families of other people who have died, or
have nearly
died on the ramp, of which these three South Australians are
representatives. I will take into account this effect in a general
determining which circumstances are appropriate matters on which to make a
recommendation. There is no greater attunement
to the true issues and genuine
solutions than directly dealing with the loss of these South Australians to
their families and friends.
I will also take into account the effect of any
recommendations on the health system. My recommendations must be tailored to
issues at hand and what combined to bring about the deaths under
examination.
reason why aspirational recommendations are not called for is that they would
add nothing to the enormous effort already put
into addressing the ramping issue
daily. It is therefore the practical reality of ramping to which I must address
my key recommendations.
Counsel Assisting gave his opening address, he said that the tragedy of ramping
is that a patient has to sit and wait, at their
time of most need, with world
class medical equipment just inside the hospital which is full of medical
professionals with all of
the necessary skills and the best intentions. I would
like to focus on that last part. That has been absolutely proven without
doubt in this Inquest. Over the weeks of the clinical evidence, as well as the
overarching corporate evidence that followed
from witnesses who stand outside
the day-to-day stress of providing healthcare, the Court was treated to evidence
from a cavalcade
of excellent medical professionals. Each, to varying degrees,
appeared to care about not only the health system as a whole, but
the patients
who progress through it each day. Many appeared to care very deeply about the
problems posed by ramping. The upper
echelons of the South Australian
health system were particularly impressive, namely; the Chief Executive of SA
Health, Dr Robyn Lawrence,
the Commissioner for Excellence and Innovation
in Health, Professor Keith McNeil, Co‑Director of the Flinders Medical
Emergency Department, Dr Matthew Wright, Co-Director of the Royal
Adelaide Hospital Emergency Department, Dr Katrina Romualdez, Clinical
Partnerships Lead for the State Health Coordination Centre, Dr Megan
Brooks, Southern Adelaide Local Health Network Nurse Educator,
Jessica Toohey
and Flinders Medical Centre Acting Nursing Director Steven Peck.
of the clinicians involved who gave evidence attended with clear goodwill,
sharing their involvement in these cases and their
wider work in order to assist
me to gain a full understanding of the issues. Many witnesses spoke about a
high level of goodwill
in the health sector toward dealing with ramping. That
was evident amongst the witnesses who presented their evidence.
issue that I will therefore not spend time on is assessing the credibility of
witnesses. I heard oral evidence from 24 witnesses
and received affidavits from
others. I find that each was credible and gave largely reliable evidence. In
fact, I was impressed
by the quality of the evidence given by each of them. The
overall quality of the professionals who came and spoke gives a great
reassurance that the future of the health system is in good hands. It is the
system that needs the attending, including
maintaining the wellbeing of the
medical professionals who keep it functioning.
observe that there are always going to be things that could be done differently,
or better, but that is not where I consider that
I need to focus my attention.
It cannot be said that anyone involved in the treatment of Mrs Panella,
Mr Skeffington or Mr Jessett
had anything but the best intention and
applied their skills as best they could in the circumstances they faced. So it
is that that
is where I will focus my attention; the circumstances that these
staff were, and are, placed in and what brought about disastrous
consequences in
each case. This can be done without attributing blame.
The quick fix
is tempting to try to answer the problem of ramping by recommending the
expansion of the size of the Emergency Departments. While
Department access
should naturally expand in line with a growing population, the addition of beds
within the Department itself beyond
population growth is unlikely to achieve any
meaningful reduction in ramping. As witnesses described, should there be more
in the Department, more patients will be taken in. This would then create
a higher level of demand for beds in wards and exacerbate
the access block issue
that already exists.
analogy is a take-away drive through. Where a drive through is considered
particularly popular, a second lane might be added.
This has the result of
allowing a greater intake of diners ordering at once. Without an expansion of
the number of burger-makers,
those diners will wait for their burgers and hot
chips. The pressure placed on the burger-makers might lead to stress, mistakes
and delays. The product might be substandard. Once diners receive their meals,
they need to exit the premises through the exit
lane which can only accommodate
so many cars, the same number it could before the second intake lane. Very
quickly, the drive through
will be backed up as it was before, or potentially
worse. The point of this analogy is to highlight that without greater capacity
for users to flow out, increasing capacity within the front end of the system is
unlikely to decrease waiting.
problem that would be faced with the quick fix of larger Emergency Departments
is a phenomenon similar to the Jevons paradox.
This is effectively where the
better something is, the more it will be used. Dr Lawrence described it as
‘...the more we
can do, the more we will do and the more people will
Dr Lawrence spoke of a phenomenon of new bigger Emergency Departments
having an increased patronage after opening, without any reduction
in patronage
quick fix would be a quick path to more problems.
Ramping understood
Court heard that ramping is the chosen method of dealing with overcrowding due
to previous incidents of patient deaths in corridors
that led to coronial
The Court heard
that ramping was well-entrenched at the Flinders Medical Centre in about
and the Ambulance
Employees Association
show industrial action was taken about ramping at the Lyell McEwin Hospital in
its most basic, ramping simply refers to the practice of having patients wait
in ambulances outside the Departments of hospitals
until there is enough
space inside to allow them entry. That simple concept masks a much more complex
scenario which is unveiled
by asking the question ‘what causes
ramping?’. All witnesses were quick to explain that, while ramping occurs
door of the Department, it is actually caused initially by access block,
which is contributed to by exit block, which itself is caused
by resource issues
spread across the entire health system.
Court heard about the factors which contribute to ramping. Helpfully, Professor
Kelly provided a chart prepared by Professor
Simon Craig which sets out the
complex interplay of issues which brings about overcrowding in the
Department.
Professor Kelly
said that most Departments can operate efficiently enough if they achieve 25% of
arriving patients flowing out within
That this cannot be
achieved demonstrates the depth of the flow issue.
is a symptom of different issues arising in the complex, interconnected and
adaptive health system. Given the evidence, it
is beyond doubt that the most
significant mechanisms which bring about ramping are access block and exit
block. Access block is
the inability to move patients from the Department into
hospital wards, resulting in patients simply waiting in the Department long
after they have been stabilised and treatment commenced, and they are no longer
in need of emergency-level care. Exit block is the
inability to move patients
from wards out into the
resulting in
patients simply waiting in hospital wards well after they no longer need
hospital-level care. Exit block contributes
to access block which causes
overcrowding in the Department. With all suitable treatment spaces taken up by
patients, newly arriving
patients cannot progress into the Department. They
will therefore wait either in the waiting room or in an ambulance outside
and exit block issues themselves appear to be exacerbated by deficits in
residential aged care and disability care facilities
in the community, as well
as the limited number of mental health treatment spaces in hospitals. The
consequence of mental health
limitations is that patients in need of acute
mental health care end up sitting in the Department waiting for a space. The
consequence
of community placement limitations is that patients who would
otherwise be released from hospital wards into the community end up
hospital for placement, taking up a bed with a level of care that exceeds their
requirements.
respect of aged care, witnesses spoke about the difficulty in having elderly
patients access the residential care facilities they
require. Dr Lawrence
observed that high-needs aged care is a high-risk endeavour and the profit
margins expected are low. She has
perceived a downtrend in availability as
providers close high-needs facilities on the basis of the risk versus reward
assessment.
Professor Kelly
was not surprised to hear of these
identifying that the
aged care deficit is a national
Professor McNeil
said that the issue had been drawn to the attention of the Commonwealth
Government.
Dr Lawrence
also highlighted particular issues on the weekend, with aged care facilities not
being able to accept new residents
on the weekend, meaning that any patient who
is ready for discharge to a facility for the first time on a weekend must wait
Monday. Dr Lawrence pointed out that a significant proportion of the
long-term hospital population are elderly patients waiting
for placement in a
residential aged care facility. Of course, these patients who occupy hospital
beds are not suitable for discharge
elsewhere as they require a specific level
of care. The result is that actual hospital bed capacity is less than figures
many beds are occupied on a longer-term basis.
shows that South Australia has the highest proportion of older people on
mainland Australia with more than 37% of the population
over 50 years of age and
44% of all hospital admissions over 70 years of
Health data shown reveals that on 9 January
90 patients across South Australian hospitals who were waiting for an aged
care placement but were otherwise suitable
for discharge. By 8 July 2024, that
number had escalated to 184 patients. On 27 August 2024, there were 220
patients. This data
demonstrates that if these patients could be released to
aged care facilities, there would be a significant reduction in access block
therefore ramping. SA Health has been working with the aged care sector to
better understand the barriers involved and has implemented
some initiatives to
facilitate the transition from hospital to aged
care is a Commonwealth funded sector largely outside the control of SA Health.
In that light, I can only suggest that the Minister
for Health continue to
advocate to the Commonwealth Government for increased investment in the local
aged care sector as a direct
measure to address ramping and prevent deaths. It
does not rise as high as a recommendation. I have assumed the Minister has made
many representations to the Commonwealth on this topic and will continue to do
respect of disability care, the issues are similar to aged care.
Dr Lawrence observed that a lot of work has been done in conjunction
the NDIS and that the number of long-term patients waiting for disability care
in the system has reduced.
In that light, I also need not make any recommendations about this aspect.
Mental health patients
turn to mental health. The issue of the role that mental health patients play
is complex. The first aspect is the use of resources
placed on the Department
itself by patients in acute mental health crisis. Over two days in May 2024, I
attended each of the major
metropolitan Emergency Departments, including the
Flinders Medical Centre. While at the Flinders Medical Centre, a patient in an
apparent mental health crisis was waiting on the ramp in the care of two police
officers. Later, I observed the patient in the Department,
guarded by a
security guard and two police officers, all in cramped quarters.
explained that these patients are often intoxicated. Where there is a mental
health concern mixed with intoxication, it
is clinically necessary to wait for
detoxification, essentially for the patient to ‘sober up’ to
determine whether there
is an underlying mental health issue or whether it was
merely drug induced.
the unknowns, and the high safety concerns posed in the situation, this waiting
must occur in the Department. The result
is the occupation of an emergency bed
for a patient sobering up who may or may not turn out to have an independent
mental health
issue. Given the clinical need for this process, it is
unfortunately unavoidable. Some hospitals have constructed areas with less
stimulation for mental health patients as accommodation in the hustle and bustle
of a working Emergency Department has the potential
to overstimulate these
patients and exacerbate their symptoms. These areas appear to be useful and
contribute to the safety of the
patient as well as the safety of staff and other
mental health patients are a strong contributor to Department overcrowding. For
example, Dr Romualdez said that it was not
uncommon to have
20 patients in the Royal Adelaide Hospital Emergency Department waiting for
mental health care.
Dr Brooks said there were 20 admitted mental health patients in the
Royal Adelaide Hospital Emergency Department the weekend before
said that it was not uncommon to deal with these patients, leave hospital and
return for her next shift only to see the
same patients still
Mr Peck said
the Department is a very busy, high-stimulus
environment.
described this as ‘deeply
counter-therapeutic’.
Professor Kelly said the practice is ‘terrible health
Dr Lawrence said that the data shows that the number of mental
health-related Emergency Department presentations had doubled from
2020-21, with the second highest overnight occupancy rate in the
contributory aspect of mental health patients is access block. Witnesses spoke
of particular difficulties in moving mental
health patients to mental health
wards ‘after
this evidence, it may be argued that SA Health would see quicker improvements in
ramping if efforts were focussed on encouraging
the expansion of aged care and
mental health support services in the community. That is not to say that SA
Health has not been working
on those issues. In fact, as Dr Lawrence made
clear, a great deal of effort has been made in these areas. For example, new
Mental Health Care Centres have been
These are designed
to take the brunt of mental health presentations. Ideally these would leave the
Department to deal only with
mental health patients who have concurrent medical
issues or are sobering. If these Centres achieve that, then in accordance with
Dr Romualdez’s evidence, up to 20 beds might be freed up in the
Royal Adelaide Hospital Emergency Department alone. Given
the capacity of the
Department, that would be a remarkable increase in capacity.
Transferring patients
component which contributes to overcrowding are transfer patients; usually those
coming from rural and regional facilities
to metropolitan facilities. As these
patients have been assessed by an emergency physician, they are usually not in
need of urgent
care and so they assume a lower priority than incoming patients
who have received no medical assessment or
They end up
waiting for inordinate amounts of time for entry into the Department to be
briefly assessed and then sent to a ward.
This is an area where SA Health has
made dramatic improvements, through the introduction of the Statewide
Inter-Facility Transfer
The result has seen
data about a patient’s assessment shared between hospitals in advance of
moving the patient, which has
resulted in a high number of patients bypassing
the Department in the receiving facility and being admitted directly to a ward
the care of a medical team which is comfortable with their condition and
SA Health on this project, which would have been undoubtedly more difficult
than it might appear.
24 hours a day 7 days per week v ‘9 to 5’
component which exacerbates exit block is the concept of the ‘9 to
5’ hospital.
public hospitals in metropolitan Adelaide provide a 24 hours a day, 7 days
a week service.
However, the
level of services provided across those seven days
Witnesses spoke of
there being a glut in patient discharges over the
Professor McNeil
spoke of personal experience of a patient who was ready to be discharged on a
Sunday waiting until Monday morning
for a senior doctor to attend work and order
their discharge.
Dr Hopping said that observations and discussions with patients during ward
rounds are a key component leading to
discharges.
Dr Lawrence
spoke of limitations in the industrial agreement which covers consultants.
While consultants in the Department are
required to work to a roster which spans
seven days, those in other areas of hospitals are
Professor McNeil
considered that the proper approach to the issue is to empower less-senior
doctors with the knowledge, skills and
ability to make these discharge decisions
themselves.
Professor Kelly
said that it is not only about consultants. As she explained, weekend
discharges also rely on the availability
of medical imaging, allied health and
operating rooms.
innovative solution to the weekend discharge glut has been implemented at the
Lyell McEwin Hospital; the Supportive Weekend Interprofessional
Flow Team or
‘SWIFT’. Dr Aman Anand explained that this is a
multi-disciplinary team which assembles on weekends and
identifies bottlenecks
in discharges to keep them happening over
Dr Lawrence
described it as a coordinated use of resources and gave an example of a patient
that needs to pass a physio assessment
in order to be
discharged.
She explained
that artificial intelligence is used to review ward round notes and produce a
list of patients that SWIFT might be
The SWIFT will
identify that and send a physio to that patient to achieve the discharge instead
of the patient waiting for the usual
hours of the physio
roughly estimated that the SWIFT was achieving 20-30 more discharges on
Dr Lawrence
said that an evaluation identified a 34% increase in
discharges.
Professor McNeil
observed that the existence of SWIFT has brought about a cultural shift across
the hospital.
contributors involve an escalating prevalence of chronic health conditions in
the community which require specialised and
coordinated
combined with a
reduction in access to GPs by virtue of a reduction in bulk billing and the
number of doctors practising as
South Australia must
also deal with a significantly greater proportion of people living in areas of
socio-economic disadvantage
(39% compared with the national average of 28%)
which carries greater incidence of poor health, chronic illness and disability,
well as creating barriers to access to
healthcare.
summary of the main factors contributing to ramping demonstrates something
Professor Kelly said; that ramping is a sector-wide
issue, not a hospital-wide
It is also a
phenomenon experienced throughout Australia and the developed
The consequences of overcrowding
Hospital staff
clearest evidence of the consequences of ramping was given by Dr Brooks.
She said that there is a wealth of evidence which shows
that patients who
receive care in an overcrowded Emergency Department have an increased risk of
morbidity and mortality, which carries
even after they leave the
Department.
A concerning
part of this is that the negative health impact is not limited to the actual
patients who wait on the ramp, but extends
to all those who receive care in the
high pressure environment of an overcrowded Department. Patients are also put
at increasingly
higher risk to their ongoing wellbeing as their waiting time
Professor Kelly
spoke of shorter off-stretcher times resulting in less
Professor McNeil
pointed out that patient flow affects both patient safety and quality of
is not just patients who suffer. Dr Brooks identified five groups who are
directly affected by ramping; patients in the waiting
room, patients on the
ramp, potential patients in the community waiting for an ambulance,
patients receiving care in the Department
process of dealing with patients is more cognitively difficult when the
Department is overcrowded, which results in
identified a swathe of senior nursing staff, with 20 or 30 years of experience,
who have left the health system in recent
Mr Peck said
that while some nurses cite overcrowding as their reason for leaving, others
simply find other employment and do not
specifically cite
overcrowding.
Dr Romualdez said that it is often reported that staff are moving on
because the Department is too
said that ramping was one of the reasons she left the Royal Adelaide
Dr Lawrence
said that there has been a rise in staff attrition and that SA Health is
increasingly reliant on overtime and agency
or locum staff to keep up with
takes approximately 300 nurses to operate the Flinders Medical Centre Emergency
Department 24 hours a day, 7 days a
described nursing staff as the ‘backbone’ of Emergency
Departments.
She identified
a vicious cycle where staff leave because of the pressure of overcrowding, which
results in a less experienced workforce,
which brings about more
overcrowding.
This evidence
supported my view that efforts must be made to reduce the stress around the
issue of ramping, contributed to by the
safety issues it causes.
spoke of a reduction in levels of doctors, with vacancies at all
Dr Brooks spoke
of multiple shifts where an entire wing of the Royal Adelaide Hospital Emergency
Department, about 20 cubicles,
is staffed only by herself and an intern
with nursing support.
spoke of ‘being flogged’ through
which contributed to
her resignation from formal
leadership.
She spoke of an
incredibly concerning situation in 2021 where the decision was nearly made to
close The Queen Elizabeth Hospital
Emergency Department overnight due to the
unavailability of sufficient
said that South Australia has a substantial deficit in senior decision-makers in
the public health system when compared
to the eastern
Professor Kelly said
that there has been ‘an exodus’ of nurses and doctors from emergency
practice following the COVID
Dr Lawrence
agreed that there are workforce shortages across the entire health
She gave evidence
that there has been a recent turnaround and the number of health service staff
has been increasing beyond attrition
This improvement has
not yet rectified the staffing issue, as established by Dr Brooks’
experience working at the coal face
reduced workforce in the context of continued high demand takes its toll on the
clinicians who remain.
Dr Wright spoke of the difficulty of trying to run an Emergency Department
for patients arriving today when yesterday’s patients
are still occupying
a large portion of the treatment
Professor Kelly said
that ramping causes wellbeing and retention
and that clinicians
take on a lot of moral distress when things go
spoke of a particular moment of frustration of having patients that she could
not see because ‘every cubicle and
every chair and every corner’ had
been used to bring patients in and there were still patients
Dr Xiao spoke
of limitations to the level of care that he hoped to
Ambulance officers
group significantly affected by ramping are ambulance officers. A lot of
evidence was heard about paramedics being required
to miss meal breaks and
working through their shifts to deal with demand in the community that cannot be
addressed by paramedics
waiting on the
This has obvious
potential to make an already stressful job harder.
AEA suggested in its written
submissions
that paramedics
join the ambulance service due to a passion for helping those in need. That
appears to me to be well established.
The AEA went on to say that the problem
of ramping prevents them from doing this. I do not accept that these
submissions can be
linked to each other. It may be readily accepted that
ramping hampers the organisation’s ability to help all the people that
seek its help each day. However, the individual clinicians who are treating a
patient on the ramp are helping those in need; the
patient in their ambulance.
These are patients who the individual clinician has determined needs admission
to the hospital. The
hospital has, for complex reasons, not been able to accept
them immediately. The individual clinicians are therefore taking on an
important role in monitoring and assisting the ramped patients to get through
the wait unharmed. It may be that they reasonably
have a desire to drop the
patient into the Department and return to the community to be of more assistance
to others. Understandably,
frustration builds when this cannot occur. However,
that is a different concept to asserting that they have been prevented from
role. In the context of the current state of the health
system, including the
expansion of the ambulance service, at this time it must be the paramedics who
take on a wider role of care
than they traditionally have. Submissions from the
AEA to the effect that paramedics caring for patients on the ramp are not doing
their job are perilous.
is true to say they are prevented from helping more South Australians who need
them as the system is designed to achieve. The
patient waiting with them is no
doubt grateful and comforted that they have an advocate in a high-risk situation
as I explain below.
Relative risk
topic that was explored thoroughly was the concept of assessing relative risk
across the healthcare system. A simplified explanation
of the proposition put
is that patients in wards are at low risk because their condition is known,
their treatment is underway and
they are surrounded by medical supports.
Patients in the Department are more at risk because their condition might not
yet be identified
or, if it has, their treatment may not have commenced,
although they are still surrounded by health professionals. Patients on the
ramp are at a higher risk because they have not been assessed by a doctor yet.
Patients in the community waiting for an ambulance
are at the highest risk
because they have not had any medical assessment, their condition is unknown and
they are generally not surrounded
by health professionals or medical equipment.
witnesses agreed with this
As it turns out,
like so many aspects of the health system, it is not that simple.
Dr Brooks was not asked to differentiate between risk of preventable death and a
general risk to patients’
she revealed a
fundamental issue with the proposition. She said that it is impossible to make
any reliable assessment of relative
risk across the continuum of the health care
She explained that
statistics show that only two out of every three people that call triple zero
are transported to hospital.
Not every patient that is transported to hospital requires admission. Seen in
this way, the patients who progress through the system
further and further are
more certain to be seriously unwell. It is possible, therefore, that the cohort
of patients awaiting admission
to the Department could be at an overall higher
risk than the group of patients who are waiting for an ambulance.
is perhaps for this reason that Professor McNeil said that the highest risk is
firmly at the front door of the
Department,
where emergency
healthcare has been identified as necessary, but is yet to be provided.
consider that it has not been established in evidence that the greatest risk of
preventable death exists in the community as distinct
from on the ramp or in the
hospital. Given that there has been a generous expansion of the ambulance
service, it cannot be said
that expending every possible resource to prioritise
admission of ambulance patients in order to release all ambulances
the community the moment they arrive at a hospital should be the only
goal. I say that in the context of there being finite resources
available in
the health care system which must be factored in. I also say that particularly
in light of the fact that it is not
always the case that patients arriving
by ambulance are more unwell than patients arriving by their own
There is yet a
further context of there being a rapid offload process in place which can see
patients of lower acuity being taken
from ambulances into the Department
ahead of sicker patients where there is identified high demand in the community.
I acknowledge
that this ‘rapid’ process is not responsive to
momentary demand, but it is nevertheless a mechanism to deal with sustained
pressure and increasing community risk that is available in crises.
light of the finite resources available, decisions need to be made about the
best use of those resources. These decisions must
be agile and responsive to
the actual scenario in place, rather than always favouring one group. In my
view, it cannot be that in
every scenario an ambulance patient must be
offloaded so that the ambulance can be released.
The changing nature of demands on the health sector and its
Court heard evidence about the changing nature of the demand for services in the
South Australian health system. Triage Category
4 and 5 patients have reduced,
with an increase in Category 2
Anecdotal evidence
was given from multiple witnesses about patients presenting with more complex
health pictures and more chronic
conditions, or
‘comorbidities’.
It was identified that the population is ageing which contributes to this
phenomenon.
Dr Lawrence
observed that the growth in number of undifferentiated patients with geriatric
or medical classification between 2023
and 2024 exceeded the 2‑4% annual
growth which is used for
factor which is altering the level of healthcare required, specifically in the
Department, is the rise in hospital avoidance
techniques and services.
Dr Wright gave evidence that the increasing number of diversions of
lower-acuity patients means that there
are less quick-turnaround patients and
the figures for overall time spent in the Department has
Dr Romualdez
said that not being able to take a break from high-acuity case after high-acuity
case results in more mental pressure
for all doctors and less training
opportunities for junior doctors in the
Department.
Professor Kelly
said that lower-acuity patients do not meaningfully contribute to access block
as they are not often competing for
a bed on the
Hospital avoidance
will nevertheless reduce overcrowding in Emergency Departments.
aspect of change is that brought about by government initiatives. Following the
most recent change of government, an enormous
number of resources were
deployed to expand the ambulance
This has had the
effect of greatly reducing delays in ambulance callouts, which are now
nation-leading.
gave evidence about the very significant increase in the ambulance service.
It is without any doubt a positive initiative.
Getting ambulances to those
in need quickly is critical to the efficacy of a modern health service and to
engender public confidence
in it. Recent data published by the government on SA
Health website dashboards suggests that ambulance targets are largely being
met or are on a positive trend towards being met. The AEA agreed that this
initiative has gone a very long way to ameliorating the
effects of ramping in
terms of community safety.
the increase in the size of the ambulance service is a very good safety
initiative and results in people in need of urgent care
being put under the care
of paramedics quickly, one might have predicted the inevitable result; an
increase in ramping figures.
As a matter of logic, if there are
more ambulances on the road, responding to emergencies quicker, they will
collect more patients.
They will therefore bring more patients to hospitals
which will put even more pressure on the Departments than there were with
ambulances. The increase in ramping figures is therefore the natural
consequence of a larger more-responsive ambulance service providing
level of service to the community. In other words, a consequence of the
changing structure of the health system to be more
ambulance-intense is
that the ambulance service has a greater capacity to overrun Emergency
Departments which have not been correspondingly
increased. The additional
ambulances add to access and exit block issues. What the public see is an
increase in ramping figures.
What the public may not see is that the situation
overall is a safer one.
While waiting on the ramp in the back of an ambulance is a bad
circumstance, it is preferrable to waiting at home in a medical crisis
any medical professionals at all. With more ambulances, more people get
an ambulance quickly when they need one. They then
wait in the care of the
paramedics for longer, but they will have been stabilised or otherwise
identified as needing urgent care
and progressed into the Department.
overall situation is something that must be taken into account when assessing
the proper approach to the ramping issue within
a system of finite resources,
and in particular whether abolition at any cost is the only correct approach.
The breadth of the ramping issue and the culture surrounding
Court heard much evidence about the frequency of ramping. It was described as
‘an everyday phenomenon that is
unrelenting’.
Ms Weston observed that ramping occurred more often than not at the
Flinders Medical Centre.
Dr Wright spoke of a specific Category 1 patient who could not get into the
Department for 30 minutes.
That represents a patient who needs an extremely urgent high-level of care
having to wait. He said that ramping of Category 2 patients
is becoming
increasingly frequent.
Mr Lemmer said that in times of peak demand in July 2024, there was a day
when seven ambulance Priority 2 patients were ramped at
the Flinders
Medical Centre and two were ramped at the Royal Adelaide
reported having to hand over patients to incoming crews at the end of their
shifts due to extended ramping, and often
starting their own shifts by taking
over care of patients already on the
Kelly made it plain that ramping is an international
everyday occurrence in most metropolitan Emergency Departments in
She believes that
it will be incredibly hard to fix and probably impossible to
Dr Lawrence
said that delayed transfer of care occurs throughout the world and across
Professor McNeil
suggested that ramping should not be tolerated, but then acknowledged that, even
in the best circumstances, the
health system will experience
He acknowledged
that, even if hospitals achieved a flow of 85% of patients within four hours,
there would still be ramping, although
it would be
The ambition
of the task is clearest in that figure. Dr Brooks said that she does not
see ramping being solved any time
heard about the impact ramping has on those involved in the system. There were
two levels; first, the staff working in that environment,
but at least equally
importantly the impact on the patients who present to the hospital for help.
Mrs Panella, Mr Skeffington and
Mr Jessett, presented for help
and had to wait, with tragic consequences.
Potentially
due to the enormous amount of community and media attention to the issue of
ramping, there is a pervasive attitude amongst
clinicians, which I observed
at times in some of the witnesses who gave evidence, that ramping should not
occur; that ramping is
a sign of failure and that
efforts should be
directed toward its eradication.
foundational question that needs to be addressed, and I take as a starting
point, is; why is ramping bad? This was a topic addressed
by numerous witnesses
during the Inquest. There were various explanations given about the desire to
end ramping. Many simply said
that it is not good healthcare, or not good
practice. In the end, I accept on the basis of the evidence as a whole that
is bad because it puts patients and healthcare providers in a risky
situation. If I adopt that as a starting point, then my task
is clear. I must
take into account the circumstances which faced Mrs Panella,
Mr Skeffington and Mr Jessett who represent occasions
where the risks
of ramping turned out in the worst way. I must try to address those safety
risks so that others who are waiting
on the ramp are not put at the same risk.
current response to the issue of overcrowding may be seen to represent a lack of
imagination. Too many patients arrive at once,
so they will simply sit in the
back of the ambulances they arrived in. I heard evidence of various
strategies that have been tried
over time; the doctor on the ramp, or the triage
nurse on the ramp with a ‘workstation on wheels’ for example.
the essence of the solution is that the patient remains in the back of
the ambulance, experiencing anything from frustration compounded
by pain, to
anxiety about their immediate future if they are not seen promptly by an
Emergency Department doctor.
heard a number of times from witnesses during the Inquest that introducing
‘this’ improvement or ‘that’
improvement or doing
‘this’ or ‘that’ in a new way would not actually address
the root of the ramping problem;
access block, and so will not prevent ramping.
In all instances that was said, those witnesses are of course likely correct.
I pose a rhetorical question; if ramping is a daily occurrence and
addressing the root cause is an enormous issue which will take
many years and
enormous resources and might actually be impossible, then why would better ways
of dealing with the consequences not
be a worthwhile exercise? To give a
medical example, a patient with catastrophic leg injuries
requiring amputation would not be
left to bleed while awaiting
the amputation surgery. Bandages and torniquets will not deal with the
root problem, but they are nevertheless
a valuable exercise. Respectfully, to
do nothing of a serious nature about safety on the ramp because it will not
actually address
the root problem is an unacceptable approach, particularly
where it occasionally results in the loss of
If expenses are put
into developing a better way of dealing with ramping, and in years to come those
better facilities or procedures
are not needed because all incoming patients go
directly to a bed in the Department, but lives have been saved in the meantime,
I believe the people of South Australia would be not see it as a waste of
valuable public money. This is particularly relevant for
South Australians who
may have been, or were at risk of facing, life-threatening delays under the
current stressful, undesirable,
and unsafe conditions.
is an irrationality about declaring ramping unacceptable, and because of that
stance, declining to deal with it directly to
make it a less dangerous
situation. In this situation, it would be an error to only focus on the
enormous task of preventing it
happening in the first place. It results in a
situation where those patients who face being ramped are in a worse situation
they could have been because those involved are dedicated to preventing
ramping, not making it a less dangerous situation when it
does happen. This
approach completely overlooks the overall goal of the Emergency Department and
indeed hospitals and the entire
healthcare system; namely to take care of people
in the safest way possible in the circumstances in which they present.
first half of the dangerous situation which ramping creates, and potentially the
most serious, has been drastically reduced; the
inability to get
an ambulance to people who need it. Dr Lawrence gave evidence that SA
Health is pursuing 255 additional ambulance
employees, 36
additional ambulances, five new ambulance stations, four station
rebuilds and 10 ambulance station
other ambulance efficiency projects. As I have already observed, a lot of
this has been realised already. The increase
in the size of the ambulance
service, which has increased ramping hours, means that people in the community
who need the care of
paramedics receive it quickly. It is trite to say that as
many ambulances should be free as much as possible, however to have
ambulance deliver a patient to hospital and leave immediately would
put those patients and others at extreme risk until the hospital
has capacity to
take them. The patient is actually safer in the care of the paramedics than
they are alone in the airlock or corridor
or at home without any medical
attention. There appear to be sufficient ambulances and paramedics to
achieve low response times
and still deal with ramping. Therefore, it is the
next part of the dangerous situation that now needs to be addressed; the safety
of those patients while they inevitably wait in the care of the paramedics
during times of peak demand.
order to address this aspect, SA Health and its clinicians need encouragement to
be imaginative, and a redirection of their enthusiasm.
The State of South
Australia submitted that there has more recently been a focus on efforts to
mitigate the risks arising from ramping
at the same time as continuing work on
the reduction/elimination effort.
the Court view to the Lyell McEwin Hospital, I saw what can only be
described as a breath of fresh air. The contrast between
that and the two other
major hospitals was stark. The Lyell McEwin’s approach to overcrowding
represents thinking from the
ground up about better ways. Not minor
adjustments, an entirely new way. Of course, the Lyell McEwin Hospital’s
Department recently underwent renovations and it was freely
acknowledged during the view that the ability to design a new Emergency
Department was a luxury.
Culture and the goodwill conundrum
Court heard evidence of serious culture issues within SA Health under previous
leadership. It was most concerning to receive
a copy of Dr Brooks’
and Dr Soulsby’s letter to Central Adelaide Local Health Network
leadership in which they raised
concerns about safety on the
It was particularly
concerning that no response was ever received to such alarming correspondence.
I say that in light of the fact
that the correspondence spoke of specific
adverse incidents that were never queried. It raised a concern that the
government insurer
ought to be made aware of, which appears never to have been
done. Dr Brooks said she was not surprised that she never received any
response to such a serious
Dr Brooks spoke
of occasions of being called into meetings to be told that she was spending too
much money on overtime without any
consideration being given to the requirement
to properly staff the
Department.
gave evidence about her request for a cluster review into multiple ramping
incidents being denied, notwithstanding that
There were clearly
issues at that time. Dr Brooks said that the situation is better now,
although there is still improvement to
heard from many witnesses currently serving in the South Australian health
professions. There was a palpable sense of goodwill
in addressing ramping, its
causes and its effects. However, at the very same time there was evidence on
occasions of resistance
to trying new things and resistance to any individual
component of the health system changing its practices. While the State
that this has been changing, there were clear examples of this
attitude persisting.
Blood tests for ramped patients
example of this was an issue which took some prominence during the Inquest;
taking blood samples on the ramp. There are obvious
benefits in doing so. In
particular, I highlight Mr Jessett’s case. Professor Kelly said that
Mr Jessett’s death was
potentially preventable if his hyperkalaemia
was identified earlier and reversed. She said that hyperkalaemia is a
potentially deadly
condition which is rarely associated with
Identification
would occur through a simple blood test, which for Mr Jessett was not
conducted until it was too late. The idea
behind blood tests on the ramp is to
identify these cases of extreme emergency which are not readily apparent on the
basis of the
patient’s visual presentation and physiological
observations.
witnesses spoke in support of the
Dr Wright said
that in an earlier trial of blood tests for waiting room patients, 8-10% were
sicker than initially
appreciated.
Some of these
may have had their deaths avoided.
were issues raised about the practical implementation of the proposal, such as
identifying who would be responsible for reviewing
the results as the patient
will not yet be assigned to a clinician. Those issues are reasonable to raise
and I make no criticism
of those who raised them. There are obviously things to
work through as part of implementation.
there was active resistance to the very idea of the paramedic scope of practice
being extended to taking a blood
The resistance was
described in evidence on the basis of there being the potential for comforting
results meaning a patient is left
on the ramp longer. That concern has an easy
fix; you have a policy that it cannot be used by those determining patient
prioritisation.
You have a procedure where the results of ramped
patients’ blood samples are not reviewed by the triage nurse or any doctor
involved in intake processes unless highly abnormal. This is actually a simpler
model of implementation because it does not require
anyone to be assigned to
reviewing ramped patients’ blood samples. Instead, it relies on the
process already in place where
highly abnormal results are flagged by the
pathology unit. Professor Kelly gave evidence of certain abnormal results being
through to the Department to alert them immediately of a patient in an
extremely concerning
Through this
process, a patient with a serious condition simmering away under the surface,
like Mr Jessett, would be identified
and treated, but others without will
simply have a blood test result available to doctors when they are eventually
seen. Intake
staff continue to treat the patient on the ramp according to their
triage Category and presentation upon initial triaging. Mr Lemmer’s
evidence was that this was how the initiative is designed to
reality, this is merely an issue of implementation that needs to be worked out.
However, instead of working towards an appropriate
manner of trying this
initiative, the response to this proposal was to ‘strongly
disagree[d]’.
enormous benefit of potentially picking up a patient who is about to lose their
life on the ramp is lost amongst argument about
scope of practice, the
traditional role of paramedics and ramping figures. That is unfortunate.
spoke in her oral evidence of the AEA’s concerns about blood samples
being taken from patients waiting on the ramp.
Her concerns were not focussed
on any scope of practice, training or skills concerns. She
‘...in an example where there may be three, say, ATS
score 3 patients on the ramp, and three ATS score 3 patients in the waiting
room, they all have bloods taken, and say the waiting room patients have more
concerning blood levels, that will then reasonably
lead to a decision by the ED
clinicians that whilst their ATS score is all the same priority, the ones with
the concerning blood
results have a higher treatment priority and they will all
be seen sooner.’
respect, Ms Watkins’ concern has a fundamental flaw. Her
position amounts to a complaint that a patient who is sicker
treated before a patient who is less sick. While SA Health policies
require ambulance patients to be prioritised over waiting
room patients,
this is always subject to both patients being of equal clinical
To raise concerns in
the manner that Ms Watkins did in her evidence perhaps reflects a lack of
clinical experience.
concern was based solely on the industrial situation of paramedics, consistent
with her duty to AEA. It has no regard to clinical
care required or the welfare
of the individual patient that paramedics have in their care weighed up against
the welfare of the patient
who drove themselves to hospital. Dr Wright
said that even if a few patients ended up waiting longer because of their
results, but one patient who cannot wait for hours is discovered,
then the greater good is
course, Ms Watkins’ concern would have more merit in a circumstance
where there were cases in the community of higher concern
than both cohorts of
patients spoken of in her example. If that was the situation, it would readily
be accepted that both ramped
patients and waiting room patients should yield to
the urgency of the patient in the community who is sicker than both. In that
scenario, the Ambulance Transport
should be implemented
and the less sick ambulance patient would be taken into hospital to allow
for the ambulance to be released
to return to the community to deal with
the emergency there. This should occur as quickly as possible, but not prior to
there being
any actual known inability to respond to community demand. Absent
actual demand for higher patients in the community, it cannot
be that less-sick
patients must always be offloaded just in case a sicker case might arise in the
the goal of returning ambulances to the community as soon as possible to
deal with emergencies, or to ensure there is capacity
to deal with potential
emergencies, is extremely important, the health system cannot prioritise that
over an objective assessment
of clinical urgency in the cases actually presented
for care. With respect, Ms Watkins’ concern merely shifts the risk
a potential case in the community to a known case in the waiting room. The
ability to identify serious risks to known patients cannot
be cast aside in
favour of the desire to be available for potential patients. That is an
unacceptable approach and represents silo
was another difficulty to Ms Watkins’ position about blood samples;
that she, and the AEA, support the idea of nurses
being required to visit
patients on the ramp at set intervals to check on progress. Objectively, this
carries the same potential
that was raised in respect of blood tests. That is,
nurses visit the patient and deem them to be stable and so they are considered
less and less urgent the longer they remain stable. When this was raised with
Ms Watkins, she suggested that paramedics could instead
visit triage nurses
at set intervals to report on
This returns to
the initial conundrum which arises as a result of triage nurses not having
direct visualisation, single paramedics
being left inside ambulances alone
with patients and crowding the triage desk. What I consider is more likely is
that clinicians
would put patient care first and use all information available
to them to bring in patients as quickly as possible in the order of
Risks of perverse uses of blood test results can be managed with policy and
An amount of
trust would need to be placed on clinicians to do the right thing,
with ample evidence that they would do just that.
A firm policy about the
proper use of ramped blood samples would ensure that it does not result in
unfair outcomes. I cannot accept
that triage nurses would take into account
that a highly abnormal notification was not made in carrying out their duties,
given that they would not know if the test had been completed or not
and the Australasian Triage Scale does not accommodate such
considerations.
They are simply too busy during periods of ramping to be able to make efforts to
find out whether testing has been
completed in order to downgrade a waiting
patient. Ms Watkins’ suggestion of mere ongoing visualisation by
triage nurses carries
a risk of under-appreciation of concealed
which is less
pronounced with blood testing. There are compelling reasons to explore blood
testing on the ramp as a tool used to
prevent death. Professor Kelly gave
compelling reasons why these results should be interpreted by hospital staff
rather than paramedics.
AEA took issue with these criticisms of Ms Watkins’ positions when
they were raised by Counsel Assisting. It responded
with information about
Ms Watkins’ achievements as Secretary of the AEA. With respect,
Counsel Assisting made no criticism
of Ms Watkins personally, I understood
his submissions to be directed at the logic of her positions in respect of this
issue. I agree with his submissions.
Dr Lawrence
advised that the Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation also opposed the
initiative on grounds that it did not address
the core issue of ramping and that
there may be additional work for nurses in following up blood
I will address the
first aspect shortly. The second aspect is illogical, as these patients will
need blood tests in any event,
they are merely being conducted earlier.
observe that in this example of blood tests on the ramp, the enormous show of
goodwill about ramping seems to be tempered by resistance
to change of
individuals’ practices and silo thinking. There must be a balance struck
between the very desirable goal of having
ambulances on the road and
initiatives which may prevent death. In circumstances where the ambulance
service is currently able to
adequately manage its demand and hospitals are not,
the balance should properly fall in favour of this initiative to mitigate risks
to patients.
a process such as that was in place in 2022, Mr Jessett’s life may
have been saved. He is a clear example of the kind of
patient that such a
process would identify and act on. In order to give meaning to
Mr Jessett’s death, SA Health should not
entertain any arguments
drawbacks. It is a simple
tool which has the capacity to prevent tragedy. I
have carefully considered the AEA’s intense opposition to this initiative
in its written submissions and I do not accept their arguments. If implemented
in a manner of a safety check to identify patients
with extreme underlying
conditions that are not outwardly visible, the proposal is not akin to diagnosis
and does not blur the boundaries
of triage and admission. In any event, as I
have set out, some disruptions are called for in the name of patient safety.
Going over capacity on specialist wards
cultural issue raised was the complete opposition to wards taking patients
beyond their capacity or going ‘over census’.
On its face,
opposition to this practice seems reasonable; nurses should not have to
care for more patients than there are conventional
treatment spaces. However,
when one takes a whole-system view, it is clear that the Department frequently
goes over capacity and
finds every possible space to house a patient. While the
usefulness of comparative risk assessments is low, some of the patients
Department may be at a higher comparative risk than those on wards as their
diagnosis may not yet have been made and their
treatment is unlikely to have
commenced. Professor McNeil spoke about efficiencies that can be achieved
through having wards pull
in patients that are within their
specialisation.
Wards could
accommodate patients who are the lowest known risk in the Department within
their specialisation. If one is to try
to reduce the risk posed to patients in
an overcrowded environment, it would be differentiated patients with treatment
underway that
would be the obvious selection to be made to share hospital
Professor McNeil
said that a cultural shift is required towards an appreciation that at certain
agreed trigger points, wards being
over census is less risky to patients than
extremely overcrowded Emergency
Departments.
another example of a cultural issue was the evidence of a hospital not wanting
to request load levelling be instituted to reduce
the number of ambulance
arrivals to their own Emergency Department at a time of peak demand. This is
for the reason that it might
then be used on another occasion to support a
different hospital which would result in this hospital receiving more patients
subsequent occasion.
This disregards the overall patient risk benefit to using load levelling
techniques and needlessly puts patients at risk today to
avoid being busy on
another day that might have otherwise been quieter. It is a concerning example
of a lack of collaboration.
spoke of the health system being a ‘team sport’ which relies on
collaboration.
clinicians working in the public health system need to recognise that it is only
with a group effort where everyone gives something,
that actual improvements
will be realised. Anyone who has an attitude that ramping should be reduced
should look to their own area
to identify what they can reasonably do to assist
that effort and what they might do in the meantime to improve the safety of the
Funding for interim solutions, Band aids, Jules Léotard
and an unachievable goal
turn to the attitude that directly addressing the plight of ramped patients is a
misdirection of resources.
Band-Aid was invented in the United States in 1920 as a means for members of the
community to treat themselves without requiring
medical assistance. What is
unclear is whether, at the time, the new invention was referred to as a
‘band aid’ solution
and frowned upon because it did not represent
full health care. It would appear unlikely.
the Macquarie Dictionary has now included a second definition of the term
‘Band-Aid’, that is, an adjective which
means ‘palliative;
superficially helpful and short-term’. While it is understandable how the
term came to be used in
this way, it fundamentally undermines the usefulness of
the device. In circumstances where there are risks of infection, or bleeding,
band aid may be used to avoid further harm or prolong the time a person has
before they need professional healthcare. Some people
will use a band aid and
not need any formal medical treatment at all.
witnesses described initiatives addressed at the symptom of ramping as band aid
solutions. In many respects the witnesses
were oversimplifying the positive
effects of the proposed initiatives and undervaluing their potential benefits.
Dismissing efforts
at improving safety as band aids is reductive and unhelpful.
I discourage it.
1859, Jules Léotard invented the flying trapeze, a risky spectacle.
Today, a highly skilled acrobat performing on a flying
trapeze for a crowd of
paying spectators will not accept missing their cue and falling. It is not the
aerialist’s intention,
desire or plan. It is not what the spectators have
paid to see. The aerialist would view it as a failure. Nevertheless, beneath
the trapeze there is invariably a net. The net is a representation of the
recognition that everything does not always go perfectly,
despite best
intentions. The net prevents catastrophic consequences of problems that
can arise when doing something as complex and
technical as flying through the
air trying to catch a swinging bar. With great respect to flying trapeze
artists, the health system
is more complex than their performance. There are
more moving parts, more points of potential failure, there are more
interactions,
there are more variations. Like flying trapeze, there is the
potential for catastrophic consequences.
approach of clinicians who are resistant to addressing issues created by ramping
is akin to telling the trapeze artist not to
use a net, that they should instead
put their efforts into becoming better at the trapeze so that they do not ever
miss. No one
would suggest it. No one should resist safety improvements for
ramped patients on the basis that they inherently despise the practice
ramping itself. This position does not follow the logic of the situation and
does not engage with the level of risk involved.
the idea of ending ramping is an admirable goal, it cannot be the only solution
pursued. To do so creates a situation which
continues to put the lives of those
that endure the wait on the ramp at risk. While South Australia is a leader in
many fields,
it seems unlikely to me that we will be the first jurisdiction
in the world to put an end to entrenched ramping once and for all.
Once this is
recognised, superficial complaints about the use of ‘band aid
measures’ fall away and the focus on safety
nets seem more desirable.
Mr Lemmer said that he has observed this attitude to be changing with a
growing understanding that new
approaches are
Professor Kelly
pointed out that safety issues with ramping can be addressed by accepting that
ramping is inevitable, without endorsing
acceptable.
What is being done about ramping?
Court heard about some initiatives that have been tried over the years to
address the risks posed by ramping, but which have not
continued. Examples were
having nurses and doctors from the hospital stationed on the
having a consultant sit
and financial
incentives for ramping
Each has issues.
solutions to ramping are likely going to be multi-system based and made up of
many partial solutions which contribute
I received a great
deal of evidence about efforts which are being made to address ramping. Those
efforts are commendable. They
are broad and meaningful. They will contribute
to a stronger more robust health system in South Australia. Dr Lawrence
to be well-equipped to manage such significant work which is being
carried out amongst current health system governance models that
are designed to
meet requirements of the National Health Reform
Agreements.
formalised central governance structure was introduced to deal with the ramping
with an overall approach; the ‘Ramping Taskforce’
Chief Executive’s Committee:
Subsequently, a Ramping Taskforce Clinical Expert Committee was created which
guides the Minister for Health on ramping
initiatives.
Local Health Networks established their own structures in order to implement
directions from the
Taskforces.
These structures
were established in an attempt to diagnose the problem and to implement
strategies to progress actions for sustainable
improvement.
are being made away from the hospital:
enormous investment has been made for the expansion of the ambulance
service which I have detailed
have been made at diverting demand from Emergency Departments where other
services can provide an adequate level of
A group of paramedics,
Extended Care Paramedics, were empowered to make higher level clinical decisions
and treat patients rather
than transporting
described this process as highly effective, although some improvements to their
utilisation could be
If patients do not
really need tertiary care then the hospital and the patient are better served by
avoiding it. In March and April
2024, the ambulance service achieved a 30%
rate of Emergency Department
Public campaigns
were released asking people to think about the many ways to get
As I have said
earlier, Professor Kelly’s opinion is that lower-acuity patients do not
meaningfully contribute to access block
as they are generally not admitted to
The utility in
these initiatives is likely to be of limited value in dealing with root causes
of ramping, but will reduce overcrowding
in the Emergency Departments.
Care Services have been introduced to provide patient access to clinicians of
various specialisations through video
This includes
access to GPs after hours. Ms White said that this service is
beneficial.
These services
are complemented by a Health Navigator, a paramedic who provides advice about
the paramedic scope of practice and
ability to deal with particular
Navigator also provides advice to paramedics on the road about alternate care
Care Centres have been introduced which are operated by GPs in locations with
auxiliary services (pathology, radiology and
pharmacy) with support from
emergency and acute care trained
Importantly, these
Centres are not GP clinics and can only receive patients by referral from an
Emergency Department, a Virtual
Care Service clinician, a paramedic and other
clinicians and services. There are five of these Centres in Adelaide.
health patients can be diverted to an Urgent Mental Health Care Centre in
Adelaide which has a focus on urgent
interventions.
Dr Lawrence cautioned that these patients might not be patients who would
have necessarily added to access
but again, their
absence will reduce overcrowding in the Emergency Department. In addition,
mental health specialists have been
embedded in ambulances, with three
crews across the metropolitan area seven days a week during peak demand.
pharmacies were extended to 24-hour
Commonwealth Government has established five Urgent Care Centres using existing
facilities, which provide care for walk-in patients
unable to wait for their
Health is also planning further initiatives away from the hospital. A new
‘Older Persons Emergency Review and Assessment
Service’ will open
with an aim of keeping those over 65 years of age in their home and out of
Emergency Departments.
practitioners will also be paired to GP clinics in areas of high
is important to recognise that many of the issues that bring about or exacerbate
ramping are not within the control of SA Health
and rely on Commonwealth funding
and management.
the end of the day, the approach of the clinicians was that patients who arrive
at the Emergency Department obviously consider
that they need that level of care
and so they are triaged and queued for
assessment.
The Emergency
Department is always going to be a place that is in high demand.
that end, initiatives are being pursued at the hospital:
the Lyell McEwin, a Q-Zone was introduced. I will discuss this initiative in
detail below. In response to the idea of rolling
out Q-Zone type areas in other
hospitals, Dr Lawrence advised that there are no immediately accessible
fit-for-purpose spaces. In
compromise, the Royal Adelaide Hospital and The
Queen Elizabeth Hospital introduced specific beds that are kept vacant, so that
can be available for immediate offload upon demand and when decompression
of the Emergency Department into wards is not
compromise, the Flinders Medical Centre has expanded its Transitional Care Unit
with a transportable ward in the hope of
indirectly assisting ramping by
improving flow.
identifies, amongst other things, geriatric patients who might be offloaded
from ambulances and redirected to alternative
care pathways outside of the
Department. While these initiatives are to be commended, they fall far short of
the benefits realised
at the Lyell McEwin Hospital with its Q-Zone, potentially
with a similar staffing model.
Hospital Ambulance
Liaison Officers (‘HALO’ paramedics) are stationed at the triage
area of five of the six major metropolitan
Emergency Departments to support and
facilitate communications between hospital and ambulance
In times of very high
demand, HALO paramedics can be moved out onto the ramp to have more direct
visibility and involvement in management
Multiple witnesses
spoke about the usefulness of this
HALO paramedics are
complemented by a Hospital Relationship Manager who liaises at a
system-level.
Multi-disciplinary
teams have been established at major metropolitan hospitals with an aim of
reducing avoidable hospital admissions
from within the Emergency
Department.
This reduces the
number of patients competing for access to hospital wards.
has been a shift recently towards active consideration about the best way to
manage mental health patients in the hospital setting,
with a workshop involving
45 clinicians and consumers producing five workstreams that are actively
seeking to improve processes.
result, SA Health is undertaking a project aimed at understanding the factors
involved in mental health patients’ length
of stay and optimising
strategies to address the issue. Professor McNeil gave evidence that a
particular focus of the project has
been on patients with schizophrenia who are
the highest cohort of mental health patients and have a more heterogeneous
presentation,
meaning that
addressing this cohort will see the most impact quickly.
have already explained that SA Health are pursuing the initiative of taking a
blood sample from patients on the ramp.
Health has committed to introducing consultant-led Rapid Assessment and
Treatment models of care at metropolitan hospitals but
has encountered
recruitment issues
nursing-led model has been introduced in the interim at major metropolitan
mentioned at [
the Statewide Interfacility Transfer System has been mandated for most patient
transfers. Dr Brooks gave evidence about the prior
system of patients
simply arriving at the destin
on hospital
with a yellow envelope containing documents from the sending
These patients would inevitably wait outside the
Department because they did not need emergency-level care. The introduction of
s seen a dramatic reduction in the
use of resources by managing patients this way,
with doctors on
wards receiving notice of a patient’s circumstances
ccepting them for direct admission,
bypassing the Emergency Department altogether.
transit lounge was introduced at the Lyell McEwin Hospital, and the Flinders
Medical Centre are consulting on an expansion of their
transit lounge to a
24-hour service.
operation of SWIFT, which I have detailed at [
from Thursday to
Lyell McEwin Hospital has seen a significant increase in weekend
discharges.
‘Geriatric Emergency Department In-reach’ project has embedded
specialist geriatric expertise within the Department
to provide a single point
of contact, rapid assessment, senior decision making and care coordination for
patients older than 65 years
This ensures that the
patient receives the specific care they require earlier with the goal of
reducing length of stay by 25%.
Medical Assessment and Planning Unit was established adjacent to the Lyell
McEwin Hospital Emergency
Department.
It operates 24
hours a day and deals with patients who are expected to be discharged within 24
hours with a view to identifying
appropriate out-of-hospital services that will
be suitable for these patients. This is complemented with an Acute Surgical
that deals with patients presenting for emergency surgery that is expected
to generate a length of stay less than 72
have been trialling new front-loading models of care in the hope of expediting
patient progress.
been hindered by recruitment
coordination of system resources is being introduced:
Health has turned some of its focus onto the better use of data. The rollout of
a single statewide electronic medical record,
Sunrise, has enabled live analysis
of patient-level data.
SA Health established the State Health Coordination Centre (SHCC) which has
brought about system-level oversight and
navigation.
This work is no
doubt assisted by the direct involvement of talented and driven clinicians like
Dr Brooks who is posted at the SHCC
in a multi-disciplinary
One particular project
discussed in evidence was the construction of a digital model of The Queen
Elizabeth Hospital so that real‑time
flow patterns can be viewed remotely
in ways not possible without the digital
McNeil’s background and interest in technology has given the Commission
for Excellence and Innovation in Health
a particular advantage. One particular
project he is pursuing is the development of a ‘risk calculator’
which takes
real‑time data to allow clinicians to make patient decisions
which factor in overall system
SHCC works with the Network Operations Centres of each Local Health Network to
improve patient flow and to identify where system-level
cooperation is required
to facilitate patient care.
Paramedics receive guidance from Hospital Network Coordinators about the state
of hospitals which they can use to select the most
appropriate place to take
their patient.
A mechanism
of ‘ramp control’ is now used to ensure that no individual hospital
is overrun with demand at times when
others are less pressured, and this is a
less absolute position than going on
Dr Wright said
there has been improvement with these
initiatives.
The ambulance
service undertook an efficiency project which reviewed the work of the Patient
Transport Service. The service was
extended to assist 24 hours a day, which
has seen an increase in on-time arrival from 25% to
and a reduction in the
workload pressure placed on fully qualified paramedics during busy times.
‘Discharge Ready Long Length of Stay’ project is identifying issues
with, and implementing a range of process and efficiency
improvements
specifically for, patients who spend long periods in acute hospital
effective coordination of mental health resources is being implemented with a
view to improving the efficiency and flow of
improvements are being made:
Health has made enormous investments in capital projects and
redevelopments.
additional beds were opened alongside the Modbury Hospital Emergency Department.
A new Emergency Department was opened at
Murray Bridge, larger than before. An
additional 24 beds were added to the Flinders Medical Centre Emergency
Department as well
as six flex spaces, although this was subsequently reduced
under the Monaghan Review
recommendations. The Emergency Department at Mount Barker was expanded by 12
beds. The Lyell McEwin Hospital Emergency Department
was redeveloped with an
additional 23 beds and a new Mental Health Short Stay Unit to accompany it. A
new Emergency Department at
Gawler was opened, larger than before. The Flinders
Medical Centre and Royal Adelaide Hospital Emergency Departments have been
remodelled.
A new Emergency Department at The Queen Elizabeth Hospital was
opened, larger than before. An aim appears to have been set in line
Australian Medical Association and Australasian College for Emergency Medicine
advice to operate hospitals at 85% capacity which
would allow them to better
deal with peaks and troughs in patient
presentations.
Health intends to open a new Emergency Department in Victor Harbor, larger than
before, and a new Women’s and Children’s
Hospital which will
incorporate a larger Emergency
Department.
Hundreds of new
ward beds are being opened between 2024 and
Specifically, SA
Health intends to open 113 new geriatric beds across three hospitals, 142 mental
health beds across five facilities,
and a significant number of new hospital
beds at Mount Barker and the Flinders Medical Centre.
beds in hospitals, outside of the Emergency Department, have already been opened
over consecutive years.
issues are also being
A practical
example of a simple but expensive initiative is the ‘tap on, tap
off’ system which reduces log-in delays
for clinicians.
are being used to minimise ramping:
Health has entered contractual arrangements for the use of private hospital
facilities during periods of peak demand, facilitating
the clearance of
blockages at short notice.
formal ‘Fit to Sit’ policy was introduced after Dr Lawrence
commenced as Chief Executive of SA Health and realised that
there was no formal
policy on this topic.
standardises and guides decision-making around whether a patient arriving
by ambulance can safely wait in the waiting
Where it is achieved,
the ambulance is released back into the community ready to deal with
policy on managing the discharge of patients was introduced which streamlines
the discharge process.
all of this evidence, I find that SA Health’s response to ramping is
extremely comprehensive and well thought through.
Yet, ramping remains an
everyday occurrence. According to data published by SA Health, 3479 hours were
spent on the ramp across
the network in January 2025, an average of more than
112 hours each day. At the Royal Adelaide Hospital, the figure was 1178 hours.
This represents an average of 38 hours a day which might, for example, be made
up of about five ambulances for seven hours each
or 11 ambulances for
3½ hours each. The Flinders Medical Centre recorded 902 hours, an
average of 29 hours per day.
Dr Lawrence
said that it does not matter how quickly new beds come online, the capacity is
being eroded by growth in patient
This is yet another
reason why eradication cannot be the only approach. To be clear, I find that SA
Health’s comprehensive
attack on the root causes of ramping is an
excellent use of public funds, but root causes cannot be the
approach pursued when
the issues are so deep.
The Q-Zone, Lyell McEwin Hospital
I briefly mentioned, the Lyell McEwin Hospital Emergency Department was recently
renovated, with a re-thinking of the best way
of administering emergency
medicine. Scoping of innovations in other hospitals was
At a basic level,
Nurse Unit Manager Amy Jacobs, who was involved in the design process, said
that there was a design intention
of breaking staff conceptions about patient
flow and so the new zones within the Department were ingeniously named after the
rhythm complex; P, Q, R, S,
constructed, the Q-Zone contained two de-escalation rooms, which were given the
consumer-focused name ‘quiet
four cubicles which were initially used for front-loaded care. There were three
cubicles that were always intended to
be used for ambulance
In February 2024,
hospital management ‘wiped the slate clean’ and converted the entire
Q-Zone into an area for ambulance
arrivals with 24‑hour/7-day nursing
The staff comprise
two dedicated ambulance offload assist nurses and one ambulance triage
When there are
no ambulance patients to triage, the triage nurse assists in the care of
the patients in the Q-Zone.
Assuming transfer of care is achieved for all ten spaces, this represents about
the normal ratio for nurses to
however some
patients may remain in the care of two paramedics. The Department’s Flow
Navigator was also relocated to the
area and now has a view over the ramp, the
Q-Zone and the waiting
arriving by ambulance are brought to this area by paramedics and will wait
in their care on a hospital bed until such time
as a transfer of care can be
achieved. That period of time will, obviously enough, vary. There is a
30-minute target.
handover of care is achieved, the patients are put into the care of nurses who
staff the area and the paramedics are released.
The Q-Zone, structured in this
way, has taken the name ‘Rapid Offload Zone’.
pointed out that the Q-Zone bays were used as conventional treatment spaces
during renovation works and so there is equipment
there from those times, making
it of an improved standard to usual waiting
Ms Jacobs held
the view that the area would not be as successful without cardiac monitoring, as
many patients arriving by ambulance
who are not Fit to Sit will require
monitoring and, without the equipment, they would need to remain in
the ambulance to use monitoring
pointed out that sometimes patients who arrive by their own transport are not
well enough to wait in the waiting room.
These spaces are sometimes used to
accommodate them while they
Dr Anand pointed
out that when access block reaches high levels, the Q-Zone also becomes blocked.
Dr Lawrence pointed out that when
staffing issues arise, the Q-Zone is less
In my view, the
occasional filling up of the space does not constitute a valid reason to dismiss
the adoption of such an initiative.
It does, however, make it very important to
ensure that the space is used for flow and does not become merely a new wing of
Department.
spoke of difficult decisions needing to be made in times of high demand
(‘when the numbers blow out’), which
involve an assessment of the
appropriateness of assigning only one triage nurse to 40 patients in the waiting
room, but three nurses
to the 10 patients in the Q-Zone who could remain in the
care of two paramedics if
visited the Q-Zone at the Lyell McEwin Hospital in May 2024 and heard much
evidence regarding it. At the time of the view, data
published by SA Health
recorded that there were 61 patients who had commenced treatment against a
capacity of 59, with eight waiting
to be seen and three expected
three ambulances on the
The overall
environment was far from hectic. At the conclusion of the view one hour and
20 minutes later, there were no ambulances
SA Health’s
trend data shows that there has been a significant and sustained improvement in
offload times since the refashioning
It may be that this
particular initiative is the most meritorious one amongst all of SA
Health’s recent work.
The fixation with ramping figures
now established the problem and having established the work being directed at
the problem, there is a fundamental issue that
needs to be addressed before
continuing. There is a lot of focus in the health sector, in the media and in
the community on the
ebbs and flows of ramping figures; is it up this month or
down? While that occurs in the public, I have formed the view that bringing
ramping figures down should not be my sole focus. I need to have regard to the
figures only to understand that significant ramping
continues. However, I am
tasked with exploring the cause and circumstances of the deaths of three South
Australians who died after
periods of ramping. If there was an easy solution
and ramping could be fixed overnight, I would focus on that. However, it is
that there is no simple solution. In fact, aside from the Q-Zone, every
effort that has been made so far appears to have been swallowed
ever-growing demand on the health system. As efficiencies and improvements are
realised, ramping gets worse.
a consequence, and by the terms of the Act, I must focus on what caused the
deaths of these three South Australians and what improvements
can be made to
avoid the same thing happening again, within the way a modern health system
functions, which includes delays to transfer
of care. Effectively, I must focus
on recommendations which will make the process of being ramped as safe as
possible. It can be
easily acknowledged from the evidence of many witnesses,
not least Dr Lawrence’s comprehensive evidence, that SA Health
attributing enormous levels of resources towards the ramping issue and
trying to reduce it. As I have said, that is an approach
that should be
commended. It is worthwhile and important work and it will hopefully see
dramatic improvements in ramping figures.
However, the evidence from numerous
witnesses was that all modern healthcare systems have ramping. It appears
to be almost impossible
to eliminate. It may appear self-evident and
understandable; unless hospitals hire enough doctors and nurses to ensure that
is always available and not actively treating a patient, it is simply
not possible to admit every patient immediately upon arrival.
starting proposition, one that the Victorian health system appears to have
recently reached, has to be that ramping is going to
happen. Having accepted
that, attention can turn firstly towards reducing the levels as much as
possible. As I have said, so much
is being done to address the issue. Secondly,
to implementing improvements to the safety and comfort of those who have to deal
the consequences of ramping; patients and paramedics. I consider that I
should make focused recommendations in areas where safety
improvements can be
expected. These should not only encompass physical improvements, but also
process improvements, as well as broader
cultural or attitudinal improvements.
Just as a very wide approach is needed to reduce ramping, a wide approach is
also needed to
improve the safety of ramping.
order to commence the process of cultural change and change in the
community’s attitude to ramping, I make a
recommendation
to the Minister for Health and Wellbeing:
Rec 1 That the South
Australian Government formally acknowledge that ramping is a reality that all
modern healthcare systems encounter.
While efforts to reduce the levels of
ramping remain extremely important, efforts must also be made to make the
process of ramping
safer for those patients who will inevitably experience it.
Dr Lawrence
agreed that it is reasonable to act on ramping as a reality but also continue to
maintain a focus on strategies to end
If that fundamental
policy was adopted, the health system can stop pulling itself apart each month
as ramping figures roll in.
It can instead focus on doing health the best way
it can. The State of South Australia indicated that more recently there has
some level of recognition of this
AEA opposed this recommendation, calling it ‘incredibly dangerous’.
Respectfully, that approach ignores the effect
of later recommendations and
disregards my reasoning that an entirely new way of thinking needs to be adopted
throughout all levels
of health care. The State of South Australia opposed the
recommendation on a number of bases. I have taken into account the opposition
to this recommendation. I still consider that a public statement is the
necessary first step to moving beyond a paradigm where so
much effort and energy
is wasted on discussing ramping figures instead of actually focusing on
improvements to the ramping process.
It would have the effect of readjusting
clinicians’ views about ramping and ensuring their ‘buy-in’ on
improvements.
It would quell public disquiet about the phenomenon of ramping.
I consider that in all of the circumstances of this Inquest, this
recommendation
is not only appropriate but is critically important. I encourage the State of
South Australia to give very careful
consideration to adopting this
recommendation as setting the health system on a new path.
Key recommendations to improve safety
I have said, given the context of this Inquest, my primary focus must be on
improving safety for those who will be ramped. A number
of key areas were
explored where meaningful improvements might be achieved. I will make
recommendations which will mitigate the
consequences of the compromised standard
of care attributable to ambulance ramping.
Offload directions
Court heard evidence of ‘break glass’ Directions issued under the
Health Care Act 2008
which effectively set a timeframe ceiling which,
upon a ramped patient reaching, would see their immediate offload ahead of any
patient, including more seriously ill waiting room patients or more
seriously ill ramped patients who arrived subsequently, but are
yet to reach the
evidence of the clinicians was that these Directions are not achievable and can
in fact be dangerous to more seriously unwell
They represent an
added pressure and another consideration in an already complex scenario.
The Ambulance Transport Policy requires
consideration of the value of
having ambulances in the community amongst clinical
It is at that level
that offload should be considered rather than abstract timeframes which do not
take into account the actual
clinical picture facing the Department.
I accept on face value that directions to offload ambulance patients who
reach a particular ceiling are well-intentioned, they
carry dangers and are not
appropriate. Clinicians must be left to make appropriate decisions about
patient order on the basis of
their professional medical assessments. I have
accepted submissions from the State of South Australia that Dr Lawrence has
these Directions and therefore I make no recommendation on this topic.
The appropriateness of the Australasian Triage Scale
Court heard evidence from many clinicians about the manner in which patients are
taken into the Department. A significant component
of the process is reliance
on the Australasian Triage
The Court heard that
this scale is used by all hospitals across
It was first
developed in 1976 as a three-category
It has received
numerous scientific validations as a tool which reliably determines urgency of
patient arrivals.
requires an assessment of an incoming patient in less than five
and sets out the
minimum amount of information that must be
ascertained.
respects, it is a process of applying gut feeling using experience and
observation.
There are a
number of ‘red flags’ which will raise a patient’s urgency, in
particular haemodynamic
instability.
Court heard that triage nurses are very experienced and have worked towards
taking on the triage role through a progression pathway
over a number of
Ms Toohey said
that triaging is an art, different from other nursing roles, that is refined
with time and experience.
The triage nurses who gave evidence all appeared to be sufficiently experienced
and adequately trained for the task and, in the
case of Ms Crowther,
appropriately supervised towards the end of her training. It certainly could
not be said that there was any
training issue which compromised the care
provided to Mrs Panella, Mr Skeffington and Mr Jessett, except
that mandatory visualisation
was not enforced, an issue I will address shortly.
ATS now breaks patients down into five
categories.
Category 1 are
patients that require immediate care (immediate patients). Category 2 patients
are those who can safely wait 10
minutes for care (emergency patients).
Category 3 patients are those that can safely wait 30 minutes for care (urgent
Category 4 patients are those that can safely wait 60 minutes for
care (semi-urgent patients) and Category 5 patients are those
that can safely
wait 120 minutes for care (non-urgent patients).
Paradoxically,
even though these times are frequently exceeded, the evidence of the
clinicians,
as well as the
expert opinion of Professor Kelly, was that no adjustment should be made to the
Category assigned to a patient by
virtue of the actual delay that may be
experienced.
The effect of
this is that all patients remain in relative order to each other, even though
the specific timeframes will not be
many occasions clinicians spoke about the manner of dealing with Category 1
These patients
include those in respiratory or cardiac arrest or with airway concerns. They
are patients who will not survive without
immediate intervention. Their arrival
rightly overrides anything else happening in the Department. They are usually
in the resuscitation area. I find that this is entirely appropriate.
Court heard that Category 3, 4 and 5 patients, while ranked on paper, are simply
seen in order of their arrival. One witness
conceded that the task of assigning
a triage Category to these patients is ultimately
Given that all
three of the South Australians under consideration in this Inquest were assigned
to Categories within this band,
the appropriateness of this practice was
explored during the Inquest. One might reasonably infer that the process is not
as it does potentially result in scenarios where numerous patients of
lower acuity (4 and 5) might be seen before a higher priority
(3) who arrives
after them.
However, as is
usually the case in the health system, there are underlying complexities and
nuances to be considered.
primary factor at play is the use of streaming. This breaks patients down into
streams of patients that are dealt with in different
areas of the
Department, with different resources and different goals. The best example of
this in operation was a patient of lower
acuity that is able to be seen in
the ambulatory stream by a nurse practitioner without the use of a fully
equipped hospital bed.
The patient is discharged without having had any
involvement of a doctor or any use of a space that could have been occupied by
sicker patient. Seen in this light, the earlier treatment provided to the lower
acuity patient has had no practical impact on
the higher acuity patient who was
likely in a different stream, competing for different resources. Further, if
strict category-driven
intake was practised, the actual effect in light of the
level of demand in the Department would be that some Category 4 and 5
would simply never be
an unacceptable
outcome. Dr Lawrence’s view was that streaming is an effective way of
dealing with intake.
Professor Kelly agreed.
Mr Peck pointed out that streaming models are used across the country and
internationally.
In light of
that analysis, there was no improvement identified in the manner of application
of the ATS, which appears to be achieving
what it needs to achieve.
Court heard that triage is guided by an Emergency Triage Education Kit, a new
version of which was released in 2024 and which
was contributed to by
Education Kit is clear, comprehensive and concise. It contains 132 test
scenarios. It is, no doubt, an excellent resource
for triage nurses who are
supported into the role generally after years of experience in emergency
Education Kit defers to local hospital policies in respect of
‘re-triaging’ but implies that patients should be reviewed
expiration of the target
This was another
issue explored during the Inquest. There is a formal ‘re-triage’
requirement of 30 minutes in Queensland
and a general expectation of
checking on patients in
The very clear
import of the evidence was that triage nurses, as currently staffed, would be
unlikely to be able to comply with
a requirement to visit patients again after
10, 30 or 60 minutes to review their
I consider that
other recommendations that I will make will address the workload of triage
nurses and no separate recommendation
need be made about
‘re-triaging’ at set intervals. I am also concerned about the
possibility of adding to the workload
of triage nurses prior to a review of
their duties being conducted. This could put a great deal of additional
pressure on these
busy staff and would likely not be achievable. It could have
the effect of making triage nurses more difficult to find in urgent
circumstances, as occurred in Mrs Panella’s case. I have determined
not to make any recommendation about re-triaging, particularly
given that I will
recommend observations be taken at minimum intervals by paramedics who will be
empowered to escalate concerns.
However, I note for the benefit of SA Health
that this topic should be revisited once triage nurses are given more capacity
particularly where visiting ramped patients is not as difficult as it is
outside the hospital.
the end, triage categories are only part of a complex system of information that
is used to determine patient order. In light
of all of the evidence and in
light of that analysis, I consider that I need not make any recommendations
of the use of the Australasian Triage Scale and its
manner of implementation in South Australia.
Visualisation at triage
key issue that was explored at Inquest was the lack of visualisation by triage
nurses of ramped patients. Visualisation is a process
of looking at and
interacting with a patient while ascertaining their medical
The document now
governing triaging, version 2 of the Australasian Triage Education Kit, mandates
visualisation of patients during
predecessor. An accompanying document, ‘Guidelines on the Implementation
of the Australasian Triage Scale in Emergency
Departments’ explains that
triage involves a combination of the presenting problem, the general appearance
of the patient and
any pertinent physiological
observations.
Kelly explained that important information, meaningful nuances and subtle visual
clues are easily lost in a triage where
there is no visualisation. This can
result in an under-appreciation of how unwell a patient
Dr Lawrence said
that all patients should have a brief assessment by the triage
Notwithstanding
that the agreed-upon process requires patient visualisation, clinicians all
agreed that visualisation is a critical
The evidence of
multiple witnesses established that visualisation was not standard practice at
the time of the deaths of Mrs Panella,
Mr Skeffington and
Mr Jessett.
That it had
become a totally accepted practice not to visualise a patient was evidenced by
the introduction of an acronym
in effect a set of
standard triage text which recorded that triage had been compromised due to
before the commencement of the Inquest, the Flinders Medical Centre introduced a
visualisation requirement, which is effectively
a workaround of numerous issues,
that involves unloading patients from ambulances and returning them to
the ambulance after
Safety concerns were
raised about blocking the entry when a resuscitation-level patient
however the evidence
of clinicians was that this was workable and an overall
improvement.
import of the evidence was that Category 1 patients who require immediate
life-saving treatment are able to be brought
through even with
airlock-visualisation in place. The evidence was that another issue of the
expectations of patients is managed
by explanations of the
Dr Romualdez
said that there is no proposal for triage nurses at the Royal Adelaide Hospital
to conduct visualisation of ramped
although if that
was recommended she would work with nursing staff to make it
I consider that
without external disruption, Royal Adelaide Hospital patients will continue to
be prioritised on the basis of second-hand
information from paramedics.
lack of visualisation appears to have most clearly had an impact on
Mr Skeffington’s care, as paramedic Stacey White gave
evidence that
Mr Skeffington was in a lot more distress during his episodes of dry
retching than his observations showed. He was
never visualised at these
light of the evidence, I make the following
recommendation
Minister for Health and Wellbeing:
Rec 2 A statewide policy
should be introduced requiring visualisation of patients arriving for triage,
regardless of their manner
of arrival, in line with the Australasian Triage
Scale Education Kit. Additional resourcing for triage nurses may be necessary
achieve the requirement in practice. The policy should allow for each
hospital to decide the manner in which visualisation occurs.
The policy should
be kept up to date with best clinical practice.
State of South Australia asked me not to make this recommendation on the basis
that policies and procedures are inflexible, prone
to outdating, might be
inconsistent with national standards and are sometimes not supported by
clinicians. The State submitted that
if standards were to change over time and
visualisation is no longer recommended in the ATS, then the existence of my
recommendation
would not require SA Health to continue the practice. In my
view, given that the ATS mandates visualisation it cannot be said that
recommendation might be inconsistent with national standards. I do not foresee
that such a fundamental and basic requirement
will be removed from the national
standard. All of the clinicians and administrators who gave evidence on the
topic spoke in support
of the requirement for visualisation to have a reliable
triage. Given that, I consider such a policy would likely have clinician
engagement. Given the clear evidence that this critical process is not
conducted, I consider that this recommendation is an appropriate
one to make.
Leaving this issue to operational clinicians has simply not worked sufficiently.
AEA supported this recommendation but asked me to consider including a
prohibition on visualisation in
I have carefully
considered that issue. When close attention is paid to the evidence, it is
clear that it did not establish safety
issues which are so apparent that they
would preclude visualisation in the airlock as being a viable option and, in
effect, override
the enormous advantages to triage gained by having a direct
visualisation. To be clear, I do not endorse visualisation inside airlocks
an ideal practice, but as I have already explained, these are difficult times
for the health system and some compromises are inevitable.
AEA also asked me to consider recommending that a separate nurse be specifically
assigned to deal with ambulance arrivals
While that is
attractive, in light of the evidence I consider that it is very unlikely for
paramedics to wait for any excessive
time for a triage nurse. Mandating
specific roles might be considered appropriate by SA Health, but I cannot
say that with certainty.
In this area of individual roles, there is the
possibility of restricting flexibility in an unhelpful way. In the end, I am
satisfied that it is appropriate to recommend that this be mandated.
have not been presented with evidence about the productivity of triage nurses
and so, while I am satisfied on the evidence that
they are too busy, I am unable
to conclude with the required degree of certainty that an increase in triage
nurse staffing is what
is required, particularly where I propose to recommend
that the duties of those staff are reviewed.
Triage distractions and workload
nurses are a vital interface between patients seeking treatment and Emergency
Department clinicians, providing the initial
point of contact and liaising with
staff in the Department and on the wards to facilitate the flow of patients.
Triage nurses need
to manage patient prioritisation which constantly shifts with
developments amongst all patients. It is a challenging
Court heard evidence from six triage nurses about the number of distractions
experienced and their effect. Paramedic Kristen
Carter said that continual
interruptions can throw her thought while trying to get through a triage
handover and was one of the biggest
frustrations in her
The following
distractions were identified:
Communications
with shift coordinators and area coordinators about:
becoming available
to bring patients through
Discussions
with other triage nurses about patient order
notifications
incoming patient identity and directing them
interrupting with a more urgent case
nurses spoke about developing the skill of taking a complex medical handover in
a chaotic environment,
agreed that interruptions and distractions do not
The high demands of
the triage role were part of the reasoning behind visualisation ceasing to be
potential improvement identified was the removal of the obligation of the triage
nurse to listen to the radio. This was rejected
by the triage nurses who gave
evidence, as they considered the information coming through to be critical for
their role and that
it must be a clinician who listens to what is being
The movement of the
radio at the Royal Adelaide Hospital to be between both triage nurses was noted
to be an improvement, as it
meant that the role of listening to incoming
notifications could be
Educator for the Southern Adelaide Local Health Network, Ms Toohey, agreed that
triaging involves some administrative tasks,
such as notifying other
She agreed that the
removal of some administrative tasks would improve their ability to carry out
nurses spoke about having backup to help them in times of peak demand using an
informal process,
being a delay to additional staff being able to attend to
and there being
concerns about taking a staff member away from somewhere else during busy
considered that informal backup processes were
backup processes were generally thought
sufficient,
that must be
viewed against the background of visualisation and periodic reassessment being
impossible to achieve.
Ms Toohey gave evidence of not calling for backup when required because it
would have the consequence of removing a resource from
another area equally
under pressure.
Ms Heywood said that she would not seek additional support just to conduct
visualisation on the ramp.
course, triage distractions and an unrelenting workload not only make the triage
nurse’s actual triage task more difficult,
but they also have an impact on
the triage nurse’s ability to fully do their work. In particular, I again
refer to the fact
that visualisations have faded out of practice due to workload
light of the ample evidence about workload pressures and distracting tasks, I
make the following
recommendation
to the Minister for Health and
Rec 3 SA Health should review the staffing model and
workload of triage nurses at metropolitan Emergency Departments with a view to
identifying tasks which may be appropriately carried out by an administrative
support person assigned during times of peak demand
to assist triage nurses.
This review should consider the costs and benefits of an increase in
administrative staffing per shift
versus an increase in triage staffing per
shift. The review should take into account any applicable workplace agreements.
should be consultative and consider the full impact of any proposed
State of South Australia submitted that there was insufficient evidence of the
planning of triage nurses’ work in order
to make this recommendation. I
disagree. Much evidence was given about tasks which add to the workload of the
multiple triage nurses
who gave evidence. My recommendation is merely that
their duties be reviewed. If the result of that review is that staffing is
sufficient and the tasks being undertaken cannot be asked of any other staff,
then the recommendation will be satisfied. I consider
that this is an
appropriate matter upon which I should make a recommendation in order to prevent
further deaths through an inability
to manage all tasks required of a triage
nurse performing a crucial duty at a crucial moment in the patient’s
Triage handovers
Court heard much evidence about triage handovers and the content of the triage
note. There was a heavy focus on this issue, as
there were differences
discovered between the notes of paramedics and the triage notes recorded,
sometimes in significant
The evidence
explored the differing purposes between paramedic records and triage notes and
established that the notes will always
be different.
from SA Health established that a new digital Patient Clinical Record is being
developed which will integrate with Sunrise,
so that a patient’s
observations will be transferred and recorded in the hospital’s
This was welcomed
by clinicians.
this will be able to be charted visually, so that abnormalities can be easily
identified with colour banding which has
proven a useful tool over many years.
Both efficiency and accuracy gains are likely to be achieved through the use of
digital integration.
More information will be available to doctors upon picking
up a patient’s case. This will also remove delays in locating
the correct
patient record at the triage
This work is underway
and I consider that I need not make any recommendation about it.
Notwithstanding
the proposed digital integration of ambulance records, paramedics will
still be required to conduct oral handovers
to triage nurses. This will involve
visualisation and a discussion about the actual medical impression of the
patient so that a
proper triage score can be assigned.
Kelly, who routinely reviews South Australian medical files for coronial
investigations, gave evidence about structured
handover processes.
Mr Gallagher said that he was trained to use a structured
however Professor
Kelly said that she rarely finds handovers recorded in a structured way, which
she considers to be a ‘missed
opportunity’.
facilitate the handing over of a complex set of information in a short space of
time without missing important topics. Professor
Kelly considered that it would
be appropriate for handovers to be mandated in a structured
AEA submitted that a structured handover might inhibit flexibility in tailoring
a handover. Respectfully, what is proposed is
a structure around the very broad
topics to be covered rather than specific content. For example, under the
structure, the ‘S’ requires recording of what
the situation is, the ‘B’ requires recording of what the background
is. These leave ample scope for customised clinician observations. I cannot
accept the submission that recording content under
particular headings in a
particular order is ‘another layer of bureaucracy’, nor that
extensive training is required.
have not been presented with any evidence that SA Health’s rollout of a
digital patient clinical record is expected to record
a handover in a uniform
way. It might be thought by designers that a blank page would be appropriate
for paramedics to write their
notes in whatever format they wish, replicating
current paperwork. If it does require a set structure, a policy requiring that
be easily met during the rollout. In any event, I am proposing to limit my
recommendation on this topic only to oral handovers,
as I consider that the area
where there are more likely to be miscommunications.
State of South Australia acknowledged that accurate-handover issues
but submitted that
no recommendation is necessary because there is evidence of structured handovers
being in use and being required
under national standards. The State seems to
call for a rejection of the evidence of Professor Kelly on the basis that she
not reside in South Australia. While I agree that the evidence did not
establish that a failure to use a structured handover specifically
contributed
to the handover issues comprehensively explored in the cases of Mrs Panella
and Mr Jessett, a standardised approach having
flexibility within it is, in my
view, an appropriate matter upon which I should make a recommendation.
light of the evidence, I
to the Minister for Health and
Rec 4 A statewide policy should be introduced
mandating the use of a structured oral handover between paramedics and triage
Triage communication
Court heard evidence that there is no standardised practice of paramedics being
informed of the triage Category their patient
is assigned at the conclusion of
triage, although paramedics do sometimes ask triage
Many triage nurses
do offer the information.
Ms White was not informed of Mr Skeffington’s triage Category,
but inferred it was low from her conversation with the triage
Ms Pankoke said
that it would be useful to know how long a patient is likely to
Ms Araki and
Mr Peck said that the time a patient might wait is a difficult thing to
predict because there are so many factors
This is a fair
observation. Sometimes, paramedics are instead advised how long the last
patient on the ramp waited before being
State of South Australia made submissions about potential friction that
communication of the triage Category assigned could create.
Friction may be
experienced, but there are likely to be benefits which outweigh the risk of such
are obvious benefits in paramedics having more information about the hospital
status and their patient’s individual assigned
priority. It must be
remembered that paramedics are highly trained and have a great deal of
experience on the ramp. They will be
able to form an impression of whether
their wait is likely to be long or short. If they knew their patient was at a
lower priority
and they observed chaos when they were inside triaging, they
would be able to temper their language with their patient about the
timeframe. They would also be able to feed information back to the Operations
Centre about their likely availability for
further cases, facilitating better
management of resources. Knowing the assigned priority would also allow for
them to make their
own assessment as to whether some important feature of the
patient’s case has been missed during triage. For example, it might
raised a query about whether Mrs Panella’s hypoxia had been
understood or whether Mr Jessett’s multiple comorbidities
appreciated, or even whether they should be handed over if they initially had
not been. In the absence of the result of triage,
paramedics have no way of
knowing whether there has been an obvious error. The provision of the Category
would serve as a safety
net for glaring errors. Whether triage nurses have good
or bad news, this should be shared with the paramedics. I consider that
policy is required for consistency of approach amongst clinicians across the
State. In that light, I make the following
recommendation
Minister for Health and Wellbeing:
Rec 5 A statewide policy
should be introduced with, or an existing policy amended to include a
requirement for triage nurses to advise
paramedics of the triage Category
assigned to each patient who is not immediately brought into the Emergency
Department.
Blood tests for ramped patients
have set out above the proposal for blood samples to be taken on the ramp. I
consider that this is a very important safeguarding
technique that will identify
cases of impending disaster. Dr Lawrence gave evidence that SA Health had
decided to pursue the initiative,
but had encountered significant opposition to
this proposal, and so I am inclined to intervene. I make the following
recommendation
to the Minister for Health and
Rec 6 That a trial be undertaken of blood samples
being taken from patients waiting for emergency treatment in metropolitan
following triage who are anticipated to wait on the ramp beyond their
ATS target timeframe, with the usual processes applied for
the review of results
to detect and raise alarm about results which indicate that the patient is at
imminent risk of death. A review
should be scheduled at the end of the trial to
determine whether there were any unexpected negative impacts, with consultation
those involved.
Conditions on the ramp
Court heard a great deal of evidence about the conditions facing patients,
paramedics and hospital staff on the ramp. These conditions
environment of risk to patient health in various ways.
The environment
respect of patients, multiple witnesses spoke of the discomfort of the actual
barouche used in ambulances when used for prolonged
Dr Romualdez
spoke of a sense of inaction felt by patients waiting
All witnesses who
were asked agreed about the undesirability of exposure of sick patients to
extreme weather,
results in the need to use air conditioning inside ambulances. This
results in fumes being delivered into the ramping area.
A number of studies
have been conducted in relation to fumes on the ramp with external scientists
recommending mechanical ventilation
fans be used to minimise
The most recent
independent study relied on anecdotal experience of the scientist to conclude
that exposure to fumes on the ramp
was an irritant that brought about discomfort
and a headache.
to be quite difficult to scientifically quantify the fumes issue, but there does
appear to be a genuine issue.
Deteriorations
in dealing with deteriorating patients on the ramp were raised. If a patient is
within the Emergency Department and crashes,
an alert system is in place to
assemble a MET quickly.
There is no equivalent on the ramp. That puts patients deteriorating on the
ramp at heightened risk given that they need to be
offloaded and brought in
before a doctor even sights them, much less a team being assembled. If a
patient crashes, these are critical
moments which could be the difference
between life and death.
are three aspects to patient deteriorations. The first is the training of
paramedics to detect slow deteriorations and being
able to escalate them. Given
that the primary role of paramedics is to stabilise patients and transport them
to hospital, they are
not traditionally trained to monitor patients over
extended periods and detect deteriorations. I do not suggest that they would
not appropriately identify deteriorations and act on them, I merely point out
that it is not their traditional role to watch for
deteriorations over extended
periods. There are no specific timeframes for paramedics to record observations
of ramped patients,
set timeframes exist in the
Department.
If a paramedic
does detect a deterioration, they still have no power in the situation and are
at the mercy of the triage nurse who
makes all relevant decisions. Professor
Kelly pointed out that an absence of formal protocols was inconsistent with
National Safety
and Quality Health Service
acknowledged that some junior paramedics, or ambulance officers without
paramedic qualifications, may not have the confidence
required to interrupt a
busy triage nurse to discuss changes to their patient who has been deemed low
priority. Also, in the case
of Mr Jessett, Ms Weston did not consider
that Ms Wegener was actually escalating Mr Jessett’s case,
instead believed only
that she was providing an
Ms Wegener said that
she was reporting a new
and that she was
concerned about it in light of Mr Jessett’s
These approaches
can be rationalised, however that there can be ambiguity demonstrates the need
for clear guidance.
light of those issues, Professor Kelly proposed a ‘track and
trigger’ process where a patient’s observations
are taken at set
processes followed where certain results are seen. To this end, Professor Kelly
provided a copy of a track and trigger
chart used by nurses inside hospitals in
New South Wales.
seen that observations are set out with colour bands representing levels of
concern. Where a certain number of observations
are seen within a certain
colour band, specific steps for escalation are set out. I observe that
the ambulance service has colour
banded observations on its paper-based
Patient Clinical Record, however the key difference in Professor Kelly’s
proposal is
that there are currently no steps for escalations set out and to the
extent there are, they do not relate to or involve the hospital.
component of Professor Kelly’s proposal would be the agreement by the
hospitals of those steps. This would empower
the junior paramedic
or ambulance officer with a requirement to raise certain combinations of
observations, and thus ensure that
no patient’s deterioration is missed as
a result of these issues.
second component is the physical ability to escalate a patient’s case.
There are no, or insufficient, emergency buttons
in the ramping
The result is that
paramedics are required to walk back into the hospital to speak to the triage
nurse. This is time consuming.
This had a devastating effect in
Mr Skeffington’s case where a paramedic was sent inside to speak to
the triage nurse, leaving
paramedic Stacey White alone with Mr Skeffington.
His condition escalated dramatically in that time and Ms White had to
provide emergency
care alone. Fortunately, she was able to bang on the side of
the ambulance in order to attract the attention of nearby paramedics
began to assist with unloading him. A connection to the triage desk by radio
was explored, however this is not timely and is
not a suitable
I accept that in
cases of known extreme emergency, paramedics are likely to bring a patient
directly into the Department without
trying to seek permission first. However,
as occurred in the cases of Mrs Panella and Mr Skeffington,
deteriorations can build under
the surface and time was spent seeking approval
for entry. It is also not ideal to have such a potentially concerning event be
to individual clinicians to make their own decision about the right thing
to do without any formal guidance. The evidence established
varying views about
how to handle a deteriorating patient and, for example, when it would be
appropriate to simply bring a deteriorating
patient inside the Department
without prior permission.
short, leaving this issue to individual clinical judgement creates an
unsatisfactory situation.
third aspect of deteriorations on the ramp is the time involved in unloading a
patient to bring them into the hospital. During
the Inquest I viewed a
demonstration of unloading at the ambulance Operations
This takes at least
a couple of minutes. In cases of deterioration, these are crucial moments,
particularly when mounted on top
of delays experienced in seeking out a triage
nurse’s attention.
Dr Lawrence
said that a protocol to govern paramedic escalations could be developed if
necessary to give guidance and
empowerment.
submissions, the State of South Australia acknowledged that work is required in
this area and pointed out that a policy for
escalations is in place in one
The State pointed
out that clinicians who gave evidence had an inherent sense of the right
approach to deteriorations.
Given that that could vary, I consider that a policy should be made and I
consider that the process of managing deteriorations should
take a particular
form, colour banding, which has been very successful for many years. In order
to deal with the issue of patients
who deteriorate on the ramp, I make the
recommendation
to the Minister for Health and
Rec 7 SA Health should introduce a statewide policy
and/or protocol for dealing with patients who deteriorate in the care of
while waiting for admission to an Emergency Department. This policy
should recommend observations by paramedics at minimum regular
(subject to clinical judgement) and would ideally contain a colour-banded chart
with specific actions required depending
on the results. The protocol should
set out who is responsible for dealing with the deterioration on the
hospital’s behalf
and what should be done. The protocol should endorse
escalation in any circumstance where there is clinical concern, whether it
the criteria set or not.
gave evidence that such a protocol is under
consideration.
observations of the demonstration, there appears little that can be done to
reduce the time involved in safely unloading
a patient from an ambulance on
the ramp. Identifying the need to do so early is therefore of high importance.
AEA supported this recommendation but opposed the aspect requiring regular
intervals. In my view, without a requirement to specifically
take observations
at set times, there is a risk that an escalation protocol will not actually
achieve the purpose of identifying
deteriorations early. In my view, this is a
key aspect of the recommendation and it is appropriate to incorporate it.
issue which arose was the availability of toilet facilities on the ramp. There
are none. The result is that patients who
have been ramped who wish to use the
toilet must be unloaded from the ambulance taken inside to use facilities
and then brought back
the ambulance.
a manually intensive task
which ambulance officers may be required to do multiple times. It is
unlikely to assist the patient’s health where they have
been deemed not
Fit to Sit.
The ability to properly care for patients
with the undesirability of patient monitoring inside the confined space of
the ambulance were explored. I entered and viewed
the space available
inside an ambulance.
Clinicians spoke of needing 360-degree access to a patient to properly assess
their condition. This is impossible inside
an ambulance.
Dr Brooks spoke rhetorically of wanting ten pieces of information in order
to treat a patient and needing to make decisions in the
Emergency Department
with only four of those pieces of information, by assessing risk. She agreed
that if she had to assess patients
inside an ambulance, she may only get
one or two of those pieces of information. Professor Kelly spoke of the same
difficulty.
An ambulance is
a suboptimal space to manage a sick person in circumstances other than active
aspect of this issue is the phenomenon of paramedics providing a level of care
which exceeds their training and usual scope
of practice, which the State of
South Australia has accepted is a safety concern resulting from
Visualisation
related issue which arose was the difficulty in conducting adequate
visualisation by triage nurses of patients inside ambulances
during triage
and subsequently.
the triage nurse is the only clinician to observe an incoming patient and that
they are weighing many factors into their
prioritisation system, this
visualisation is incredibly important. Witnesses spoke of being able to view
patients from behind and
which gives limited
information about their condition.
were also issues raised about the difficulty in conducting ongoing observations
due to the distance between the triage desk
and ambulance, as there is
insufficient time in the triage nurse role to visit patients
inside ambulances along the
This specifically
caused a problem in Mr Skeffington’s case as visualisation occurred
after a specific request, but at a time
when Mr Skeffington had
If distances were
shorter, a visualisation might have been facilitated quicker, during his less
settled state.
accept that there are also likely to be safety issues with nurses having to
visit an area with vehicles moving
State of South Australia initially made submissions to the effect that none of
these issues are actually safety issues and are
instead issues of
however later seemed
to accept that at least some of the issues were related to patient
I disagree with the
submission, to the extent that it was maintained, that there are only comfort
issues arising from the practice
of ramping patients inside ambulances. There
are certainly comfort issues, but they are overshadowed by clear safety issues
on the ramp and also affecting the patient’s healthcare journey. In
light of the evidence about the impact of ramping on patient
I do not consider
there to be any meaningful distinction between the concepts of appropriate
healthcare for patients and safety concerns.
The risk of poor healthcare is a
safety risk in and of itself, even without regard to physical risks which I have
set out above.
Notwithstanding
these issues, I consider the evidence establishes that, as the health system is
currently structured, waiting in the
back of an ambulance is the ‘least
worst’ option or the safest option available in the current circumstances.
To be clear,
I do not accept the characterisation that external ramping in the
back of ambulances is a ‘well‑attuned’ solution
to the problem
of overcrowding. However, I consider it does represent the best that can be
done in the current prevailing conditions,
which must quickly be addressed,
first by shifting attitudes and then by implementing safety improvements for
ramped patients.
Internal ramping
potential solution to these safety issues created by ramping was explored;
internal ramping. The evidence established that internal
ramping was conducted
at Modbury Hospital until
Interstate,
internal ramping is the normal practice in Queensland and Victoria. There are
many attractive features to internal
ramping; it mitigates issues with
visualisation, deteriorations, toilets, weather and fumes. It provides a small
anxiolytic benefit
for the patient merely from being inside a facility rather
than a truck.
clinicians raised issues about the indignity involved in being exposed in a
corridor while sick.
clinicians raised concerns about clogging corridors with barouches, monitoring
equipment and oxygen tanks,
Mr Lemmer raised a
complexity about having to choose what equipment to bring to a non-treatment
Some clinicians
raised concerns about infection
Kelly said that internal ramping in an appropriate space is preferrable to
external ramping, if ramping is
Dr Romualdez
Ms Toohey agreed.
Dr Lawrence expressed her personal preference for internal ramping, but
acknowledged physical limitations which make the practise
inappropriate in South
Professor McNeil
agreed that there are benefits to internal ramping even if they do not achieve a
transfer of care and release of
an ambulance back to the
agreed that patient visualisation would be easier internally even if the triage
nurse could not directly see the ramped
patients at all
The ambulance
service formally supports internal ramping (although not all of its clinicians
do), on condition that there is a suitable
dedicated space which is fully
stocked with appropriate equipment for use by
paramedics.
overwhelmingly, the witnesses indicated that the number of patients ramped would
not be able to be accommodated inside the
layout of the metropolitan Emergency
Departments.
I apprehended
the nature and extent of these difficulties during the views, particularly at
the Flinders Medical Centre. It is
likely for that reason that the
recommendation to adopt internal ramping made in the 2012 Monaghan Report was
never implemented.
Interestingly, that recommendation was made in the report as a ‘strictly
interim measure’ while efforts being made to
reduce access block were
brought into effect. That was 13 years ago. Professor McNeil was clear that
physical constraints are already
a significant issue affecting the ability to
flow patients through the
Department.
This should not
be exacerbated.
accept the clear advice of the clinicians who work in these spaces each day;
that ramping patients internally would not be appropriate.
The consequence of the inability to ramp internally
that there are extremely significant issues with ramping patients inside
transport vessels (ambulances) and that ramping patients
internally is not
possible, a third approach is required. This is an approach that the Court
heard is being pursued at the new Footscray
Hospital in Victoria and which
already exists at the Sunshine Hospital in
That is, the
construction of a specific area that allows for patients who arrive
by ambulance to wait in the care of paramedics
or ambulance officers
in conditions with increased safety for the patient and staff. Western
Australia has also previously had examples
of ambulance areas which are
effectively wards used by paramedics to deal with patients waiting for
Kelly pointed out the counter-productiveness of taking existing Department space
and converting it to ramping
Professor McNeil said
it could potentially be beneficial to do so, but it would have to be properly
planned and considered.
These spaces should not be within the current Emergency Department footprints.
McNeil encouraged the consideration of the roll-out of the Lyell McEwin
Hospital’s Q-Zone as part of each hospital’s
This proposal is
similar to the Q-Zone, except that there would be no transfer of care within the
area and it would not take away
any current treatment space. Dr Romualdez
said that an area could be built on the ramp at the Royal Adelaide
a purpose-built area was constructed in the direct vicinity of the Department,
but not within its current footprint, the following
safety improvements would be
Ambulances would
not need to continuously run to maintain air conditioning, meaning that the
exposure to fumes would be less likely
There would be
less loading and unloading of patients, placing less stress on the patient and
the paramedic alike.
Triage nurses
would be able to safely visit the area and conduct a proper triage,
incorporating interaction with the patient and a
360-degree view of the patient
without blocking any emergency ingress.
Paramedics would
not be required to monitor and manage patients in a transport vessel and would
instead have ongoing 360-degree access
to the patient as needed.
Paramedics would
not need to carry any equipment, as the area would be set up with equipment
familiar to paramedics that they have
Where incidents
of acute deterioration occur, to a resuscitation level, the patient would
experience less delays because unloading
would not need to occur. In these
episodes, drawing the attention of the hospital staff would be easy, as
emergency buttons could
be placed in the area to allow paramedics to make a MET
call or call a Code Blue directly from the
Existing procedures
for these kinds of emergencies would then take effect.
deteriorations occur, but less than resuscitation-level, drawing the triage
nurse’s attention would be easier because
of the adjacency to the
Department. Where a paramedic leaves the area to speak to a triage nurse, the
other paramedic is not alone
inside a truck with the patient should an extreme
event occur.
The patient
experience would be vastly improved. Instead of sitting inside the back of a
truck on an ambulance barouche for hours,
patients could be transferred to
a hospital mattress and would be moved to a more comfortable area which is
temperature controlled,
less noisy and has basic amenities like drinking
water and, ideally, toilet facilities. Professor McNeil spoke about the
effect, where patients who arrive at hospital experience a reduction
in symptoms on account of their relaxed state from being in
an environment of
They would likely
begin to experience that effect.
a purpose-built area was constructed, many other possible initiatives also open
up, such as:
Doubling patient load in times of
system-crisis
This refers to a
practice that Professor Kelly gave evidence about that is being explored in
other jurisdictions.
paramedic crew (consisting of two paramedics) arriving at hospital with a
patient has the ability to hand their patient over to
a crew (consisting of two
paramedics) who is already at the hospital waiting with a patient on the ramp.
One crew of two paramedics
thereafter takes over the care of two patients. The
other crew are free to return to pending emergency cases in the community.
would only be done in appropriate clinical scenarios. This process is not
possible with patients in the back of trucks as those
trucks are precisely what
is needed to be released and it is physically impossible to share care across
trucks. While the handover
of care from practitioner to practitioner is not
best practice, it is far less risky than leaving patients in the community
for ambulances.
Alternative staffing
In future, if
staffing difficulties can be addressed and nursing numbers bolstered, there
could be nurses assigned only to the ramping
area who take handover from
paramedics. This has been trialled in
This then releases
the paramedics back to the community and the nurses thereafter provide the level
of care that paramedics would
have if they had waited. Dr Wright pointed
out that nursing care is less resource intense than two paramedics per
Again, this would
not be possible with patients in the back of trucks, as the trucks are what need
to be released. Of course, this
has also been achieved at the Lyell McEwin
Hospital which evidences that this goal will be within reach once new areas are
Nurse staffing could be introduced as easily in an external area as
it could in an internal ‘Q-Zone-type’ area.
Safeguarding against catastrophe
proposal for blood samples to be taken by paramedics is, unfortunately,
controversial, if a patient was housed in a suitable
purpose-built area, it
would be likely that nursing staff could visit (without concern of moving
vehicles and fumes) and take blood
samples which would reduce the
patient’s overall length of stay, lead to a quicker definitive diagnosis
after admission and
potentially identify an impending catastrophe. Given that
nursing staff employed by the hospital would be taking the blood sample
requesting the test, this would simply fit within the hospital’s usual
processes which include a call through to the Emergency
Department where there
is an abnormal result of concern. In routine cases the blood sample will simply
be left to wait for the patient
to commence being treated and cared for by the
Department. Put this way, it becomes clear that there needs to be no person
to be responsible for reviewing the blood test result; unless pathology
identifies an extreme concern, it simply waits for the doctor
assigned to the
patient once in the Department.
possibilities could be explored once new ambulance waiting zones are
constructed and operational.
real concern raised with these kinds of proposals appeared to be that the area
would quickly fill up and its positive effect would
be lost. Dr Lawrence
made it clear that zones such as this must only be used for undifferentiated
patients, to avoid them merely
being filled with admitted
The answer to this
concern is to ensure that the ambulance waiting zone remains an area for
use by triage nurses and paramedics
and nothing else. Physical separation,
while maintaining adjacency to the Emergency Department, would assist with that
policy that, aside from resuscitation-level events, doctors cannot
commence treatment for any patients in the ramping area (with
an exception for
the blood test to rule out a hidden impending disaster) would be logical. This
would mean that to progress patients,
the hospital would still need to intake
them into a conventional treatment space. Under this arrangement, the new
ramping area would
improve safety levels on the ramp without altering the
hospital’s approach to ramped patients.
many ways therefore, what is proposed is a maintenance of the status quo of the
ramping process; ramped patients wait outside the
Department in the care of the
paramedics who brought them until the Department can accommodate them. However,
it would occur in
a far safer way. Professor Kelly described these areas as
‘unfortunate’, but better than care in corridors or ambulances,
which is the practical
alternative.
light of that analysis, I make the following
recommendation
Minister for Health and Wellbeing:
Rec 8 An ambulance
waiting area should be constructed adjacent to, but not within, the Emergency
Department of each metropolitan hospital
which has experienced significant
periods of ramping (i.e.,` in excess of 300 hours) in the majority of months
over three years.
These areas should be fitted out with appropriate equipment
and supplies familiar to paramedics, to allow for patients who are unable
immediately admitted to the Emergency Department to wait in the care of
paramedics, ambulance officers or nurses outside of
the ambulance. These
areas should be fitted with appropriate emergency buttons. Policies should
prevent the use of this space by
the hospital, other than for visualisation and
other triage processes by triage nurses, intake blood samples and sudden
resuscitation-level
have decided against naming particular hospitals as I hold the view that the
recommendation should be linked specifically to whichever
locations continue to
experience sustained ramping, rather than targeting any named list. The area
should only be introduced where
ramping cannot be controlled to an infrequent
level or for brief durations.
that I have expressed a clear view in favour of blood samples being taken from
ramped patients, I consider that it is appropriate
to specifically reference it
in my recommendation so that it is clear to all that I consider it an
appropriate use of these areas.
AEA urged me to make a recommendation for the construction of ramping areas
without making a recommendation that the policy framework
around ramping be
changed (i.e., without recommendation 1). In my view, without such a
fundamental shift being made, there is a
genuine risk that the clinicians and
administrators working in the health system will continue to actively oppose
initiatives like
the construction of these areas. If that occurs, they would
likely be constructed in less-than-ideal circumstances, potentially
their full effect being realised. In my view, it is only in combination with
the policy shift in relation to ramping that
the areas can be properly pursued.
Therefore, I do not accept the AEA’s submission that this recommendation
can properly be
made without the first.
AEA asked me to refrain from mentioning paramedics. While I consider that these
areas are suitable for staffing by nurses in
future, for present purposes I
consider it more appropriate that they be established with a view to maintaining
the status quo of
the provision of care until they are established and
operational, allowing for future revision of staffing models when safe to do
have carefully considered the position of the State of South Australia in
respect of this recommendation. I consider that the brief
position statement by
agencies in the United Kingdom is of little guidance in the South Australian
context, particularly in light
of the composition of our ambulance service
relative to our hospitals. I also consider that the temporary facilities spoken
that document are not akin to what I have recommended, given that it
speaks of facilities in the nature of tents.
I do not intend that the construction of new areas take resources away from
other aspects of the ramping effort, or create unintended
problems or limit
creativity, I consider that these areas are necessary, not temporarily, but in
the long term. I consider that
there are real and significant safety issues
with housing sick patients for extended periods in the back of ambulances which
be addressed in order to prevent deaths. It must be remembered that a
lower level of care has greater ramifications than just those
that accrue during
the time spent outside.
that light, SA Health will need to carefully consider where the resourcing for
this recommendation will come from. If SA Health
consider that implementing
this recommendation would preclude other initiatives which are also specifically
directed at preventing
the deaths of patients waiting on the ramp, then they
will need to assess and justify the most appropriate use of their resources.
SA Health considers that they wish to instead continue with efforts at reducing
ramping instead of efforts specifically directed
at making ramping safer, then I
do not consider that an appropriate approach. For that reason, I consider this
recommendation is
necessary to prevent further deaths.
that I have reached the conclusion that this recommendation is necessary, it
follows that I do not consider the recommendation
proposed by the State of South
Australia, for an alert mechanism to be introduced on the ramp, is necessary.
That solution does
not address all of the safety issues that exist on the ramp
but may be a useful interim improvement. I can foresee issues with using
and sirens to alert hospital staff to deteriorations, similar to those spoken of
in evidence which make it impossible to use
the radio, as well as triage staff
not necessarily being at the triage desk at the precise moment needed. While
the State of South
Australia submitted that there is no possible space at the
Royal Adelaide Hospital, I observed plentiful space in the current ramping
for better facilities than are available inside ambulances which currently
occupy that physical space. This space is immediately
adjacent to the
Department entry. Proximity to the ‘centre of the ED’ is not
something achieved by waiting inside ambulances,
therefore I do not accept
criticism of new areas as being worse on that basis.
Flinders Medical Centre
issue which was raised as a serious impediment was the physical structure and
placement of the Flinders Medical Centre Emergency
Department. The hospital was
opened in 1976, nearly 50 years ago. The expected service life of a
hospital is 20 to
with a refresh
required about every ten
The population
surrounding the hospital has changed, with various small towns now being part of
the metropolis.
Dr Lawrence pointed out that the Flinders Medical Centre meets required
standards and is accredited,
but acknowledged that it would be unlikely to meet the current standards if
those were applicable.
Dr Wright lamented the choice to construct the Emergency Department on a
higher floor,
which he said
has frequently returned to cause problems. Dr Wright said that the cramped
floor plan creates inefficiency and adds
to the cognitive overload for
clinicians.
He said that
space redesigns have led to dysfunction and
inefficiencies.
the Department overcrowded during the view. It was markedly more chaotic than
the other hospitals that were visited,
also during times of high demand and
overcrowding. It was hard to concentrate. Professor McNeil said that the
Flinders Medical
Centre Emergency Department is not an environment that
encourages the pursuit of excellence because it puts significant constraints
how patient care can be
frankly said that it has not been providing ideal care for a long time and is
increasingly not even providing good
Southern Adelaide Local Health Network’s two largest hospitals are the
Flinders Medical Centre and its companion, the Noarlunga
Hospital. The Flinders
Medical Centre is one of the two Level 1 Trauma Centres for the entire
Its Emergency
Department is required to be equipped to handle the arrival of the worst cases.
respect of the limited number of isolation spaces which affected
Mr Jessett’s case, Dr Lawrence said that retrofitting negative
pressure is extremely complex and
That would be
particularly so in already cramped spaces. Patients like Mr Jessett who
present with conditions requiring isolation
will therefore continue to be
disadvantaged.
addition to the issues raised with the current facilities at the Flinders
Medical Centre, many witnesses said that a newly constructed
waiting area could simply not be achieved near the current Emergency
Department.
In effect, there
is no space for internal ramping and there is no ability to construct a safe
waiting area, therefore patients must
continue to sit inside trucks waiting for
admission. That is an unacceptable position for a major metropolitan hospital.
reason, I make the following
recommendation
to the Minister for
Health and Wellbeing:
Rec 9 A review should be conducted by SA
Health into the adequacy of the building and facilities of the Flinders Medical
Centre Emergency
Department to manage its demand and its expected role within
the health system. The review should identify whether there is any
alternative location for the construction of a new Emergency Department,
including consideration of the feasibility of moving
it to the floor immediately
below and whether that would allow for improvement of facilities and future
review should, quite obviously, occur with consultation of those who work at, or
deliver patients to, the Flinders Medical Centre.
It will be a matter for
SA Health to determine who ought to be involved and to what extent.
new facilities are being constructed at the Flinders Medical Centre which might
facilitate more flow, I specifically draw attention
to, and make my
recommendation about, a review of the adequacy of the Emergency
Department’s facilities.
State of South Australia submitted that there is no evidential foundation for
the making of this recommendation and that it is
not connected to the death of
Mr Jessett who waited outside the Department for one treatment space likely to
become available, or
two others that were not going to become available. I
disagree with the position put by the State. What happened to Mr Jessett
the evidence of Dr Wright alone raised an evidential foundation for at least the
consideration of whether the current location
of the Emergency Department is
acceptable and whether what it offers is sufficient for the population it
serves. The State submitted
that I cannot be satisfied that there is
inadequacy. That is precisely why I have recommended a review, not actual
construction
of a new Emergency Department. The State said that such a review
would occur as a matter of course without a recommendation. I
consider that, in
light of the issues traversed in this Inquest, this is an appropriate matter
upon which I should make a recommendation.
It is a matter of public
which might reduce the
likelihood of another patient like Mr Jessett waiting outside for a limited
resource with an undetected condition.
Who has duty of care for ramped patients?
issue which was explored during the Inquest was the understanding of clinicians
and leadership about who is responsible for the
care of patients on the ramp. I
am not permitted
wish to make any findings or suggestions as to liability in respect of the
deaths of Mrs Panella, Mr Skeffington and Mr
Jessett. I will
discuss the issue of clinicians’ understanding of responsibility without
reference to the individual cases.
witnesses held the view that the hospital only took responsibility for patients
once they were admitted.
Some witnesses suggested that there might be two shared legal
responsibilities.
suggested that responsibility for patients is split, with each group (paramedics
and hospital staff) being required to do their
job to the best of their
One witness
suggested that there was a shared responsibility for triage Category 2 patients
who are brought inside the hospital
to wait with
paramedics.
witnesses, especially those in leadership positions, acknowledged that patients
on the ramp are within the responsibility of
drew a distinction between who is responsible for a patient and who must provide
care for a patient.
witnesses raised concerns about the hospital having any role in respect to care
for patients on the ramp as it ‘blurs
boundaries’.
Dr Lawrence
and Dr Romualdez said that they have encountered those with the opinion
that the patients on the ramp are simply not the
responsibility, although that is not a view that they
my view, the law in the United Kingdom is clear and compelling. There are no
clear reasons why it would not be followed in Australia
if tested; the hospital
has responsibility for patients who present seeking assistance from the point at
which the hospital becomes
Professor McNeil and Dr Grigg’s report, they highlighted the legal
scenario which they suggested is, when the caselaw is
read, very clear even
though it has not been tested in this
They drew an analogy
from the United Kingdom common law which appears apt.
witness could identify any policy which sets out the actual position, and many
agreed that the lack of policy or shared understanding
Kelly’s opinion was that a policy would be helpful as it would create a
shared understanding of something the law
Professor Kelly
provided a copy of a policy in Queensland which simply says ‘Hospitals
assume overall responsibility for patient
care from the time of
Assisting raised the idea of introducing a policy in South Australia which sets
out very clearly that the hospital is responsible
for patients on the ramp.
Dr Lawrence considered that such a policy could be
Professor McNeil
said that given there is uncertainty, clarity would be
was apparently clear to all that such a policy would be a much-needed
improvement and should be pursued. It appears that there
was an attempt at
proactivity on this topic after Dr Lawrence’s evidence.
Responsibility of the media relating to SA Health initiatives
to address ramping
fully recognise that the administration of public services and the expenditure
of public funds should carry with it heavy obligations
of transparency and
accountability. That is a fundamental aspect of our democratic system of
governance. I also recognise that
the media play an important role in
facilitating that transparency and accountability. However, there are risks
associated with
some of the media’s attention that is, as one witness
‘hysterical’.
I hope is obvious, I do not intend to restrict media coverage of a patient or
patients who have suffered personal hardship, pain,
or even death whilst ramped.
My comments are specifically directed to wider policy issues and strategies that
may be implemented
by SA Health.
January 2025, it was publicly revealed that SA Health had produced a policy for
consultation which set out with clarity that the
responsibility over ramped
patients fell to the hospital. I consider that SA Health should have been
commended for taking a simple
pragmatic step to make an improvement which had
been identified during this Inquest. Instead of that commendation, a narrative
established which was, in short, wrong. The full consequence of this flawed
narrative is not known, but it must have engendered
some anxiety and
apprehension in many concerned members of the public.
was something done with obvious good intent, which merely puts into policy a
statement of the existing law. It generally was
not portrayed as a positive and
well-intentioned acceptance of reality on the vital topic of legal
responsibility for the care of
is clear that the road to reducing and indeed trying to eliminate ramping is
going to be a long one. It is going to be paved with
initiatives which are
novel, initiatives which fail and hopefully initiatives which each individually
contribute in a small way to
the overall goal. If SA Health are continually
pitted against the public by the media, then the path to a better future will be
incredibly difficult. I highlight again that the policy produced by SA Health,
while meaningful in written form, actually changed
nothing about the law. The
independent expert evidence of Professor Kelly, an extremely experienced and
respected emergency physician,
was to the effect that this policy would be very
appreciated. As said, Queensland Health already has the exact same written
am concerned that based on the response to this objectively-positive initiative
which actually effects no change, as to what can
be expected when a
well-intentioned initiative does fail, which no doubt will
SA Health must have
the courage and latitude to try new things without the fear of unfair criticism.
They must of course be open
and held accountable, but only in a fair and
accurate way.
media have a significant role in reporting on ramping to inform the public of
any developments. I consider it appropriate to briefly
discuss this issue in
these Findings to emphasise that fair and accurate reporting may be a positive
factor in emboldening SA Health
to try new properly planned and discussed
initiatives, even when the risk of mistakes and failure is real. After all, we
we make mistakes. But mistakes and failure are how we learn. Honest
acknowledgement of setbacks, paired with balanced reporting,
will contribute to
a culture where reflecting on errors will foster improvement rather than
defensiveness. In that sense, clear
and accurate media coverage can support
evidence-based innovation and the capacity to adapt. I am confident all
initiatives will
have the safety of patients and staff as the paramount
consideration during planning and discussion.
order to put this issue to rest, on the urging of the State of South Australia
and the AEA to assist to overcome challenges encountered
in the introduction of
such a basic concept into policy, I make the following
recommendation
the Minister for Health and Wellbeing:
Rec 10 That a statewide
policy be implemented that makes clear that the principal duty of care for a
patient who has arrived at hospital
lies with that hospital, even if the patient
is not admitted to the hospital but is ramped in the care of paramedics.
Recommendations which will assist with the effort to reduce
hearing the evidence about the enormous effort to eradicate ramping, I consider
that there are a number of recommendations that
will be useful in guiding the
‘Silo thinking’
Court heard much evidence about silo thinking. This was a concept discussed by
Professor McNeil and Dr Griggs in their
It is, effectively,
the disregard of issues in areas of the health system other than the area in
which one directly works. It is
an entirely separate concept than the
assessment of relative risk. Professor McNeil and Dr Griggs raised the
issue with the suggestion
that the health system as a whole needs to work
together to allow the system to address risk wherever it may be. For example, a
doctor on a ward needs to have knowledge of the situation in the Emergency
Department to know how much demand there is for spaces
on that ward. Similarly,
an Emergency Department doctor needs to have visibility of the cases waiting
for ambulances in the community
so they can prioritise
releasing ambulances and making space for those incoming cases. An
advanced level would see a doctor with
patients on a ward having visibility of
cases in the community waiting for ambulances on the weekend so that they
can decide to visit
the ward to discharge a patient who was on the borderline of
discharge on Friday, thus generating a space for an Emergency Department
to flow into, in turn generating a space for the community patient arriving
by ambulance.
counter-argument to an allegation of silo thinking is that clinicians are
trained to treat the patient in front of
Dr Brooks said
that it was unfair to put pressure on clinicians to think of people in the
community waiting for ambulances other
than in a general sense, given the
job of treating the patient they actually have is hard enough without the added
pressure. Dr
Lawrence said that this is a particularly hard task to ask of
junior clinicians who are still
This is a fair
concern. At the other end of the scale, Professor McNeil pointed out that if a
clinician focusses too much on the
patient in front of them and expends a lot of
resources on the one patient, it has the capacity to deny others the care they
A balance must be
McNeil and Dr Griggs essentially described a desire for a more cohesive
health system which is more flexible to changing
areas of demand. This is an
extremely ambitious, but worthwhile, goal. There are, of course, small
changes that might make a meaningful
reduction to silo thinking. For example,
screens at strategic locations could be used to ensure that all areas of
hospitals have
visibility of the level of demand being experienced elsewhere.
There was evidence that these screens do exist in some metropolitan
Departments, allowing them to see ambulance
availability of this data across the system, the more clinical leaders will be
gently reminded that they are part of a
wider effort and that their actions in
their area could make a meaningful difference. That is, the very existence of
the screens
reminds those who pass them that they should be mindful of the need
to maintain flow, particularly in times of peak demand. This
is likely to be
more effective and engaging if using real-time data than a static poster.
Professor McNeil said that visibility
is the first step and the culture of
considering what to do about it is the
McNeil’s ‘risk calculator’ project may in time assist with
this second step.
light of that, I make the following
recommendations
to the Minister for
Health and Wellbeing:
Rec 11 Status board displays should be
rolled out with a wider scope than they are currently used. SA Health
should consider the
cost versus benefit to determine the breadth of the rollout.
Rec 12 A statewide policy should be implemented to address the principles
of admitting patients to wards over census. It should set
out the agreed
indicators that trigger a requirement for wards to negotiate to take additional
consider that an over census policy is an appropriate matter upon which to make
a recommendation. I disagree with the submissions
of the State of South
Australia that a statewide policy would not be sufficiently attuned to local
conditions. As with many SA Health
statewide policies seen during this
Inquest, the policy itself would be framed widely and allow for local
implementation. I also
disagree that it would not sufficiently effect cultural
change, I consider that a formal policy would drive change.
do not consider it appropriate to nominate particular individuals who should
lead any particular work.
Weekend discharge glut
have discussed above the issue of the weekend discharge glut. Dr Lawrence
explained that there are many factors involved in discharge
fluctuations.
requested Local Health Networks improve the timeliness of their discharges but
acknowledged that further work needs to be
done. She said that $5.4 million
(indexed annually) had been assigned for seven-day hospital
She expressed that
senior medical staff being available on the weekend is critical to the provision
of optimum health care. She
spoke of the significant task involved in changing
industrial conditions.
order to ensure that the increased resource allocation to auxiliary services is
optimally used, I
to the Minister for Health and
Rec 13 A review should be conducted into the best
manner of achieving an increase in weekend and overnight discharges across the
metropolitan
area. This might or might not include negotiating for a mandate or
incentivisation of rostering across seven days in the enterprise
covering consultants when it next expires. It might include incentivisation of
weekend rostering by initiatives outside
of the enterprise agreement. It should
include consideration of the establishment of SWIFTs across all metropolitan
The fragmented LHN structure
South Australian public health system is divided into ten Local Health
each servicing a
geographical population and administering hospitals within its
Dr Lawrence
gave evidence that the LHN structure was adopted as recommended by a national
panel and that it is the structure that
exists across the country. Of course,
that structure is better than each hospital having its own board. However,
evidence was given
by Dr Lawrence that the entirety of the three
metropolitan health networks in South Australia could fit within the single
Sydney health network. Professor McNeil said that metropolitan
Adelaide’s three health networks together are slightly smaller
than one he
worked at in Queensland.
question must therefore be asked, have the benefits that were intended from
moving to a divided metropolitan LHN structure been
achieved? With respect,
LHNs which contain one major and one minor hospital carry inefficiency and
create difficulties for those
that work in the system. Some of these issues
were explored during the Inquest.
modern times, nurse and doctors work across hospitals which span
Dr Brooks spoke
of an administrative burden taken up through moving across the system, even
having separate employee
identification.
they move, they are required to learn new processes and protocols. The issue is
of even greater significance for paramedics
who can be expected to attend
multiple hospitals in a single day. It is likely that this fragmentation of
policy and procedure is
partly responsible for the overwhelming evidence in this
Inquest that some key policy is not well understood and, in many cases,
meet reality.
it is acknowledged that each metropolitan hospital is physically different and
offers different services, I have heard no evidence
which justifies vastly
contradictory policies and procedures, nor differing staffing models. In fact,
Dr Brooks gave evidence that
standardisation of practise has real
Her belief of that is
so strong that, while in charge at the Royal Adelaide Hospital Emergency
Department, she established the ‘ED
Standardisation Group’ made up
of clinical leadership from across all metropolitan Departments with a view to
standardising
Professor McNeil agreed that reducing variation across the system in what it
does and how it does it is really
the Inquest there was evidence of a disconnect between Departments with senior
doctors questioning whether they would even
take a patient who had initially
presented to a different hospital, even when objectively there was a good case
for quicker entry
to their own
This was in the
context of Mr Jessett’s circumstances, a patient who was thought to
be stable enough to wait for four hours,
and hence would be stable enough to be
driven the 14 kilometres between Flinders Medical Centre and the Royal Adelaide
Hospital to
compete for entry to one of 67 rooms, instead of competing for
entry to a single appropriate room at the Flinders Medical Centre.
Dr Lawrence accepted that the divided management structure might lead to a
lack of collaboration between
single metropolitan LHN would serve to unite all metropolitan hospitals with a
single voice of leadership and a single policy framework
which allows for
individual hospital variations. That is, one large network that spans Adelaide.
It cannot be said that it could
not be achieved. It has in other states.
Professor McNeil himself has merged five hospitals into one LHN in another
consider that there are benefits to at least looking at the matter and
considering carefully what issues are caused by fragmentation
and what the
consequences would be of amalgamating. I acknowledge that actually
restructuring the metropolitan health system would
be a substantial undertaking.
That will obviously be a significant factor to be addressed in a review by those
who work in the system.
I acknowledge that a review into this topic is, of
itself, likely to take some time. In light of that, I make the following
recommendation
to the Minister for Health and
Rec 14 A review should be conducted into the LHN
structure across metropolitan Adelaide to consider whether there are advantages
incorporating all metropolitan LHNs into a single structure with standardised
procedures and a single chain of command and whether
that would benefit the
healthcare provided and those who provide it.
Mental health catchment areas
McNeil said that mental health patients are a major factor affecting patient
Court heard evidence that the catchment areas for mental health patients do not
align with general medical catchment
Dr Lawrence said
that the Royal Adelaide Hospital has the most populous catchment area for mental
health. It also receives patients
from other LHNs, including regional
explained that due to a policy that LHNs must treat all mental health arrivals
at their facility until discharge, the
Royal Adelaide Hospital has a
disproportionate share of mental health patients without an appropriate
allocation of resources.
This increases demand for a limited number of mental health treatment spaces and
exacerbates access block and ramping.
large number of mental health patients add to the chaotic environment of some of
the Emergency Departments. All witnesses asked
spoke of the undesirability of
having mental health patients in a stimulating environment with a lot of
movement and noise for days
at a time. Dr Brooks pointed out that these
patients also have an effect on other non-mental health patients around
She said that at the
Royal Adelaide Hospital she feels at times like she is running an Emergency
Department out of a psychiatric
There appears to be a
misalignment of mental health resources compared with expected demand.
make the following
recommendation
to the Minister for Health and
Rec 15 SA Health should consider the appropriateness
of the mental health catchment areas and whether the mental health resourcing
within those catchment areas is aligned to the expected demand for those areas.
Particular consideration should be given to the
Royal Adelaide Hospital which
receives a disproportionately large number of mental health patients.
do not consider that it is appropriate to recommend the construction of new
mental health facilities. The Court did not explore
the depths of mental health
resourcing and facilities. Any specific recommendation about facilities would
require a great deal more
evidence on the topic.
Transit lounges
Inquest explored the usefulness of transit lounges. Dr Romualdez explained
that an aspect of exit block, and therefore access
block, are patients who are
ready to be discharged from wards, but are delayed and continue to occupy the
treatment space.
Ms Toohey said this might be patients simply waiting for transport, such as
a family member to pick them
She said that it has
been a successful mechanism to free up some space, but that it is commonly full
at the Flinders Medical
Dr Wright and
Mr Peck said that a limiting factor was that it does not operate 24 hours a
day at the Flinders Medical
As I said earlier,
this is currently under consideration. Dr Lawrence raised a clinical issue
with moving elderly patients in the
middle of the night which might slightly
temper the usefulness of 24-hour transit
She also explained
that transit wards do not help with the issue of patients waiting for
residential aged care or disability care
placements, who are unfortunately not
simply transiting in the short
Mr Lemmer said
that transit wards can be useful in assisting with interfacility transfer
patients arriving where the ward bed is
how useful this tool could be, I make the following
recommendation
Minister for Health and Wellbeing:
Rec 16 SA Health should
explore the expected benefit to the introduction or expansion of 24-hour transit
wards accommodating patients
of various levels of mobility at the major
metropolitan hospitals.
AEA urged me to recommend a mandate for transit wards. In my view,
SA Health should be given the latitude of determining in light
of an actual
analysis of the patient flow data where transit wards are likely to be of most
benefit and what their size should be.
The Statewide Interfacility Transfer System
have described the SIFT above. I was urged to make a recommendation to mandate
the SIFT. The evidence I heard during the Inquest
was to the effect that
following the statewide Code Yellow in 2024, at Dr Lawrence’s
direction, the SIFT has been largely mandated
as a required consideration,
although it has not reached complete coverage of all
submissions of the State of South Australia about efforts being made to increase
the use of the SIFT. Given what has
been achieved, I consider that a blanket
mandate is not warranted and SA Health must have the latitude to finalise
the implementation
of this work when it is clinically appropriate for all
cohorts of patients.
Extended Care Paramedics
heard evidence about the usefulness of Extended Care Paramedics, in particular
in treating patients rather than transporting them
to hospital. This of course
reduces demand on hospital beds (i.e., access and exit block) and reduces
overcrowding in the Emergency
Departments. I was urged to make a recommendation
that the number of Extended Care Paramedics be increased. The evidence of Mr
Lemmer was that before an increase in the size of this program, work is required
on increasing its efficiency. I do not consider
it appropriate to recommend an
increase where the agency itself considers that premature.
Issues which arose incidentally
number of issues arose incidentally which highlighted the need for process
improvements.
Adverse incident reviews
Court heard that none of the clinicians directly involved in the care of
Mrs Panella, Mr Skeffington and Mr Jessett were directly
in the adverse incident reviews conducted in respect of their
They were not even
formally involved to the extent required to ascertain the full factual
circumstances and context within which
these deaths occurred.
Court heard about factual issues with the reviews. The review of
Mrs Panella’s case recorded that she had an unconscious
which is in direct contrast to the evidence and the
It recorded an
arrival time at hospital of 9:45pm which appears to be a misreading of the
‘arrived scene’ time on the
Patient Clinical
In the case of
Mr Skeffington, it was suggested that he had been strapped to
the ambulance stretcher and that this may have made
it difficult to assist
him when he began vomiting. The evidence from the paramedics involved suggests
that this was unlikely to
have been the case. In respect of Mr Jessett,
assumptions were made about the validity of blood tests which were not supported
the evidence.
It recorded
98 patients in the Department at the time of his arrival, which was
Kelly’s opinion was that best practice would be for clinicians involved to
have input into reviews as they have valuable
information about the context and
nuanced details of the care of a patient which you cannot get from
Further, it
recognises them as experts and it minimises the risk of system improvements
being identified which are not feasible,
practical or have barriers to
implementation.
Kelly considered that these reviews must be conducted on a
‘no-blame’ basis as an exercise in working out
what went wrong and
what can be fixed. Professor McNeil agreed that clinicians should be involved
where they are willing, at least
to the extent of providing
Professor Kelly
accepted that clinicians should be given the right not to participate in adverse
incident reviews if that is their
Dr Lawrence
considered that the goals of an adverse incident review could be met with or
without clinician
involvement,
but raised no
concern about the suggestion that clinician involvement be
with the option
available for the clinician to decline.
Dr Romualdez
expressed that reviews are conducted without those directly involved to ensure
an independent approach.
Dr Brooks considered that it is important to ‘close the loop’
(i.e., provide information about the outcome of reviews)
in a caring way, but
expressed a preference for adverse incident reviews to be kept separate from
debriefing processes which are
important for clinicians. She said that the
proper facts can be ascertained by having representatives of each workgroup
participating
in the review process after having liaised with the clinicians
involved to ascertain their
State of South Australia made submissions about this being a philosophical
issue, given there were diverse opinions about the
role that clinicians should
play in reviews. In my view, it is appropriate to have those philosophical
discussions about the role
of clinicians in discussion about process, procedure
and identifying improvements, however it is not appropriate to have those
discussions
clear picture of all of the circumstances involved in an incident.
difficulty with the approach preferred by Dr Romualdez and Dr Brooks
is that there are factual issues which have been highlighted
in the reviews in
this matter and clinicians who have said they would have readily participated if
The system as it
stands is not working optimally. I make the following
recommendation
the Minister for Health and Wellbeing:
Rec 17 SA Health should
amend the Clinical Incident Management Policy to include a requirement that
clinicians directly involved in
providing care are offered the opportunity of
providing information to the reviewers on a no-fault basis and including a
for those involved to be notified of the outcome if they wish.
Ambulance advice about demand
the course of her review, Professor Kelly highlighted advice given to people who
call triple zero and are unlikely to receive an
ambulance response
Kelly’s opinion was that the language used is not
accessible.
In particular,
Professor Kelly said that saying ‘we are experiencing high demand for
emergency services’ may not get
the message across that an ambulance
is not coming. Professor Kelly said that clearer language such as
‘significant delay’
would be preferrable and that it should give
alternative examples such as transport with a ‘friend or family
In order to address that, I
to the Minister for
Health and Wellbeing:
Rec 18 The SA Ambulance Service should
review the accessibility of its scripting in situations where there will be
significant delay
in the arrival of an ambulance to ensure that it makes
the fact of delay clear and provides examples of alternative options.
recommendation does not require the introduction of any new concepts. It merely
seeks to refine the language used in circumstances
where this topic is already
Consultation
AEA urged me to make a recommendation that any changes to the workings of the
Emergency Departments occur only following consultation
with the AEA and others.
While it was established in evidence that some changes have occurred with
minimal consultation, in my view
the evidence failed to establish that the level
of consultation was inappropriate. It must be remembered that Emergency
Departments
deliver a much wider gambit of services than its intake processes.
While I consider consultation is important, I consider that it
should be left to
SA Health to determine when and to what extent agencies should be consulted
policies and processes.
Amalgamation of recommendations
have made a number of recommendations for the introduction of new policies and
procedures or protocols. I wish to make clear that
these recommendations do not
necessarily need to be viewed in isolation to each other. Where multiple
recommended policies are suitable
for inclusion in a single policy, that should
be done. Where an existing policy is suitable to be amended or expanded, that
be done. I do not wish to be taken to suggest that new policies should
be independent from the framework of policies that already
exist in the health
Input from a nursing organisational perspective
enough, many of the recommendations that have been suggested directly relate to
the work of nurses. Counsel Assisting made
Midwifery Federation of South Australia in order to encourage their
participation, to any degree,
in the Inquest. The Federation did not cooperate
in any way.
unfortunate that they did not wish to have any input into an Inquest which was
exploring their working conditions and that
the Court has not had the benefit of
their advice in respect of proposed recommendations. It would be most
unfortunate if they were
to seek to oppose any recommendations after they have
been made. I note now with frustration and disappointment, to say the least,
that the Federation has chosen to make public statements on important issues
on their members. I
cannot now consider nor act on their reported issues revealed publicly on
16 and 17 July
wish to thank counsel for their assistance in this complex Inquest. I want to
mention Mr Evans, Counsel Assisting the Court, for
his tireless efforts and
enthusiasm in coordinating the vast material and presenting it with great skill,
which also allowed the
interested parties’ counsel to focus on their
respective submissions. His meticulous preparation and impartial approach
that all relevant information was thoroughly examined, facilitating a
sound understanding of the issues at hand. Mr Evans’
dedication has been
instrumental to the Inquest, and his contributions are deeply
appreciated.
Condolences
heard complex and technical evidence about the state of the South Australian
health system it is important to remember the
lives of those whose deaths were
under investigation. The loss of a family member is difficult in any
circumstance. Where it comes
in tragic circumstances, that loss can be very
deeply felt and long lasting. I express my sincere condolences to the families
Mrs Panella, Mr Skeffington and Mr Jessett on the loss of
their loved ones. It is my hope that the health system adopts my
recommendations
and improves the manner in which people wait for entry to
Emergency Departments during times of extreme demand. In this way, the
have meaning for the families in that something positive has developed from the
death of their loved ones. Mrs Panella,
Mr Skeffington and Mr Jessett were each
important and productive South Australians. I hope that part of their legacy is
deaths caused an improvement in care for all other South
Australians.
attach extracts from family statements to this Finding. These statements
reinforce the valuable life they lived in their devotion
to family and work.
Keywords: Ambulance Ramping; Delayed Transfer of Care; Triage; Emergency
Departments
Annexure – Extracts of family statements
Anna arrived in Australia in 1958 with her mother and younger
brother. She was 15 years old and didn’t speak a word of English.
father migrated six years earlier in 1952 where he worked with the Unley council
to support the transition from Italy to Australia.
During those years, he worked
hard to save money and buy a home in the suburb of Parkside. Once he had
established the family home,
he sent for his family whom he had not seen for six
Anna’s early employment began at San Remo Pasta—a
well-renowned company that employed and supported many young migrants
While travelling to work she met a fellow young migrant, Antonio
(Tony) Panella at a bus stop in the city. They formed an instant
friendship,
talking at the bus stop every single day before work, until Tony sought after
her father to ask for her hand in marriage.
Anna was only 17 years old and her
father felt she was too young for marriage. He told Tony to return in two years
when she was older.
Tony continued to wait for Anna at the bus stop and
the pair solidified their friendship. Once two years had passed, he returned to
Anna’s father to ask for her hand in marriage. And so, in 1962 Anna
married Tony Panella and the couple lived all their life
in Payneham. In 1963,
they had their first and only child Lina.
At the age of 20 years, Anna
gained employment at a private nursing hospital in St. Peters as a cleaner. The
Matron in charge saw
that Anna was a dedicated, compassionate and responsible
worker and asked Anna whether she would be interested in a nursing career.
that her English and, in particular, her writing of the English language was not
up to par to meet the necessary requirements,
she was unsure if this was a
reasonable career path. The Matron, however, felt this wasn’t a barrier
and proceeded to assist
her student in learning to speak and write English
proficiently. Anna eventually acquired the relevant nursing qualifications to
pursue her desired career for 42-years. During this time, she worked at two
nursing hospitals providing care to geriatric patients
and was being a welcome
sight to fellow Italian migrants who often did not speak English.
and her husband worked hard all their lives, both choosing to retire at 70 years
respectively. They put their daughter through
university, paid off their home
and two investment properties despite working in relatively low-paying jobs.
They believed that working
hard was the key to building a good life for
themselves and their family.
In July of 2007, Anna lost her husband
unexpectedly in his sleep. They were married for 45 years. She faced many
challenges after
her husband’s death and struggled to manage her grief.
With her daughter living in Melbourne, she was left to live alone for
time in her life. But she forged through with strength and resilience knowing
that her nursing career and support of her
family would provide her with the
solace needed to move through this phase of her life.
In 2015, Anna
became an Australian Citizen, which was one of the major highlights of her life.
In that same year, she returned to
Italy her country of birth for the first time
since 1958 with her daughter and family. She had not seen her village in
50-years and
even though much remained the same, Anna had already found her new
Anna was an avid church goer, and participator in the
church community. She also enjoyed walking as a means of keeping fit, for
mobility, and for her mental health; it was her primary means of getting
around as she did not drive. The only time walking became
difficult was on days
when her thrombosis played up.
Anna was respected and admired by her
colleagues, friends and anyone who knew her. Her patients loved her, as did
their families.
Anna spent many a Christmas and Easter working away from her
family and spend it working and brightening the day for many patients
didn’t have families on these festive days.
She loved to cook, meet
and talk to new people, care for others, attend her exercise classes, celebrate
her faith and—above
all else—she adored her family! Anna was a
wonderful wife, mindful mother and generous grandmother, and these were the
she lived for.
I thank you for the opportunity to be able to
highlight fragments of my mother’s life that made her the strong and
caring women
she was until her death. It saddens me that her life was taken in
such an awful and distressing way. She provided medical care to
individuals and trusted that she too would be provided with the same medical
care. Unfortunately, the health system let her
down in April of 2019 when she
needed help the most.
Mr Skeffington
Firstly, I would like to thank and acknowledge all those directly involved
with looking after my dad. To Stacey and Erin from SA Ambulance,
we thank you
from the bottom of our hearts, you guys are truly amazing, and we appreciate the
love and care you provided to my dad.
To the ED and ICU nurses, doctors and all
staff at the RAH, you were phenomenal, and we are forever grateful. As a
clinical nurse
myself I can fully understand how busy and time poor you must
feel at times in your position.
Despite being 89 dad was relatively healthy, so to lose him
suddenly to an acute
catastrophic event was quite a shock. Dad emigrated from Ireland by himself at
18 years of age looking for a
new life. He worked across Western Australia in
the mining industry until a mining explosion saw him flown to Adelaide to treat
injuries. Here in Adelaide, he met Mum- married and remained here ever
since. His entire working life then was at General Motors
Holden where he
started on the assembly line as a young man but worked his way up in the
company. Dad and Mum both worked hard and
sacrificed a lot to providing for my
late brother and myself with the best private school education. Since
retirement, nothing pleased
dad more than his children, grandchildren and great
grandchildren. He would take any opportunity to have his photo taken with them.
He was proud of us all. He was very much looking forward to celebrating his 90th
birthday with all of his family. Prior to his passing,
dad was living
independently, he was still driving, walked unaided, helped mum with her local
charity work, and put the bins out
weekly for those not able in their small
retirement village. He loved doing his daily crosswords and reading anything to
his knowledge. He wasn’t how you would picture a typical
89-year-old. We felt had had many more years to share with Pa.
Sadly, his passing was attributed to ramping. Had he have been collected and
admitted into hospital within an hour or two, his bowel
obstruction would have
been identified, a nasogastric tube inserted, and he would still be with us
To sitting in ICU and having to tell my dad that his lungs were too damaged
from his aspiration and no further treatment options were
available to save his
life still upsets me to this day. Within an hour or so of his life support being
turned off he slowly passed
away with all of us feeling helpless. This in his
case was the end effect of the ramping crisis.
We hope the findings and
recommendations from this inquest can avoid any further preventable deaths and
other families to not have
to go through what we have endured.
Mr Jessett’s family did not wish to provide a personal statement.
Exhibit C3 at
Exhibit C3 at
Exhibit C3 at
Exhibit C4 at
Exhibit C4 at
Exhibit C49b at 4;
Exhibit C3 at
Exhibit C15 at
Inquest 91/2020,
Finding delivered 26 October
Single Paramedic
Response and INTervention
Exhibit C26 at [31] and [33]
Exhibit C26 at [32]
C23 at [14]; Exhibit C15 at
Exhibit C23 at
Exhibit C23 at
[12]-[13], T190.34
C26 at [44]; Exhibit C23 at
Exhibit C23 at
Exhibit C23 at
the Department,
Emergency Department
C23b; Exhibit C16 at 16; Exhibit C15 at 11; CCTV footage in Exhibit C6b (as
agreed in Exhibit C52)
Exhibit C23 at [46]; T155.6,
Exhibit C23 at
Exhibit C34 at
T1628.12; Exhibit
C43 at [31]
Exhibit C25 at
[15]; Exhibit C25d at 7; CCTV footage in Exhibit C6b (as agreed in Exhibit
Exhibit C23 at [53] and
Exhibit C25 at [13] and
Exhibit C25b at 3.4.2;
Exhibit C25c at 3.4.2; Exhibit C25a at
T264.15; Exhibit C25
at [19]; Exhibit C25d at 7
T268.27, T269.1, T269.7,
By virtue of
referring to a character played by Dustin Hoffman in the 1988 film ‘Rain
Man’ who is a savant,
Exhibit C49a at
10-11; T2030.19
T359.30-T361.20;
Exhibit C25f
submissions of the State of South Australia dated 28 March 2025 at
Exhibit C23 at
Exhibit C23 at
CCTV footage in Exhibit
C6b (as agreed in Exhibit
T83.37; CCTV footage in
Exhibit C6b (as agreed in Exhibit
Exhibit C25 at [21]
Exhibit C25 at
CCTV footage in Exhibit
C6b (as agreed in Exhibit
Exhibit C25 at
Exhibit C29a at
Exhibit C29b at
Exhibit C29b at
Exhibit C29b at
Exhibit C29b at
Exhibit C29b at
Exhibit C49a at 10;
T2030.9, T2031.5
DVT; Exhibit C2 at
Exhibit C15 at
T230.18, T381.5,
Exhibit C49a at
12-13; T2032.4
Exhibit C49a at
Exhibit C49a at
Exhibit C17 at
Exhibit C17 at
Exhibit C17 at
Exhibit C17 at
Exhibit C17 at
Exhibit C65 at
Exhibit C65 at
Exhibit C17 at
Exhibit C27 at [16];
Exhibit C27 at
Exhibit C27 at [27] and
Exhibit C27 at [28],
[29] and [32]
Exhibit C35 at
T1507.31, T1628.10,
Written submissions
of the State of South Australia dated 28 March 2025 at [18] and
Exhibit C18 at
Exhibit C32 at
Exhibit C27 at
Exhibit C31 at
Exhibit C18 at
T691.20; Exhibit C32
Exhibit C66 at
Exhibit C66 at
Exhibit C11 at
Exhibit C27 at
Exhibit C17a;
Exhibit C27 at [55]
Exhibit C27 at [57]
Exhibit C31 at [15]
Exhibit C27 at [58]
Exhibit C31 at [15]
Exhibit C27 at [58]
Exhibit C31 at [19];
Exhibit C18 at
108; T651.19
Exhibit C27a
at [15]-[16], [19] and [23]; T634.33,
Exhibit C27 at
Exhibit C27 at
T599.20, T618.18,
acknowledging that if Mr Skeffington’s condition had been worse, they
could have brought him directly in
without seeking
Exhibit C31 at
Exhibit C27 at
Exhibit C27 at
Exhibit C27 at
[63]; T427.33
Exhibit C27
Exhibit C18 at
Exhibit C31 at [21];
Exhibit C18 at
Exhibit C18 at
Exhibit C18 at 135
Exhibit C18 at
Exhibit C18 at
Exhibit C18 at
Exhibit C18 at
Exhibit C18 at
Exhibit C8 at
Exhibit C47g at 2
Exhibit C49e at
9 and 10; T2044.19,
T564.34, T565.7
T469.37, T553.9,
Exhibit C49e at
Exhibit C49e at
Exhibit C19 at
Exhibit C37 at
Exhibit C37 at
Exhibit C19a at
Exhibit C37 at
Exhibit C37 at
Exhibit C37 at
Exhibit C37 at
Exhibit C36 at
Exhibit C45 at Annexure
Exhibit C39 at [40];
Exhibit C45 at [26]
T1366.5, T1371.2
Exhibit C45 at
Exhibit C45 at
Although mild
shortness of breath was also recorded at the
Exhibit C37 at
Exhibit C39 at [23]
and [31]; Exhibit C39b;
T1342.5, although Mr Peck could not recall this
Exhibit C19 at
Exhibit C21 at
For example,
T1161.7, T1330.29,
Exhibit C41 at
[17]; T1395.17
Exhibit C41f;
Exhibit C11 at
Exhibit C11 at
Exhibit C11 at
Exhibit C21 at
T1080.6, T1128.36,
Exhibit C39 at
[12] and [20]
Exhibit C39
at [28]-[29]
Exhibit C49g at
11; T2048.2
T1328.2, T1328.12, T1329.15, T1330.6,
Exhibit C37 at
Exhibit C37 at
Exhibit C37 at
Exhibit C21 at
Exhibit C37 at
Exhibit C37 at
Exhibit C39 at
T1078.28, T1092.27,
T1125.26, T1153.18
Exhibit C41 at [18]
Exhibit C41a, T1359.3
Exhibit C41a; T1359.34, T1428.5,
Exhibit C37 at
Exhibit C37 at
Exhibit C21 at
Exhibit C9 at
Exhibit C49h at
Exhibit C49h at 7;
T2059.30, T2060.10,
Exhibit C65 at
T847.35, T884.18,
T1019.8, T1031.6
Exhibit C45
Annexure MDW1
submissions of the State of South Australia dated 28 March 2025 at
Exhibit C49g at
11; T2047.29
Exhibit C49g at
12; T2064.15, T2066.26
Exhibit C49g at
12; T2106.24
T1900.2; Exhibit
C47 at [51]
Exhibit C50 Annexure
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C47 at
T1731.32, T1947.25
Exhibit C47 at
For example,
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C47 at
[167]-[168]
T1898.16, T1900.20,
Exhibit C58 at
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C58 at
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C47 at
[46.2] and [68.4];
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C47 at
[27]; Exhibit C66 at MRB3; T1810.30, T2072.14,
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C66 at
[57]; T2549.16
Exhibit C47 at
For example,
submissions of the Ambulance Employee Association dated 18 March 2025 at
Written submissions
of the Ambulance Employee Association dated 18 March 2025 at
T1126.34, T1683.17,
T2494.29-T2498.26
T2494.35, T2498.12,
T1608.34, T1741.33,
T1663.21, T1825.8
T1970.15; Exhibit C47B
Exhibit C47 at
Written submissions
of the Ambulance Employees Association dated 18 March 2025 at
T952.15; Exhibit
C38 at [11]
T478.12, T135.1
Exhibit C47 at
I do not mean to suggest
that SA Health has done nothing of a serious nature in relation to ramping,
I am responding to the attitude
of those that see safety improvements as a
misdirection of resources
Exhibit C47 at [207]
Exhibit C66 Annexure MRB2
Exhibit C66 at
[36]; T2543.9, although a cluster review was subsequently conducted (T1517.5,
Exhibit C49g at
Exhibit C47 at
T449.18, T819.29,
T1025.36, T1391.27
T1653.15, T1664.22
example, Exhibit C50a
Exhibit C65 at
Exhibit C33;
Exhibit C47c
Exhibit C33;
Exhibit C47c
I do not intend
to suggest that patient visualisation is anything other than
Exhibit C47g at
Exhibit C65 at
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C47 Annexure
RAL5 at 129
Exhibit C47
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C47 at
[105] and [107]
Exhibit C47 at
[109]-[110]
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C47g at
Exhibit C47g at
Exhibit C47 at
[136]; T437.31, T475.20, T629.12, T820.38,
T849.2, T865.7,
Exhibit C47 at
[136]; T922.5
Exhibit C47
T2506.29, T2508.2, T2509.12, T2510.7,
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C47 at
[167]-[168]
Exhibit C47
at [169], noting that not every patient is suitable for direct admission (see
Exhibit C47 at [172]).
Exhibit C47 at [191]
Exhibit C47 at [226]
Exhibit C47 at [227]
Exhibit C47 at [233]
Exhibit C47 at
[240]-[241]
T1361.36, T1378.9, T1521.36, T1652.5,
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C66 at [5];
Exhibit C47 at [126]
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C47 at
[197]-[198]
Exhibit C47 at
[141]-[143.1]
Exhibit C47 Annexure
Exhibit C47 at
[143.2]-[143.3]
C47 at [175]
Exhibit C47
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C47 at
[176]-[179]; T1662.11
Exhibit C41 at
[30]; Exhibit C47 at
[155]-[157]
Exhibit C47
Recognising that
‘only’ is an inapt description for such a broad range of
initiatives.
C47g at [4]
Exhibit C59
Annexure ALJ1 at 1233.2
Exhibit C59 Annexure ALJ1 at
Exhibit C59
Annexure ALJ1 at 1235.16
Exhibit C59 Annexure ALJ1 at
Exhibit C59
Annexure ALJ1 at 1236.17
Exhibit C59 Annexure ALJ1 at
Exhibit C59
Annexure ALJ1 at 1239.32
Exhibit C47g at [36]
Exhibit C58 at [7]
Exhibit C59 Annexure ALJ1 at
Exhibit C59
Annexure ALJ1 at 1236.27
Exhibit C47g at [36]
Exhibit C58 at [8]
Exhibit C53 at 18-LMH6
Exhibit C53 at
Exhibit C59
Annexure ALJ1 at 1237.5
submissions of the State of South Australia dated 28 March 2025 at [47.2], [54]
For example,
Exhibit C43c; Exhibit C47 at
T1608.25, T1740.20,
The effect of
Exhibit C47c, which is currently being formally written into a new version of
the policy (see T2280.23)
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C39a at
Exhibit C39a at
Exhibit C39 at
Exhibit C39 at [10];
T643.34, T680.2, T990.3,
Exhibit C39a at
9 and 23; Exhibit C43 at
T352.23, T502.34, T1156.32,
T2067.6; Exhibit
C41 at [12]
Exhibit C39a;
Exhibit C39a at
Exhibit C49f;
T2043.9, T2115.26
T357.31, T765.31,
T1124.26, T2015.29
Exhibit C39a
Exhibit C32a
Exhibit C49a at 9;
T2014.2, T2015.1; Exhibit C49e at
Exhibit C47 at
T252.37, T361.13,
T623.10, T656.23, T746.28, T903.17, T906.32, T925.10, T1064.26, T1095.15,
T1332.21, T1339.32, T1344.113, T1373.30,
T1648.20; Exhibit C39 at [34]
T129.9, T220.9, T342.26,
T457.38, T606.6, T621.6, T626.30, T634.2, T656.15, T656.30, T670.31, T687.17,
T688.18, T737.36, T806.34,
T953.19, T970.29, T1063.17, T1095.28, T1331.19,
T1649.10; Exhibit C37 at [41]
T252.15, T311.3, T312.21,
T664.26; Exhibit C18 at 108
T800.38, T809.32,
T944.14, T1348.1, T1373.17, T1389.13; Exhibit C38 at [20]; Exhibit C39 at [36];
Exhibit C41 at [27]
T904.11, T915.19,
T971.38, T1097.14
T925.25, T998.6, T1063.29,
Employees Association written submissions dated 18 March 2025 at
Ambulance Employees
Association written submissions dated 18 March 2025 at
T217.4, T257.18,
T305.5, T415.18, T717.2 T961.31 T1088.10, T1316.18, 1334.19,
T359.6, T1476.25,
T985.22, T1141.1
T327.37, T763.5
T246.37, T341.33,
T978.16, T1129.35,
T728.17, T746.28
For example,
T671.2, T728.19, T740.34
For example T53.37, T54.18, T105.26, T268.15,
Exhibit C65 at
T322.12, T917.27,
T2503.4, T1849.11
submissions of the State of South Australia dated 28 March 2025 at
T124.34, T218.30,
T356.36, T638.8, T692.25; Exhibit C39 at
T834.35; Exhibit C37
Exhibit C27 at
T232.16, T478.7,
T622.4, T657.11,
T1106.1, T1553.26, T928.2, T973.23,
Exhibit C65d
Annexure PL6 at 15, Annexure PL7 at 59 and Annexure PL8 at
Exhibit C65d Annexure
Exhibit C49a at
10; Exhibit C49c
T193.29, T200.24,
T202.36, T429.24, T438.29, T979.24, T1098.9, T1102.6, T1334.1, T1377.28,
T1542.4, T2407.14
C57 Annexure NEB1 at 7
submissions of the State of South Australia dated 28 March 2025 at
submissions of the State of South Australia dated 28 March 2025 at
Exhibit C65 at
See Exhibit C53
For example,
submissions of the State of South Australia date 28 March 2025 at
T269.26, T456.16,
T633.37, T647.30, T654.21, T811.38, T954.4,
See Exhibit C53
at 10-SAAS5; Exhibit C25 at [21] and [24]; Exhibit C31 at
T403.9, T472.30,
T596.37, T623.19
For example,
written submissions of the State of South Australia dated 28 March 2025 at [8]
submissions of the State of South Australia dated 28 March 2025 at
For example,
T207.30, T624.8,
T2491.29, T1106.27
T1939.16, T1967.26
Exhibit C65 at
T973.28, T1106.27, T1860.16, T1939.16, T1967.26, T2318.7,
Exhibit C47f at
8; T2132.23
Exhibit C65 at
Exhibit C47 at
25(2)(b)(ii)
Coroners Act
Coroners Act
T317.27, T330.27, T809.4,
T619.1; Exhibit
C65 at [10]
T1541.6, T1101.22,
For example, see
Darnley v Croydon Health Services NHS Trust
[2018] UKSC 50
(2018) 3 WLR 1153
T619.1, T900.10,
T1659.17, T1705.32; Exhibit C49g at
T2230.21; Exhibit C49f
T1835.10, T1904.3,
T2267.35, T2560.3
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C47 at
For example,
T687.8, T724.36, T737.11, T1100.17, T1424.5,
Dr Lawrence accepted a hypothetical case for quicker entry
Exhibit C66 at
Exhibit C47 at
Exhibit C66 at
[19]; T2528.8, T2531.30
T230.18, T381.5, T476.5,
T634.36, T1624.21, T847.35, T884.18, T1019.8, T1031.6; Exhibit C26 at [53];
Exhibit C27 at [77], although
a team leader on shift at the time of
Mr Skeffington’s attendance participated in an SLS process; Exhibit
C17 at 14; and Ms
Toohey participated in the Pit Stop Huddle in respect of
Mr Jessett; Exhibit C39 at
Exhibit C24 at 1;
Exhibit C15 at 1 and 6; Exhibit C16 at
Exhibit C24 at 1;
Exhibit C23b
T381.5, T847.35,
T884.18, T109.8, T1031.6; Exhibit C26 at
For example, article
in The Advertiser, 17 July 2025, pages 10-11
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.44 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (1.22 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter