URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCRP/1994/732.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:09:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Satterthwaite v WorkCover (Adelaide Int Linings) (No.2) [1994] SAWCRP 732 (23 November 1994)
[1994] SAWCRP 732
Review Officer
Catchwords:
Loss of earning capacity assessment
— discount rate — provision for taxation — whether should
include Medicare levy
— interim assessment — Review Officer
confirming decision to make assessment but evidence insufficient to enable
determination
of amounts.
RE: SATTERTHWAITE AND THE CORPORATION (ADELAIDE INTERNATIONAL LININGS
(1994) 7 WCRP Determination 94-0732
See previous,
Satterthwaite and WorkCover
[1993] SAWCRP 68 (Review
Officer Mason);
and see further,
Sabatino v. WorkCover; Satterthwaite
v. WorkCover
(1995) 7 WCATR 325
[1995] SAWCAT 86 (Gilchrist
Determination No. 94-0732
Workers’ Compensation Review
SATTERTHWAITE AND THE CORPORATION
INTERNATIONAL LININGS PTY
(05996174/02/04)
Determination of Review Officer made
on 23 November 1994
(Hearings 15 August, 22 August and 14 October
Review Officer Palmer
This is the determination of an application lodged on 6 July 1994 by
Michael Satterthwaite as worker under a contract of service with
International Linings Pty Ltd as employer. The application seeks a review
pursuant to the
Workers' Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
of a decision made on 27 April 1994 by the WorkCover Corporation of South
Australia to make an assessment pursuant to Section 42a
assessing the
worker's loss of future earning capacity as a capital loss and making a lump sum
payment with respect to a portion
of the remainder of the worker's working
When the matter came on for hearing the applicant worker attended
and was represented by Mr David Prendergast of counsel of Palios,
Nicholson. Mr Paul Martin of the WorkCover Corporation attended and represented
the respondent.
The issues in dispute that the applicant wished to review
were firstly, the use of the actuarial multiplier within the equation set
Section 42a of the
and secondly, the deduction of the estimated tax also
required by the equation set out in the
and the Regulations.
submitted on behalf of Mr Prendergast that the determination of the WorkCover
Corporation made on 27 April 1994 only refers
to Section 42a(4), (2) and (6) and
Section 35(6a)
which is not relevant with respect to the issues
before me. Mr Prendergast submitted that Section 42a(2)(c) of the
that in determining the present value of a loss, a prescribed discount rate must
be applied. However, in turning to Regulation
8aa(3) it states:
"For the purposes of subregulation (2) the prescribed discount rate is
Subregulation 2 of Regulation 8aa states:
"For the purposes of Section 42a(5) of the
the principles and discount
and inflation rates that are to be applied to determine actuarial equivalents of
equal instalments to
a lump sum are reflected in the following
Mr Prendergast submitted that it was note worthy that the only
section referred to with respect to that subregulation was Section
42a(5) of the
. He stated that as a consequence there were no prescribed discount rates
applicable to Section 42a(2) or (4) of the
(1) Where a worker suffers a compensable disability that results in
incapacity for work for a period exceeding two years, the Corporation
the worker's loss of future earning capacity as a capital loss.
(2) In making the assessment, the following principles will be applied:
(a) the worker's notional weekly earnings (less an estimation of income tax)
will be projected forward over the remainder of the worker's
notional working
(b) in the case of partial incapacity, the amount the worker could earn in
suitable employment that the worker has a reasonable prospect
of obtaining by
way of average weekly earnings (less an estimation of income tax) will be
projected forward over the remainder of
the worker's notional working life and
subtracted from the amount projected under paragraph (a);
(c) the worker's capital loss will be taken to be 80 per cent of the present
value of the loss indicated by the above projections
(and in determining the
present value of that loss a prescribed discount rate must be applied).
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2)-
(a) the projections referred to in that subsection will be made on the basis
of rates of earnings current at the date of the assessment
and without regard to
possible future changes in those rates;
(b) the worker's notional working life is the period over which the worker
would have worked assuming that he or she had not been
incapacitated and that
period will be assessed having regard to the contingencies and vicissitudes of
life that might in any event
have prevented the worker from continuing in
employment but the period will not, in any event, be taken to extend beyond the
on which weekly payments would (assuming no assessment of capital loss were
made under this section) cease to be payable (see
section 35(5))
(c) in assessing what a partially incapacitated worker could earn in suitable
employment, the following factors must be considered,
and given such weight as
may be fair and reasonable:
(i) the nature and extent of the worker's disability;
(ii) the worker's age, level of education and skills;
(iii) the worker's experience in employment;
(iv) the worker's ability to adapt to new employment.
(4) The Corporation may make one or more interim assessments of loss as to
nominated portions of the worker's notional working life
before making a final
assessment of loss under this section.
(5) An amount assessed under this section becomes due and payable from the
date of the assessment but may be paid, at the discretion
of the Corporation, in
a single lump sum or in instalments that are actuarially equivalent to the lump
sum (and in determining actuarial
equivalence any principles, and any discount,
decrement or inflation rates, prescribed by the regulations must be
Regulation 8aa
(1) For the purposes of section 42a(2)(c) of the
, the prescribed discount
rate is 3 per cent.
(2) For the purposes of section 42a(5) of the
, the principles, and
discount and inflation rates, that are to be applied to determined the actuarial
equivalence of equal instalments
to a lump sum are reflected in the following
I is the prescribed discount rate (expressed as a decimal number) plus the
prescribed inflation rate (expressed as a decimal number)
for the period to
which the assessment relates (
see subregulation (3))
P is the lump assessment of capital loss
N is the total number of instalments to be paid over the period to which the
assessment relates.
(3) For the purposes of subregulation (2)-
(a) the prescribed discount rate is 3 per cent;
(b) the prescribed inflation rate is the annual change (expressed as a
percentage) in the weekly award rates of pay index for full-time
employees, referenced to persons and South Australia, as published by the
Commonwealth Statistician for September in the year
immediately preceding the
year in which the assessment is made.
Mr Prendergast submitted that
whilst section 8aa(1) of the regulations refers to Section 42a(2)(c) of the
and 8aa subregulation 2 of the regulations refers to Section 42a(5) of the
there is no mention in the regulations of any formula or discount rate relating
Section 42(4)
, which is the section of the
the Corporation
relies upon in making an interim assessment with regard to this particular
worker. Furthermore, that the prescribed
discount rate of 3% appears to take
into account inflationary rates and also the risk of the person passing away.
If this the case,
an interim assessment under Section 42a of the
period of one or two years certainly alters the risk of the person passing away
as it is not a period of time where this person
approaches sixty five and the
higher risk of passing away occurs. It was submitted that the discount rate
should be somewhat less
than the 3%, particularly as these are only principles
to be applied.
It was submitted on behalf of the applicant that the
concerns with respect to the estimation for tax purposes required to be done
the Corporation under the
, is that the Corporation lacks "bona fides" as no
monies deducted from the equation by the Corporation for the estimation of tax
is forwarded to the Australian Taxation Office to discharge any liability of the
worker whilst it was acknowledged by Mr Prendergast,
for the applicant, that
there is no requirement in the
for the Corporation to make an estimation for
tax and then pass on that amount to the Australian Taxation Office. It was
that this estimation and deduction for taxation liability was an
action of the Corporation which was for an improper purpose. The
applicant's
representative relied upon the "
Introduction to Australian Administrative Law
" paragraph 5 point 3.6 where it states:
"Circumstances in which an administrative action is illegal, for improper
purpose or the broad notion of unfairness."
"Where the administrator uses a power to achieve a purpose which ought
properly to be achieved by use of another power, to which there
are attached
various protections or review mechanisms for the benefit of the person whose
interests are affected."
It was submitted on behalf of the applicant that
if a tax assessment is to be adopted by the Corporation then they should not use
a broad axe approach for this purpose. It is clear that the purpose with
respect to this estimation is to assess for each recipient
of compensation a
capital loss which is particular to their circumstances. It was submitted that
in this particular case the Corporation
had not undertaken this approach and it
simply used a broad axe approach using the Australian Taxation Office's scales
totally inappropriate in all the circumstances.
submitted on behalf of the applicant that the worker has dependents which
results in a rebate from the tax office and that
his personal circumstances with
regard to his taxation liability should be considered in line with the decision
of Review Officer
FitzGerald in the matter of
Hill v. The
Corporation
WCRP Determination No.561/1994;
[1994] SAWCRP 561
delivered on 20 September 1994.
It was submitted on behalf of the
respondent that Section 42a(2) of the
contains the governing principles with
respect to capital loss payments for injured workers. That the Corporation in
their absolute
discretion are able to make a final assessment with respect to
Section 42a of the
, or an interim assessment and then are also able to make
decisions on whether they will pay the final assessment or interim assessment
a single lump sum or in instalments which are the actuarial equivalent of that
lump sum. The use of Section 42a(4) of the
is governed by the principles as
set out in Section 42a(2) of the
, those principles must be adhered to as
they are mandatory with respect to their operation as they are referring to the
of payment under Section 42a(4) of the
. Therefore, by the
governing principles of Section 42a(2)(c) of the
regulation 8aa
subregulation 1 must be applied which prescribes a discount rate of 3% to be
utilised in the equation.
It was submitted on behalf of the respondent
that the Corporation, rather than assessing the worker's earnings for the
remainder of
his notional working life, have taken the "option" of using Section
42a(4) and making an interim assessment for a period of one year.
This is quite
different from Section 42a(5) of the
and is an interim assessment rather
than an instalment. It was further submitted that the Corporation are in a
position to make
an assessment with regard to the worker's earnings for the
remainder of his notional working life or for a lesser period at the
Corporation's
complete discretion.
It was submitted on behalf of the
respondent that Section 42a(2)(b) of the
is mandatory and requires the
Corporation to make an estimation of income tax liability to be included in the
mathematical equation
for arriving at a capital loss payment. In this
particular case, the worker's PAYE tax rate on his weekly payments of
compensation
was obtained, that figure was reduced by 20% and then that reduced
tax rate was applied to the equation.
Section 42(b)
requires the
worker to furnish such information relevant to the operation of this division of
as the Corporation sees fit.
The Corporation requested that the
worker, by way of questionnaire, advise them of a number of matters, not the
least of which was
any tax rebates he may be entitled to, however, this
information was not forthcoming from the worker. Therefore, the Corporation
having attempted to make a particular estimation for tax having regard to this
worker's circumstances were unable to make that assessment
as a consequence of
the worker's response to the questionnaire. The Corporation chose the
appropriate PAYE tax rate less 20% to
afford the worker every opportunity to
maximise his capital loss and applied this to the equation. It was submitted on
the respondent that it is not a requirement under the
Corporation, having factored in that estimation for tax liability, to then pay
any such amount to the Australian Taxation
Office. It is problematical at this
stage whether or not there is any tax liability attached to these forms of lump
sum payments.
I have considered the submissions of the parties and
documents on file and I am satisfied and find that Section 42a(2) of the
a complete method of calculating a worker's capital loss payment pursuant to
that section of the
with respect to a final or interim assessment. In my
view, the Corporation is required to utilise Section 42a(2)(a) of the
project forward over the remainder of the worker's notional working life the
worker's notional weekly earnings less an estimation
for income tax. If the
worker has partial incapacity then the amount the worker could earn in suitable
employment that the worker
has a reasonable prospect of obtaining by way of
average weekly earnings less an estimation for income tax will be projected
over the remainder of the worker's notional working life and subtracted
from the amount projected under paragraph (a) of subsection
actuarial multiplier of 51 contained in the decision is quite appropriate when
using the "Luntz" tables as I have indicated that
the Corporation must use the
formula as set out in Section 42a(2)(a)(b)(c) of the
together with
Regulation 8aa.
Further, that the worker's capital loss will be taken to
be 80% of the present value of the loss indicated by the above projections
in determining the present value of that loss a prescribed discount rate
be applied. I consider that section of the division is quite clear
in its intention and application and it is required to be done
before any final
assessment or interim assessment of capital loss can take place. It provides a
quite specific mathematical equation
which is the foundation upon which these
assessments are to be made.
In this particular case the applicant has not
received an instalment of an assessment pursuant to Section 42a of the act and
in particular
Section 42a(5), in fact what he has received by way of
determination dated 27 April 1994 is an interim assessment pursuant to Section
42a(4) of the
which the Corporation, in their absolute discretion, are
entitled to make before making their final assessment of loss under this
division. Therefore, regulation 8aa(i) clearly is applicable and the prescribed
discount rate of 3% must be applied to the equation.
I am satisfied
having regard to the estimation of tax that it is a mandatory requirement of the
for the Corporation to make an estimation of the tax liability and include
that estimation in the mathematical equation. However,
I am satisfied and find
that the requirements of Section 42a are such that this estimation is to be done
in accordance with the overall
principles of Section 42a of the
requires a quite specific assessment of the worker's individual position with
regard to his income tax liabilities. In this
particular case the Corporation
attempted to obtain this particular information from the worker however, as a
consequence of his
responses it was clear that he indicated to the Corporation
that he has no entitlement to any
rebate of taxation. However,
that does not preclude him from obtaining rebates from the Australian Taxation
Office at the conclusion
of each financial year and the manner in which the
question was asked in this case did not afford him an opportunity to advise the
Corporation of those circumstances.
I find that I am in agreement with
the reasons for the decision of my colleague Review Officer FitzGerald in the
Hill and the Corporation (Tyremarketers Australia)
am satisfied that the Corporation acted with "bona fides" in attempting to
obtain this worker's individual taxation circumstances
in order to made an
assessment pursuant to Section 42a of the
for a capital loss payment. That
there is no requirement under the
for the WorkCover Corporation to provide
any monies to the taxation office on behalf of this worker as a consequence of
the operation
of Section 42a of the
. In those circumstances I am not
satisfied that this action is illegal, for improper purposes or for that matter,
under the broad
notion of unfairness.
The current situation with
respect to any tax liability of the worker is problematic with respect to those
payments under Section
42a(2) of the
and I am satisfied that in those
circumstances the Corporation are not using these powers to achieve a purpose
which could be achieved
by some other means, namely the taxation office
assessing the worker's entitlement.
I find that as the
indicate that a Medicare Levy should be assessed on Section 42a payments that
the worker is not liable to be assessed for
this levy and that component should
be deducted from any estimation of tax.
The representative for the
respondent was unable to provide me with any details as to whether or not the
Corporation had utilised
Section 42a(2) of the
in projecting the worker's
notional weekly earnings less an estimation for income tax over the remainder of
the worker's notional
working life prior to making an interim assessment for a
particular period. Further, the applicant's representative did not provide
with any details which would indicated the worker's particular circumstances
regarding his tax liability and any rebates, reductions
etc applicable
I recommend to the Corporation that it reassess its decision to
award capital loss payments pursuant to Section 42a of the
Satterwaite. However, I realise that the Corporation has absolute discretion
with respect to Section 42a assessments and it
appears to me that despite the
fact that I have indicated that the calculations involved in that assessment,
which are reviewable,
are flawed that the making of an assessment is solely
within the realms of the Corporation's
DETERMINATION
Pursuant to
Section 96(2)
I determine to confirm the decision of the WorkCover Corporation made on 27
April 1994 to make an assessment pursuant to Section
worker. However, as a consequence of a lack of information and documentation I
am not in a position to make a determination
in accordance with my
recommendations and findings regarding the appropriate sum. I leave this
calculation to the parties in accordance
with this determination.
worker was represented by legal counsel and is entitled to costs and
disbursements relevant to this application for review.
Any appeal against
this determination must be lodged with the Workers' Compensation Appeal Tribunal
within one month of the receipt
of this determination. Enquiries about appeals
may be directed to the Registrar of the Tribunal, 8th Floor, Riverside Centre,
Terrace, Adelaide, (phone: 207.0999) and forms for appeal are available
from the same address.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (62.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter