URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCFC/2021/44.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
PASCHALIS v RETURN TO WORK CORPORATION OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA & ANOR [2021] SASCFC 44 (25 November 2021)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Full Court)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
PASCHALIS v RETURN TO WORK CORPORATION OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
[2021] SASCFC 44
Judgment of The Full Court
(The Honourable Chief Justice Kourakis, the Honourable Justice
Livesey and the Honourable Justice Bleby)
25 November 2021
WORKERS' COMPENSATION - PROCEEDINGS TO OBTAIN COMPENSATION - DETERMINATION
OF CLAIMS - APPEALS, JUDICIAL REVIEW AND STATED CASES
STATUTES - ACTS OF PARLIAMENT - INTERPRETATION - GENERAL APPROACHES TO
INTERPRETATION
WORKERS' COMPENSATION - ENTITLEMENT TO COMPENSATION - EMPLOYMENT RELATED
INJURY, DISABILITY OR DISEASE - GENERALLY
INTERPRETATION - GENERAL RULES OF CONSTRUCTION OF INSTRUMENTS
This is an appeal against the finding of the Full Bench of South Australian
Employment Tribunal (the Full Bench) that the appellant
had a “whole
person impairment” (WPI) of 15 per cent, disentitling him to compensation
as “seriously injured worker”
(SA) (the Act).
The appellant worker sustained a psychiatric injury after a workplace
incident on 7 August 2017 and subsequently sought benefits as
a “seriously
injured worker”. Dr Begg, an accredited assessor, assessed the appellant
as having a “whole person
impairment” (WPI) of 35 per cent, which
was reduced by 20 per cent to 15 per cent on account of pre-existing impairment
related to the work injury.
The trial Judge found that the 20 per cent WPI deduction was erroneous and
substituted for it a WPI of 35 per cent. The employer appealed
to the Full Bench
which concluded that the trial Judge erred and restored the 15 per cent WPI.
The appellant now appeals that finding to this Court on the basis that the
Full Bench exceeded jurisdiction, erred in adopting the
20 per cent deduction
and misconstrued
ss 28(8)(b)
(8)(g) of the Act.
Held per Kourakis CJ, allowing the appeal and setting aside the decision of
the Full Bench:
1. The Full Bench exceeded its jurisdiction by finding, in the absence of any
evidence to that effect, that the pre-existing conditions
of an adjustment and
alcohol abuse disorder were the cause of an unrelated impairment.
2. The Full Bench conflated the subject matter of
ss 22(8)(b)
and (g) and did
not grasp that subparagraph (g) only authorises a deduction for pre-existing
conditions if it was due to an injury.
3. In relation to subparagraph (g), there was no assessment of the impairment
in accordance with the principles of the Impairment
Assessment Guidelines as so
4. It was not correct to postulate the degree of impairment that the
workplace insult would have caused a hypothetical worker who
did not suffer
losses from a subsequently contracted condition and deduct that from the actual
5. The Full Bench erred in its construction of the words “unrelated
by extending them to impairments which are not
the consequence of an injury.
6. When conducting a deduction exercise in relation to pre-existing or
unrelated causes, there must be an assessment of the degree
of impairment
flowing from any pre-existing condition or any condition or injury resulting
from an unrelated cause.
Held per Livesey and Bleby JJ, dismissing the appeal:
1. The Full Bench did not substitute or make a finding of fact contrary to
that of the trial Judge. Rather, it identified an error
of law in the trial
Judge’s approach to the evidence.
2. It is permissible to have regard to the Act and the Impairment Assessment
Guidelines referred to in the Act in order to ascertain
the nature of the
scheme, particularly where they establish an interdependent regime.
3. A construction of the Act that permits compensation for injuries or
impairments arising from injuries or causes which have no relevant
connection to
a compensable injury is inconsistent with the objects and the scheme of the Act
as a whole.
Sections 22(8)(b)
and (g) express the same legislative intention: only
impairment attributable to the relevant work injury will be assessed for
compensation.
The difference between the provisions is that
limited in application to injuries or causes that are “unrelated” to
the relevant work injury, whereas
may apply even where previous
injuries are related to the relevant work injury in some way. The previous
injury need not be a work
injury and may arise “because of a pre existing
condition”.
5. Where a pre-existing injury or cause leading to impairment is identified
as affecting any assessment of a work injury impairment,
the assessor must
recognise the impairment flowing from that pre-existing cause or injury,
evaluate it, and deduct it from the work
injury assessment.
6. The Guidelines provide for a two-stage approach to the assessment of WPI,
whereby the assessor must first assess the worker’s
WPI taking into
account both the relevant work injury and any unrelated or previous injury
before deducting the degree of impairment
attributable to the unrelated or
previous injury.
South Australian Employment Tribunal Act
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
s 43A(9)(b)
, referred to.
McMahon Services Australia Pty Ltd v Return to Work Corporation of South
Australia & Paschalis
[2019] SAET 199
Paschalis v RTWSA &
McMahon Services Australia Pty Ltd
[2018] SAET 121
, discussed.
Abraham v Return to Work SA
[2016] SAET 76
Alcoa Holdings Limited
& Anor v Lowthian & Ors
[2011] VSC 245
Attorney-General (NSW) v
Melco Resorts and Entertainment Ltd
[2020] NSWCA 40
(2020) 102 NSWLR 47
Transport Accident Commission
[1999] VSC 484
(1999) 15 VAR 414
Barnett v Transport
Accident Commission
[2001] VSCA 12
(2001) 34 MVR 26
Berden v Return to Work SA
[2018] SAET 27
Comcare v Martin
[2016] HCA 43
(2016) 258 CLR 467
Connelly v MMI
Workers Compensation (Vic) Ltd
[2003] VSCA 60
(2003) 6 VR 555
Dallimore v Return to
[2017] SAET 72
Department for Health and Ageing v Neilson
[2017] SAET 136
Frkic v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia (No
[2020] SASCFC 59
Gillat v Transport Accident Commission
[2003] VSC 15
Harrison v Melhem
[2008] NSWCA 67
(2008) 72 NSWLR 380
H J Heinz Company
Limited v Kotzman
[2009] VSC 311
Lake v Transport Accident
[1998] 1 VR 616
Lennon v Gibson & Howes Ltd
Marrone v Employers Mutual Ltd
(2013) 116 SASR 501
v Dynamic Engineering Construction Co Pty Ltd
[2005] VSC 204
Hacker & Greenberg
[2003] VSC 72
Mountain Pine Furniture Pty Ltd v
[2007] VSCA 146
(2007) 16 VR 659
O’Connell v Nixon
(2007) 16 VR 440;
Plaintiff M47-2012 v Director-General of Security
[2012] HCA 46
(2012) 251 CLR 1
Purkess v Crittenden
[1965] HCA 34
(1965) 114 CLR 164
Redman v Return to Work
Corporation of South Australia
[2021] SASCA 25
Reilly v Workcover
Corporation/MMI Workers Compensation (SA) Pty Ltd (Anglicare South
[1999] SAWCT 93
State Trustees Ltd v Transport Accident
[2002] VSC 428
(2002) 6 VR 359
Tabcorp Holdings Ltd v Victoria
[2016] HCA 4
328 ALR 375
The State of South Australia (In Right of the Department for
Health and Ageing (SA Ambulance Service)) v Dohnt
[2021] SASCFC 33
State of South Australia v (SAPOL) v Weeding
[2014] SAWCT 36
Accident Commission v Elworthy
[2007] VSC 48
Vegco v Gibbons
Watts v Rake
[1960] HCA 58
(1960) 108 CLR 158
, considered.
PASCHALIS v RETURN TO WORK CORPORATION OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
[2021] SASCFC 44
Full Court: Kourakis CJ, Livesey and Bleby JJ
KOURAKIS CJ:
This is an appeal against the decision of the
Full Bench of the South Australian Employment Tribunal (the Full Bench and
SAET respectively)
reinstating the whole person impairment (WPI) assessment
resulting from the appellant’s major depression made by an approved
medical practitioner, Dr Begg. That percentage impairment was 15 per cent,
at which Dr Begg arrived after deducting 20 per cent
‘unrelated causes’.
2 I would allow the appeal and restore the decision of the Deputy President
which had set aside Dr Begg’s assessment and found
that the appellant,
Mr Paschalis, had a WPI of 35 per cent. My essential reasons for doing so
appear immediately below. The construction
to Work Act 2014
(SA) (RTW Act) and the findings to which I have applied
that construction are then further explicated in what follows.
3 Dr Begg was asked by the first respondent, Return to Work Corporation
(RTW), to assess the impairment of Mr Paschalis’ ‘major
depressive disorder with psychotic features’. Although described in
different terms on Mr Paschalis’ claim, and the
subsequent acceptances of
that claim, the proceeding in SAET proceeded on the basis that Mr Paschalis
suffered the psychiatric injury
so described as a result of an injury at work on
7 August 2015.
4 Mr Paschalis’ employer, McMahon Services Australia Pty Ltd, is the
second respondent.
5 The circumstances of the injury are described in the judgment of Livesey
J. I will refer to it as the workplace insult to encapsulate
both the nature of
the incident and its effect on his psyche.
6 In requesting an assessment of Mr Paschalis, RTW, through its agent
Gallagher Bassett, informed Dr Begg that the work injury was
depressive disorder with psychotic features which had been diagnosed by another
psychiatrist, Dr Van den Bos. Dr Begg was
not asked by
Gallagher Bassett to make a deduction for any unrelated or pre‑existing
impairment identified by them, but was
asked to identify for himself, and
disregard, any portion of the impairment that was due to a pre-existing or
unrelated condition,
injury or cause.
7 Dr Begg accepted the diagnosis of a major depressive disorder which he
described as severe and with psychotic features. He assessed
the WPI arising
from that condition in accordance with the Impairment Assessment Guidelines
(IAG) to be 35 per cent but apportioned
20 per cent of that impairment
to what he described as ‘multiple relationship losses’. The IAG is
the statutorily prescribed
guide against which approved medical practitioners
must assess degrees of impairment for the purpose of the RTW Act. The
relationship
losses were Mr Paschalis’ marital separation, within a week
or so of the work insult, distancing from his children, and subsequent
between him and his sister. Dr Begg thought, unremarkably, that if a
relationship breaks down within six months of contraction
of an illness it is
often because of pre-existing problems, and that the loss of the relationship
itself can become a potent cause
of mental illness, particularly depression. I
pause to make the trite observation that a poor marital relationship, like
no marital relationship, or being relatively isolated, is not in itself
an injury or impairment. True it is that all three life
circumstances may be
manifestations of an injury, illness or impairment. However, in his report to
RTW Dr Begg did not identify
nor assess any non-work injury, illness or
impairment which contributed to Mr Paschalis’ relationship problems and
diagnose any medical condition at all which pre‑existed the
workplace insult. Nor did he identify any particular impairment
flowing from
the relationship breakdown which was not an integral part of
Mr Paschalis’ major depression which was the accepted
work injury.
8 However, in the trial before the Deputy President, Dr Begg testified that
there was a pre‑existing impairment which made
‘quite a contribution
to the overall subsequent injury or subsequent
impairment.
Dr Begg attributed the
pre-existing impairment to Mr Paschalis’ pre-existing personality but was
reluctant to describe it
as a psychiatric disorder. He did not assess the
degree of the impairment which pre‑existed the workplace insult against
9 In his evidence Dr Begg spoke of a ‘pre-existing impairment in
[Mr Paschalis’]
relationships’:
I think they were related to a pre-existing impairment that he had in his
relationships and in general with how he was dealing with
the world as such, and
that meant that when those relationships broke down, he didn’t have a
capacity to be able to re-establish
the relationships.
10 Dr Begg explained that he quantified the degree of impairment unrelated
to the workplace insult at 20 per cent because he thought
that the depression
from which Mr Paschalis suffered was a disproportionate reaction to the
workplace insult.
11 Insofar as Dr Begg’s opinion was based on an opinion that there was
no relationship between Mr Paschalis’ distress
over the workplace insult
and the argument with his wife which precipitated their separation, the
Deputy President found otherwise.
The evidence supporting the Deputy
President’s finding was strong. Indeed, it would have been unreasonable
to find otherwise
given concessions made by Dr Begg in cross‑examination
to which I refer below. Whether or not the review before the Deputy
was a review of Dr Begg’s assessment in itself, or of the decision of
RTW to reject Mr Paschalis’ claim that
he was a seriously injured
worker on the basis of that assessment, the Deputy President was entitled,
and indeed required, to reach
the correct or preferable decision after having
due regard to the decision of the original decision
Accordingly, the assessment
of Mr Paschalis’ WPI must proceed from the Deputy President’s
finding that the workplace
insult contributed to the breakdown of
Mr Paschalis’ familial relationships. It follows that, to the extent
that those losses
manifested a medical condition, that condition, howsoever it
might be described, was aggravated or exacerbated by the workplace insult.
12 Insofar as Dr Begg based his opinion, either in his reported assessment
or in his testimony, on a pre-existing personality, adjustment
or alcohol abuse
disorder, there was no proper ground on which to make a deduction to
Mr Paschalis’ incapacity because Dr Begg
made no assessment of the
degree of Mr Paschalis’ impairment against the IAG before the workplace
insult occurred. That is
not surprising. His pre-workplace functioning was not
explored at all in the report and was barely touched on in evidence. The
evidence simply did not allow an assessment of that pre-existing impairment to
be made in accordance with the IAG or at all.
13 In any event, on a proper reading of Dr Begg’s report and his
testimony, his opinion was that the major depression caused
by the workplace
insult was worse than it might otherwise have been because Mr Paschalis lost
close personal relationships, which
were already in a poor state prior to the
workplace insult. The question of relative contributions to the major
depression is a
completely different one to the degree of any impairment which
Mr Paschalis might have suffered before the workplace insult.
14 It might also be accepted that it was Dr Begg’s opinion that
Mr Paschalis’ work caused major depressive illness and
was made worse
than it might otherwise have been because of his pre-existing personality.
15 However, in whichever way Dr Begg’s opinion is understood it
did not support a deduction for an unrelated impairment. As
to the former, it
is an ordinary incident of life’s ebb and flow that personal
circumstances, and changes in personal circumstances,
will undermine resilience
and wellbeing in a way which obstructs recovery from, or increases the severity
of, an illness. Those
life events are not pre-existing or unrelated impairments
or causes within the meanings of ss 22(8)(b) and (g). They are simply
of the personal circumstances on which the illness operates. As to the latter,
a pre-existing personality vulnerability which
exposed Mr Paschalis to a
more severe injury is not a condition which warrants a deduction of the assessed
WPI, nor is it something
which must be disregarded. Even if it is a condition,
but one which is aggravated by a work injury, the compensable injury which
be assessed is the condition so aggravated.
16 In summary, Dr Begg and the Full Bench of SAET conflated two quite
different concepts. The first concept is the relative contribution
of different
causes or illnesses to the compensable illness or impairment. The second is the
assessment and deduction of impairments
which operate independently of the
compensable impairment.
17 The first concept is primarily a question of liability. Liability for
Mr Paschalis’ major depression with psychotic features
was accepted
by RTW (and is not in issue). It is the condition which RTW asked Dr Begg to
assess. Section 22(8) of the RTW Act
does not authorise a deduction to the
WPI assessed by Dr Begg, even if it be accepted that
Mr Paschalis’ pre-existing personality
and alcohol abuse disorders
and subsequent relationship breakdowns contributed substantially to his major
depression. To the extent
that the pre-existing disorders were aggravated or
exacerbated, and will indefinitely continue to be aggravated or exacerbated by
the workplace insult, they form part of the compensable condition which fell to
be assessed. It is those conditions so aggravated,
together with the direct
effect of the workplace insult, which are the compensable injury or
impairment.
Section 7 of the RTW
7—Injury must arise from employment
(1) This Act applies to an injury if (and only if) it arises from
employment.
(2) Subject to this section, an injury arises from employment if—
(b) in the case of a psychiatric injury—
(i) the psychiatric injury arises out of or in the course of employment and
the employment was the significant contributing cause
of the injury; and
(3) In connection with the application of subsection (2) to an injury that
is, or results from, the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation,
deterioration
or recurrence of a prior injury (
a prescribed event
(b) in the case of a psychiatric injury—
(i) employment must be the significant contributing cause of the prescribed
(ii) the prescribed event must not arise wholly or predominantly from any
action or decision designated under subsection (4) [reasonable
disciplinary or
administrative action],
and then the injury is only compensable to the extent of and for the duration
of the relevant aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation,
deterioration or
recurrence.
18 It follows that the relative extent of the contributions made by the
various causes of an injury, which is an aggravation or exacerbation,
single resulting compensable impairment is irrelevant. So too are any
pre-existing or subsequently occurring personal circumstances
which are not an
injury or impairment within the meaning of those terms in the RTW Act. There
can be no deduction to the WPI assessment
of an injury or impairment which is
compensable under the Act on the grounds that a person’s functioning,
although not limited
by a medically recognisable injury or condition, has always
been sub‑optimal.
19 On the other hand, s 22(8) of the RTW Act does require an assessment of
the degree of any pre-existing impairment or a subsequently
contracted,
unrelated injury or impairment which limits the worker’s functioning
independently of, or in addition to, the compensable
impairment. The best
measure of a pre-existing impairment is its effect on a worker’s
functioning prior to the work injury.
The best measure of subsequent but
unrelated impairment is its additional effect over and above the worker’s
compensable impairment.
There was no evidence in this case of any such
assessment because no medical practitioner attempted it. Dr Begg’s
proceeds on the premise that all of Mr Paschalis’ impairments
are inextricably connected and are part of a single major depression.
no attempt to identify parts of Mr Paschalis’ permanent
post-workplace insult impairment which were related either
to relationship
losses (which in any event are simply part of his personal circumstances) or of
any psychological impairment which
resulted from those losses alone. Nor was
there an identification or assessment of any pre-existing impairment due to a
personality
disorder which was not aggravated by the workplace insult.
20 An integral part of a single injury or impairment caused by an
aggravation cannot constitute a pre-existing or unrelated impairment.
impairment cannot be separately identified, it is probable that it is integral
to the compensable impairment.
21 The point I seek to make about Mr Paschalis’ pre-existing disorders
can perhaps be better explained by contrasting them
with a major psychiatric
illness which is clearly not affected by the later work injury. For example, if
Mr Paschalis had suffered
from a pre‑existing schizophrenia or
bipolar disorder which was not exacerbated by his workplace insult, an
assessment of Mr
Paschalis’ psychological impairment for either of
those pre-existing illnesses would be made and deducted before assessing
permanent compensable impairment. Equally, if, after the workplace insult, Mr
Paschalis had developed either illness, their
adverse effects on his psychiatric
functioning would be disregarded.
22 The point can also be illustrated by reference to a physical injury. A
pre‑existing lumbar spine impairment from a L2 vertebral
injury must be
deducted if it has not been aggravated by a subsequent workplace vertebral
injury at the L4 level. So too if a L2
vertebral injury is subsequently
suffered without any contribution from an earlier compensable vertebral injury
at the L4 level.
The additional impairment must be disregarded.
23 Expanding on the last example, the conflation of concepts in the approach
adopted by Dr Begg and the Full Bench can be illustrated
as follows. Let
it be assumed that a non‑compensable vertebral injury at the L4 level has
stabilised, leaving a worker with
a 10 per cent functional impairment. Let it
be assumed that that condition is aggravated by a work injury to the L2
vertebra, leaving
a permanent impairment of 30 per cent, to which both the first
and second injury contributed equally. The proper approach is to
deduct from
that 30 per cent assessment the pre-existing 10 per cent impairment. It is
an improper application of s 22(8) of the
RTW Act to halve the 30 per cent
impairment on the basis that both injuries contributed equally to it.
24 It is the latter, and erroneous, approach which was taken by Dr Begg
and the Full Bench. The error is one of law in the construction
of s 22(8)(g)
of the RTW Act. Alternatively, it is an error of law in accepting that
there was evidence on which an assessment of
a pre-existing or unrelated 20 per
cent impairment might be made when there was none. Dr Begg and the Full Bench
reduced Mr Paschalis’
WPI by the percentage causal contribution to
his final overall condition and not by reference to an assessment of a
pre-existing
or unrelated impairment. The former approach might properly be
adopted in assessing the proportionate liability of multiple wrongdoers
guide a reduction of damages for adverse contingencies at common law. The
latter is the approach prescribed by s 22(8) of
the RTW Act.
25 I elaborate on the above reasons and expand on the facts on which they
are based below.
The applications for
26 The workplace insult occurred on 7 August 2015. Mr Paschalis lodged a
claim for income support and medical expenses on 31 August
2015. A medical
certificate was attached. On 29 September 2015 WorkCover accepted the claim for
medical expenses and weekly payments
for an ‘adjustment disorder with
anxiety and depression that occurred on 7 August 2015’. It is probable
that the certificate
was that of the psychiatrist Dr Farnbach who saw Mr
Paschalis on 11 August 2015, or Mr Paschalis’ general
practitioner who
had referred him to Dr Farnbach, because Dr Farnbach
diagnosed Mr Paschalis with an ‘adjustment disorder with anxious and
27 On 15 November 2016 Gallagher Bassett wrote to Mr Paschalis informing him
that he was not eligible for long-term support under
the amendments to the RTW
which came into effect on 1 July 2015 because he was assessed with a
WPI below 30 per cent and therefore did not qualify as a seriously
28 On 3 February 2017 Gallagher Bassett, as agents for RTW, denied
Mr Paschalis’ request for an adjustment of his income maintenance
pursuant to s 47 of the RTW Act on the grounds that he was not a seriously
injured worker. On 27 March 2017 Mr Paschalis’
solicitors applied for a
review of that decision on the ground that Dr Begg had erred in making a
deduction from the WPI he had assessed.
29 On 12 April 2017 RTW confirmed its decision of 3 February 2017.
30 On 24 July 2017 Mr Paschalis’ solicitors made an application for a
review of the decision of Gallagher Bassett dated 15
November 2016 referred to
in [27] above. Again, the application asserted that Dr Begg had erred in that
there was no evidence to
support the conclusion that Mr Paschalis suffered a
pre‑existing or unrelated impairment of 20 per cent. On the same day Mr
Paschalis’ solicitors made an application for review of Dr Begg’s
assessment itself on the same grounds.
31 On 22 May 2018 Mr Paschalis’ solicitors filed a statement of issues
and contentions, ahead of the hearing before the Deputy
President, in which
identified the following issues:
1. Whether the Applicant is a ‘seriously injured worker’ for the
purposes of the
(“the Act”)?
2. Is the determination of the Respondent dated 15 November 2016 correct in
finding that 15%, out of a total 35% WPI, of the Applicant’s
psychiatric
injury is compensable?
3. If the current psychiatric opinion is unreliable, or incomplete, or does
not properly follow the Impairment Assessment Guidelines,
should the matter be
referred to an Independent Medical Assessment (see
Abraham v RTWSA
White v RTWSA
[2018] SAET 91)?
construction of
32 Section 22 of the RTW Act relevantly provides:
22—Assessment of permanent impairment
(1) This section sets out a scheme for assessing the degree of impairment
(being whole person impairment) that applies to a work injury
that results in
permanent impairment.
(2) An assessment under this section—
(a) must be made in accordance with the Impairment Assessment Guidelines;
(b) must be made by a medical practitioner who holds a current accreditation
under this section.
(3) The Minister will publish guidelines (the
Impairment Assessment
) for the purposes of the assessment of permanent impairment
(being whole person impairment).
(7) An assessment of the degree of impairment resulting from an
(a) must not be made until there is evidence that the injury has stabilised;
(b) must, subject to subsection (8), be based on the worker's current
impairment as at the date of assessment, including any changes
in the signs and
symptoms following any medical or surgical treatment undergone by the worker in
respect of the injury; and
(c) must be made by an accredited medical practitioner selected in accordance
with the Impairment Assessment Guidelines.
(8) An assessment must take into account the following principles:
(a) if a worker presents for assessment in relation to injuries which
occurred on different dates, the impairments are to be assessed
chronologically
by date of injury;
(b) impairments from unrelated injuries or causes are to be disregarded in
making an assessment;
(c) impairments from the same injury or cause are to be assessed together or
combined to determine the degree of impairment of the
worker (using any
principle set out in the Impairment Assessment Guidelines);
(d) impairment resulting from physical injury is to be assessed separately
from impairment resulting from psychiatric injury;
(e) in assessing impairment resulting from physical injury or psychiatric
injury, no regard is to be had to impairment that results
from consequential
mental harm;
(f) in assessing the degree of permanent impairment resulting from physical
injury, no regard is to be had to impairment that results
from a psychiatric
injury or consequential mental harm;
(g) any portion of an impairment that is due to a previous injury (whether or
not a work injury or whether because of a pre existing
condition) that caused
the worker to suffer an impairment before the relevant work injury is to be
deducted for the purposes of an
assessment, subject to any provision to the
contrary made by the Impairment Assessment Guidelines;
(h) assessments are to comply with any other requirements specified by the
Impairment Assessment Guidelines.
(10) Subject to subsections (11) to (15) (inclusive), only 1 assessment may
be made in respect of the degree of permanent impairment
of a worker from 1 or
more injuries (including consequential injuries) arising from the same trauma
(and any injury that may subsequently
develop or manifest itself or develop
after the assessment of impairment is made will not be assessed).
(12) Subsection (10) does not affect the requirement under subsection (8)(d)
for impairment resulting from physical injury to be assessed
separately from
impairment resulting from psychiatric injury.
33 Section 22(1) of the RTW Act announces that the purpose of the scheme
which follows is the assessment of the degree of impairment,
known as whole
person impairment, resulting from a work injury. Section 22 contemplates the
making of guidelines pursuant to s 22(3)
of the RTW Act but unfortunately, its
language, in parts, anticipates the very contents of the yet to be published
guidelines. For
example, s 22(8) of the RTW Act requires certain
impairments to be ‘assessed together or combined’ but that phrase
be given no precise statutory meaning other than that which the phrase might
be given by the principles set out in the IAG, to which
that subsection refers.
Similarly, whatever meaning might be given to the word ‘disregarded’
on a reading of subparagraph
(b) alone, its practical effect is likely to be
determined by the requirements of the IAG which are given statutory force by s
of the RTW Act.
34 The RTW Act does not define an impairment. However, the definition of
the word ‘injury’ shows that the statutory
concept of impairment
under the RTW Act is inextricably linked to the concept of injury which is
defined to include loss, deterioration
or impairment of a body part or physical,
mental or sensory faculty.
35 RTW submitted in this Court that s 22(8)(b) and s 22(8)(g)
should be construed as a complementary suite of provisions, a central
which is to exclude from the compensable WPI any impairment from a cause other
than the relevant work injury. So much can
be accepted, but their
interrelationship is more complex than that.
36 The predecessor of s 22(8)(b) of the RTW Act is s 43A(9)(b) of
Workers Compensation and Rehabilitation Act 1986
(the repealed Act).
It governed the assessment of lump sum compensation for non‑economic loss.
Its purpose was to ensure that
the lump sum payment was made only in respect of
permanent impairment which was
compensable.
37 The WPI assessed in accordance with s 22 of the RTW Act now governs
not only lump sum compensation for non‑economic loss
but also determines
whether a worker is a seriously injured worker for the purposes of the extended
income maintenance provisions.
For those two purposes, s 22(8)(b) of the
RTW Act operates together, and must be construed coherently, with
s 22(8)(g) of the RTW
Act and indeed the Act as a whole.
38 It is convenient to consider first the operation of
subparagraph (g). It operates in cases in which a worker suffered an
before the relevant work injury. It is that impairment which is the
portion of an impairment that is ‘due to a previous injury’
must be deducted. The words in parenthesis show that the deduction must be made
whether the previous injury is an earlier
compensable work injury or a
non‑work related condition. It is for that reason that
subparagraph (g) operates ‘subject
to any provision to the contrary
made by the IAG’. It allows, as an alternative to reducing the WPI, the
deduction of a lump
sum previously paid by way of compensation from the lump sum
which would otherwise be payable for the WPI comprising both the pre-existing
and the current, compensable, condition, in accordance with the IAG.
39 The deduction authorised by the IAG is of the lump sum paid for the
pre-existing impairment. If deductions made from a WPI were
calculated by
reference to the percentage contribution to the final injury and not the degree
of pre-existing impairment there would
be a tension between those two approaches
to reducing the compensation payable for the later impairment. The former
approach would
favour the compensating authority: the latter the worker. Of
course, impairments due to pre‑existing conditions which are not
injuries will generally be deducted from the WPI. As shall be seen, however,
whichever construction is given to s22(8) of the
RTW, the IAG requires an
assessment of the pre-existing impairment and not the percentage impairment
contributed by the pre-existing
40 Subparagraph (b) is wide enough, on its face, to extend to
pre‑existing work injuries or conditions and to subsequently
conditions. In the former respect, however, it must be read coherently with,
and must therefore not yield any different
result to, subparagraph (g). It
would be anomalous to apply subparagraph (b) to pre‑existing
‘causes’ which are
not injuries or conditions within the meaning of
subparagraph (g), or for the process of disregarding authorised by
subparagraph
(b) to result in a different WPI than the WPI calculated in
accordance with subparagraph (b). If that were allowed, a legislative
would be impermissibly conferred on RTW or the SAET.
41 That result suggests that for subsequently contracted conditions
‘causes’ are also limited to injuries or other conditions.
construction of subparagraph (b) is, in any event, also consistent with its
purpose. Subparagraph (b) requires both unrelated
and ‘causes’ to be disregarded because an injury may be related to
the compensable injury but
have a different (unrelated) cause. It is because
the word ‘injury’ includes the physiological effects of both an
insult or endogenous condition, and the resulting impairment, that
subparagraph (b) is drafted as it is. To return to my earlier
example, an
impairment of the lumbar spine may be attributable to vertebral disruption at
two different levels caused by different
incidents, only one of which is
compensable. The injuries are related because they both limit the function of
the lumbar spine but
the impairment due to the non‑work injury results
from an unrelated cause. The pre‑existing impairments governed by
subparagraph (g) will in practice be related impairments in the sense that they
affect the same functionality as the compensable
impairment, because if they
were not it would be either supererogation or irrational to deduct one from
another. There would seem
to be little point in assessing and accumulating the
WPI resulting from both a non-compensable arm injury and a compensable lumbar
spine impairment only to then deduct the former from the total. When there is
an impairment attributable to an unrelated injury
it is simplest to disregard it
so that no occasion for a deduction arises. It follows that impairments which
are unrelated, in the
sense that they do not affect the functionality impaired
by the compensable injury or condition, whether pre‑existing the work
injury or sustained after it, will generally be disregarded in accordance with s
22(8)(b) of the RTW Act. The practical effect may
be the same as a deduction
but there will not be a need to quantify the impairment in accordance with the
IAG because it only affects
a completely different function. It would of course
be irrational to deduct the WPI attributable to the arm injury alone from the
WPI attributable to the lumbar spine injury alone.
42 That leaves for consideration a related impairment which affects the same
functionality as the compensable condition, but which
is caused by injury or
illness sustained or contracted after the work injury. Unlike pre-existing
conditions which are expressly
dealt with by s 22(8)(g) of the RTW Act, there is
no statutory direction to deduct the unrelated impairment from the
WPI; the impairment must instead be disregarded in accordance
with s 22(8)(b) of the RTW Act. However, guideline 1.23 of the IAG
of the deduction of the unrelated impairment. The process of disregarding an
impairment, without resort to the IAG principles,
necessitates the
identification of the loss of function due to the work injury alone, and its
quantitative assessment against the
criteria of the IAG. Alternatively, if a
deduction is to be made from the totality of the work, and unrelated,
impairments, the
unrelated impairment must be assessed in accordance with the
IAG. Neither approach was adopted by Dr Begg, even if it be accepted
Paschalis’ subsequent relationship losses were injuries.
43 As I have already emphasised, in making any deduction, logic demands that
like must be compared with like. It would be irrational,
therefore, if there
was a deduction from an impairment caused by a recognisable medical or
psychiatric injury or illness on account
of a condition which is no more than a
common vicissitude of life. It is contrary to both the statutory regulation of
compensation and common law principles for the assessment of
personal injury to make a deduction for individual vulnerabilities and
circumstances short of impairment causing illnesses. Moreover, impairment
resulting from those conditions must be capable of assessment
by applying the
same guidelines which are promulgated for the assessment of medical conditions
arising out of employment. In the
absence of a clear statutory command to
engage in the irrational exercise of deducting physiological incommensurables,
the connotation
of the word ‘cause’ must be read down; it means only
those causes which operate through injuries, illnesses, or other
conditions.
44 The IAG cannot, of course, govern the proper construction of the
RTW Act, even though, as I observed earlier, s 22 anticipates
the making,
and some of the content, of the guidelines. Nonetheless, I observe that the IAG
is drawn, and is premised, on the construction
I would give s 22(8)(b) and
(g). Moreover, to the extent that s 22(8)(b) and (g) of the RTW Act might
be given a different construction,
the IAG requires an assessment in accordance
with the construction I have given those subparagraphs. I refer to:
Guideline 1.23 which requires deductions for ‘unrelated or previous
Guideline 1.24 which directs that:
[I]f the requestor asks for any injuries to a part of the body to be
‘deducted’, the assessor assesses the permanent impairment
affected part of the body by applying the methodology in the Guidelines then
deducts the permanent impairment % attributable
to such injury. ...
Guideline 1.29 which stipulates that there must be objective evidence to
support an assessment of impairment attributable to a pre-existing
The impairment rating of the pre-existing injury is determined by applying
the methodology in the Guidelines. The impairment from
the pre-existing injury
is then subtracted from the overall impairment rating.
45 The provisions of the Guidelines to which I have referred are not only
consistent with the construction I would give the word
‘cause’ but
are also necessary to ensure that the resulting WPI is scientifically and
medically sound and consistent
with the very purpose of the RTW Act, as
with all workers compensation Acts which preceded it, to compensate each worker
his or her injury and impairment
. If a person’s actual age,
fitness level, and inherited physical, cognitive, and psychological variations
were ignored, the
assessed impairment would be of a mythical worker and not of
the actual worker who suffered the injury. Moreover, a deduction for
which is not a physical or psychiatric injury is likely to be subjective and,
indeed, incapable of assessment by applying
the methodology of the IAG or any
other guideline devised for the assessment of injuries.
The evidence
46 The paragraph headed ‘Diagnosis’ in Dr Begg’s report,
set out in [128] of the judgment of Livesey P, concludes
with a finding of a
severe major depressive disorder with psychotic features. The paragraph
preceding that diagnosis is a discursive
discussion of the features of Mr
Paschalis’ condition. Dr Begg notes Mr Paschalis’
tendency to blame and distrust others
and his poor rapport. Dr Begg observes
that Mr Paschalis ‘is retraumatising himself psychologically by
constantly thinking
themselves, support a diagnosis of a pre-existing, or unrelated, condition.
They are symptoms, particularly the ruminations, commonly suffered by
depressives.
47 Next, Dr Begg suggests that the rapid breakdown of the marital
relationship after the workplace insult suggested that Mr Paschalis’
rosy view of his marriage did not match the reality. Mr Paschalis is not the
first, nor will he be the last, spouse to labour under
that misapprehension
which is, or course, not unique to persons suffering from an illness or
impairment. When giving his evidence,
Dr Begg accepted that the
personality traits and personal circumstances observed by him suggested an
‘underlying personality
vulnerability’. A mere vulnerability is, of
course, not a pre-existing personality disorder.
48 Under the heading ‘Impairment assessment for each work
injury’ Dr Begg assessed the impairment flowing from Mr Paschalis’
major depression to be at ‘class 3’ and in the
‘mid-range’. Those terms are elements of the impairment assessment
of psychiatric injury prescribed by Chapter 16 of the IAG which is entitled
‘Guideline for the Evaluation of Psychiatric Impairment
Clinicians’ (GEPIC).
49 GEPIC prescribes the use of matrices for the evaluation of dysfunction in
the fields of intelligence, thinking, perception, judgement,
emotive mood and
behaviour as a whole number on a scale of 1-5. The median value is then
selected as the measure of WPI. Accepting
for present purposes that the median
value across those largely incommensurable mental health fields is a meaningful
measure of impairment,
it nonetheless exposes the difficulty in making any
assumption about the expected GEPIC measure of impairment which might result
from a particular psychiatric insult inflicted on a particular individual. I
also observe that GEPIC considers psychiatric disorders
to be synonymous with
mental or psychological disorders. Accordingly, it defines a psychiatric
disorder to be ‘a syndrome
characterised by clinically significant
disturbance in an individual’s cognition, emotional regulation or
behaviour that reflects
dysfunction in the psychological, biological or
developmental processes underlying mental functioning’. I observe that
definitional requirements of clinical significance and the anchoring of the
dysfunction in psychological, biological or developmental
processes limit
assessable impairments to those flowing from an injury or illness. In that
respect, the introduction to GEPIC warns
that ‘expected’ responses
to common stressors or loses are not mental disorders. GEPIC also requires that
the diagnosed
disorder is based on ‘DSM-5’, which is a compilation
of psychiatric conditions accepted as such by a professional body
psychiatric profession of the United States of America.
50 Returning to Dr Begg’s written assessment, he observed that if a
relationship breaks down within six months of an illness
there is usually to be
found a significant relationship problem. Dr Begg continues ‘the loss of
such a relationship is a potent
cause of mental illness, particularly
depression’. Dr Begg then noted the history of separation from his
wife and the breakdown
of his relationship with his sister shortly thereafter
and concluded:
The depression that arose from the workplace injury is not sufficient to
explain the failure to re-establish a relationship with his
sister, or with his
wife or children. There is persistence of his depression because of the manner
in which he relives in his mind
the humiliation of the workplace event, and the
loss of his relationship with his partner and with his family. In my opinion
multiple relationship losses contribute 20% to the whole person impairment
and are not related to the original injury.
51 I have explained above why the relative contributions to
Mr Paschalis’ final and permanent condition of its various causes
have no bearing on the deduction prescribed by s 22(8) of the RTW Act. However,
I observe that Dr Begg offers no explanation in
his report as to why the
relative contribution of the relationship losses is not some percentage in a
range (allowing for something
more than a
contribution
from each cause) of say five per cent to 30 per cent. The unexplained
selection of 20 per cent may be contrasted with
the quantitative scale
prescribed by GEPIC. I deal below with the explanation given by Dr Begg in his
testimony. It is sufficient
for present purposes to foreshadow that it was not
based on an assessment in accordance with the IAG.
52 Dr Begg did not find, and could not possibly have found, that if Mr
Paschalis had lost those relationships, absent the workplace
insult, he would
have suffered a depressive illness of a particular severity resulting in a 20
per cent WPI. All that can be said
with any scientific or medical certainty is
that the work injury resulted in a major depressive condition with a
consequential 35
per cent WPI and it is unlikely to have been as great if
Mr Paschalis’ marriage and relationship with his sister had not
53 That reasoning does not permit a deduction to be made pursuant to
s 22(8) of the RTW Act for at least three reasons. First, the
Mr Paschalis’ personal relationships which left him vulnerable to a
more severe major depression is not in itself an
injury impairment or cause for
the purpose of s 22(8)(b) or (g) of the RTW Act. It is no more than a
change in the ordinary circumstances
of life in which injured workers might find
themselves. The Full Bench observed that s 22(8)(b) of the RTW Act did not
limit an unrelated cause to a recognised medical condition. However,
for the reasons I have given in [40] to [43] above, there is
a necessary
implication to that effect.
54 Secondly, and not surprisingly, the trial Judge found that there was a
causal relationship between the work injury and the separation
which was not
55 Thirdly, Dr Begg did not make any assessment at all of
Mr Paschalis’s actual unrelated or pre-existing impairments. Counsel
for RTW asked Dr Begg how he quantified the contribution of the relationship
losses at 20 per cent. He
I think essentially there was two ways I quantified it, and the first method
was looking at what I thought I would have expected given
the nature of the
injury that occurred, and I thought, well, that would probably be around about a
10 or a 15 per cent impairment,
and the other way I quantified it was I
didn’t - that wasn't my final conclusion, but that was sort of my ballpark
and then I was looking through the impairment guidelines and essentially
he was at class 3, which is a moderate impairment, and I
was thinking, well,
really these other things are not - you know, it’s not all class 3. The
class below it was about class
2, and I thought, well, that would kind of make
sense, that if you’ve got these other factors - a relationship is a very
significant
factor. I think we tend to just say, “Oh, a relationship
loss.” I mean, an intimate relationship with your partner is
powerful experience in anyone's life, and so to lose that is going to make - is
going to be significant. So I felt, well,
I would attribute the non-work-related
issues of the relationship loss with wife, sister and children as causing a mild
impairment,
and that was consistent with his sort of history of being able to
continue to work beforehand, didn't appear to have come into much
grief with a
lot of people beforehand. I mean, he hadn’t told me of problems, so it was
an assumption on my part that the relationship
had been problematic for a long
time. So, yeah, I thought that was probably about where the mark was, but 5 per
cent either way,
I’d have to accept that as well.
56 Dr Begg’s answer shows that he hypothesised the degree of
depression which an imagined ordinary worker might have suffered
by reason of
the workplace insult and reasoned that any more severe depression suffered by
Mr Paschalis must have another cause.
Dr Begg did not suggest that there
were benchmarks accepted by any body of psychiatrists standardising the level of
depression a
range of life events can be expected to cause. Life experience
suggests that any such attempt would be a quixotic endeavour. Human
varies widely. Some workers might have reacted to the insult with some
well-placed punches and left the workplace, far
from feeling depressed. Others,
as Dr Begg hypothesised, might have suffered mild depression. Yet others
might have suffered depression
as severe, or more severe, than Mr
Paschalis’. Dr Begg did not explain why Mr Paschalis might not have
suffered a relatively
severe depression irrespective of the breakdown of his
marital and sibling relationships.
57 The explanation for the particular reaction of a particular worker may,
or may not, require some expert psychiatric elucidation.
Some might react
differently because of their personal experiences and personality traits which
are neither illnesses nor impairments.
Others might have pre-existing
conditions which are aggravated or exacerbated by the result. Others may, by an
unrelated cause,
subsequently contract a condition of a related, or unrelated
kind, to the work injury, which operates in parallel to it. Of those
suffer depression, some may recover completely or partially, again because of
their personal experiences and resilience.
The personal traits and
circumstances of others may leave them without the resilience to resist the
progression of the impairment.
58 Moreover, it is difficult to see how any useful conclusion can be made
without investigating the root causes of the poor relationships,
which Dr Begg
acknowledges he did not undertake. Married partners might simply be
incompatible. Sibling relationships may suffer
from poor parenting. Without
an assessment of those, and other, factors, a conclusion that the breakdown is
indicative of an underlying
pre‑existing personality flaw can be little
more than speculation. If the relationship breakdowns are not indicative of an
illness, impairment, or other condition within the meaning of those statutory
terms, the relationship losses are no more than the
background personal
circumstances on which the workplace insult operated.
59 The point I make is not that there was good reason for the trial Judge to
reject Dr Begg’s opinion as a question of fact.
The point is that
his subjective approach is inconsistent with the objective assessment of
impairment required by the RTW Act and
the IAG and was therefore vitiated
by error. He did not address the statutory question.
60 In any event, Dr Begg’s assessment of 20 per cent was not a
quantification of an impairment related to the breakdown of
those relationships
alone. So much is clear from the following exchange during a sympathetic
cross-examination of Dr Begg by counsel
If I could ask, having considered all of the questions that I’ve just
asked you or all the information I’ve just put to
you, does it change your
view with respect to your decision to attribute 20 per cent of the whole person
impairment to pre-existing
impairment?---No, I think it - it doesn’t
change my view, and it reinforces my view.
Can I just ask one question which probably follows logically, but for the
sake of evidence can you categorically rule out that the
worker would have been
at zero per cent whole person impairment prior to the workplace
incident?---Well, you’re asking for
my opinion, and my opinion is that,
yes, he was not at zero per cent whole person impairment before the
61 I digress to observe that the questioning is premised on Dr Begg’s
assessment of 20 per cent referring to a pre-existing
impairment,
whereas his report attributed that level of impairment to be the subsequent loss
of relationships and was silent as to
any pre-existing impairment on Mr
Paschalis’ part which caused those losses. I also observe that
Dr Begg did not support his
‘opinion’ that the
pre‑existing impairment was not zero by reference to an assessment made on
objective evidence
and in accordance with GEPIC.
62 More importantly for present purposes Dr Begg’s response clearly
shows that his opinion was that a pre‑existing condition
contributed
, in a causal sense, to the extent of 20 per cent of the major
depression suffered by Mr Paschalis
the workplace insult; it was
not an assessment of Mr Paschalis’ impairment before the workplace insult.
If there was an identity
between those two concepts the percentage impairment,
too, would be identical; that is to say, Dr Begg’s response would have
been a clear, if not indignant, response ‘of course it is not zero, it is
as, I have said, 20 per cent’. Far from that
being the case, Dr Begg
could opine no more than that the pre‑existing impairment was something
more than zero. Indeed, Dr
Begg acknowledged that he had
‘estimated’ the impairment he attributed to pre-existing or
unrelated conditions and had
not assessed that impairment against the GEPIC.
63 It also follows from Dr Begg’s answer that Mr Paschalis’
impairment had deteriorated from something more than zero
before the workplace
insult to 20 per cent after the workplace insult. It follows that the
workplace insult had aggravated Mr Paschalis’
pre-existing condition,
whatever Dr Begg thought it might be, because Dr Begg, as we have seen, accepted
that the workplace insult
contributed to the loss of the relationships. That
being so, the degree of impairment attributable to the aggravation, and
the entire 35 per cent WPI, was compensable in accordance with
s 7(3) of the RTW Act.
64 Under cross-examination from Mr Paschalis’ counsel, a rather
nebulous picture of Mr Paschalis’ pre-existing condition
Doctor, you have described a number of behaviours which you suggest could be
consistent with having a mild impairment, and I take
it there to mean a mild
impairment of mental functioning?---Yes.
Those behaviours could, for example, include behaviours such as being, in the
workplace, more cautious than others or some others.
Correct?---Yes.
Reticent?---Yes.
Less flexible, withdrawn and touchy I think were other behaviours you
described?---Yes.
Those behaviours are routinely exhibited by people who don’t have any
diagnosable mental impairment, aren't they, doctor?---Yes.
They're in fact behaviours that are demonstrated in the community at large.
Would you agree with that?---Well, yes. You have to put
it in the context,
though, of they may not be diagnosed with an impairment but they may still have
an impairment if their ability
to relate with people is poor.
If a person has a collection of particular behaviours, sometimes that
collection is sufficiently identifiable that they are described
as having an
identifiable personality disorder. Do you agree with that?---Yes.
Are personality disorders as described in the DSM-5, for example - are they
regarded as psychiatric disorders?---That's a conundrum,
that question, because
some people would separate out the mental illness as a discrete issue that you
have, and your personality
is separate, and yet another way of looking at it is
to say, “Let's cut down the barrier between personality disorder and
illness and look at how the person is functioning,” and the AMA5
guidelines, for example, has a number of examples of people
with personality
disorders that are rated under the guidelines, so I think it's quite applicable
to rate personality disorders. I
also think it’s - you know, we’re
applying a theory or a construct to understanding human behaviour and illness,
we're not talking about a biological illness, we’re talking about
people's mental functioning, and so there's a lot of people
with personality
disorders that have a lot of distress and I think a lot of people that are
impaired with personality disorders.
65 Dr Begg’s explanation of the approach taken by psychiatrists to
diagnosing a personality disorder is important. The conundrum
he describes
means that even though DSM-5 includes the condition known as a personality
disorder as a psychiatric condition, whether
the condition can be diagnosed in a
particular case is problematic. Dr Begg did not, in his assessment, or
when testifying, diagnose
a personality disorder. He recognised a continuum
between personality traits and a personality disorder with consequential
and impairment. Dr Begg’s cross‑examination
Doctor, isn’t it also the situation that there are many, many people in
the community who don’t have, if you like, the
full range of behaviours
which might lead to a diagnosis of a particular personality disorder but just
generally have different ways
of behaving? That’s a self-evident
proposition, isn't it?
---It’s self-evident and, you know, perhaps the way in which - the
DSM-5 is a categorical diagnostic tool, and so once the person's
behaving are persistently problematic in a number of different domains and
generally evident throughout the life span, then
that person might attract a
personality disorder diagnosis, as against the person who demonstrates those
traits that are ubiquitous
and common throughout the community, and some of
those traits, if they're exacerbated by a stress such as an illness or a
might be only a temporary aberration. So there’s, if you like, a
judgment call made in deciding whether this is a persistent
problem or just a
temporary problem.
MR POSSINGHAM: All right, doctor. Is it the situation that people can have
irritating behaviours and not have any diagnosable impairment?
Do you follow
There must come a point where people’s behaviours are just regarded as
part of the normal run of human behaviours, which we
know are very broad. Do you
agree with that proposition?---Yes, and I differentiate that from mental illness
or personality-driven
behaviours that are rateable, by the transient nature of
that irritating trait that you refer to. That is, if that person is irritating
you just, you know, when there’s a problem in the workplace but otherwise
is functioning quite well, then I wouldn't rate that
as a disorder.
Doctor, behaviours – let’s call them somewhat difficult
behaviours, being perhaps a little argumentative for example -
they can be
behaviours that again are demonstrated by ordinary members of the community,
friends and relations. We put up with them
and they don't attract any impairment
rating. Would you agree with that proposition?---Yes.
somewhere or another there’s got to be, what, some sort of line
drawn about when
somebody is just demonstrating a range of behaviours
some of which can be irritating or
difficult to deal with, and where
somebody is demonstrating behaviours that fall into the - can I call it clinical
category; that
is, that they are rateable impairments? ---Yes
(Underlining added)
66 The underlined question and answer shows that, notwithstanding the
acceptance in DSM-5 of a personality disorder as a psychiatric
disorder, a
distinction remains between personality behaviours and traits and a
‘clinical’ diagnosis which would support
a ‘rateable
impairment’. It is also significant that in the above passage Dr Begg did
not offer a clinical diagnosis
that Mr Paschalis had a pre-existing personality
disorder. In the following exchange the speculative nature of Dr Begg’s
that Mr Paschalis had any pre‑existing impairment at all
You say that you are able to determine that this man had pre-existing
impairments on the material that you have. Is that correct?---Yes.
You didn’t even have his GP notes at that time?---No, but I had the
response that he had to the workplace event, his marital
breakdown and, you
know, the loss of the relationships, which I considered was quite out of the
ordinary experience for someone without
any impairments beforehand.
So doesn’t it amount to that, doctor, with respect: that you have
inferred or determined that because he had an unusual or even
most unusual
reaction to this event, as you understood it, in the workplace, that therefore
he must have had a pre-existing impairment?---Yes.
Is that how you've done it? Yes?---Yes.
67 Later again in cross-examination, Dr Begg was pressed on the reason for
his deduction:
Look, the commissioning letter to you asked – I’ll just read it
out, the bottom of page 3. “If there is any part
of the worker’s
impairment attributable to unrelated injuries or causes, please deduct that
impairment before arriving at your
final assessment.” So is that the
instruction you were following when you made your estimate of some - the
proportion of contribution
from the relationship breakdown issues? ---Yes. I
think I saw the relationship breakdown as a pre-existing -
I mean, I believe
he has a pre-existing impairment that is in his personality domain and that
resulted in all the problems with the
relationship, et cetera
, and the need
to see himself in the workplace. So
then an event occurs in the workplace and
he just doesn't have the strength of relationship to weather that. While I
accept that there
might be a direct chain between anger at the workplace,
getting drunk, taking mirtazapine and having an argument and separating from
wife because of the argument, then feeling suicidal, you know, and requiring
hospitalisation under Dr Van den Bos
- normally in that six-week period you
see the relationship heal. I mean, usually the spouse will go - a sigh of relief
last he's getting treatment and maybe he'll get better. We can
start talking about getting back together again.” You know,
usually a bringing together and - I mean,
obviously I haven't interviewed the
wife, but I would suggest to her it was like, “That's it. Final straw.
I've had enough.
I've been putting up with problems for a long time. Now he's in
this state, I can't cope any more
(Underlining added)
68 Three significant matters emerge from the underlined parts of that
answer. First, an ‘impairment in the personality domain’
diagnosis of a personality disorder. Secondly, the ‘[lack of] strength of
the relationship’ is put, not as
an impairment, but as a vulnerability, or
psychological ‘eggshell skull’, which allowed the workplace insult
a more severe effect. Again, Dr Begg did not venture an assessment of
the degree of pre-existing or unrelated impairment.
69 Thirdly, it is not admissible opinion evidence for Dr Begg, who
acknowledged that he had not interviewed Mr Paschalis’ wife,
on an imagined interview in which he would have elicited from her that Mr
Paschalis’ reaction to the workplace insult
was the ‘final
straw’. Moreover, the difference between Mr Paschalis’ actual
impairment as assessed and the impairment
of the hypothetical worker is not a
measure of an impairment. If, and only if, the failure to re-establish his
prior relationship
or enter into replacement relationships is the result of an
injury or impairment within the meaning of those terms in the RTW Act,
be a deduction, and even then only to the extent of the assessment of the loss
of function due to that impairment. That
assessment may be, indeed generally
will be, very different to the degree that another illness is more severe
because of the vulnerability
of persons who are the loss of a relationship.
70 Dr Begg’s opinion was that if Mr Paschalis had been able to restore
his relationship, he is likely to have had no greater
depression than his
hypothetical ordinary worker. However, the failure to re-establish a
relationship is a personal circumstance
in which any worker, not only Mr
Paschalis, might find himself or herself for any number of reasons which are not
relevantly an impairment.
71 Dr Begg accepted that a person may have an inherent vulnerability to
depression without suffering an impairment before its onset:
Accepting all of that, doctor, but there is still a situation that can exist
where a person doesn't have an identifiable psychiatric
disorder despite having
a pre-existing psychological or psychiatric vulnerability. That can occur,
can’t it?---Well, it’s
the - yes. I mean, it’s a bit like your
example of the car accident. There are people who are exposed to quite horrific
situations.
In fact, fortunately the majority of people actually in a car
accident do not get a post-traumatic stress disorder. And so, yeah,
have exposure to these events and not get ill.
72 In the following answers, Dr Begg accepted a causal link between the
workplace insult and the breakdown of Mr Paschalis’s
marriage, thereby
accepting the work caused aggravation of such pre-existing impairments as there
might have been:
But does that piece of information - how would you see that piece of
information? I suppose - - -? --- I suppose I see him as a person
who - my view
is that he’s a man whose marriage is failing when he’s in the
workplace, and to counter the failure of
his relationship, which ultimately is a
sexual relationship, and he’s brought up already with the doctor - the GP
lack of sex is an issue for him. So even if he can't articulate it to
himself, I think he sees himself as a failure sexually and
so he counteracts the
whole failure of the marriage and his self-identity by taking on the persona of
a very competent and good worker,
well respected by everyone else, and then that
comes crushing down because of this – I’ll call it a gay - I don't
what one refers to it as.
(indistinct) phobia? --- Well, yes, but the comment - you know, the drawing
on his helmet implies that he's gay, and so psychologically
there’s a link
now with the failure of his marriage, because he's going, “Well, you know,
maybe I am gay.” Well,
that's just anathema to him. I don't think he could
accept that. So it becomes quite a strong reaction and probably an angry
and then he's faced with his life afterwards and the whole history of,
“Well, you know, look at me, I’m a failure sexually.
desire me. They think I'm” - you know,
I’m postulating
unconscious thoughts that may have gone on along the lines of, “Well, they
think I'm gay. Maybe she thinks
I’m gay,” and then, “I'm very
angry,” and that kind of wells up in depression and then the drinking,
the mirtazapine. The whole lot leads to argument and the breakdown of
the relationship. And so I think that it’s - well, I
answered your question.
(Underlining added)
73 In a report dated 17 May 2017, which was admitted into evidence in
Mr Paschalis’ case, the psychiatrist Dr Blakemore diagnosed
depressive disorder with psychotic features which caused a permanent impairment
resulting from the workplace insult. Dr
Blakemore reported that Mr Paschalis
did not appear to be suffering from a permanent impairment from any
non-work-related condition.
Dr Blakemore’s opinion was that the
‘disturbing ruminations’ which Dr Begg thought were
exacerbating Mr Paschalis’
impairment were symptoms of Mr Paschalis’
very serious illness over which he had no control.
74 In a supplementary report dated 31 July 2017 Dr Blakemore accepted that
Mr Paschalis had an underlying personality disposition
to depression but
observed that given the development of his depressive illness following the
workplace insult that was a ‘statement
of the obvious’. Dr
Blakemore denied that an underlying personality vulnerability was an injury or a
disability and that it
could be considered an impairment which could be assessed
for the purposes of the RTW Act. As to the first proposition,
Dr Blakemore
was entitled to give his medical opinion as to whether Mr
Paschalis’ underlying personality vulnerability was an injury for
purposes. However, whether or not it was an injury for any purpose under the
RTW Act involved a question of construction
of that Act and the IAG.
75 Dr Blakemore expressed the opinion that the breakdown of Mr
Paschalis’ marital relationship and the relationship with his
sister were
caused by the workplace insult and subsequent depression. Dr Blakemore disputed
Dr Begg’s opinion that the depressive
disorder resulting from the
workplace insult was insufficient to explain the failure to re-establish the
relationship with his wife.
Dr Blakemore’s opinion was that the
relationship breakdowns were related to the workplace insult. Dr Blakemore
denied that
there was any factual basis for Dr Begg’s opinion that 20
per cent of the WPI was due to non-work related factors.
76 A report of Dr Peter Farnbach, a consultant psychiatrist practising in
Victoria, which was obtained for the purposes of clinical
management by
Mr Paschalis’ general practitioner, was also received into evidence
but Dr Farnbach was not called to testify.
77 Dr Farnbach attended upon Mr Paschalis on 11 August 2015 remotely by
audio‑visual means. In his report, Dr Farnbach commented
‘number of background issues affecting [Mr Paschalis’]
presentation’. Dr Farnbach observed that Mr Paschalis
was drinking
too heavily in response to his marital difficulties over the preceding 15
78 Dr Farnbach diagnosed an adjustment disorder with anxious and depressed
mood which was significantly exacerbated by his prominent
angry ruminations. I
noted in [26] above that it was that condition which was first accepted by RTW
as a compensable condition.
Somewhat inconsistently, RTW contends in these
proceedings that the condition so described is an unrelated pre‑existing
Dr Farnbach also diagnosed a mild alcohol use disorder.
79 Dr Farnbach did not assess or report on the degree of any impairment in
functioning resulting from those conditions and did not
assess them in
accordance with GEPIC. It would be surprising if Mr Paschalis suffered no
impairment at all from the mild alcohol
abuse disorder and perhaps the
adjustment disorder, but the evidence is very sparse on the nature of that
disorder, prior to the
workplace insult. As Dr Begg testified, it is most
unlikely that an assessment, if it had been undertaken before or shortly after
the workplace insult, would have revealed a zero impairment. However, the
relevant question was whether the impairment was as high
as 20 per cent, or any
percentage at all, if assessed in accordance with GEPIC. There was no evidence
on which such an assessment
could be made.
80 The Deputy President found that:
Paschalis’ marriage had serious difficulties despite its outward
stability, and that in the months prior to the incident
he told colleagues that
he wished to leave his wife.
Prior to the
incident Mr Paschalis drank alcohol to a harmful level but that his alcohol
intake did not interfere with the successful
completion of his period of
probationary employment and his permanent employment thereafter.
Mr Paschalis was
vulnerable to psychiatric illness, but that vulnerability was not a
pre‑existing or unrelated injury or condition.
The workplace
insult precipitated Mr Paschalis’ marital separation.
Paschalis’ other familial relationships broke down as a result of the
workplace insult and were therefore not unrelated causes
or conditions.
Dr Begg had not
diagnosed any unrelated depressive psychiatric illness or medical condition, a
vulnerability is not an illness or
medical condition.
81 The Deputy President construed the word ‘cause’ in s 22(8)(b)
of the RTW Act widely, but accepted that it was limited
by the IAG:
The word ‘cause’ in s 22(8)(b) of the RTW Act was on the face
broader than injury or illness but the concept was limited
by the Guidelines and
a diagnosis of an injury was necessary before the GEPIC criteria could be
applied to assess an impairment.
82 The Deputy President concluded that there was no rateable impairment due
to a previous illness and that no deduction should be
83 The Deputy President explained that a different approach would have
surprising consequences:
Any deduction for mild impairment of thinking, perception or judgement due to
personality factors, which is not the product of an
illness or medical
condition, is in reality a deduction for a contributing non-work factor to the
one compensable mental illness.
This approach would permit deductions for a host
of personal vulnerabilities to psychological injuries such as age, gender, life
history and low IQ. It would result in discounting of compensable illnesses or
injuries in proportion to non-work contributing factors,
but where there is no
separate unrelated diagnosed illness or medical condition. In my view the scheme
establishes a threshold for
deduction of a separate diagnosable illness or
medical condition that is assessable under the GEPIC. It does not permit
for any lesser form of contributing impairment.
84 The Deputy President also rejected the respondent’s submission that
there was a pre-existing alcohol use disorder based
on Dr Farnbach’s
report. The Deputy President observed Dr Begg gave no such opinion and
that in any event no assessment of
that impairment had been made.
85 The Deputy President then considered, in the alternative, whether Dr
Begg’s assessment was correct on the premise that there
was an unrelated
or pre-existing impairment. The Judge rejected the respondent employer’s
submission that Dr Begg’s
estimate ultimately was a correct assessment of
a prior impairment for the following
The employer submits that the evidence demonstrates Dr Begg ultimately made
the correct assessment, albeit by estimating the prior
impairment. In my view
this submission invites the Tribunal to evaluate the estimate based on its lay
view of the evidence relevant
to important medical issues, and to disregard the
unambiguous terms of the Guidelines. I am not qualified to make that
evaluation.
The guiding legal principles relevant to resolving this issue are clear. The
Tribunal must follow the prescribed Guidelines, and there
is no room for
discretion regarding their application:
GM Holden Ltd v Roberts
Tribunal must not make a finding as to a WPI assessment which is not based on a
proper assessment by an accredited expert assessor
under the Act:
of SA v Weeding
(Citations omitted)
86 The formal orders of the Deputy President were:
decision of the respondent dated 15 November 2016 finding a 15 per cent whole
person impairment.
Determine the
applicant to have a 35 per cent whole person impairment.
Determine that
the applicant is a seriously injured worker.
Set aside the
decision of the respondent dated 21 June 2017 discontinuing the
applicant’s weekly payments.
arrears of weekly payments.
The applicant to
have the costs of the proceedings.
87 No formal order was made as to the determination of Dr Begg
88 The essential reasons of the Full Bench of the South Australian
Employment Tribunal were:
(1) Dr Begg did not diagnose a pre-existing psychiatric condition because he
was reticent to give a personality disorder the status
of a psychiatric
diagnosis, but the Impairment Assessment Guidelines (the Guidelines) made under
s 22(3) of the RTW Act requires
a psychiatric diagnosis to be based on
DSM‑5 using GEPIC.
(2) A personality disorder is a condition recognised by DSM-5. Accordingly,
regardless of Dr Begg’s doubts about whether a
personality disorder was a
psychiatric illness, the RTW Act and the Guidelines proceed on that basis.
(3) Even though no psychiatric diagnosis of a pre-existing illness was made
by Dr Begg or anyone else, there was a sound evidentiary
basis for finding
that Mr Paschalis had a pre-existing psychiatric illness or condition,
namely the adjustment disorder with anxious
and depressed mood and the mild
alcohol use disorder diagnosed by Dr Farnbach.
(4) Dr Begg was entitled to have regard to the circumstances of the matter
and Mr Paschalis’ pre-injury behaviour. While the
Deputy President was
entitled to have regard to the evidence of Dr Blakemore, the different
conclusion arrived at by Dr Blakemore
did not mean that Dr Begg erred insofar as
he found contrary to Dr Blakemore, that the work insult alone did not account
degree of Mr Paschalis’ depression.
(5) The fact that Mr Paschalis’ drinking did not interfere with his
successful completion of employment probation and the fact
that the marriage had
not dissolved before the work insult were relevant to the question of the
significant contribution of the work
insult but neither qualification precluded
there being a pre-existing impairment.
(6) It was open to Dr Begg to have regard to the earlier illness of which he
was not aware at the time that he wrote the report.
(7) Even in the absence of a prior psychiatric diagnosis the phrase
“unrelated injuries or causes” in s 22(8)(b) of the
extends to a condition that does not amount to a diagnosed psychiatric illness.
A personality disorder or traits may be
an unrelated cause of impairment even if
not an illness. Even though paragraph 16.4 of the IAG requires a psychiatric
in order to make a WPI for a mental injury, no corresponding
requirement exists in relation to disregarding or deducting a pre-existing
impairment.
89 The following brief remarks on each of those steps follow from my
analysis of the evidence and construction of s 22(8) of the
(1) Contrary to the Full Bench’s understanding of Dr Begg’s
evidence, he was not reticent to, indeed he accepted, that,
a personality
disorder had the status of a psychiatric diagnosis in DSM-5 but he did not
himself make that diagnosis of Mr Paschalis.
(2) The recognition of a personality disorder in DSM-5 did not mean that
Mr Paschalis had a psychiatric disorder and there was no
such diagnosis in
the psychiatric evidence before the Deputy President.
(3) There was evidence that Mr Paschalis suffered a pre-existing adjustment
disorder and a mild alcohol abuse disorder but there was
no evidence about the
nature of the former disorder, and neither any evidence of, and no psychiatric
opinion on, the degree of impairment
suffered by Mr Paschalis, if any, in
accordance with GEPIC as a result of either or both of those disorders.
(4) It can be accepted that Dr Begg was entitled to have regard to all of the
evidence in the case about Mr Paschalis’ condition
before the workplace
insult, but the Deputy President’s finding that the workplace insult alone
accounted for Mr Paschalis’
depression necessarily demonstrated error
in Dr Begg’s assessment because it necessarily entailed a conclusion
that no part
of Mr Paschalis’ major depression was due to, or caused
by, a pre-existing or unrelated condition. The Full Bench proceeded
acceptance of Dr Begg’s opinion, that the workplace insult could not
alone have caused Mr Paschalis’ major depression,
to a conclusion
that there was an unrelated cause. That conclusion does not necessarily follow
because the workplace insult may
have aggravated the unrelated cause insofar as
it was an illness or injury, and insofar as it was not, it need not be
disregarded.
In this particular case, the conclusion was contrary to the
finding of the Deputy President that the workplace insult contributed
breakdown of the familial relationships which were therefore related to the work
(5) It can be accepted that Mr Paschalis might nonetheless have suffered an
impairment, even though he was undertaking his employment
duties and remained in
a marital relationship, before the workplace insult. Dr Begg’s
assessment was nonetheless vitiated
by error, in that there was no evidence of
the nature and extent of any pre‑existing impairment and no assessment of
that impairment
in accordance with GEPIC.
(6) It can be accepted that it was open to Dr Begg to have regard to the
adjustment disorder and mild alcohol abuse disorder diagnosed
Dr Farnbach, but the diagnosis of a condition is only the necessary first
step and not a sufficient basis on which to assess a
deductable impairment.
(7) A personality dysfunction is not an illness and cannot be disregarded or
deducted pursuant to s 22(8)(b) for the reasons I have
paragraph [53] above.
90 The Full Bench explained the rationale for its approach in the following
[50] In considering what part of Mr Paschalis’ overall impairment
should be deducted, Dr Begg was required to estimate the likely
prior level of
impairment. He could not assess prior impairment in the sense
‘assess’ is used in the IAG and AMA5 because
he did not conduct a
clinical examination of Mr Paschalis before the work incident. That illustrates
a difficulty with the approach
taken by the Deputy President. Without
undertaking a clinical examination of the patient before a PIA, it would not be
if an assessor did not want to make a pre-injury diagnosis given the
assessor would not have examined the patient prior to the work
[51] Despite not making a pre-injury diagnosis, Dr Begg assessed pre-injury
impairment. He did so having regard to the evidence about
Mr Paschalis’
pre-injury behaviour. There may be some cases where despite the best efforts of
an assessor, no reliable estimate
of prior impairment can be made. However, in
this case the assessor was sufficiently confident to estimate prior impairment
and explained
how he did so, and no error of approach is apparent. The
assessment made by Dr Begg should stand as it was made.
[52] The scheme of impairment assessment under the RTW Act is based on there
being one assessment made by one assessor. Mr Paschalis
had the right to choose
the assessor and he selected Dr Begg. That does not mean Mr Paschalis has to
accept an error made by Dr Begg,
but no error has been demonstrated. Dr
Begg’s unwillingness to diagnose a pre-existing psychiatric illness does
not mean there
was no pre-existing impairment.
91 That reasoning must be rejected. It
possible to assess a
pre-existing impairment based on a history taken after a work injury, alone
or in conjunction with other evidence
such as the notes of a treating medical
practitioner. If an approved medical practitioner conducting the assessment is
to make a pre-injury diagnosis, that is not a difficulty with the
Deputy President’s approach. Far from it. It simply means
that there is
insufficient evidence to diagnose a pre-existing injury or assess its
consequential impairment.
92 The premise of paragraph [51] that it is possible to make a reliable
estimate of pre‑injury impairment in the absence of
a pre-injury diagnosis
must be rejected. The making of a diagnosis is fundamental to an
evidence-based, scientifically sound medical
assessment of impairment. The
making of a diagnosis allows the assessment to be informed by that body of
medical knowledge concerning
impairments generally to be found in, and
associated with, the diagnosed condition. That is precisely why GEPIC requires,
as a pre-condition
to the assessment of a psychiatric impairment, the diagnosis
of a condition which is found in DSM-5. In any event, contrary to the
observation of the Full Bench in paragraph [51], Dr Begg made no assessment of
Mr Paschalis’ prior impairment. He assessed
a completely different
matter, which was the proportion of Mr Paschalis’ present, not
pre-existing, impairment which had developed
after his workplace insult. As to
paragraph [52], it follows from my remarks on paragraphs [50] and [51] that Dr
Begg’s assessment
was plainly erroneous.
93 The first ground of appeal complains that the Full Bench exceeded its
by treating the
relationship losses, and any pre-existing condition, as unrelated to the work
injury. The Deputy President found,
in fact, that the workplace insult
contributed to Mr Paschalis’ relationship losses, and that there was
no pre-existing impairment.
94 Insofar as Dr Begg’s assessment was based on the contribution of
the relationship losses to Mr Paschalis’ major depression,
Deputy President correctly found on the evidence, including Dr Begg’s
concession, that the workplace insult contributed
to the loss of the
relationships and the impairments were therefore not unrelated. The Full Bench
therefore erred in law in treating,
contrary to the finding of the Deputy
President, the impairments as unrelated. Moreover, neither in
Dr Begg’s report nor in
his evidence did he attribute any proportion
of the major depression to any pre-existing condition. The
Deputy President did not
and could not, on the evidence before him, make an
alternative medical finding to that effect. The Full Bench exceeded its
by finding, in the absence of any evidence to that effect, that the
pre-existing conditions of an adjustment and alcohol abuse disorder
diagnosed by
Dr Farnbach were the cause of an unrelated impairment which happened to
have the same degree of impairment as that to
which Dr Begg attributed to the
relationship losses. The appeal on ground 1 must be allowed.
95 Ground 2 complains that the Full Bench conflated the subject matter of
ss 22(8)(b) and (g) of the RTW Act. The Full Bench did
not advert to the
distinct field of operation of those subparagraphs which I have adumbrated in
[38] to [42] above. This ground
of appeal too must be allowed. The Full Bench
did not grasp that, insofar as there was a pre-existing impairment, subparagraph
only authorised a deduction if it was due to an injury, and that the IAG
required that the impairment be assessed in accordance with
the principles set
out therein as if it were a work injury. There was no evidence of any such
assessment.
96 The Full Bench erred in its construction of the words ‘unrelated
cause’ in subparagraph (b) by extending them to impairments
which are not
the consequence of an injury. In any event, subparagraph (b) had no application
to the personality disorder and alcohol
abuse disorder. Both were pre-existing
conditions and therefore governed exclusively by subparagraph (g). Subparagraph
on its own terms, limited to medical conditions. Subparagraph (b) could
only have application to the additional depression caused
by the subsequent
marital and family relationship breakdown. However, given the evidence, and the
Deputy President’s finding
of fact in accordance with that evidence,
that they were related, no occasion arose to apply subparagraph (b).
97 Moreover, even on the false premise that the relationship losses were a
subsequently contracted condition, and that they were
not related, the proper
approach was to identify and disregard the dysfunctions attributable to those
losses. There was no statutory
warrant to postulate the degree of impairment
that the workplace insult would have caused a hypothetical worker who did not
those losses and deduct that from the actual WPI.
98 Ground 3 complains that the Full Bench upheld Dr Begg’s deduction
when there had been no assessment of the degree of impairment
flowing from any
pre‑existing condition or any condition or injury resulting from an
unrelated cause. That ground too must
be upheld. The marital relationship
losses were, for the reasons that I have given, not unrelated. There was no
assessment of the
impairment, if any, from which Mr Paschalis suffered before
the work insult as a consequence of an adjustment disorder and alcohol
disorder. Dr Farnbach made no such assessment. Dr Begg could say no more than
that it was something more than zero. Based
on that evidence, and holding the
respondents to their respective cases, that contribution might have been a de
minimis contribution
which could be ignored. There is no good reason to refer
the matter for an independent medical assessment of the correct question
accordance with the IAG after the protracted litigation in this matter.
99 Ground 3.4 and ground 3.5 make similar complaints to the ones already
discussed. Those grounds should be allowed for the same
100 I would allow the appeal, set aside the decision of the Full Bench and
restore the orders of the Deputy President.
LIVESEY AND BLEBY JJ:
This is an appeal from a decision of the
Full Bench of the South Australian Employment Tribunal (the
allowing an appeal from a decision of a single member of the Tribunal (the
trial Judge
which he found the appellant to be a
“seriously injured worker” within the meaning of
102 On 1 July 2015, amendments to the Act restricted the availability of
long‑term compensation for income and medical expenses
seriously injured workers. Under the new scheme,
workers who are assessed as having a “whole person impairment”
) over 30 per cent are designated as “seriously injured
103 The appellant sustained a psychiatric illness following an incident at
work on 7 August 2015. This appeal concerns the interpretation
and application
of ss 22(8)(b) and 22(8)(g) of the Act, in circumstances where the
appellant’s work injury was assessed as
contributing 15 per cent to his
total WPI of 35 per cent.
104 For the reasons that follow, we would dismiss the appeal.
105 The appellant is a qualified trade painter. He commenced employment as
an industrial painter in Port Pirie with McMahon Services
Australia Pty Ltd in
March 2015. He had lived in Port Pirie since about 2007, after moving there with
his wife and two children.
106 On 7 August 2015, the appellant’s white hard hat, and that of a
female co‑worker, were defaced with a drawing of
male genitals. The image
on the appellant’s hat was preceded by the letter “I” and a
“love heart” symbol.
The appellant wore the hat for an hour or more
before noting that colleagues were laughing at him. He then discovered the
He was angry and upset. He approached two colleagues, Mr Steele and Mr
Tootell, suspecting their involvement. They denied responsibility.
appellant then reported the incident to his supervisor. He left the workplace.
He has never returned to work.
107 The following morning, the appellant received a phone call from Mr
Tootell, who criticised him for complaining because it resulted
in Mr Steele
getting into trouble. Later that day, the appellant saw two co-workers while
shopping at the supermarket. He waved at
them, but they did not acknowledge him.
He saw them whispering to each other. The appellant gave evidence that he
“knew instantly
that things had spread” about him and “the
whole town of Port Pirie knew”. He began to feel depressed and
leave his home for six days. He said he started drinking alcohol
108 After six days, the appellant was “kicked out” of home by
his wife. He stayed at his sister’s house for a short
appellant’s sister began to be concerned by his excessive drinking and
some comments that he had made that caused
her to fear that he may commit
suicide. She sought help from police, who attended and took the appellant to the
Port Pirie Hospital.
Upon his release from hospital, the appellant left Port
Pirie for Adelaide. He did not return. The appellant and his wife divorced
December 2017.
109 On 11 August 2015, the appellant had a medical consultation with Dr
Peter Farnbach, a psychiatrist based in Victoria. Dr Farnbach
reported that the
appellant presented with an acute adjustment disorder with anxious and depressed
mood. He also diagnosed a mild
alcohol use disorder.
110 On 31 August 2015, the appellant filed a claim for worker’s
compensation. That claim was accepted by an authorised claims
agent of the
respondent (the
claims agent
) on 29 September 2015.
111 Sometime later, the appellant sought an assessment of permanent
impairment pursuant to s 22 of the Act. On 11 November 2016,
a psychiatrist and
accredited impairment assessor, Dr Jules Begg, assessed the appellant as having
an overall WPI of 35 per cent.
However, after making deductions for contributing
factors not related to the compensable work injury, Dr Begg assessed a 15 per
WPI arising from the work injury.
112 On 15 November 2016, the claims agent wrote to the appellant informing
him that, based on Dr Begg’s assessment, the appellant
did not qualify to
be treated as a seriously injured worker under the Act.
113 On 22 December 2016, the appellant’s solicitors wrote to the
claims agent requesting a review of the appellant’s
entitlements under s
47(1) of the Act. On 3 February 2017, the claims agent refused that
request, reiterating that the appellant
did not fall within the requirements of
the section because he was not a seriously injured worker. On 21 June 2017, the
claims agent
wrote to the appellant indicating that his entitlement to weekly
payments of income support would cease from 4 August 2017.
114 The appellant filed a series of review applications in the Tribunal
pursuant to s 99 of the Act against Dr Begg’s assessment
and the claims
agent’s determinations of 15 November 2016, 3 February 2017 and 21 June
115 On 11 July 2018, the trial Judge dealt with each of these applications.
The trial Judge determined that Dr Begg had erred in
deducting 20 per cent from
the WPI of 35 per cent. He set aside Dr Begg’s determination and
substituted a determination of
35 per cent WPI resulting from the
appellant’s compensable mental illness. He declared the worker to be a
injured worker” for the purposes of the Act.
116 The appellant’s employer appealed against the trial Judge’s
decision to the Full Bench of the SAET. On 26 September
2019, the Full Bench
allowed the appeal, set aside the decision of the trial Judge and restored the
original WPI assessment of 15
per cent. The appellant now appeals against the
decision of the Full Bench to this Court.
The relevant
provisions of the Act
117 The objects of the Act are set out in s 3 as follows:
3—Objects of Act
(1) The object of this Act is to establish a scheme that supports workers
who suffer injuries at work and that has as its primary
objective to provide
early intervention in respect of claims so as to ensure that action is taken to
support workers—
(a) in realising the health benefits of work; and
(b) in recovering from injury; and
(c) in returning to work (including, if required, after retraining); and
(d) in being restored to the community when return to work is not possible.
(2) In connection with subsection (1), the other objectives that apply with
respect to this Act are—
(a) to ensure that workers who suffer injuries at work receive high-quality
service, are treated with dignity, and are supported
financially; and
(b) to ensure that employers' costs are contained within reasonable limits
so that the impact of work injuries on South Australian
businesses is minimised;
(c) to provide a reasonable balance between the interests of workers and the
interests of employers; and
(d) to reduce the overall social and economic cost of work injuries to the
State and to the community; and
(e) to support activities that are aimed at reducing the incidence of work
injuries; and
(f) to reduce disputation when workers are injured at work by improving the
quality of decision-making and by reducing adversarial
contests to the greatest
possible extent.
(3) A person exercising judicial, quasi-judicial or administrative powers
must interpret this Act in the light of its objects and
these objectives without
bias towards the interests of employers on the one hand, or workers on the
(4) The Corporation, the worker and the employer from whose employment a
work injury arises must seek to achieve an injured worker's
(taking into account the objects and requirements of this Act).
118 The provisions relevant to the determination of this appeal are ss 21
and 22 of the Act. The relevant portions of those sections
are set out
21—Seriously injured workers
(1) This Act makes special provision in a number of places for seriously
injured workers.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, a seriously injured worker is a worker
whose work injury has resulted in permanent impairment and
the degree of whole
person impairment has been assessed under Division 5 for the purposes of this
Act to be 30% or more.
(5) Unless or until a worker is assessed or determined to be a seriously
injured worker as contemplated by this section, the worker
will be taken not to
be a seriously injured worker for the purposes of this Act.
(6) However, if a worker is taken not to be a seriously injured worker and
the worker at a later time is characterised as a seriously
injured worker under
subsection (2) or determined to be a seriously injured worker under subsection
(a) the worker will be taken to have been a seriously injured worker from
the date of the injury; and
(b) the worker is entitled to be paid the amounts that would have
constituted the worker's entitlements under this Act had the worker
to be a seriously injured worker from the date on which an incapacity for work
in consequence of the relevant work injury
first occurred after taking into
account any amount already paid under this Act.
(7) An amount paid under subsection (6)(b) will be increased by interest at
the prescribed rate.
(8) In assessing whether the 30% threshold under this section has been met
(that is, whether the degree of whole person impairment
resulting from a work
injury is at least 30%)—
(a) impairment resulting from physical injury is to be assessed separately
from impairment resulting from psychiatric injury; and
(b) in assessing impairment resulting from physical injury or psychiatric
injury, no regard is to be had to impairment that results
from consequential
mental harm; and
(c) in assessing the degree of whole person impairment resulting from
physical injury, no regard is to be had to impairment that
results from a
psychiatric injury or consequential mental harm; and
(d) the 30% threshold is not met unless the degree of whole person
impairment resulting from physical injury is at least 30% or the
degree of whole
person impairment resulting from psychiatric injury is at least 30%.
22—Assessment of permanent impairment
(1) This section sets out a scheme for assessing the degree of impairment
(being whole person impairment) that applies to a work
injury that results in
permanent impairment.
(2) An assessment under this section—
(a) must be made in accordance with the Impairment Assessment Guidelines;
(b) must be made by a medical practitioner who holds a current accreditation
under this section.
(3) The Minister will publish guidelines (the Impairment Assessment
Guidelines) for the purposes of the assessment of permanent impairment
whole person impairment).
(7) An assessment of the degree of impairment resulting from an
(a) must not be made until there is evidence that the injury has stabilised;
(b) must, subject to subsection (8), be based on the worker's current
impairment as at the date of assessment, including any changes
in the signs and
symptoms following any medical or surgical treatment undergone by the worker in
respect of the injury; and
(c) must be made by an accredited medical practitioner selected in
accordance with the Impairment Assessment Guidelines.
(8) An assessment must take into account the following principles:
(a) if a worker presents for assessment in relation to injuries which
occurred on different dates, the impairments are to be assessed
chronologically
by date of injury;
(b) impairments from unrelated injuries or causes are to be disregarded in
making an assessment;
(c) impairments from the same injury or cause are to be assessed together or
combined to determine the degree of impairment of the
worker (using any
principle set out in the Impairment Assessment Guidelines);
(d) impairment resulting from physical injury is to be assessed separately
from impairment resulting from psychiatric injury;
(e) in assessing impairment resulting from physical injury or psychiatric
injury, no regard is to be had to impairment that results
from consequential
mental harm;
(f) in assessing the degree of permanent impairment resulting from physical
injury, no regard is to be had to impairment that results
from a psychiatric
injury or consequential mental harm;
(g) any portion of an impairment that is due to a previous injury (whether
or not a work injury or whether because of a pre-existing
condition) that caused
the worker to suffer an impairment before the relevant work injury is to be
deducted for the purposes of an
assessment, subject to any provision to the
contrary made by the Impairment Assessment Guidelines;
(h) assessments are to comply with any other requirements specified by the
Impairment Assessment Guidelines.
119 The term “injury” is defined in s 4(1) to mean:
(a) any physical or mental injury including—
(i) loss, deterioration or impairment of a limb, organ or part of the body,
or of a physical, mental or sensory faculty; or
(ii) a disease; or
(iii) disfigurement; or
(b) where the context admits—the death of the worker, and includes an
injury that is, or results from, the aggravation, acceleration,
exacerbation,
deterioration or recurrence of a prior injury;
The Impairment
Assessment Guidelines
120 Sub-sections 22(2), 22(3) and 22(7)(c) of the Act refer to the
“Impairment Assessment
Guidelines”
), which are to direct any assessment made under s 22.
Under s 22(7)(c), an assessment of the degree of impairment resulting from
injury must be made by an accredited medical practitioner selected in accordance
with the Guidelines. That assessment must then
be made by the accredited
assessor in accordance with the Guidelines, in addition to taking into account
the principles laid down
in ss 22(7) and 22(8).
121 The Guidelines comprise 17 chapters dealing with the assessment of
injuries across various body parts and systems. Relevantly,
chapter 16 provides
for the assessment of psychiatric impairment. This chapter is based on the Guide
to the Evaluation of Psychiatric
Impairment for Clinicians (
122 Before undertaking an impairment assessment, chapter 16 directs that an
assessor must be familiar with the introductory chapter
of the Guidelines, and
chapters 1 and 2 of the American Medical Association’s Guides to the
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment,
5th Edition (
). Chapters 1 and 2
of AMA-5 cover the purpose of, and the applications and methods for performing
and reporting, impairment evaluations.
123 The introductory chapter to the Guidelines provides, relevantly, that
assessments are only to be conducted when an injury has
stabilised and the
assessor considers that the degree of whole person impairment of the worker is
fully ascertainable. Whole person
impairment is fully ascertainable where the
assessor believes the worker has attained maximum medical improvement, defined
stability of the worker’s condition for three months, that
condition being unlikely to change in the foreseeable
124 The introductory chapter also provides for the treatment of previous
injuries, pre-existing conditions and unrelated injuries
in the assessment
process. Chapters 1.21, 23, 24 and 29
1.21 The Act requires that injuries are assessed, not assessed or deducted,
depending on specific requirements. For example:
“Impairments
from unrelated injuries or causes are to be disregarded in making an
assessment” (subsection 22(8)(b) of
portion of an impairment that is due to a previous injury (whether or not a work
injury or whether because of a pre-existing
condition) that caused the worker to
suffer an impairment before the relevant work injury is to be deducted for the
purposes of an
assessment...” (subsection 22(8)(g) of the
1.23 If the unrelated or previous injury is to the same part of the body as
the work injury and is not related to the work injury,
the requestor will ask
the assessor to disregard the unrelated or previous injury, which means that the
current permanent impairment
attributable to both injuries is assessed but the
degree of impairment attributable to the unrelated or previous injury is then
If, at the time of the request, the requestor is uncertain as to
whether there are any previous injuries, they may ask the assessor
to identify
and disregard any previous injuries. This should be appropriately documented in
the assessment report.
1.24 If the requestor asks for any injuries to a part of the body to be
‘deducted’, the assessor assesses the permanent
impairment of the
affected part of the body by applying the methodology in the Guidelines then
deducts the permanent impairment %
attributable to such injury. If there is no
impairment from the previous unrelated injury or cause then there is nothing to
and this should be appropriately documented in the assessment report.
1.29 When a pre-existing injury needs to be considered, there should be
objective evidence to support the assessment of impairment
caused by that injury
(e.g. clinical evidence, medical records and reports, the worker’s
history, etc) and this must be carefully
documented in the report. The
impairment rating of the pre-existing injury is determined by applying the
methodology in the Guidelines.
The impairment from the pre-existing injury is
then subtracted from the overall impairment rating. There cannot be a negative
that is, below 0%. If a worker suffers an impairment caused by a
pre-existing unrelated injury which has already been assessed in
accordance with
the Guidelines or previous Guidelines, the assessor can deduct that impairment
from the overall impairment which
reflects the effect of both injuries.
125 Appendix 1 to the Guidelines, entitled “Notes for the
Requestor”, contains a series of definitions aimed at clarifying
the terms contained in s 22 and the introductory paragraphs quoted
‘Disregarded’ means that the permanent impairment attributable to
the injury which is to be disregarded should be calculated
and deducted in the
assessment.
‘Assessed together or combined’ means a number of injuries should
be included in the final whole person impairment assessment.
‘Assessed separately’ means that separate and independent whole
person impairment assessments should be made.
‘No regard’ means the impairment should not be included in
assessing whole person impairment.
‘Deducted’ means that one assessment is subtracted from another
assessment. This may occur, depending on the facts of
a particular matter, where
the work injury being assessed is an aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation,
deterioration or recurrence
of a previous injury.
‘Unrelated injury’ means any injury or cause that is not the work
injury or relevant to that injury.
126 Chapter 16.4 provides that, prior to any impairment assessment being
made pursuant to that chapter, the worker must have had
a psychiatric diagnosis,
made by the treating psychiatrist, based on the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth
127 The method for assessing psychiatric impairment described in the GEPIC
involves the assessment of the severity of six specific
mental functions into
five classes of increasing severity. The six mental functions are intelligence,
thinking, perception, judgment,
mood and behaviour. The different classes of
impairment for each mental function are then combined to produce a total
psychiatric
impairment.
128 Dr Begg’s report identified the relevant history of the matter,
before expressing the opinion that the appellant had a
severe major depressive
disorder with psychotic features. In reaching this diagnosis, he noted that the
appellant had experienced
“a significant humiliation in the
workplace”, but the way in which he had failed to recover was surprising.
that the appellant blamed others from an early stage in the history of
his illness and, despite intensive efforts by therapists,
the appellant’s
rapport appeared to be poor and he did not trust others.
129 Dr Begg believed that the appellant was re-traumatising himself
psychologically by constantly thinking about the workplace incident.
appellant described the incident as the “straw that broke his back”,
despite not having described any pre-existing
mental health problems. Dr Begg
considered the sudden breakdown of the appellant’s relationship with his
wife and the fact
that they had not reconciled to be unusual if the relationship
had been, as the appellant claimed, a satisfactory relationship of
years. He suspected that the appellant had a distorted view of the past, and an
idealised view of his work and relationship,
which were shattered by his
humiliation in the workplace.
130 Dr Begg noted that the appellant had received biological, psychological
and inpatient treatments, but he had not always participated
recommendations of his therapists. Dr Begg considered that the likelihood of
this changing in the future was low, and that
the appellant had reached his
maximum improvement. It was therefore appropriate to undertake a rating of the
major depressive disorder.
131 Dr Begg proceeded to assess the appellant in accordance with the
Guidelines and undertook a GEPIC rating. He concluded his report
assessment of the contribution of the appellant’s relationship losses to
his overall impairment:
Mr Paschalis experienced a psychological humiliation in the workplace, and
within two weeks an 18 year marriage had failed. This is
most unusual, and
would suggest there were already problems in the marriage before the workplace
event. In my experience a stable
marriage will sustain at least 12 months of
significant illness in a partner. Where a relationship breaks down within six
of an illness, there is usually found to be a significant relationship
problem predating the illness. Intimate personal relationships
important for psychological well-being. The loss of such a relationship is a
potent cause of mental illness, particularly
depression. After he separated from
his partner he then lived with his sister for a short period of time until she
was sufficiently
concerned by his suicidal thoughts to call the police and he
was then admitted to hospital. He described this as a betrayal, rather
an expression of concern. It has created a significant rift in his relationship
with his family. The depression that arose
from the workplace injury is not
sufficient to explain the failure to re-establish a relationship with his sister
or with his wife
or children. There is persistence of his depression because of
the manner in which he relives in his mind the humiliation of the
event, and the loss of his relationship with his partner and with his family. In
my opinion these multiple relationship
losses contribute 20% to the whole person
impairment and are not related to the original injury.
132 Therefore, in his final assessment Dr Begg considered that the
appellant’s total psychiatric impairment amounted to 35
per cent, but that
impairments not related to the work injury amounted to 20 per cent, leaving a 15
per cent compensable psychiatric
impairment.
Judge’s reasons
133 The dispute at first instance before the trial Judge concerned the
validity of Dr Begg’s 20 per cent reduction. The trial
Judge set out the
factual background of the matter and summarised the evidence that had been
presented to him.
134 The trial Judge did not go into any detail about the appellant’s
admission made during cross-examination that the statement
made in his pre-trial
affidavit that he did not have any problems with his marriage whilst working for
McMahons was not true. In
addition, the appellant admitted discussing his
marriage problems with his female co-worker, despite saying otherwise in his
The appellant also admitted telling his female co-worker about
undergoing marriage counselling for “intimacy issues”
in 2011 and
that he was looking for a rental property before the incident because of the
trouble he was having with his wife. Under
cross‑examination, the
appellant explained that he was frustrated because he had not had sex with his
wife for a considerable
period of time: “I lost it and I just wanted to
move on”. Mr Curtis, one of the appellant’s work colleagues,
that he could not recall seeing or hearing anybody suggest to the appellant
that the appellant and the co‑worker were in a
relationship or having sex.
He did not think that they were “having a relationship”. The female
co-worker was not called
to give evidence, although she had given an affidavit
to the appellant’s solicitors.
135 Relevantly, the trial Judge discussed the oral evidence given by Dr
Begg, in addition to his written report, and the opposing
written opinion of
another psychiatrist, Dr Warwick Blakemore.
136 In oral evidence, Dr Begg was asked to explain his view that the
appellant’s relationship losses were not related to the
compensable
psychiatric illness. His evidence was essentially that he believed the appellant
had a pre-existing impairment, likely
a personality disorder, that had
contributed significantly to the overall subsequent injury, although he had not
specifically diagnosed
that condition in his report.
137 Dr Blakemore’s written opinion expressed the view that the
appellant was suffering a permanent impairment due to a major
disorder resulting from the work incident, and there did not appear to be any
impairment as a result of any non-work-related
condition. He agreed that the
worker had an underlying personality disposition to depression, but that this
vulnerability could not
be considered an impairment capable of assessment.
Similarly, he thought the consequences of the worker’s relationship
could not be assessed as an impairment.
138 Dr Blakemore did not agree with Dr Begg’s opinion that the
work-related illness was insufficient to explain the appellant’s
to re-establish his relationships. He said it was common for people with serious
mental illness involving paranoid thinking
to alienate people close to them.
139 After summarising these opinions, the trial Judge turned to the question
whether there were existing serious difficulties in
the appellant’s
marital relationship. He was constrained by the absence of evidence from the
appellant’s ex-wife. He
considered the appellant’s evidence to be
generally unreliable due to his severe illness, acknowledged memory problems,
idealisation of the past. He accepted the evidence from the
appellant’s sister that there were no major relationship issues
she was aware. However, he acknowledged that she had a limited perspective.
140 The trial Judge generally accepted the evidence of one of the
appellant’s work colleagues, Mr Curtis, who said that the
appellant had
expressed dissatisfaction about his marriage before the work incident, and that
he believed the appellant had a heavy
drinking problem. On these issues, the
trial Judge concluded:
I conclude that in the months prior to the incident the worker did believe
his marriage was in such difficulty that he said to two
work colleagues he
wished to leave his wife. I find these serious difficulties existed despite the
outward appearance of a stable
marriage, albeit with some apparent ‘ups
and downs’.
I also conclude that prior to the incident the worker drank alcohol to a
level harmful to his health, as described by Dr Farnbach,
but that his alcohol
intake did not interfere with his successfully completing his probation period
or with his continuing employment
in the months prior to the incident.
141 The trial Judge then turned to the question whether the appellant had an
impairment from an unrelated injury or cause pursuant
to s 22(8)(b). He
considered that this provision raised “distinct but overlapping issues to
those raised by s 22(8)(g)”,
which he went on to address.
142 He considered that there was no dispute that the worker had suffered
some degree of depressive feelings over the loss of his
relationship with his
wife and two children. He noted that Dr Begg had not diagnosed any separate
psychiatric illness or medical
condition, but accepted that the word
“cause” in s 22(8)(b) connoted a broader concept that captured Dr
treatment of the appellant’s relationship losses as
contributing to the mental impairment he had at the time of assessment.
143 According to the trial Judge, the question then arose as to whether the
relationship losses were unrelated to the compensable
illness. Dr Begg had
accepted in oral evidence that a causal connection existed between the final
argument between the appellant
and his wife, and the appellant’s reaction
to feeling unsupported by his wife over his response to the work incident. He
also postulated that the appellant’s concern at being seen as gay as a
result of the work incident, was psychologically linked
to the failure of the
marriage. The trial Judge accepted both opinions.
144 The trial Judge accepted Dr Blakemore’s evidence that mentally ill
individuals tend to alienate others close to them and
took into account the fact
that the marriage had lasted 18 years despite long term marital issues. He
considered that the appellant’s
long-term drinking habit was not an
adequate explanation for the relationship breakdown. He concluded that the
relationship loss
was inextricably related to the compensable psychiatric
illness, and that this connection was not tenuous or insubstantial.
145 The trial Judge then turned to the question whether there was an
impairment from a pre-existing condition pursuant to s 22(8)(g).
He considered
that the word “condition” in that section was a reference to a
medical condition, and was analogous to
the meaning of “cause” in s
22(8)(b). He explained that Dr Begg had not diagnosed any pre-existing illness
condition, but had merely inferred an existing impairment from the
extreme nature of the appellant’s psychological reaction
to the work
146 The trial Judge considered that the scheme established a threshold for
the deduction of a separate diagnosable illness or medical
condition assessable
under the GEPIC, but that it did not permit deductions to be made for any lesser
form of contributing impairment.
The trial Judge accepted the appellant’s
submission that a vulnerability is not an illness or medical condition for the
of the Act. The trial Judge therefore concluded that there was no
rateable impairment due to a previous illness or condition and
s 22(8)(g) did
not authorise a deduction.
147 The trial Judge then turned to consider whether, if his conclusions were
wrong, Dr Begg’s approach to estimating a 20 per
cent deduction was
sufficiently compliant with the scheme. He concluded that, on his view of the
authorities, an undocumented estimation
of a level of impairment, as undertaken
by Dr Begg in his written assessment, was not permitted. An assessment could not
outside the Guidelines.
148 Nevertheless, the trial Judge considered that Dr Begg’s overall
assessment of 35 per cent WPI was made in compliance with
the overall scheme and
had been made separately to the later 20 per cent deduction estimate. Dr Begg
had not disavowed his original
assessment of 35 per cent WPI in his oral
evidence. The trial Judge therefore did not consider it appropriate to order a
fresh assessment.
He set aside Dr Begg’s determination and substituted the
determination of a 35 per cent WPI resulting from the appellant’s
compensable mental illness.
Bench’s reasons
149 The appeal to the Full Bench of the Tribunal concerned the question
whether the trial Judge erred in concluding that Dr Begg
was wrong to estimate a
deduction for a pre-existing, undiagnosed condition.
150 The Full Bench began its consideration of this question with an
examination of the relevant authorities. We will return to these
authorities
when considering the Grounds of Appeal. The Full Bench concluded that the trial
Judge had erred in excluding the deduction
made by Dr Begg for several
151 First, the Full Bench noted that, despite Dr Begg’s reluctance to
diagnose a pre-existing psychiatric condition “because
he was reticent to
give a personality disorder the status of a psychiatric
diagnosis”,
personality
disorders must be taken into account for the purposes of a permanent impairment
assessment. That is because the Guidelines
provide that, prior to any impairment
assessment, a psychiatric diagnosis must be made by a treating psychiatrist
based on DSM-5.
DSM-5 describes 10 specific personality disorders which may
qualify for psychiatric diagnosis.
152 Secondly, the Full Bench considered that there was “a sound
evidentiary basis” for finding that the appellant had
a pre-existing
psychiatric illness or
The Full Bench
considered that Dr Farnbach’s diagnosis of a mild alcohol use disorder, as
well as the general evidence that
pointed to the instability of the
appellant’s marriage prior to the work incident, were sufficient to
identify an unrelated
injury or cause pursuant to s 22(8)(b) of the Act. It
considered that these factors led to a description of the appellant that matched
the definition of a psychiatric disorder contained in chapter 16.3 of the
Guidelines:
A psychiatric disorder (the term is synonymous with a mental disorder or a
psychological disorder) is a syndrome characterised by
clinically significant
disturbance in an individual's cognition, emotion regulation or behavior that
reflects a dysfunction in the
psychological, biological or developmental
processes underlying mental functioning.
153 Whilst the trial Judge was entitled to have regard to the evidence of
Dr Blakemore to consider whether Dr Begg erred, the Full
Bench noted that
the mere fact that Dr Blakemore arrived at a different view did not justify that
conclusion. In any event, the Full
Bench considered that Dr Begg’s view,
in comparison to Dr Blakemore’s view, sat more comfortably with the
evidence before
the Tribunal.
154 The Full Bench criticised the trial Judge’s opinion that, because
Dr Begg had not made a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder,
Dr Farnbach’s
diagnosis could not be relied upon. It
That finding misapprehends the role of the impairment assessor and the role
of the Tribunal. If Mr Paschalis had a prior psychotic
illness which Dr Begg was
not aware of until he gave evidence, it would be appropriate for both Dr Begg
and the Tribunal to consider
the earlier illness. Conversely, if a prior
psychiatric history had been wrongly assumed or recorded, the assessor and the
should each reconsider the assessment. The Tribunal “must reach
the correct or preferable decision” when exercising its
in equity, good conscience and with regard
to the substantial merits of the
matter, it was not appropriate for the Deputy President to not have regard to
evidence of a prior
psychiatric diagnosis.
155 The Full Bench explained that, although the Guidelines provide that a
psychiatric diagnosis is required in order to make an impairment
assessment for
a mental injury, no corresponding requirement exists in relation to disregarding
or deducting unrelated or pre-existing
impairments under either ss 22(8)(b) or
(g) of the Act. While this may create a perceived injustice on the part of an
injured worker,
the Full Bench noted that the relevant provisions strongly
suggested that result.
156 The Full Bench concluded that, despite not making a pre-injury
diagnosis, Dr Begg had assessed pre-injury impairment. This was
which the assessor was sufficiently confident to estimate prior impairment and
had explained how he did so. It held that
the appellant had a pre-existing
impairment, which was the result of a psychiatric disorder within the meaning of
chapter 16.3 of
the Guidelines, and overturned the orders made by the trial
The appeal –
some observations
157 Before addressing the appeal grounds in detail, it is appropriate to
make some brief observations. First, this case is not concerned
compensability of a psychiatric condition, including an aggravation, within s 7
of the Act. When looking at that issue,
the Tribunal is constrained to apply the
statutory test and it forms no part of that test to apportion between that which
that which is not, compensable. If the relevant criteria and causal
connection are made out, the condition for which the claim is
compensable.
158 Secondly, and assuming the compensability of the condition for which a
claim has been made, the Tribunal must then determine
the appropriate WPI. That
is, it must make a determination which affects the assessment and recoverability
of compensation under
the Act. Whilst aspects of that process may bear some
similarity to an assessment of damages at common law, there is in truth no
analogy. From first to last, the process of determining WPI is governed by the
Act, the Guidelines and DSM-5. For example,
whilst there are common law rules
governing when a latent, pre-existing condition can be taken into account at
common law, whether
as confining the assessment to a closed
or as merely to be
reflected in adverse
contingencies,
those rules have
no application to an assessment of WPI made under the Act. The so-called
“eggshell skull” rule does
not apply to the assessment of WPI.
Rather, the Parliament has by s 22 and the scheme it enacts adopted a different
approach which,
utilising the Guidelines and DSM-5, is intended to set out the
principles and rules which govern the determination of WPI. Considerable
must be taken to apply those principles and rules, especially where they are the
subject of existing authority, without applying,
whether consciously or
otherwise, common law rules which form no part of the Act. Under the statutory
scheme, non-compensable causes
and conditions must be disregarded and deducted
in a way which might not be countenanced in a common law damages assessment.
159 Thirdly, the assessment of WPI is, in the first instance, addressed by
an accredited and approved assessor (here, Dr Begg) who
is selected as the sole
expert and whose assessment is, absent material errors of fact or law,
determinative. The Tribunal may consider
other expert views when determining
whether the approved assessor has erred but is it not free to disregard the
assessment made by
the approved assessor unless error is
This case is not
concerned with the powers available to the Tribunal in the event of error by the
approved and appointed assessor.
160 Finally, as we read the evidence and findings, Dr Begg did not merely
point to a latent, pre-existing cause or condition. This
was not a case of a
latent vulnerability to developing mental illness. Dr Begg identified a
pre-existing psychiatric condition, without
which he could not explain the
appellant’s history. Despite his denials, the appellant’s history
could only be explained
by pre-existing personality and alcohol disorders which
had already manifested long before the workplace incident. Whilst the appellant
was worse following the workplace incident, Dr Begg’s views about the
appellant’s pre-existing condition were reinforced,
and not undermined, by
the further materials put to him in evidence which supported the assessment he
made using the Guidelines and
AMA-5 (including GEPIC). Those views were open to
161 The Notice of Appeal advances the following five Grounds of Appeal:
The Full Bench of the South Australian Employment Tribunal:
3.1 Exceeded jurisdiction by interfering with the Trial Judge’s finding
of fact that the multiple relationship losses were related
to the work injury,
such that they were not an unrelated injury or cause for the purposes of
(SA) (“the RTW
3.2 Conflated the subject matter of s 22(8)(b) and (g) of the RTW Act;
3.3 Misconstrued s 22(8)(b) of the RTW Act in that
to the extent there was an impairment from an unrelated injury or cause, the
assessor did not make an assessment of the degree of impairment
resulting from the work injury in accordance with the Impairment
Guidelines;
3.4 To the extent that it was necessary to consider s 22(8)(g) of the RTW
Act, misconstrued and/or misapplied s 22(8)(g) as to:
3.4.1 whether there was a previous injury that caused the worker to suffer an
impairment before the relevant work injury;
3.4.2 in failing to apply paragraph 1.29 of the Impairment Assessment
Guidelines as a provision to the contrary;
3.5 Exceeded jurisdiction by making a finding as to the degree of whole
person impairment in circumstances where there was no assessment
of impairment
resulting from an alternate diagnosis of previous or unrelated injury not relied
upon by the accredited assessor.
162 It is appropriate to address Appeal Grounds 3.1 and 3.5 before the
balance of the grounds that, in one way or another, concern
interpretation of ss 22(8)(b) and (g) of the Act.
Did the Full Bench
exceed jurisdiction by interfering with a finding of fact of the Trial
Section 26I
South Australian
Employment Tribunal Act 2014
(SA) provides that an appeal from a decision of
the Tribunal under the Act (other than in the exercise of its criminal
is limited to a question of law.
164 The appellant argues that Dr Begg’s opinion, properly understood,
was that the appellant’s relationship losses were
an unrelated cause that
fed into his depressive illness and subsequent impairment. The trial Judge then
made a contrary finding that
the relationship losses were, in fact,
“inextricably related to the compensable psychiatric
The Full Bench,
however, proceeded as if the relationship losses were unrelated, effectively
substituting or making a finding of
fact different to that made by the trial
165 The respondents submit that this misconstrues the approach of the Full
Bench in addressing identifiable errors of law in the
trial Judge’s
decision. They submit that Dr Begg’s report and oral evidence point to a
diagnosable, pre‑existing
personality disorder which, despite Dr
Begg’s reluctance to diagnose it, should have been taken into account by
the trial Judge
for the purposes of the impairment assessment. They submit that
the trial Judge’s failure to do so was an error of law which
basis of the Full Bench’s intervention.
166 For the reasons that follow, we accept the respondents’
submission.
167 The Full Bench was correct to describe the purpose of the
Tribunal’s review jurisdiction, as exercised by the trial Judge,
to “reach the correct or preferable decision” on the evidence
available to it. Subsections 27(3) to (5) of the
(3) Subject to subsections (4), (5) and (6), the Tribunal will examine the
decision of the decision-maker by way of rehearing.
(4) On a rehearing, the Tribunal must reach the correct or preferable
decision but in doing so must have regard to the decision of
the original
decision-maker.
(5) A procedure on a rehearing will include—
(a) an examination of the evidence or material before the decision-maker
(unless any such evidence or material is to be excluded
under another provision
of this Act or under any other law); and
(b) a consideration of any further evidence or material that the Tribunal
decides, in the circumstances of the particular case, to
admit for the purposes
of rehearing the matter.
168 The introduction of new evidence on a rehearing, partnered with the
requirement to reach the correct or preferable decision (rather
than to merely
affirm or quash the original decision), requires that the Tribunal reach a fresh
decision which incorporates all of
the evidence laid before it.
169 The Full Bench correctly observed that “[i]f Mr Paschalis had a
prior psychotic illness which Dr Begg was not aware of
until he gave evidence,
it would be appropriate for both Dr Begg and the Tribunal to consider the
earlier illness.”
170 In this case, in various locations, the evidence identifies the
recognition of and discussion about the appellant’s pre-existing
personality disorder. This condition was not merely latent. Initially, for
example, Dr Begg’s report noted the following about
I suspect he is a man who has a distorted view of the past, and idealisation
of his work and relationship, which has been shattered
by the experience of
humiliation in the workplace, such that he is now in such a negative position he
cannot see any positive now,
or in the future. These extremes of viewpoints are
unusual and suggest an underlying personality vulnerability. This does not take
away the presence of a depressive disorder, as depressive disorders will make
such a vulnerability worse. Consequently I believe
understanding the
perpetuation of his depression requires an appreciation of the psychological
processes occurring in his mind as
well as the biochemical aspects [sic]
depression.
171 The trial Judge’s reasons also acknowledged Dr Begg’s
inference that the appellant had an underlying personality
Dr Begg thought the applicant had a pre-existing impairment with his
relationships and in general with how he was dealing with the
world. This
evidence was later qualified by Dr Begg saying the applicant was able to
continue with his work and had not come into
grief with other people before the
incident. This pre-existing impairment meant he did not have a capacity to
re-establish the relationships
after they broke down.
Dr Begg said: “I believe there was an impairment pre-existing this
actual workplace event that made quite a contribution to
the overall subsequent
injury or subsequent impairment.” Due to the worker’s extreme
reaction to the work incident and
loss of relationships soon after, Dr Begg
thought he must have had an impairment before-hand.
Dr Begg said he did not diagnose a pre-existing psychiatric condition, but
felt the applicant had one. He thought this was a personality
disorder, as
referred to in the assessment report, although it was debateable whether this
was an accepted diagnosis of illness.
172 After making these observations, the trial Judge considered the question
whether there was any impairment arising from an unrelated
injury or cause
pursuant to s 22(8)(b) of the Act. In the course of this discussion, the trial
Judge did not consider whether the
appellant’s personality disorder could
fall within the purview of that section. Rather, he focussed on the
appellant’s
relationship losses. When turning to the application of s
22(8)(g), the trial Judge did consider the appellant’s personality
vulnerability, but accepted the appellant’s submission that this
vulnerability could not be considered an illness or medical
condition, and that
therefore no deduction was justified on that basis. Again, the trial Judge did
not consider the appellant’s
personality disorder in the context of s
173 The Full Bench did not substitute or make any finding of fact contrary
to that made by the trial Judge. Rather, the Full Bench
identified an error of
law in the trial Judge’s approach, which failed to give effect to the
evidence of Dr Begg, as supplemented
by Dr Farnbach’s diagnosis of an
alcohol disorder, which identified unrelated or previous injuries or causes of
pre-existing
impairment and, therefore, of the appellant’s overall
impairment, which ought in law to have been disregarded for the purposes
22(8)(b) or deducted for the purposes of s 22(8)(g).
174 We dismiss Ground 3.1.
Did the Full Bench
err in adopting Dr Begg’s 20% deduction estimate?
175 The appellant’s complaint under Ground 3.5 follows from the
previous ground. He submits that the Full Bench exceeded jurisdiction
a finding as to the degree of his WPI in circumstances where there was no
assessment of impairment of the appellant’s
pre-existing personality
disorder by an approved assessor. That is, on a plain reading of the initial
assessment report, Dr Begg’s
20% deduction was not made on account of
impairment arising from the personality disorder. Rather, the deduction was only
to the appellant’s “multiple relationship
176 For the purposes of addressing this ground of appeal, it is not
necessary to address the question whether the assessment of impairment
appellant’s pre‑existing personality disorder was or was not made by
an approved assessor in accordance with the
Guidelines before the work injury.
That contention is addressed later when considering the proper approach to s 22
of the Act and
the Guidelines. This issue concerns the question whether the
Full Bench erred in treating “multiple relationship losses”
part of the appellant’s pre-existing condition when the trial Judge found
that “they were in fact related to”
177 In order to address this appeal ground, it is first helpful to
understand the evidence before the trial Judge. The report of
Dr Farnbach,
psychiatrist, dated 11 August 2015 included the history that there were a
number of “background issues”
affecting the appellant’s
presentation:
He drinks too heavily – he has “5 to 6 shots” of vodka more
than half of the days of the week. He attributed his
use of alcohol to his
marital difficulties – he describes “on and off problems with my
wife for the last 15 years”.
The difficulties include a lack of the sex
life, “neglect” and related issues. He has little in the way of
social supports
(he has few friends) and is estranged from his family.
178 Dr Farnbach described the appellant as very angry with little insight
into his difficulties with excessive alcohol consumption.
Although Dr Begg did
not have Dr Farnbach’s report when he prepared his WPI report dated 11
November 2016, it may readily
be seen that he anticipated what Dr Farnbach was
told, even though the appellant had failed to provide the same history to him.
To recapitulate Dr Begg’s opinion:
Mr Paschalis experienced a psychological humiliation in the workplace, and
within two weeks an 18 year marriage had failed. This is
most unusual, and would
suggest there were already problems in the marriage before the workplace event
... Where a relationship breaks
down within six months of an illness, there is
usually found to be a significant relationship problem predating the illness ...
depression that arose from the workplace injury is not sufficient to explain
the failure to re-establish a relationship with his
sister, or with his wife and
children ... In my opinion these multiple relationship losses are contribute 20%
to the whole person
impairment and are not related to the original injury.
179 Dr Begg was clearly concerned by the
breakdown in the appellant’s marriage within two weeks of being humiliated
workplace, as well as his ongoing difficulties with his sister. Whilst
it may be accepted that the “multiple relationship
losses” occurred
after the work injury and may have been in part the result of it, Dr Begg
could not account for them without
the presence of “a significant
relationship problem predating the illness”. This he attributed to a
pre-existing personality
disorder, as well as an alcohol use disorder. It was
with impairments such as these in mind, “not related to the work
that he made his 20 per cent reduction as part of his formal WPI
assessment.
180 When asked in evidence to explain his approach, Dr Begg described the
appellant’s “pre-existing impairment that he
relationships” and the “alcohol-fuelled ... argument” during
which the appellant felt unsupported by
his wife in response to the work
incident, and which culminated in the appellant’s wife asking him to leave
the home, “separate
to the work incident”. As Dr Begg explained it,
the appellant exhibited an inability to appreciate what had occurred:
He doesn’t come to me saying, “Look, I’ve had a bad
marriage. It’s been really difficult for a long time,
and then this other
thing happened...”
181 Dr Begg then explained how he quantified the impairment using GEPIC.
Dr Begg accepted that the appellant’s concerns about
called gay” and about being criticised for “purported sexual
relations with a female co-worker” could
indicate a pre-existing
impairment. Dr Begg was then asked whether the appellant’s statements made
in a marital counselling
session in 2011 about sleeping “in a caravan
every night” and drinking alcohol “as much as I can to escape the
misery and bullshit every day” and having depression, “Yes, a lot,
and insomnia”, existing for some time prior,
were consistent with an
assessment of “at least a mild level of impairment prior to the
incident” in 2015, to which Dr
Begg readily agreed. Dr Begg said that,
though he was not given that history by the appellant, he was “not
and they were “the sort of problems I would have expected
... there’s been a long-term problem”. Dr Begg said that
the further
material put to him reinforced his view about the 20 per cent WPI reduction he
182 Having ruled out that the appellant was “at zero per cent re
WPI” before the work incident, under cross-examination,
Dr Begg agreed
that he was able to determine that the appellant had pre-existing impairments on
the material “you have”.
Dr Begg emphasised the
“conundrum” as to whether a “personality disorder” is a
“psychiatric disorder”
under DSM-5, or a “mental
illness”, instead focusing on the extent of any pre-existing impairment
and impeded functioning
rather than the existence of any particular, formal
183 Dr Begg rejected the proposition that the appellant was without
pre-existing impairment and merely vulnerable, having reacted
to the work
incident in an extreme way. Dr Begg responded that it is “part and parcel
of any of these disorders ... that ...
generally there is a lack of
self-awareness, and so the person will tell you that they were fine up until
this event”. Eventually
Dr Begg agreed that he did not diagnose a
condition, but he felt that the appellant had a condition: “it’s
write a personality disorder diagnosis in...”.
184 In a sense, it misstates the position to suggest that the Full Bench
“adopted” the 20 per cent estimate. The estimate
was made by Dr
Begg as a part of the assessment required by s 22. Having found that the trial
Judge failed to give effect to the
opinion of Dr Begg, the appointed WPI
assessor, the Full Bench did not err in acting on Dr Begg’s assessment.
That WPI assessment
was not properly rejected on the grounds that it was
erroneous or affected by error. The Full Bench was, with respect, correct to
find that whether another psychiatrist disagreed with the assessment was beside
the point. The Full Bench respected and gave proper
legal effect to the
assessment made by the WPI assessor in accordance with s 22 of the
185 We dismiss this ground of appeal.
construction of ss 22(8)(b) and 22(8)(g) of the Act
186 Grounds 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4 all concern the proper interpretation of ss
22(8)(b) and 22(8)(g). It is helpful to again set out those
two subsections:
(b) impairments from unrelated injuries or causes are to be disregarded in
making an assessment;
(g) any portion of an impairment that is due to a previous injury (whether
or not a work injury or whether because of a pre-existing
condition) that caused
the worker to suffer an impairment before the relevant work injury is to be
deducted for the purposes of an
assessment, subject to any provision to the
contrary made by the Impairment Assessment Guidelines;
187 There are clear textual differences between the two provisions.
188 The first is that s 22(8)(b) refers generally to
“impairments” rather than to the “portion of an
impairment”
referred to in s 22(8)(g).
189 Secondly, and as a corollary of the first difference, s 22(8)(b) broadly
addresses impairments from “unrelated injuries
or causes”, whereas s
22(8)(g) specifically addresses “any portion of an impairment ... due to a
previous injury ...
that caused the worker to suffer an impairment before the
relevant work injury.” The words “an impairment” in this
paragraph refer to the impairment the subject of the s 22 assessment, ostensibly
arising from the relevant work injury.
190 The third difference is the use of different terms:
“disregarded” in s 22(8)(b) and “deducted” in s
Under s 22(8)(b), impairments from unrelated injuries or causes are to
be disregarded in making an assessment. In the case of a
pre-existing injury
that resulted in impairment before the relevant work injury, s 22(8)(g)
requires that a deduction from the overall
assessment be made for that
“portion” of the impairment which was caused by pre-existing injury.
191 The appellant’s fundamental submission to this Court is that the
use of the word “disregarded” in s 22(8)(b),
as opposed to the use
of the different word “deducted” in s 22(8)(g), suggests a different
approach, namely, that in
the case of an unrelated injury or cause under s
22(8)(b), an assessment of impairment should be made
without regard
any impairment from that unrelated injury or cause. In other words, one must
effectively
any impairment from that unrelated injury or
192 The fourth difference is the use of the word “unrelated” in
s 22(8)(b), which has no counterpart in s 22(8)(g). The
term is not defined in
the Act and must be given its plain and ordinary meaning having regard to the
relevant statutory context and
purpose. “Relate” means to
“make or show a connection between” or “to be casually
connected.”
The drafting of the subsection raises a question as to what
exactly the injuries or causes must not be connected with, but the surrounding
context shows that the word “unrelated” refers to the absence of a
relationship between the injuries or causes and the
relevant work injury for
which the impairment assessment is required.
193 By contrast, whilst the injuries or causes in s 22(8)(b) must be
“unrelated” to the relevant work injury, s 22(8)(g)
necessarily
assumes some degree of relationship between the “previous injury”
referred to in that section and the relevant
work injury. That is, insofar as
the previous injury contributes to a portion of the impairment apparently
arising from the relevant
work injury, the two injuries must be related. That
probably follows from the focus on one impairment with at least two contributing
injuries. Therefore, the difference between s 22(8)(b) and s 22(8)(g)
appears to be that the former is limited in application to
injuries or causes
that are relevantly “unrelated” to the relevant work injury, whereas
the latter may apply even where
a previous injury is, or the previous injuries
are, related to the relevant work injury in some way.
194 As the words in parentheses in s 22(8)(g) show, the “previous
injury” need not be a work injury and, importantly,
the previous injury
may arise “because of a pre-existing condition.” The term
“pre-existing condition” is
not defined. In context, this broad term
is capable of referring to a pre-existing illness or medical issue, capable of
being described
as a condition, such as a congenital defect or other bodily or
mental abnormality. The condition need not be specifically referable
trauma so long as it capable of resulting in an injury, as defined.
195 The final difference between s 22(8)(b) and s 22(8)(g) is that the
latter only applies “subject to any provision to the
contrary made by the
Impairment Assessment Guidelines.” The appellant submits that chapter 1.29
of the Guidelines is a provision
“to the contrary” for the purposes
of s 22(8)(g):
When a pre-existing injury needs to be considered, there should be objective
evidence to support the assessment of impairment caused
by that injury (e.g.
clinical evidence, medical records and reports, the worker’s history, etc)
and this must be carefully
documented in the report. The impairment rating of
the pre-existing injury is determined by applying the methodology in the
Guidelines.
The impairment from the pre-existing injury is then subtracted from
the overall impairment rating. There cannot be a negative rating,
that is, below
0%. If a worker suffers an impairment caused by a pre-existing unrelated injury
which has already been assessed in
accordance with the Guidelines or previous
Guidelines, the assessor can deduct that impairment from the overall impairment
reflects the effect of both injuries.
196 The proper effect of this chapter will be addressed when reviewing the
Guidelines as one aspect of the scheme created by the
Act, the Guidelines and
AMA-5, generally.
197 The appellant’s fundamental submission about the meaning and
effect of the word “disregarded” in s 22(8)(b)
must be rejected for
at least three reasons.
198 First, the Act is intended only to compensate work injuries and
impairments caused by work
That is clear from the
objects and scheme of the Act as a
On their face, and when
read together, ss 22(8)(b) and 22(8)(g) express the same legislative intention:
only a work injury, or an
impairment to the extent that it is attributable to a
work injury, is to be assessed and compensated. The appellant’s proposed
interpretation of s 22(8)(b) carries with it the prospect that workers might be
compensated for injuries or impairments arising from
injuries or causes which
have no relevant connection to a compensable work injury. That is, to simply
ignore impairment from an
unrelated injury or cause which forms part of the
worker’s presenting impairment could confer a form of windfall because the
assessment would necessarily include something which is not compensable. That
approach is inconsistent with the objects and scheme
of the Act as a
199 Secondly, courts in other jurisdictions have interpreted analogous
provisions in other, comparable legislation adversely to the
appellant’s
contention. There is no good reason, whether in the text or scheme of that
other legislation, or this Act, to
take a different view. In
Alcoa Holdings
Limited v Lowthian
Supreme Court of Victoria considered an application for judicial review arising
from a medical panel assessment under the
Accident Compensation Act 1985
Victorian Act
). A worker sought lump sum compensation for
a workplace injury. The medical panel assessed the worker as having a 5 per cent
The employer contended that the panel erred because it failed to take into
account a pre-existing condition. In considering the correct
interpretation of s
91(7)(c) of the Victorian Act, a provision identical to s 22(8)(b) of the Act,
Forrest J relied on the Victorian
v Hacker & Greenberg
Millane v Hacker & Greenberg
, Balmford J considered the
decision of a Medical Panel which had found a psychiatric impairment of 50% but
also concluded that only
20% of that impairment resulted from the injury which
was the subject of the worker’s claim for compensation. The worker
the manner in which the Panel had applied s 91(7)(c). Her Honour
concluded that the section meant what it said – that the
psychiatric symptoms not related to the subject injury were to be disregarded.
Her Honour said as follows:
The assessment is to be “in accordance with section 91” and
section 91(7)(c) requires that “impairments from unrelated
injuries or
causes are to be disregarded in making an assessment”. The question is,
“unrelated to what?” It would
appear to me that that provision is
concerned with injuries or causes which are unrelated to the injury the results
of which are
being assessed; that is, the injury in respect of which the claim
was made. The logic of that provision is thus that compensation,
in respect of a
particular claim under section 98C, is, by virtue of section 91(7)(c), to be
paid only in respect of the results
of the employment out of or in the course of
which the injury sought to be compensated arose and which was a significant
contributing
factor to that injury, in terms of section 82(1). In particular, I
can see no other meaning to be given to the expression “impairments
unrelated causes”. The cause of an impairment must be related to that
impairment. The expression cannot be intended to
mean “causes of an
impairment which are unrelated to that impairment”. Nor can it be intended
to mean “causes of
an impairment of the worker which are unrelated to the
worker”. The applicant's previous history of psychiatric illness was
related to the applicant and related to her psychiatric condition, but was not
related to the injury of 12 February 1999. Thus, in
making the assessment of the
results of the 1999 injury in terms of the degree of the applicant's impairment,
any impairment resulting
from that previous history is to be disregarded.
Her Honour concluded that it was open to the Panel to reach the conclusion
that it did and to apportion psychiatric impairment as
Subsequent to
, Kyrou J in
Vegco v Gibbons
was required
to determine whether a Medical Panel, in determining a claim under s 98C
and s 98E of the Act, had wrongly ignored a
subsequent injury which had
exacerbated the compensable injury, the subject of the claim. The Panel
concluded that the worker had
a 15% whole person impairment. Kyrou J upheld the
employer’s contention that the Panel had fallen into jurisdictional error
by failing to take into account the impairment related to the aggravating
injury. His Honour said as follows:
Section 91(7)(c) of the AC Act contains a clear legislative direction to
medical Panels to disregard impairments from unrelated injuries
or causes in
making their assessment. It follows that if a medical panel takes into account
an impairment from unrelated injuries
or causes in making its assessment, it
will have taken into account a consideration it is bound not to take into
Section 91(7)(c) of the AC Act required the medical panel to
disregard any impairment to Mr Gibbs from unrelated injuries or causes.
aggravation to the injuries sustained by Mr Gibbs from his employment with Vegco
arising from his subsequent employment in Broome
constituted an impairment from
unrelated injuries or causes within the meaning of s 91(7)(c). It is clear
from the medical panel’s
reasons that it did not disregard the impairment
Mr Gibbs suffered from the unrelated Broome injury in making its assessment and
that it considered that impairment as material. It thus failed to comply with
s 91(7)(c) of the AC Act. In failing to disregard such
impairment, the
panel took into account a consideration it was bound to ignore and therefore
made a jurisdictional error.
(footnotes omitted).
200 Justice Forrest observed that these decisions demonstrated that the
statutory command to the medical panel was to evaluate only
the impairment
related to the compensable injury and to put to one side any impairment produced
by unrelated injuries or causes.
If the evidence established the existence of a pre-existing impairment from an
unrelated injury or cause, the medical panel was obliged
to ensure that its
estimate of the impairment disregarded any pre‑existing impairment or any
subsequent impairment flowing
from the unrelated injury or
201 Justice Forrest’s reasoning in
was subsequently
followed by the Full Bench of the Tribunal in
Department for Health and
Ageing v Neilson
essence, in each of
Vegco, Alcoa
was held that where a pre-existing injury or cause leading to impairment is
identified as affecting any assessment of a work
injury impairment, the
assessment must recognise the impairment flowing from that pre-existing injury
or cause, evaluate it, and
deduct it from the work injury assessment.
Admittedly, this process is not without difficulty, for as the Full Bench in
recognised:
It must be accepted, as was the case here, that it can be difficult to
quantify the degree of permanent impairment of an unrelated
injury or cause in
accordance with the Guidelines and AMA5. For the reasons given by Forrest J in
, which we respectfully adopt, that does not relieve the assessor or
the Tribunal from undertaking the task of limiting the assessment
of the degree
of permanent impairment suffered as a result of the compensable injury to that
compensable injury and nothing else.
As it is with a common law assessment of
damages where a “plaintiff is not to be deprived of damages because the
evidence does
not permit a mathematical calculation”, so it is that an
assessment under s 43A(9) requires the exclusion of any permanent
suffered as a result of an unrelated injury or cause. The assessor must do the
best he or she can, on the evidence that
is at hand. This is so because the Act
mandates it. In saying that, we adopt the approach that has been taken by the
Supreme Court
of Victoria, that in terms of primacy, the Guidelines yield to the
Act and that if there is any inconsistency between the Act and
the Guidelines,
the Act prevails.
(footnotes omitted).
202 The third, and perhaps most important, reason why the appellant’s
interpretation of “disregarded” must be rejected
is that it fails to
address the relevant legislative history. In
, the Full Bench
described the circumstances preceding the introduction of s 43A(9)(b) to the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
), which was in exactly the same terms as s 22(8)(b) now appears in the
current Act. The Full Bench
The law as it was prior to the enactment of s 43A and the WorkCover
Guidelines promulgated thereunder was as declared by the Full
Bench of the
Tribunal in
Reilly v Workcover Corporation/MMI Workers Compensation (SA) Pty
Ltd (Anglicare South Australia)
where, having surveyed the relevant cases it
An important feature of the method of assessment provided for by the third
schedule is that it contains no provision limiting the
assessment to the
disability that can be attributed solely to the compensable disability. It does
not, for example, contain a provision
of the type discussed in
Jones Bros Bus
Company Pty Ltd v Baker Wyong Shire Council v Graham
(1992) 26 NSWLR 322
339 which provided:-
‘In the case of impairment of the back ... compensation is payable only
in respect of the degree of permanent impairment suffered
as a result of the
injury concerned and as if any impairment existing before that the injury did
not exist.’
If it did, the Corporation’s contention regarding the percentage loss
to be ascribed to the disability sustained by the worker
on 22 November
1996 would be correct. But absent such a provision there is no basis upon which
to assess the level of pre-existing
disability and to then deduct that from an
assessment which reflects the overall loss of function of the particular
faculty. This
was made clear in many decisions and in particular in
General Motors Holden's Limited
[1940] NSWStRp 13
(1940) 40 SR (NSW) 117
Dubsky v The
Electricity Trust of South Australia
(1977) 44 (Pt
2) SAIR 1541.
underlying principle that emerges from these cases and the authorities to which
they in turn refer, is as described by Cripps
Clutha Ltd v Danswan
(unreported No CA 40087, Court of Appeal, New South Wales, delivered 5 April
1993), namely:-
‘... lump sum compensation for successive injuries to the one member
[is] payable, calculated in each case, by reference to
the effect of the injury
to that member as it was at the time of the injury the subject of the
Section 43A(9)(b) is a clear departure from such an approach and was plainly
intended to alter the law as described in
. Its purpose is to
ensure that lump sum compensation for non-economic loss is payable only in
respect of the degree of permanent
impairment suffered as a result of a
compensable injury and nothing else. The assessment of the degree of permanent
impairment must
not include any permanent impairment suffered as a result of an
unrelated injury or cause. This informs how the expression “are
disregarded” is to be construed.
(footnotes omitted).
203 This reasoning undermines the appellant’s submission that the word
“disregarded” indicates that an assessment
of impairment should be
without regard
to any impairment from an unrelated injury or cause,
even if it contributes to the worker’s present impairment.
204 Section 43A(9)(b) of the WRAC Act was intended to alter the law as
described in
Reilly v Workcover Corporation/MMI Workers Compensation (SA) Pty
Ltd (Anglicare South
so as to ensure
that lump sum compensation for non-economic loss was payable only in respect of
the degree of permanent impairment
suffered as a result of a compensable injury,
and nothing else.
concerned the application of s 49A(9)(b) under
the repealed WRAC Act. As already mentioned, that section is identical to s
of the current Act.
205 This leads to the question whether the introduction of s 22(8)(g), which
had no analogue in the repealed WRAC Act, somehow altered
the meaning of s
22(8)(b). In our opinion, that question should be answered in the negative. The
reproduction of s 49A(9)(b) in
the new Act as s 22(8)(b) suggests that the same
meaning and effect was intended:
Speaking generally, where provisions in earlier legislation are reproduced in
later legislation, the same meaning and effect is generally
intended. That
assumption must of course yield to any difference in text or context.
206 The first respondent, who appeared solely to advance submissions about
the construction and application of s 22 of the Act, submitted
that ss 22(8)(b),
22(8)(g) and the Guidelines should be construed as “a complementary suite
of provisions”. In particular,
the introduction of s 22(8)(g) was
intended to provide explication as to how the process of disregarding an
impairment due to an
unrelated injury or cause would be addressed in a case
where any portion of one particular impairment is caused by a previous injury
condition. That is, each of ss 22(8)(b), 22(8)(g) and the Guidelines give
effect to the same legislative intention, namely, that
only impairment
attributable to the relevant work injury will be assessed for compensation. The
first respondent submitted that,
in each case, the assessor must evaluate the
extent to which impairment from the unrelated injury or cause plays a part in
the worker’s
current impairment and ensure that the unrelated impairment
is not the subject of
assessment.
207 In our view, these submissions must be accepted. They accord with the
relevant legislative history and demonstrate that s 22(8)(g)
was added to the s
22 assessment scheme, of which s 22(8)(b) already formed a part, so as to make
clear the intended operation of
the scheme. That, indeed, is consistent with
the way in which the Guidelines have been drafted. It is permissible to have
to the Act and Guidelines in order to “ascertain the nature of the
scheme”, particularly where they “establish
an interdependent
208 The view just expressed regarding the operation of the statutory scheme
can be seen in various parts of the Guidelines. Chapter
1.21 provides that
injuries are to be assessed, not assessed or deducted, depending upon the
circumstances. Chapter 1.22 explains
that, where a worker has injuries to other
body parts that are not to be assessed, those other injuries are not to be
included in
the assessment. That reflects s 22(8)(b). Chapter 1.23 requires
that an unrelated or previous injury to the same part of the body
as the work
injury, but not related to the work injury, must be disregarded. This means that
the current impairment attributable
to both injuries must be assessed but that
the degree of impairment attributable to the unrelated or previous injury must
deducted. That reflects s 22(8)(g).
209 This view of the operation of the scheme is also reinforced by Appendix
1 to the Guidelines, which comprises notes for the requestor
assessment. At page 117 of Appendix 1 it is made clear that
“disregarded”, in respect of an injury which is to
be disregarded,
means calculated and then deducted. The same point is made in respect of the
terms “unrelated injury”
and “pre-existing condition or
injury” at page 119 of Appendix 1.
210 The method of deduction is laid down in chapter 1.24 of the Guidelines.
It requires the assessor to assess the permanent impairment
of the affected part
of the body by applying the methodology in the Guidelines, then deducting the
permanent impairment percentage
attributable to the previous or unrelated injury
or cause. Only if there is no impairment from the previous or unrelated injury
cause will there be nothing to deduct. This is to be “appropriately
documented” in the assessment report.
211 Chapter 1.29 of the Guidelines requires that a pre-existing injury be
addressed by “objective evidence to support the assessment
of impairment
caused by that injury (e.g. clinical evidence, medical records and reports, the
worker’s history, etc)”.
Chapter 1.29 provides that the impairment
rating of the pre-existing injury be determined by applying the methodology in
the Guidelines.
However, assessment of the impairment rating of the
appellant’s pre-existing injury necessarily proceeds with some
modifications.
That is because the assessment of the current impairment involves
a single clinical assessment made on the date of the assessment,
necessarily includes a proportion of permanent impairment resulting from any
previous injury. Two “stand-alone”
assessments are not required.
By the date of assessment, the worker will typically be presenting with
impairments from both the
relevant injury and the pre-existing injury, and the
assessor’s task of disentangling, so as to identify the extent of
from the work-related injury, will sometimes be difficult, if not
compromised. Nonetheless, the statutory command remains clear:
the impairment
from the previous injury must be excluded from the WPI assessment, and therefore
212 Chapter 1.29, by referring to the calculation of the impairment rating
for the pre-existing injury using the methodology in the
Guidelines, is not to
be interpreted as if it was a statutory provision, however it does, as with
AMA-5, form an integral part of
the scheme. Respectfully, we would adopt what
was said in
H J Heinz Company Limited v Kotzman
by Kyrou J as applicable
to the Act, the Guidelines and AMA-5 (referred to below as “the
The interpretation of the Guides is a question of
The determination of a
level of impairment is a question of
It has been said that to the extent that an Act requires determinations of
impairment to be made in accordance with the Guides, the
Guides has the force of
and is a legislative
However, the Guides is, as its title suggests, a
It was written by expert
medical practitioners and not by statutory draftspeople, and should not be
overlaid with legalistic –
or a lawyer’s precise –
interpretation.
paramount importance to be faithful to the Guides’ plain
The Guides should not be
interpreted as if it was a
The use of the Guides is designed to promote precision, certainty and
consistency.
Its purpose is to
make as objective as possible the process of estimating impairment by reference
to sufficient medical and non-medical
information to justify the
If there is any inconsistency between the ...Act and the Guides, the ...Act
will prevail. If there is any inconsistency between the
text in the Guides and
an example which seeks to illustrate what is said in the text, the text will
213 Chapter 1.24 contemplates the assessment of a single WPI after the
assessor has made the relevant deduction to account for previous
To reiterate, two
“stand-alone” assessments of WPI are not required.
214 In the case of a psychiatric impairment evaluation, chapter 16.15 (at
[8]-[11]) addresses how pre-existing and continuing impairments
and unrelated
impairments are to be identified, and then excluded, when assessing the
impairment due to pure mental harm relevant
to a work injury. The inability to
“assess” the impairment from a pre-existing psychiatric injury, at a
time when a clinical
assessment of the pre-work injury position is no longer
possible, is addressed by the methodology set out in chapter
215 By this means, chapter 1.29 is satisfied insofar as it requires that the
impairment rating of the pre-existing injury be determined
by applying the
methodology laid down in the Guidelines.
216 To summarise, when making an impairment assessment under the Act, the
Guidelines and AMA-5, any impairment from an unrelated
injury or cause is
disregarded so as to ensure that the impairment assessment relates solely to
that resulting from the compensable
injury. It is not intended that impairments
referable to an unrelated injury or cause will be included in any
assessment.
217 This appears to be the general approach adopted by the Full Bench.
Although it did not specifically address the interaction between
ss 22(8)(b) and
22(8)(g), it did not err in law by conflating their subject matter as the
appellant contends. We dismiss Ground 3.2
of the appeal.
Did the Full
Bench misconstrue s 22(8)(b) of the Act?
218 The appellant submits that the Full Bench misconstrued s 22(8)(b) in
that, to the extent there was an impairment from an unrelated
injury or cause,
the accredited assessor did not make an assessment of the degree of impairment
resulting from the work injury in
accordance with the Guidelines.
219 The appellant’s argument in support of this ground relied to a
degree upon the proposed interpretation of the term “disregarded”
s 22(8)(b). He submitted that, by deducting from the WPI an estimated degree of
impairment attributed to an unrelated cause, Dr
Begg failed to apply the GEPIC
methodology in the Guidelines, which required him to assess impairment resulting
from the work injury,
and only the work injury, because he failed to ignore any
impairment from the unrelated cause.
220 As the appellant’s proposed interpretation of the term
“disregarded” has been rejected, this argument must
rejected. In any event, the Guidelines do not support the appellant’s
contentions. Chapters 1.23 and 1.24 provide:
If the unrelated or previous injury is to the same part of the body as the
work injury and is not related to the work injury, the
requestor will ask the
assessor to disregard the unrelated or previous injury, which means that the
current permanent impairment
attributable to both injuries is assessed but the
degree of impairment attributable to the unrelated or previous injury is then
If the requestor asks for any injuries to a part of the body to be
‘deducted’, the assessor assesses the permanent impairment
affected part of the body by applying the methodology in the Guidelines then
deducts the permanent impairment % attributable
to such injury. ...
221 These chapters envisage a two-stage process. First, a single evaluation
of the worker’s WPI is conducted, taking into account
the relevant work
injury and any unrelated or previous injury, then the degree of impairment
attributable to the unrelated or previous
injury is subsequently to be deducted.
Appendix 1 to the Guidelines, as set out above, provides further explication of
the treatment
of unrelated injuries and pre-existing conditions under the
Guidelines:
Unrelated injury
An unrelated injury means any injury or cause that is not the work injury or
relevant to that injury. Impairments from injuries or
causes unrelated to the
work injury are not to be included in calculating the degree of whole person
impairment. When the assessor
makes their assessment, the % impairment may
include impairments from unrelated injuries or causes but the degree of
permanent impairment
attributable to these unrelated injuries or causes must be
disregarded (i.e. deducted) and not included in the whole person impairment
assessment. If there are known unrelated injuries or causes that are relevant to
the work injury or injuries to be assessed, the
requestor must advise the
assessor by identifying the relevant injuries and requesting that the unrelated
injuries or causes be disregarded
(i.e. deducted).
Pre-existing condition or injury
A pre-existing condition or injury means a condition or injury that is not
medically related to the work injury. The value of the
% impairment attributable
to these pre-existing conditions or injuries must be deducted in the summary
table before giving the final
WPI rating. If there are known pre-existing
conditions or injuries, the requestor must advise the assessor by identifying
the relevant
injuries and requesting that any impairments arising from such
injuries be deducted.
222 Chapter 16.15 provides 11-steps which summarise the procedure to be
followed by an assessor in arriving at a WPI for a psychiatric
1. Take a comprehensive history.
2. Do a mental state examination. This must be consistent with your scores
in the table.
3. Write your opinion, incorporating a summary of the data leading to a
diagnosis or diagnoses. Relate the diagnosis or diagnoses
to the workplace
injury or incident and comment on any diagnoses for which the employment was not
the significant contributing cause.
4. Write a brief impairment formulation, explaining your rationale for your
impairment scores.
5. Complete
Worksheet Table 1
(the GEPIC table) including scoring
both for the class and severity within the class.
6. Follow the instructions for determining the median class and median level
of severity.
Worksheet Table 2
to refine the percentage range within the
median class.
8. Determine the whole person impairment as a percentage.
9. Determine pre-existing and continuing impairments and unrelated
impairments. Exclude those from consideration.
10. Determine impairment due to consequential mental harm, exclude that.
11. The final figure is the impairment due to pure mental harm relevant to
the work injury.
223 Steps 1 to 8 concern the process by which the assessor arrives at the
whole person impairment as a percentage. Step 9 then simply
provides that the
assessor must determine “pre-existing and continuing impairments and
unrelated impairments” and “exclude
those from consideration.”
The fact that the exclusion occurs at the end of the assessment process, rather
than at the beginning,
further supports the view that a two-stage process
involving the initial examination of the entire WPI, followed by a deduction for
unrelated injuries or causes, must be undertaken. For these reasons, we dismiss
Ground 3.3.
Did the Full
Bench misconstrue or misapply s 22(8)(g) of the Act?
224 The appellant submits that the Full Bench misconstrued or misapplied s
22(8)(g) when determining whether there was a previous
injury that caused the
worker to suffer an impairment before the relevant work injury.
225 The Full Bench did not separately address s 22(8)(g) or chapter 1.29 and
the appellant effectively says that it should have done
so. Respectfully, the
appellant’s contention fails to grapple with the approach adopted by the
Full Bench, which accepted that
the appellant’s personality disorder,
originally presumed to exist by Dr Begg, was an unrelated
purposes of s 22(8)(b). It is helpful to commence with the reasons of the Full
Even if a prior psychiatric diagnosis had not been made, s 22(8)(b) of the
RTW Act requires impairments from “unrelated injuries
or causes to be
disregarded”. The Deputy President approached that subject as follows:
The assessor has not identified a different illness, but has he identified a
different cause? The term ‘cause’ is not
defined, but is likely
intended to have a broader meaning than injury. The context implies a cause,
other than an injury or illness,
which has given rise to an identifiable and
assessable concurrent impairment. This may include a bodily or mental
abnormality, such
as a congenital defect, that is not the result of injury or
illness, but which is still causing an impairment. It may refer to signs
symptoms which have not yet been diagnosed.
A condition that does not amount to a diagnosed psychiatric illness might
still amount to an unrelated cause of impairment. A personality
disorder to a
clinician like Dr Begg who has reservations about treating the condition as a
psychiatric diagnosis, may nonetheless
cause impairment. The Deputy President
was correct to observe that s 22(8)(b) refers to “cause” and not to
a diagnosed
or diagnosable psychiatric illness. There is nothing in s 22(8)(b)
which precludes Dr Begg from taking into account a pre-existing
impairment and
making a deduction for it if considered appropriate. The plain language of s
22(8)(b) and the approach taken in
to provisions identical to s 22(8)(b)
lead to that result.
However the Deputy President found in paragraph 87 of the judgment that the
GEPIC criteria require that a diagnosis is required before
an unrelated injury
or cause can be disregarded.
Paragraph 16.4 of the IAG provides a psychiatric diagnosis is required in
order to make a PIA for a mental injury. No corresponding
requirement exists in
relation to disregarding or deducting unrelated or pre-existing impairments in
either ss 22(8)(b) or (g).
(footnote omitted).
226 In our opinion, the Full Bench was indeed correct to find that a
condition that does not amount to a diagnosed psychiatric illness
might still
amount to an unrelated cause of impairment for the purposes of s 22(8)(b). A
personality disorder, to a clinician like
Dr Begg who had reservations about
giving the condition a psychiatric diagnosis, may nonetheless cause
impairment.
227 In a case where it may be accepted that the appellant had an unrelated
injury or cause which caused pre-existing impairment for
the purposes of s
22(8)(b), it is difficult to see why he did not also have, within the meaning of
the Act, a previous injury due
to a pre-existing condition that caused
impairment before the work injury for the purposes of s 22(8)(g).
228 For these reasons, we dismiss Ground 3.4.1.
229 The essence of the appellant’s next submission is that, as there
is no reference in s 22(8)(b) explaining
an unrelated injury or cause
is to be disregarded, s 22(8)(g) explicitly provides that any deduction is
subject to any provision
to the contrary in the Guidelines and no deduction is
required under the Guidelines. In this context, the appellant contends that
chapter 1.29 is a provision “to the contrary”, because it requires
that any impairment rating of a pre-existing injury
“is determined by
applying the methodology in the Guidelines.”
230 In contrast to the approach which permits consideration of the Act and
Guidelines in order to “ascertain the nature of
where the Act
provides for the modification of its own operation, delegated legislation may
prevail “to some
appellant emphasises the necessity for the Act to yield to the Guidelines.
However, whether that is so depends on the
proper interpretation of the relevant
chapter, having regard to the proper operation of the statutory scheme of which
the chapter
forms a part.
231 Accordingly, in circumstances where the chapters of the Guidelines
already set out above (i.e. 1.23, 1.24, 16.15 and Appendix
1) do not explain
exactly how an assessment of pre-existing or unrelated impairments should be
undertaken, it may be accepted chapter
1.29 provides clarification. However, for
the reasons earlier given, any interpretation of chapter 1.29 that suggests two
assessments for the relevant work injury and for any unrelated injury
or cause, does not accord with the way in which an assessment
is undertaken and
must be rejected.
, Forrest J considered that, when undertaking the
exercise of determining what matters it must disregard, the medical panel was
bound to apply AMA-5 (referred to below as “the Guides”) for two
First, s 91(7)(c) does not mandate that such an assessment be carried
out in accordance with the Guides. If the legislature had wished
to impose such
a requirement then it would have said so, as it did in s 91(7)(a) and
s 91(7)(d) as well as in a number of the other
provisions of s 91.
Secondly, to require an assessment would be patently unreal where the Panel
was required to disregard an impairment of another body
part. It would be a
nonsense to require the Panel to utilise the Guides to conduct an assessment of
the impairment of, say, a leg
injury when the compensable injury was to the
back. The obligation on the Panel under the Act is to disregard the unrelated
impairment:
it is not bound to carry out this exercise by a slavish application
of the Guides (in particular clause 9).
233 These observations are also pertinent to the South Australian scheme.
does not mandate that an assessment of an unrelated injury or
cause be subject to an assessment under the Guidelines in the same way
relevant work injury must be assessed. The difficulties expressed by Forrest J
in his second observation are compounded by
the problem already adverted to,
namely, that it may be impossible to accurately assess injuries, particularly
psychiatric injuries,
under the Guidelines at a time long before the work
injury, when relevant medical records or other evidence may no longer be
and the assessor may have little more than a history, or earlier
documented histories, on which to rely.
234 In that kind of case, as the Full Bench observed, the independent
assessor must estimate the degree of impairment that the unrelated
cause contributed to the overall WPI, relying upon the assessor’s
expertise and whatever objective evidence remains
In considering what part of Mr Paschalis’ overall impairment should be
deducted, Dr Begg was required to estimate the likely
prior level of impairment.
He could not assess prior impairment in the sense ‘assess’ is used
in the IAG and AMA5 because
he did not conduct a clinical examination of Mr
Paschalis before the work incident. That illustrates a difficulty with the
taken by the Deputy President. Without undertaking a clinical
examination of the patient before a PIA, it would not be surprising
assessor did not want to make a pre-injury diagnosis given the assessor would
not have examined the patient prior to the work
Despite not making a pre-injury diagnosis, Dr Begg assessed pre-injury
impairment. He did so having regard to the evidence about Mr
pre-injury behaviour. There may be some cases where despite the best efforts of
an assessor, no reliable estimate
of prior impairment can be made. However, in
this case the assessor was sufficiently confident to estimate prior impairment
and explained
how he did so, and no error of approach is apparent.
235 Dr Begg was not required to make a separate assessment of the degree of
impairment arising from the identified, pre-injury causes
in accordance with the
Guidelines. That process is neither practical nor warranted by GEPIC.
Nonetheless, in his evidence Dr Begg
explained how he made his 20 per cent
assessment in accord with GEPIC. Of course, if a reliable previous WPI
assessment were available,
then it may well be used. Speaking generally,
however, it was sufficient that the worker’s WPI was assessed in accord
the Act, the Guidelines and AMA-5 and, as part of that assessment,
appropriate allowance for pre-existing impairment was made by
way of deduction
under GEPIC.
236 We dismiss Ground 3.4.2.
237 We would dismiss the appeal.
Transcript of Proceedings,
Paschalis v Return to Work SA
(South Australian Employment Tribunal,
1334/17, 3594/17, 3636/17, 3905/17, Deputy President Lieschke, 5 June 2018)
Transcript of Proceedings,
Paschalis v Return to Work SA
(South Australian Employment Tribunal,
1334/17, 3594/17, 3636/17, 3905/17, Deputy President Lieschke, 5 June 2018)
Section 27(4)
Australian Employment Tribunal Act 2014
to Work Act 2014
(SA). I note that the effect of
may not be properly
reflected in that part of Appendix 1 of the IAG headed ‘Prior compensation
payment under another jurisdiction
for the same body part’.
Reilly v Workcover
Corporation/WMI Workers Compensation (SA) Pty Ltd (Anglicare South
[1999] SAWCT 93.
Transcript of Proceedings,
Paschalis v Return to Work SA
(South Australian Employment Tribunal,
1334/17, 3954/17, 3636/17, 3905/17, Deputy President Lieschke, 5 June 2018)
Transcript of Proceedings,
Paschalis v Return to Work SA
(South Australian Employment Tribunal,
1334/17, 3954/17, 3636/17, 3905/17, Deputy President Lieschke, 5 June 2018)
Transcript of Proceedings,
Paschalis v Return to Work SA
(South Australian Employment Tribunal,
1334/17, 3954/17, 3636/17, 3905/17, Deputy President Lieschke, 5 June 2018)
Transcript of Proceedings,
Paschalis v Return to Work SA
(South Australian Employment Tribunal,
1334/17, 3954/17, 3636/17, 3905/17, Deputy President Lieschke, 5 June 2018)
Transcript of Proceedings,
Paschalis v Return to Work SA
(South Australian Employment Tribunal,
1334/17, 3954/17, 3636/17, 3905/17, Deputy President Lieschke, 5 June 2018)
Transcript of Proceedings,
Paschalis v Return to Work SA
(South Australian Employment Tribunal,
1334/17, 3954/17, 3636/17, 3905/17, Deputy President Lieschke, 5 June 2018)
Transcript of Proceedings,
Paschalis v Return to Work SA
(South Australian Employment Tribunal,
1334/17, 3954/17, 3636/17, 3905/17, Deputy President Lieschke, 5 June 2018)
[2018] SAET 121
[2018] SAET 121
[112]-[113].
[2019] SAET 199
Impairment Assessment
Guidelines, [1.13].
Impairment Assessment
Guidelines, [1.21]-[1.29].
Impairment Assessment
Guidelines, Appendix 1.
Paschalis v RTWSA &
McMahon Services Australia Pty Ltd
[2018] SAET 121
Paschalis v RTWSA &
McMahon Services Australia Pty Ltd
[2018] SAET 121
, [79]-[80].
McMahon Services
Australia Pty Ltd v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia &
[2019] SAET 199
McMahon Services
Australia Pty Ltd v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia &
[2019] SAET 199
Impairment Assessment
Guidelines, [16.3].
McMahon Services
Australia Pty Ltd v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia &
[2019] SAET 199
Comcare v Martin
[2016] HCA 43
(2016) 258 CLR 467
(French CJ, Bell, Gageler, Keane and Nettle JJ).
Watts v Rake
[1960] HCA 58
(1960) 108 CLR 158
(Dixon CJ).
Purkess v Crittenden
[1965] HCA 34
(1965) 114 CLR 164
167-169 (Barwick CJ, Kitto and Taylor JJ).
The State of South Australia v (SAPOL) v
[2014] SAWCT 36
[2016] SAET 76 (Gilchrist
Dallimore v Return to Work SA
[2017] SAET 72
[2018] SAET
Paschalis v RTWSA &
McMahon Services Australia Pty Ltd
[2018] SAET 121
McMahon Services
Australia Pty Ltd v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia &
[2019] SAET 199
Paschalis v RTWSA &
McMahon Services Australia Pty Ltd
[2018] SAET 121
Paschalis v RTWSA &
McMahon Services Australia Pty Ltd
[2018] SAET 121
, [54]-[56].
Appellant’s outline,
The State of South
Australia v (SAPOL) v Weeding
[2014] SAWCT 36
Abraham v Return to
[2016] SAET 76 (Gilchrist
Dallimore v Return to Work SA
[2017] SAET 72
[2018] SAET 27.
Impairment Assessment
Guidelines, [1.29].
Frkic v Return to Work
Corporation of South Australia
[2020] SASCFC 59
above, which
emphasises the need to contain employers’ costs within reasonable limits,
provide a balance between the interests
of workers and the interests of
employers, and to reduce the overall social and economic cost of work
Redman v Return To Work
Corporation Of South Australia
[2021] SASCA 25
, [140]-[145] (Livesey JA,
with whom Bleby JA agreed).
Alcoa Holdings Limited v
[2011] VSC 245
Millane v Hacker &
[2003] VSC 72
Vegco v Gibbons
[2008] VSC 363
Alcoa Holdings Limited
& Anor v Lowthian & Ors
[2011] VSC 245
, [63]-[65].
Alcoa Holdings Limited v
[2011] VSC 245
Alcoa Holdings Limited v
[2011] VSC 245
Department for Health and Ageing v Neilson
[2017] SAET 136
Department for Health
and Ageing v Neilson
[2017] SAET 136
Department for Health and Ageing v Neilson
[2017] SAET 136
, [29]-[30].
Reilly v Workcover
Corporation/MMI Workers Compensation (SA) Pty Ltd (Anglicare South
[1999] SAWCT 93.
The State of South
Australia (In Right of the Department for Health and Ageing (SA Ambulance
Service)) v Dohnt
[2021] SASCFC 33
, [99]-[101] (Livesey J, with whom
Kourakis CJ and Parker J agreed). See also
Lennon v Gibson & Howes
(1919) 26 CLR 285, 287 (Viscount Haldane, Viscount Finlay, Lord Dunedin
and Lord Shaw): “In the absence of any context indicating
intention, it may be presumed that the Legislature intended to attach the same
meaning to the same words when used in
a subsequent Statute in a similar
connection”;
Harrison v Melhem
[2008] NSWCA 67
(2008) 72 NSWLR 380
, [131] (Mason P
with whom Spigelman CJ, Beazley and Giles JJA agreed);
Attorney-General (NSW)
v Melco Resorts and Entertainment Ltd
[2020] NSWCA 40
(2020) 102 NSWLR 47
[72] (Bathurst CJ,
Bell P and Gleeson JA).
Alcoa Holdings Limited v
[2011] VSC 245
, [66], [73]-[75] (Forrest J).
Marrone v Employers
(2013) 116 SASR 501
, [67]-[70] (White J, with whom Sulan J
agreed): although “it is not appropriate to use delegated legislation for
the purpose
of construing the enactment under which the delegated legislation
H J Heinz Company
Limited v Kotzman
[2009] VSC 311
, [24]-[28]
Barnett v Transport Accident Commission
[1999] VSC 484
(1999) 15 VAR 414
, [30]; aff’d and reasons adopted in
Barnett v Transport Accident Commission
[2001] VSCA 12
Gillat v Transport Accident Commission
[2003] VSC 15
Transport Accident Commission v Elworthy
[2007] VSC 48
State Trustees Ltd v Transport Accident
[2002] VSC 428
(2002) 6 VR 359
Lake v Transport Accident Commission
Connelly v MMI Workers Compensation
[2003] VSCA 60
(2003) 6 VR 555
Lake v Transport
Accident Commission
[1998] 1 VR 616
Connelly v MMI Workers
Compensation (Vic) Ltd
[2003] VSCA 60
(2003) 6 VR 555
Transport Accident
Commission v Elworthy
[2007] VSC 48
Transport Accident
Commission v Elworthy
[2007] VSC 48
Martinez v Dynamic Engineering Construction Co
[2005] VSC 204
Transport Accident
Commission v Elworthy
[2007] VSC 48
Gillat v Transport
Accident Commission
[2003] VSC 15
(2003) 38 MVR 463
Mountain Pine Furniture Pty Ltd v Taylor
[2007] VSCA 146
(2007) 16 VR 659
, 669 [33].
See also chapter 1.6
of the Guidelines.
As was contemplated by the
Full Bench,
Department for Health and Ageing v Neilson
[2017] SAET 136
Alcoa Holdings Limited v
[2011] VSC 245
, [59]-[60];
Vegco v Gibbons
[2008] VSC 363
Millane v Hacker & Greenberg
[2003] VSC 72
McMahon Services
Australia Pty Ltd v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia &
[2019] SAET 199
, [43]-[46].
Marrone v Employers
(2013) 116 SASR 50
, [67]-[70] (White J, with whom Sulan J
agreed): although “it is not appropriate to use delegated legislation for
the purpose
of construing the enactment under which the delegated legislation
O’Connell v Nixon
(2007) 16 VR 440,
[28] (Nettle JA),
Plaintiff M47-2012 v
Director-General of Security
[2012] HCA 46
(2012) 251 CLR 1
, [56] (French CJ).
Alcoa Holdings Limited v
[2011] VSC 245
, [68]-[69].
McMahon Services
Australia Pty Ltd v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia &
[2019] SAET 199
, [50]-[51].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (746 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter