URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCA/2025/119.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CITY OF PLAYFORD v MATHIE [2025] SASCA 119 (21 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Court of Appeal: Criminal)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
CITY OF PLAYFORD v MATHIE
[2025] SASCA 119
Judgment of the Court of Appeal
(The Honourable Chief Justice Kourakis, the Honourable Justice S
Doyle and the Honourable Justice David)
21 October 2025
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - PROCEDURE - SOUTH AUSTRALIA - POWERS OF COURT -
TRAFFIC LAW - OFFENCES - PARTICULAR OFFENCES - BREACH OF STOPPING AND
PARKING RESTRICTIONS
This is an application for costs.
Following a trial in the Magistrates Court, Ms Mathie (‘the
respondent’) was convicted of an offence of ‘double
contrary to r 189 of the
Australian Road Rules
Road Traffic Act 1961
The respondent appealed the decision of the Magistrate to a single Judge of
the Supreme Court (‘the Judge’), who allowed
the appeal, set
aside the conviction and entered an acquittal.
Before this Court, the City of Playford (‘the appellant’)
challenged the Judge’s decision on two grounds. First,
that the Judge
erred by not finding that
s 52(1)(a)(i)
Criminal Procedure Act
(SA) (‘the CPA’) applied to allow the commencement of
proceedings within six months of the expiry of the expiation period
specified in
the expiation notice (Ground 1 – the time limitation ground). Secondly,
that the Judge erred in not finding that
the expiation notice described the
general nature of the offence with which she was later charged under s 174A(2)
of the RTA (Ground
2 – the expiation notice ground).
The respondent filed a notice of alternative contention raising an argument
that the relevant time limit was not provided by
s 52(1)(a)(i)
of the CPA. The
respondent also filed a cross-appeal, alleging she had a defence under ARR r 165
because she was required to comply
with another road rule (Ground 1), and that
the Magistrate erred in finding beyond reasonable doubt it was safe for the
respondent’s
vehicle to overtake vehicles ahead (Ground 2).
On 8 May 2025, this Court dismissed Ground 1 of the appellant's appeal (the
time limitation ground) and allowed Ground 2 (the expiation
notice ground). The
Court found that had the appellant been unsuccessful on Ground 2, the
respondent’s alternative contention
would have been upheld.
As to the respondent’s cross-appeal, the Court dismissed Ground 1,
allowed the cross-appeal, in part, on Ground 2 and ordered
that the matter be
remitted to the Magistrates Court for re-trial.
The Magistrates Court charges have since been withdrawn.
The parties now seek competing orders for costs.
The respondent seeks an award of costs for the appeal (including the notice
of alternative contention and cross-appeal) by way of
a lump sum in the amount
of $52,896.00 including GST, plus the costs of arguing this application in the
amount of $4,400.00.
The appellant seeks an order that the parties bear their own costs of the
appeal and the costs argument. The appellant accepts that
the costs order made
by the Judge in favour of the respondent (which included an order that she be
paid her costs in the Magistrates
Court) should not be disturbed.
In the alternative, the appellant seeks an order that the appellant pay 20
per cent of the respondent’s costs of the appeal
and cross-appeal, being
Held, per the Court:
appellant pay the respondent’s costs (including the notice of alternative
contention and cross-appeal) in the sum of $10,580.00
inclusive of GST.
party bear their own costs as to the costs
application.
Australian Road Rules
(SA) rr 132, 165, 189;
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
s 52(1)(a)(i)
Expiation of Offences
Joint Criminal Rules 2022
(SA) r 191.3;
Traffic Act 1961
, referred to.
City of Playford v Mathie
[2025] SASCA 45
, discussed.
A, DC v Prince Alfred College Inc (No 2)
(2016) 139 SASR 396
Carter v Brine (No 2)
[2016] SASC 36
Duffy v Google Inc (No 3)
[2016] SASC 1
Jackson v Abram (No 2)
[2016] SASCFC 36
Vardalis (No 2)
(2001) 115 FCR 229
, considered.
CITY OF PLAYFORD v MATHIE
[2025] SASCA 119
Court of Appeal – Criminal: Kourakis CJ, Doyle and David JJA
This is an application by Ms Mathie (‘the respondent’)
for an award of costs.
By way of background,
following a trial in
the Magistrates Court, the respondent was convicted of an offence of
‘double parking' contrary to r 189
Australian Road Rules
(SA) (‘the ARR’) and
Road Traffic Act
(SA) (‘the RTA’). The respondent appealed the decision of
the Magistrate to a single Judge of the Supreme Court (‘the
who allowed the appeal, set aside the conviction and entered an acquittal.
this Court, the City of Playford Council (‘the appellant’)
challenged the Judge’s decision. The appellant
advanced two grounds of
appeal. First, that the Judge erred by not finding that
s 52(1)(a)(i)
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
(SA) (‘the CPA’) applied to allow
the commencement of proceedings within six months of the expiry of the expiation
specified in the expiation notice (Ground 1 – the time limitation
ground). Secondly, that the Judge erred in not finding that
the expiation notice
described the general nature of the offence with which she was later charged
under s 174A(2) of the RTA, as
required by the
Expiation of Offences Act
(SA) (‘the EOA’) (Ground 2 – the expiation notice
respondent filed a notice of alternative contention raising an argument that the
relevant time limit was not provided by s 52(1)(a)(i)
of the CPA. This
contention only arose for consideration if the expiation notice ground was
respondent also filed a cross-appeal alleging that she had a
‘defence’ under ARR r 165 because she was required to
comply with
another road rule (Ground 1), and that the Magistrate erred in finding beyond
reasonable doubt it was safe for the respondent’s
vehicle to overtake
vehicles ahead (Ground 2).
8 May 2025, the Court of Appeal delivered its
to the appellant’s appeal, the Court dismissed the time limitation ground
and allowed the expiation notice ground. The Court
found that had the appellant
been unsuccessful on the expiation notice ground, the respondent’s
alternative contention would
have been upheld.
to the respondent’s cross-appeal, the Court dismissed Ground 1. In
relation to Ground 2, while rejecting the respondent’s
primary contention,
the Court found that the Magistrate’s failure to explain to the respondent
(then an unrepresented litigant)
the operation of ARR rr 65 and 132, and the
burden of proof in relation to those provisions, resulted in a miscarriage of
The Court allowed the cross-appeal, in part, and ordered the matter be
remitted to the Magistrates Court for re-trial.
Magistrates Court charges have since been withdrawn.
respondent now seeks an award of costs for the appeal (including the notice of
alternative contention and cross-appeal) by way
of a lump sum in the amount of
$52,896.00 including GST, plus the costs of arguing this application in the
amount of $4,400.00.
appellant resists the application for costs and seeks an order that the parties
bear their own costs of the appeal and the costs
argument. The appellant accepts
that the costs orders made by the Judge in favour of the respondent (which
included an order that
the respondent be paid her costs in the Magistrates
Court) should not be disturbed.
the alternative, the appellant submits that a ‘fair and just’ award
would be to order that the appellant pay 20 per
cent of the respondent’s
costs of the appeal and cross-appeal, being $10,580.00.
applicable principles
Court has a broad discretion to award costs pursuant to rule 191.3 of the
Joint Criminal Rules
(SA). The general rule is that costs
should ordinarily follow the event and be awarded to the successful party.
this matter, each party had some success on appeal.
principles relating to mixed success are as stated by the Full Court in
A, DC v Prince Alfred College Inc (No
The principles
governing the exercise of the costs discretion are well established. The Court
exercises a judicial discretion with
respect to costs in which the general rule
is that costs ordinarily follow the event unless there are special circumstances
another order. In more recent times, courts more readily modify the
general rule recognising that the interests of justice sometimes
reduction in the costs that would otherwise have been awarded to a successful
party when that party has failed on particular
disputed questions of fact or
Ruddock v Vardalis (No
Black CJ and French J
summarised the principles are follows:
Within the general discretion of the courts to award costs it is accepted by
decisions in both Australia and English jurisdictions
Ordinarily costs
follow the event and a successful litigant receives costs in the absence of
special circumstances justifying some
other order.
Where a litigant
has succeeded only upon a portion of the claim, these circumstances may make it
reasonable that the litigant bear
the expense of litigating that portion upon
which he or she has failed.
A successful
party who has failed on certain issues may not only be deprived of the costs of
those issues but may be ordered as well
to pay the other parties’ costs of
them. In this case, “issue” does not mean a precise issue in the
technical pleading
sense but any disputed question of fact or law.
The modification of the ordinary rule to reflect the way in which
particular issues in the litigation are determined is a response
cases in which issues are raised which unduly extend the time and expense of
litigation”.
(citations omitted)
However, as the Full Court recognised in
A, DC v Prince Alfred College Inc
there can be no
precision in the application of the ordinary rule and its qualification.
Consideration
the present case, neither party achieved total success on appeal. The appellant
was successful on the expiation notice ground,
which meant that this Court was
not required to consider the time limitation ground or the respondent’s
alternative contention
(although, the Court proceeded to do so given the
relative importance of the issues they raised). The expiation notice ground was,
however, the focus of the appeal hearing and the only ground on which the
Attorney General intervened.
Court allowed the respondent’s cross-appeal, but only in part, on the
basis there had been a miscarriage of justice by
reason of the failure of the
Magistrate to explain to the respondent (an unrepresented litigant) the
operation of ARR rr 165 and
132. This was not the focus of the
respondent’s submissions. The cross-appeal was allowed, but the Court
remitted the matter
for re-trial rather than restoring the respondent’s
the appellant succeeded on the expiation notice ground, which meant that the
Court was not required to (but did) consider the
time limitation ground or the
alternative contention, we consider that it is still appropriate for the Court
to make an award of
costs to the respondent to reflect not only her partial
success on the appeal (and notice of alternative contention) but also on
cross-appeal. It is true that the basis upon which the Court allowed the
cross-appeal was contrary to the main premise of the
respondent’s
submissions, but the fact remains that the Court found there was a miscarriage
of justice.
have taken into account that the appellant does not seek a costs order in its
favour, nor does the appellant seek to disturb the
costs order of the Judge. In
addition, the appellant has withdrawn the charges in the Magistrates Court so
that the respondent is
no longer exposed to the costs of another criminal trial.
those considerations, we order that the appellant pay 20 per cent of
the respondent’s costs of the appeal (including
the notice of alternative
contention and cross-appeal) being $10,580.00 inclusive of GST. We would also
order that each party bear
their own costs as to the costs application.
appellant pay the respondent’s costs in the sum of $10,580.00 inclusive of
party bear their own costs as to the costs application.
City of Playford v
[2025] SASCA 45.
(2016) 139 SASR 396
(Kourakis CJ, Gray and Peek JJ). See also
Jackson v Abram (No 2)
(Peek, Stanley and Lovell JJ);
Carter v Brine (No 2)
[2016] SASC 36
Duffy v Google Inc (No 3)
(2001) 115 FCR 229.
[2016] SASCFC 36.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (339 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter