URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASC/2025/163.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:05:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
RANKINE v COMMISSIONER OF POLICE [2025] SASC 163 (29 September 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Magistrates Appeal: Criminal)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
RANKINE v COMMISSIONER OF POLICE
[2025] SASC 163
Judgment of the Honourable
Justice B Doyle
29 September 2025
MAGISTRATES - APPEAL AND REVIEW - SOUTH AUSTRALIA - APPEAL TO SUPREME
CRIMINAL LAW - APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - APPEAL AGAINST SENTENCE - GROUNDS
FOR INTERFERENCE - FRESH EVIDENCE AND EVENTS OCCURRING AFTER
The appellant was sentenced by a magistrate to a period of nine months
imprisonment following an early plea of guilty to five counts
of property damage
contrary to
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
sentencing the appellant, the magistrate did not allow the appellant a 30 per
cent discount to the sentence otherwise identified
as appropriate. The
magistrate decided that the sentence should not be partially suspended.
The appellant contended that the magistrate erred by failing to provide
reasons for not affording a 30 per cent discount by reason
of the guilty plea,
and erred in declining to partially suspend the sentence, resulting in a
sentencing outcome that was manifestly
excessive. The respondent drew the
Court’s attention to the magistrate’s failure to comply with
Sentencing Act 2017
Sentencing Act
but contended that the error was not material. The respondent submitted that
the magistrate’s failure to give a 30
per cent discount was a mistake that
should be rectified utilising
Sentencing Act
. The respondent
submitted that the decision not to partially suspend the sentence did not result
in a manifestly excessive sentence.
Held, allowing the appeal and re-exercising the sentencing discretion:
a court hearing an appeal against sentence pursuant to
Magistrates Court Act 1991
(SA) has jurisdiction to act pursuant to
Sentencing Act
where the intention of the magistrate to impose a sentence
other than the sentence imposed can be confidently ascertained, that was
magistrate’s failure to provide reasons as to why a 30 per cent discount
was not given vitiated the sentence and required
the re-exercise of the
sentencing discretion;
total effective sentence in respect of the offences of 11 months, reduced by 30
per cent to seven months and 22 days, should be
appellant had served seven months in custody before he was granted home
detention bail pending appeal. He had since obtained
employment and a
favourable reference from his employer. There is good reason to suspend the
remaining period of his sentence.
Criminal Law Consolidation Act
Judicial Administration (Auxiliary Appointments and
Powers) Act 1988
Magistrates Court Act 1991
Sentencing Act 2017
Criminal Law
(Sentencing) Act 1988
(SA) s 9A, referred to.
KB v The King
[2025] SASCA 73
R v Bechara
[2022] SASCA 37
Stenecker v Police
(2014) 120 SASR 18
Gaston v Police
[2004] SASC 222
Hubbard v Police
[2023] SASC
Johnson (a pseudonym) v The King
[2022] SASCA 126
Kentwell v The
(2014) 252 CLR 601;
Kola v The King
[2025] SASCA 38
(2020) 137 SASR 327
R v Baldetti
[2008] SASC 232
[2017] SASCFC 151
R v Farquhar
[2023] SASCA 98
[2018] SASCFC 137
[2013] SASCFC 41
(2013) 118 SASR 211
[2015] SASCFC 40
[2018] SASCFC 89
Sullivan v Police
[2010] SASC 216
Teasdale v Police
[2022] SASC 64
The Queen v Perrey
[2022] SASCA
Turner-Lindsay v Commissioner of Police
[2024] SASC 69
[2024] SASCA 62
, discussed.
[2016] SASCFC 136
, considered.
RANKINE v COMMISSIONER OF POLICE
[2025] SASC
Magistrates Appeal: Criminal
The appellant appeals against his sentence of nine months
imprisonment following a plea of guilty to five counts of property damage
contrary to
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
conduct the subject of the first two counts occurred on 21 August 2024, when,
for no apparent reason, the appellant caused damage
to two separate motor
vehicles travelling on Sir Donald Bradman Drive not far from its intersection
with Marion Road. The third,
fourth and fifth offences occurred in quick
succession in the early hours of 24 November 2024 when the appellant, again for
reason, caused damage to three shopfronts on Henley Beach Road.
considering the circumstances of the offending in some detail, the magistrate
Yes, you have pleaded guilty, but other than your pleas
and the explanation put forward by your lawyer of your excessive drinking,
have given no explanation, made no admissions, and I have no evidence of or
submissions made about your insight, remorse or anything
of that nature.
Consequently, in my view, the only appropriate penalty is one of
imprisonment.
But for your plea of guilty, I would have sentenced you to a total of 12
months imprisonment, six months on each of the two files,
cumulative.
Taking into account your plea, I reduce this sentence to 9 months, backdated
to 24 December last year.
Even though you are young, do not have a huge criminal history, and have a
number of pro-social factors in your favour, given the
seriousness of your
offending and the need very much for general deterrence to deter people from
committing these pointless, scary
offences and, in your case, the need for
personal deterrence, the seriousness of your offending has to be brought home to
Consequently, in my view, the time you have already spent in custody is not
enough in your case for this scary, dangerous type of
offending. In my view,
there is no good reason to suspend this sentence of imprisonment, whether in
part or in whole, nor to order
a sentence of Home Detention.
appellant contends that the magistrate erred in failing to give the appellant
the maximum statutory discount pursuant to
s 39(2)(b)(ii)
Sentencing Act
’) or, in the alternative, erred
in law by failing to give reasons for not affording the appellant the maximum
statutory discount.
The appellant submits that the error vitiates the sentence
and enlivens the power of the Court on appeal to re-sentence the appellant
unless it is of the view that no lesser sentence should be passed.
respondent contends that it should be taken that the magistrate intended to give
the maximum statutory discount but made an arithmetic
error of a kind that
should be rectified by the exercise of the power in
Sentencing Act
In those circumstances the respondent submits that the Court should reduce the
term of imprisonment so as to reflect a 30 percent
discount on the term of
imprisonment of 12 months, but should not otherwise re-visit any other aspect of
the sentencing exercise.
appellant also contends that the magistrate erred in failing to impose a
partially suspended sentence pursuant to
Sentencing Act
respondent submits that whilst the sentencing outcome may be seen as at the
upper end, it was within the range of permissible
sentencing outcomes.
a commendable discharge of model litigant responsibilities, the
respondent’s counsel also drew the Court’s attention
two errors made
by the magistrate, neither of which were conceded to be material:
(1) first, in declining to fix discrete sentences for each of the counts within
the two brackets of offending, the magistrate utilised
but did not comply with the requirement arising pursuant to
s 26(2a)(a)
indicate the sentence that would have been imposed in respect of each offence
had the provision not been applied;
(2) secondly, in the course of his sentencing remarks, the magistrate mistakenly
treated the second bracket of offending as having
occurred on 24 December 2024
when in fact it occurred on 24 November 2024.
a slip as to the date of offending of that kind will almost always be
immaterial, just before making the remarks extracted
above, the magistrate laid
emphasis, from the perspective of the victims of the property damage, upon the
time of year at which the
offending occurred. The magistrate
Then, the day before Christmas, when people are wanting to
wind down, looking forward to their holiday and no doubt the owners and
of those shops had been working hard and looking forward to a break, you, for
absolutely no reason other than who knows what,
because I have not been
informed, smashed a sliding door to a Chemmart shop.
You also smashed two glass windows at the Happy Jar premises with a pole, and
then smashed windows at Lenny’s Records by kicking
is convenient first to consider the question whether the sentence is vitiated by
reason that, without identifying a reason not
to give the appellant the benefit
of a 30 per cent discount, the judge applied only a 25 per cent discount to the
notional head sentence
regarded as appropriate. If so, it will be unnecessary
to consider whether the two conceded errors just mentioned are material,
so whether the appellant, who did not apply to amend his grounds of appeal, can
avail himself of them.
Discount for a plea of guilty
virtue of the appellant’s early guilty plea, the appellant was entitled to
a sentencing discount of up to 30 per
was recently affirmed in
when departing from the
applicable maximum discount available, a sentencing judge must provide adequate
reasons for doing so to ensure
that the utilitarian purpose of the statutory
scheme is not undermined.
Court went on to
requirement to give reasons explaining the discount does not mean that the
maximum discount should be awarded unless there is
good reason not to do so. As
was explained in
R v Bahrami
, such an approach would ‘bias the
balancing process in a way not authorised by the text of the
provision’.
generally speaking, there will need to be ‘significant countervailing
circumstances before a defendant [is] denied
the substantial part of the
available reduction’.
has been mentioned, the respondent submitted that I should utilise
Sentencing Act
, and should not embark on a re-exercise of the sentencing
discretion more generally. That section provides as
20—Rectification of sentencing errors
(1) A court that imposes, or purports to impose, a sentence on a defendant,
or a court of coordinate jurisdiction, may, on its own
initiative or on
application by the DPP or the defendant, make such orders as the court is
satisfied are required to rectify an error
of a technical nature made by the
sentencing court in imposing, or purporting to impose, the sentence, or to
supply a deficiency
or remove an ambiguity in the sentencing order.
(2) The DPP and the defendant are both parties to proceedings under this
Director of Public Prosecutions is not a party to these proceedings, but that
does not appear to have been treated as denying
the jurisdiction of the
Magistrates Court to utilise
(or its predecessor s 9A of the
Law (Sentencing) Act 1988
(SA)) in summary prosecutions maintained by South
Australia Police.
notwithstanding earlier decisions which might have suggested that an appellate
court should remit a matter for the sentencing
court to rectify a relevant
it is apparent that the
be exercised by an appellate court.
Kourakis CJ, with
whom Blue and Lovell JJ agreed, relied on the jurisdiction conferred by the
Judicial Administration (Auxiliary Appointments and Powers) Act 1988
(‘Judicial Administration
The Court of
Criminal Appeal took the same approach in
Stanley J, with
whom Kelly J agreed, said that in
, the Court had determined that
it was a ‘court of coordinate jurisdiction’ pursuant to
Hinton J agreed that
the Court of Criminal Appeal could exercise the power, relying upon s 5(1) of
the Judicial Administration Act,
and without characterising the appellate court
as a court of coordinate jurisdiction.
it might be argued that reliance upon s 5(1) was necessary in
because the appellate court was
a court of co-ordinate
the Court of Appeal
adopted the approach taken by Stanley J in
For present purposes,
the only important point is that it is authoritatively established that the
Court of Appeal may itself exercise
the jurisdiction conferred by
Sentencing Act
. It must follow that a single judge may exercise the same
Magistrates
Court Act 1991
(SA) in an appropriate case. Blue J considered the Court had
such a power in
and was evidently
not troubled by the fact that the Director of Public Prosecutions was not a
party to the appeal.
power is only appropriately exercised where the true intention of the sentencing
judge can be ‘confidently ascertained’
and where the nature of the
identified error is technical.
A miscalculation of a sentencing discount is an appropriate occasion for the
exercise of the
shows, but the appellate court
must be able to confidently ascertain that the judge did intend to give a
particular discount.
real question is whether, in the present case, an intention on the part of the
magistrate to give a 30 per cent discount can
be ‘confidently
ascertained’. The respondent relied upon the following remarks made by
the true intention of the sentencing Judge
could be confidently ascertained because it is well established that, absent
good reason,
a sentencing judge should ordinarily allow a discount of or
(allowing for rounding) as close as practicable to the maximum allowable
section 10B
or 10C in respect of both the head sentence and the non-parole
there was no suggestion that the Judge had reason to do
so, or intended to do, otherwise.
observation was not expressly agreed in or adopted by the other two members of
the Court. Respectfully,
was not a case in which the sentencing
judge’s intention had to be inferred. The sentencing judge explicitly
referred to a
sentencing discount of 10 per cent, but by a miscalculation
ultimately allowed a lower discount which could not be explained on the
rounding (either to the nearest week or month, or
generally).
There was no other
possible explanation for the sentence but that a miscalculation had been made.
the present case, the magistrate made no explicit reference to a discount of 30
per cent. The sentence imposed was nine months.
The magistrate might have
miscalculated that nine months involved a thirty per cent discount from a
starting point of 12 months,
or he may have decided that wielding a broad axe, a
nine month sentence was appropriate even though it did not amount to a 30 per
cent discount. In my view, this is not a case where the judge’s intention
to give a 30 per cent discount can be confidently
ascertained. It is possible,
perhaps likely, that he made a miscalculation, but I lack the requisite
confidence to consider it appropriate
Sentencing Act
my view, having regard to the principles recapitulated in
set out earlier, the unexplained denial of the full benefit of
a 30 per cent discount involved a failure to give adequate reasons.
percent difference is not obviously attributable to rounding, and the impact
upon the length of the sentence was not submitted
Unless, in the separate and independent exercise of the sentencing discretion,
it should be concluded that no lesser sentence is
warranted, the appellant must
be resentenced.
Before turning
to consider that question, I briefly address the other appeal
Failure to partially suspend the sentence
person who is liable to serve a term of imprisonment which is less than
12 months in duration cannot be granted
However, a person who
has been sentenced for a period of more than three months and less than 12
months may be made the subject
of a partially suspended
Stenecker v Police
Kourakis CJ
The option of
partially suspending a sentence of imprisonment is a very useful sentencing
option in that it combines the specific
and general deterrent effects of a
period of imprisonment with a subsequent period of rehabilitation and
supervision in the community.
The utility of [the predecessor provision] of the
Sentencing Act
has been much enhanced by the capacity to impose a bond which
extends beyond the length of the head sentence.
went on to say there was obvious utility in a partially suspended sentence for
relatively young offenders who have not previously
been imprisoned or subjected
to a suspended sentence.
order to succeed on the appeal ground concerning the magistrate’s failure
to partially suspend the sentence on a stand-alone
basis, the appellant must
demonstrate that the failure to partially suspend the sentence resulted in an
outcome that fell outside
the range of permissible
dispositions.
not advancing a separate ground of inadequate reasons on this issue, the
appellant was critical of the magistrate for not
having dealt separately with
the question whether there was good reason to suspend the sentence, to partially
suspend the sentence
or to order a sentence of home detention. Whilst
considerations which bear on each stage of the sentencing discretion may carry
different weight at each of those stages, so long as it is apparent from the
reasons that the relevant considerations have been considered
by a sentencing
judge, a failure separately to re-evaluate those considerations at each stage
will not necessarily disclose a failure
to provide adequate
In that context it is
important to bear in mind the realities of sentencing in a busy
Of course, where there
is no mention of partial suspension as an option in sentencing remarks, that is
a different matter, and may
well involve a failure to give adequate
to the substance of the matter, the second bracket of offending occurred whilst
the appellant was on bail in respect of the
charges the subject of the first
bracket. And whilst the appellant had not previously had the benefit of a
suspended sentence, he
did have prior convictions for offences of violence and
property damage and had been discharged without further penalty on 13 October
2020 on the basis of having spent time in custody on remand. The
magistrate’s conclusion that there was not good reason wholly
the appellant’s sentence was therefore unsurprising and, in my view,
the question whether there was good reason to partially suspend the sentence was
more difficult. In my view, the seriousness
of offending is a less important
consideration where the question is one of partial suspension. If the period of
imprisonment exceeds
12 months, partial suspension will be unavailable, but a
non-parole period will provide a facility to promote rehabilitation. In
respectful view, it is unlikely that the seriousness of offending which
justifies a head sentence of less than 12 months can itself
foreclose partial
suspension as a suitable sentencing approach. If partial suspension is not to
be entertained, it should ordinarily
be because there is very little prospect,
in the case of the particular offender, of the realisation of the potential
benefits identified
by Kourakis CJ in
the present case, the respondent submitted that there was no information before
the magistrate to permit a finding that the appellant
had good prospects of
rehabilitation if the sentence were to be partially suspended. There was no
information to suggest that the
appellant had engaged or had enrolled to engage
in any programs in custody or on bail to address his alcohol abuse.
is true, but having regard to the appellant’s relative youth; the fact
that his criminal history – whilst not insignificant
– was not as
serious or persistent as is often encountered; and the family support and
pro-social factors emphasised by the
appellant’s counsel in submissions
before the magistrate, there was at least some prospect of a positive response
to a partial
suspension. The appellant has six siblings and is part of a
close-knit family. He has three young children of his own. He completed
12 at Henley High School. The appellant is a talented footballer who had played
‘A’ Grade football and wanted to
resume playing as a way to maintain
sobriety and promote rehabilitation upon his release.
my view, those considerations militate in favour of partial suspension. I would
not conclude that they were so overwhelming that
a failure to partially suspend
the sentence rendered the result outside the range of permissible dispositions.
However, as I will
explain, re-exercising the discretion, including by reference
to events that have occurred since the magistrate’s decision
was made, I
find there to be good reason to partially suspend the sentence.
Section 26(2a)(a)
Sentencing Act
magistrate did not indicate the notional sentence relevant to each offence, as
was required by
s 26(2a)(a)
Sentencing Act
. The respondent pointed to
the fact that the relevant requirement was a response to a Royal Commission
recommendation to a perceived
need to provide clarity and certainty,
particularly to victims, when sentencing in relation to multiple offences of
child sexual
enacted, the operation of the provision is not as narrow as that mischief may
suggest. Compliance with the provision may also
enable it to be seen that the
facility in
is only deployed in appropriate
It is not necessary in
the present appeal to decide whether, standing alone, non-compliance with
s 26(2a)(a)
vitiated the sentence. However, in re-sentencing the
appellant, I should indicate the sentences that would have been imposed had
not been applied.
Considerations relevant to
re-sentencing
appellant relied upon the matters that had been put to the magistrate, most of
which have been canvassed earlier in these reasons.
Reliance was also placed
upon the appellant’s Aboriginal background as a matter that may have
influenced his attitude towards
alcohol and
Importantly,
subsequently to being sentenced on 26 May 2025:
the appellant
was granted bail pending appeal on home detention conditions on 24 July
the appellant
obtained employment at a barber shop business in the Hilton Plaza Shopping
Centre on 31 July 2025 and has been employed
on a 9 am – 5 pm basis since
to the owner of that business, Mr Mesologitis, the appellant has impressed, and
has enrolled to undertake an apprenticeship
within the business. Mr Mesologitis
proposes to leave the appellant in charge of the store for a period when he is
away in December.
my view, whereas minds might reasonably have differed about the
appellant’s capacity to respond positively to a partially
sentence at the time he was first sentenced, the evidence as it now stands
points firmly in favour of that capacity.
Re-sentencing
the appellant, I would emphasise that I broadly agree with the
magistrate’s assessment of the offending as serious.
In my view the first
bracket of offending in August 2024 was inherently more serious in that there
were persons in the vehicles
the appellant damaged. In particular, the
occupants of the Uber vehicle damaged by the appellant were unsurprisingly
terrified by
the appellant’s erratic and aggressive behaviour. The second
bracket of offending in November 2024 was somewhat less serious,
but there were
three shop premises damaged and the conduct was undertaken whilst the appellant
was on bail.
respect of the first bracket of offending, I consider that on a standalone basis
the first offence warranted a term of imprisonment
of four months, and the
second offence warranted a term of imprisonment of three months. The two
occasions occurred on the same evening
and during what was likely a single
period of significant intoxication. Allowing for some concurrency leads me to
consider that
a single sentence, before any reduction for the appellant’s
guilty plea, of six months imprisonment, would be appropriate.
In that respect
I agree with the magistrate.
respect of the second bracket of offending, I consider that each of the three
counts of property damage warranted similar treatment,
and that two months
imprisonment would be appropriate responses to each count. Again, however, they
occurred on a single occasion
over a short period of time. Allowing for a
measure of concurrency, I consider that a period of imprisonment of five months
is appropriate.
my view, the two periods of imprisonment I have identified for the two brackets
of offending are appropriately to be served cumulatively.
The resultant 11
month period should be reduced by 30 per cent on account of the
appellant’s early pleas of guilty. That
results in a period of
imprisonment of seven months and 22 days.
to 24 December 2024, the appellant had therefore served all but approximately
three weeks of the sentence that I would
impose when he was released on home
detention bail on 24 July 2025.
is good reason to suspend the remaining period of the sentence given the
positive step recently taken by the appellant in securing
full time employment.
That development tends to highlight the potential for the objectives of a
partial suspension of a sentence
to be realised in this case. And it highlights
the disruption that would be caused by not suspending the unserved balance of
sentence and by requiring the appellant to re-enter custody.
Disposition
would allow the appeal, set aside the sentence imposed by the magistrate and in
its place, utilising
Sentencing Act
, I would sentence the
appellant to a term of imprisonment of seven months and 22 days, backdated to
commence on 24 December 2024.
Pursuant to
, I would suspend the
period of 22 days that the appellant has not yet served upon the
appellant’s entry into a bond to be of
good behaviour for a period of one
Sentencing Act
39(2)(b)(ii).
[2025] SASCA 73.
[2025] SASCA 73
Doyle, Bleby and David JJA), referring to
[2015] SASCFC 40
(Nicholson J).
[2025] SASCA 73
Doyle, Bleby and David JJA).
R v Bahrami
at [46] (Kourakis CJ).
[2017] SASCFC
(Kourakis CJ, Stanley and Hinton JJ agreeing).
Sullivan v Police
[2010] SASC 216
(Kourakis J).
R v Baldetti
(David J, Duggan and Vanstone JJ agreeing). In
[2013] SASCFC 41
, the sentencing judge had declined to exercise the
rectification power and the Court of Criminal Appeal allowed the appeal on the
basis of the relevant error, quashed the sentence and imposed what it considered
to be the properly-rectified sentence in its stead.
[2016] SASCFC 136.
[2016] SASCFC 136
(Kourakis CJ, Blue and Lovell JJ agreeing).
[2018] SASCFC 89
(Bampton J, Kelly and Blue JJ relevantly agreeing).
[2018] SASCFC 137.
[2018] SASCFC 137
[2022] SASCA 37.
[2022] SASCA 37
(Kourakis CJ, Lovell and Doyle JJA). In
Johnson (a pseudonym) v The King
[2022] SASCA 126
(Livesey P, Lovell and Bleby JJA), the Court
confirmed its capacity to exercise jurisdiction pursuant to
on the basis
indicated by Kourakis CJ in
without directly addressing whether
the Court of Appeal was a court of coordinate jurisdiction
[2022] SASC 64
R v Bechara
[2022] SASCA 37
(Kourakis CJ, Lovell and Doyle JJA),
The Queen v Perrey
[2022] SASCA
(Livesey P and Lovell JA),
Johnson (a pseudonym) v The King
[2022] SASCA 126
(Livesey P, Lovell and Bleby JJA).
[2018] SASCFC 89
R v Klodian Pobrati and
DCCRM-15-536, Sentencing Remarks of his Honour Judge Millsteed
delivered on 8 July 2016.
Kentwell v The Queen
(2014) 252 CLR 601 at [35], [43] (French CJ, Hayne, Bell and Keane JJ),
Kola v The King
[2025] SASCA 38
(Lovell and Bleby JJA and B Doyle
R v Kreutzer
(2013) 118 SASR 211
at [10] (Kourakis CJ).
Sentencing Act
47(5)(a)(i).
Sentencing Act
(2014) 120 SASR 18.
(2014) 120 SASR 18
[2014] SASC 68
Hubbard v Police
[2023] SASC 182
(Kimber J),
Turner-Lindsay v Commissioner of
[2024] SASC 69
(Stanley J).
Vanson v The
[2024] SASCA 62
(Livesey P, Bleby and David JJA).
Turner-Lindsay v
Commissioner of Police
[2024] SASC 69
(Stanley J).
Stenecker v Police
[2014] SASC 68
(Kourakis CJ).
R v Farquhar
(Nicholson J).
Stenecker v Police
[2014] SASC 68
, Kourakis CJ said that the provision should not be
used to impose a sentence of imprisonment for a group of offences, one or more
of which would not, if dealt with individually, have attracted a period of
imprisonment.
Relying upon
[2004] SASC 222
(Gray J), and the authorities there
I received as Exhibit A1 a
letter from Mr Mesologitis as relevant only in the event that the Court reached
the point of re-sentencing.
It was not admitted as fresh evidence going to the
question whether the appeal should be allowed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (382 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter