URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCT/2015/58.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Smith v WorkCover Corporation (Downer EDI Works Pty Ltd) [2015] SAWCT 58 (25 November 2015)
Smith v WorkCover Corporation (Downer EDI Works Pty Ltd)
WORKERS COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL (SA)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION (Downer EDI Works Pty
Judicial Determination
3213 of 2013
HEARING DATE:
14 September 2015
Her Honour Deputy President Judge LJ Farrell
DELIVERED ON:
25 November 2015
CATCHWORDS:
Whether the worker
has an entitlement to lump sum compensation pursuant to s 43A and Schedule 3 and
pursuant to s 43B and Schedule
3A of the Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
Act 1986 for his compensable injuries -
: Worker entitled to the
maximum prescribed sum under s 43 - Worker not entitled to compensation in
accordance with s 43B and the
table in Schedule 3A - Determination
Marrone v Employers Mutual Limited as an agent for
WorkCover Corporation of South Australia
(2013) 116 SASR 501
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Dr R
Respondent: Mr M Livesey QC with Mr G Coppola
Solicitors:
Applicant: Lieschke & Weatherill
Respondent: Minter
standing on a platform at work Michael Smith slipped and fell onto a moving
conveyor belt. He was dragged into a machine
He recalls his head being
repeatedly bashed against a brick wall whilst he was stuck in the conveyor belt
system underneath the roller
that turns the conveyor belt around.
suffered catastrophic injuries.
has received weekly payments and other benefits pursuant to the provisions of
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
(the Act). This
claim is about the calculation of his entitlement to a lump sum for permanent
impairment.
determination pursuant to s43 of the Act dated 12 June 2013 sets out that
non-economic loss in the amount of $420,558 was payable
to Mr Smith on the
basis that he has a 91% whole person impairment as a result of quadriplegia with
complications of deep vein thrombosis
sustained on 23 May
In fact, as can be seen from
the table below at para eight, the figure of 91% included the spinal cord
injury, the left arm, scarring,
cognition, gastrointestinal problems and
vascular problems.
issue before me is a question of statutory construction. Put simply it is this:
can Mr Smith receive compensation of $215,160
pursuant to s 43B and the
table of losses set out at Schedule 3A for the loss of his left arm, in addition
to the maximum prescribed
sum of $420,558 pursuant to s 43 that Mr Smith is
entitled to receive in any event because his spinal cord injury exceeded
person impairment which qualified him for the maximum payment for
non-economic loss under s 43.
was no factual dispute on the evidence before me. A Trial Book was tendered that
contained Mr Smith’s statement, medical
reports correspondence,
determinations and other documents relating to his claim.
Bastian, Consultant in Rehabilitation and Musculoskeletal Medicine, examined Mr
Smith on two occasions. He noted as follows in
his report dated 9 May 2013:
that Mr Smith suffered significant trauma as a consequence of the accident in
question, including an
incomplete C4 tetraplegia involving the upper limbs and
right lower limb. This was complicated initially by a neuropathic bladder
neuropathic bowel. He also suffered significant brachial plexus trauma. He
suffered a dislocated left elbow, including radial
head dislocation. He suffered
an intracranial haemorrhage in the right temporal lobe. He eventually underwent
an above elbow amputation
on the left arm. He is not going to be a candidate for
prosthetic rehabilitation in view of the significant neurogenic pain and also
marked wasting of the left shoulder girdle musculature, with minimal active
movement of the left shoulder. He continues to be troubled
by chronic pain
problems requiring ongoing pharmacologic intervention. It appears his bladder
and bowel function has improved. He
is suffering from significant depression and
PostTraumatic Stress Disorder.
Bastian performed an assessment in accordance with the WorkCover Guidelines for
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
(WorkCover Guidelines) and prepared a report that set out the detailed
assessment, together with the table summarising his findings
43 of the Act entitled Mr Smith to receive a lump sum for non-economic loss
assessed in accordance with s 43A, that is, in
accordance with the WorkCover
Guidelines.
maximum prescribed sum pursuant to s 43(8) under the Act and reg 39 (2)
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Regulations 2010
Regulations) at the time that Mr Smith suffered his injury was $420,558.
3 of the Act provides that a degree of whole person impairment of between 70% to
100% entitled a worker to an amount under
regulations under s 43(2) to the
maximum prescribed sum.
4 of the 2010 Regulations lists the degrees of whole person impairment and the
amount of compensation payable with respect
to each of them. The schedule makes
it clear that a worker who has a 70% whole person impairment, or greater, is
entitled to the
maximum prescribed sum.
43(6) deals with the situation where a worker suffers two or more compensable
injuries arising from the same trauma, as occurred
43(6)(a) sets out that:
“the injuries
together be
treated as 1 injury to the extent set out in the WorkCover Guidelines (and
assessed together using any combination or
other principle set out in the
WorkCover Guidelines).” (emphasis added)
Gray, counsel for the applicant, forcefully argued that the use of the word
in s 43(6)(a) was merely directive, thus giving a worker a choice as
to whether multiple injuries could be treated as one injury.
Livesey, counsel for the respondent, argued that the use of the word
was constrained by the following words ‘together be treated as 1 injury to
the extent set out in the WorkCover Guidelines (and
assessed together using any
combination or other principle set out in the WorkCover Guidelines)’. He
sought support from White
J’s decision in
Marrone v Employers Mutual
Limited as an agent for WorkCover Corporation of South
at paragraphs 51 to
43(6)(b) of the Act then goes on to limit the compensation by way of lump sum to
the prescribed sum.
my view the only valid interpretation for the use of the word
s 43(6)(a) is as contended by Mr Livesey. The words do not mean that a
worker has a choice as to whether he can separate out entitlements
propounded by Dr Gray.
the meaning of the word
in s 43(6)(a) was as contended by
Dr Gray then the effect of subsection (6)(a) would be inconsistent with the
limit of the lump sum
to the prescribed sum in subsection (6)(b) and in Schedule
3 of the Act and Schedule 4 of the 2010 Regulations.
words of s 43B(1) of the Act provide an alternative formulation to calculate a
worker’s non-economic loss. The section also
sets a limit on compensation
where the worker suffers two or more injuries from the same trauma. It is a
lower limit than that contained
in section 43. The section appears to preserve
the historical approach to the assessment of injuries found in earlier workers
compensation
legislation. It appears to be an attempt to ensure that a worker
will not be worse off as a result of an assessment carried out in
with the WorkCover Guidelines
43B of the Act provides for a table of loss in a similar form to earlier workers
compensation legislation. The table is set
out in Schedule 3A of the Act.
It provides a payment for “loss of the arm at or above the elbow” of
$215,160. That figure
is approximately 85% of the maximum figure in the Schedule
3A table. The s 43B cap contains a limitation for injuries to multiple
parts of $254,100. It is not expressed in the same way as the limit to the
prescribed sum in s 43.
Gray argued that Mr Smith was permitted to make an additional claim for the loss
of his left arm pursuant to s 43B(1) and Schedule
3A in the sum of
She argued that as Mr
Smith was already entitled to the maximum prescribed sum in relation to his
spinal cord injury pursuant to
s 43 and s 43A (because he had 78% whole person
impairment from that injury alone).
argued therefore that no compensation was
under those provisions
with respect to his left arm. As a consequence she argued he was entitled to
compensation in accordance with
s 43B and the table in Schedule 3A.
Livesey contended that the amount
for the left arm pursuant to s
43 was $282,000 (ie 57% from Dr Bastian’s report).Thus because it was a
higher figure than the
$215,160 pursuant to s 43B it could not be used in
assessing the entitlement.
flows from Mr Livesey’s argument is that a further step not clearly
enunciated in the Act, but apparent from the tables
in the Schedules, takes
place wherein the various percentage figures, where they exceed 70%, are simply
subsumed below the prescribed
sum in s 43.
my view that must be the correct approach.
parties referred to authorities that were not focussed on the circumstances
here. They potentially mislead because they are answering
quite different
then Minister’s statement to the Parliament that “the benefit
arrangements for non-economic loss will be modernised
and, particularly for the
most seriously injured workers, will be the most generous in
also does not give
this Tribunal any guidance in this matter.
extent of Mr Smith’s injuries is not likely to have been a matter that the
legislators turned their minds to. I doubt that
any legislator or judge would
have envisaged the harm, the loss and the suffering that has been visited on Mr
reference was made to the WorkCover Guidelines in argument. I am satisfied that
the WorkCover Guidelines, whilst informing
the methodology to be used, do not
drive the legislation. It is the legislation that drives the WorkCover
Guidelines. They are designed
to guide the assessing medical practitioner in the
exercise of their clinical judgment in determining whether an injury has
in impairment and whether the impairment is permanent. They require the
use of tables, graphs and methodology in order for the degree
of permanent
impairment to be determined.
am satisfied that Mr Smith is entitled to the maximum prescribed sum under s 43
and no more than that.
therefore affirm the determination of 12 June 2013.
Parties are advised that if a party wishes to appeal against any part of this
decision which is appealable pursuant to s 86(1) of
the Act such appeal must be
filed with the Registrar in accordance with the form titled Notice of Appeal
within 14 days of the delivery
of this decision and must be served on all
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
practice of this Tribunal to publish its reasons for decision in full on the
Internet. If any party or person contends that
these reasons for decision should
not be published in full the party or person must make an application within
seven days of the
delivery of these reasons. The application shall be by an
Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should be addressed
to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within the time
specified these reasons will be published in accordance
Tribunal’s usual practice.
March 2009.
2013 SASR 501.
Schedule 3A loss of arm at or
above the elbow $215,160.
House of Assembly p 2314
Thursday 28 February 2008.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.42 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter