URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRC/2016/37.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
United Voice v Chief Executive, Department of the Premier and Cabinet [2016] SAIRC 37 (19 December 2016)
United Voice v Chief Executive, Department of the Premier and Cabinet
[2016] SAIRC 37
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT
UNITED VOICE
CHIEF EXECUTIVE, DEPARTMENT OF THE
PREMIER AND CABINET
Interpretation - Section 11
Fair Work Act 1994
HEARING DATE:
13 May 2016
JUDGMENT OF:
Honour Judge PD Hannon
DELIVERED ON:
19 December
CATCHWORDS:
Whether the provisions of Schedule 1 of
the South Australian Government Health Etc Ancillary Employees Award providing
that an employee
who performs Team Leader activities for more than a certain
number of employees is to be paid “an additional amount”
(as specified) means the employee is to be paid that amount in full no matter
how many hours per week the employee performs
such activities, or is to be paid
the additional amount on a pro rata basis by reference to the number of hours
per week the employee
performs the relevant Team Leader activities - Whether
there was evidence of what the author of the relevant part of the Award and
parties to the Award intended it to mean when it was drafted and the relevance
of any such evidence if no common intention is
ascertainable -
there was no evidence of common intention and that evidence of the subjective
intention of one party as to what the provisions
in question were intended to
mean at the time could be given no weight in the circumstances -
that the proposed interpretation of the applicant involves a too literal meaning
of the words used and that having regard to the
natural and ordinary meaning of
the words in the context of the Award itself and the history and industrial
context in which it came
to be made the provisions in question mean that an
employee is to be paid the additional amount per week for the specified Team
activities upon a pro-rata basis referable to the number of hours of
performance - Section 11 Fair Work Act 1994
Hancock v Sanctuary
Farm Child Care Centre and Kindergarten
[2000] SAIRC 30
Industry (South Australia) Award
[2003] SAIRC 30
Police Association of
South Australia v South Australian Police Department
[2004] SAIRC
Tempo Services Ltd v Robinson and Anor
[2005] SASC 161
(2005) 91 SASR
City of Charles Sturt v Australian Services Union
[2011] SAIRC
Kucks v CSR Ltd
[1996] IRCA 166
(1996) 66 IR 182
Amcor Limited v Construction
Forestry, Mining and Energy Union and Others
[2005] HCA 10
(2005) 222 CLR
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr S
Respondent: Ms A Wells
Solicitors/Agent
Applicant: United
Respondent: Crown Solicitor’s Office
Introduction
Voice (“the applicant”), an association registered pursuant to the
Fair Work Act 1994
(“the Act”), has applied for an
interpretation under s 11 of the Act of certain provisions of the
Australian Government Health Etc Ancillary Employees Award
issue arises with respect to the second and third paragraphs of the
“Special Arrangements” in clause (iii) of a schedule
to the Award
entitled “Schedule 1. Rates of Pay” (“Schedule 1(iii)”
or the “Special Arrangements”).
These provide for payment of
additional amounts per week to employees who perform Team Leader activities for
more than a specified
number of employees and are in the following
“Where an employee performs Team Leader activities for
between eleven and twenty employees such employee will be paid an additional
amount of $14.55 per week.
Where an employee performs Team Leader activities for twenty-one or more
employees such employee will be paid a further additional
amount of $14.55 per
simply, the question is whether the amount or amounts of $14.55 per week are to
be paid to an employee who performs the specified
level of Team Leader
activities regardless of whether that employee performs such activities for a
full week, or whether the additional
amount is divisible so as to be calculated
by reference to the amount of time spent per week by the employee in performance
activities.
applicant contended that, having regard to the ordinary and grammatical meaning
of the words used, the additional amount of $14.55
per week must be paid to an
employee who performs Team Leader activities regardless of the number of hours
those activities actually
are performed per week. The applicant submitted that
nothing contained elsewhere within Schedule 1, or within relevant provisions
the Award itself, whether considered on its own or with regard to the history
and wider industrial context in which the Award
was negotiated and made, should
lead to a conclusion that the Award was intended to provide otherwise.
respondent for the purposes of these proceedings was the Department of the
Premier and Cabinet, appearing on behalf of the Chief
Executive, Department for
Health and Ageing in relation to Southern Adelaide Local Health Network. It
contended that the additional
amounts payable per week were divisible in
proportion to the number of hours the employee performs Team Leader activities
It submitted this must follow from a consideration of Schedule 1 in
the context of the Award as a whole, and of the intention of
the parties as
revealed by the history of negotiations leading to the inclusion of the Team
Leader provisions in the Award.
the extent relevant, the interpretation is to be considered in the context of
both the Award and the provisions of the
South Australian Public Sector Wages
Parity Enterprise Agreement: Weekly Paid 2015
(“the Agreement”).
The Agreement is to be read and interpreted in conjunction with the Award on the
basis that the Agreement
prevails to the extent of any inconsistency with the
Award. In the event, the provisions of the Agreement have negligible impact
the interpretation of the provisions in question.
issue has arisen with respect to a category of employees subject to the Award
classified as Patient Services Assistants (“PSAs”)
who perform Team
Leader activities within the Southern Adelaide Local Health Network at Flinders
Medical Centre. However, the proper
interpretation will affect not only that
category of employees, but all employees who are appointed as Team Leaders or
asked to perform
mixed functions as such for more than a specified number of
employees may be full-time or part-time employees appointed to a substantive
position as Team Leader, or employees (whether full-time,
part-time or casual)
who perform mixed functions, either by virtue of a temporary appointment as Team
Leader for a specified period,
or on an ad hoc basis as “relief Team
the level of trainee, there are seven employee classifications from Level 1 to
Level 7. An employee who performs duties falling
within Levels 2 to 5 inclusive
who also performs Team Leader activities will fall within the next higher
classification with respect
to performance of the Team Leader activities. The
normal duties of a PSA fall within Level 3. Thus a PSA who performs Team
activities falls within the Level 4 classification during such
performance.
1.8 “Definitions” defines “Team Leader Activities”. They
mean a specific range of tasks set out in
nine dot points which describe
activities such as allocating and determining work priorities, quality
assurance, advising as to safe
and appropriate procedures and work practices,
and other supervisory activities and associated duties as
Manson, who has been employed at Flinders Medical Centre for many years as a
PSA, was called by the applicant to give evidence
as to her involvement in Team
Leader activities. Since November 2009, she has performed relief Team Leader
duties, and has worked
half her shifts as Team Leader, usually for at least 11
employees, and half as a team member. She has been paid at the appropriate
higher classification level when working relief Team Leader
but has not been paid any
additional amounts on account of the dispute between the parties in relation to
the operation of Schedule
1(iii). The dispute is not over whether or not Ms
Manson and other employees who have performed Team Leader activities for eleven
or more employees are entitled to some additional amount per week. The question
is as to how much that amount should be in a given
Award history
Award was approved by the Industrial Commission of South Australia (“the
Commission”) on 19 March 1993. Evidence relating
to the history of its
establishment was given by Mr Shone, who was called by the respondent. For the
most part his evidence was uncontroversial.
However the applicant objected to
evidence as to Mr Shone’s intention as to how the Team Leader provisions
in other awards,
in the same terms as those included in the Award, which were
said to have been negotiated in common terms, were intended to operate.
with those objections below.
relevant history commences from the time of the implementation of the Structural
Efficiency Principles following their adoption
by the Commission in the State
Wage Case 1989. Mr Shone was then employed as the Principal Industrial Relations
Consultant of the
Department of Labour (“the Department”), and took
a leading role in negotiations with respect to the review and restructuring
number of State Government weekly paid awards.
review process was undertaken in two stages. The first involved negotiations
between the United Trades and Labor Council and the
Department over general
principles relating to the implementation of a new skills based classification
structure for the State public
sector known as the “integrated wages
structure”, which was described by Mr Shone as being intended to
provide consistent
classifications and rates of pay for work of a similar value.
Once the general principles had been agreed, the second stage of the
process then followed. It involved negotiations between officers of the
Department and the individual unions which were respondents
to specific weekly
paid awards.
second stage of negotiations ultimately led to a series of new awards which
amalgamated a number of previous awards, and at the
same time implemented the
integrated wages structure and other employment conditions in common terms,
including the Team Leader provisions
as initially drafted. The new awards
included the
South Australian Government Civil Construction and Maintenance
(Miscellaneous Workers) Award
(“the Civil Construction Award”),
which was approved by the Commission, the
Metal Trades (South Australian
Government Departments and Instrumentalities) Award 1985
(“the Metal
Trades Award”), approved by the then Australian Industrial Relations
Commission, the Award now in question,
and some other State awards.
Shone was primarily involved in negotiations for the restructuring of the Civil
Construction Award and the Metal Trades Award,
including the drafting of the
Team Leader provisions in those awards. Whilst Mr Shone did not have
carriage of the negotiation and
creation of the Award, he said the provisions of
the Award, including those relating to Team Leaders, were not created in
but emanated from the agreed principles which informed the drafting
of the Team Leader provisions in the Civil Construction Award
and the Metal
Trades Award, and were intended to be consistent with those provisions and to
operate in the same way. I observe that
the initial provisions in the Civil
Construction Award were substantially in the same terms as the first two
paragraphs of Schedule
1(iii) set out
Shone agreed that at the time negotiations with respect to the Award devolved to
the Department and individual unions, no agreement
had been reached as to the
Award provisions with respect to Team Leaders. He acknowledged that at the time
the Civil Construction
Award was approved by the Commission in November 1992,
the applicant, whilst consenting to the approval as it then had no members
affected, had indicated that it did not agree to the method proposed by the
Department for rewarding Team Leaders responsible for
eleven or more employees,
and instead had proposed that Team Leaders receive an additional payment for
such work at the rate applicable
to one further classification level above the
higher level applicable to those performing the Team Leader function for ten or
was no dispute that ultimately, when the Award came to be approved by the
Commission with the consent of the parties, the applicant
then consented to the
inclusion of Team Leader provisions in the same terms as those earlier approved
for the Civil Construction
Evidence as to intention
Shone said, with respect to the Team Leader provisions in the Civil Construction
Award, that it was not intended that an employee
would receive the full amount
of $8.00 per week (as it then was) for Team Leader activities for eleven or more
employees if the employee
worked less than 38 hours in a week. Rather, the
intention was that the entitlement would accrue on an hourly basis at the rate
applicant objected to this evidence and to further parts of
Mr Shone’s witness statement in which he set forth a number
contentions as to why the disputed provisions should be interpreted in the
manner he said was intended and as to how it was consistent
with views he had
expressed at the relevant time in other
considering those objections I had regard to s 11 of the Act which
“11—Jurisdiction to interpret awards and
enterprise agreements
(1) The Court has jurisdiction to interpret an award or enterprise
(2) In exercising its interpretative jurisdiction—
(a) the Court should have regard to any evidence that is reasonably available
to it of what the author of the relevant part of the
award or enterprise
agreement, and the parties to the award or enterprise agreement, intended it to
mean when it was drafted; and
(b) if a common intention is ascertainable - effect to that
intention.”
grounds of the applicant’s objection to the evidence of Mr Shone were that
he was not the author of any relevant part of
the Award, as its negotiation had
devolved to other officers of the Department. Further that, in any event,
evidence as to what either
the author or the parties to an award intended the
relevant provisions to mean when it was drafted should be acted on by the Court
only “if a common intention is ascertainable”. It submitted that on
the evidence no common intention was ascertainable,
and that accordingly, even
if it was found that there was evidence from Mr Shone as to his intention at the
time the Award was drafted
as to the meaning of the provisions in dispute, the
Court could not act upon it absent a finding of common intention.
respondent conceded that “it may be” that it was not possible to
ascertain a common intention.
find that is clearly so, for whatever the evidence of Mr Shone, there was no
evidence as to what the applicant, as a party to the
Award, intended the Special
Arrangements provisions to mean when they were drafted. Nevertheless, the
respondent contended that Mr
Shone’s evidence as to the intention of the
Department at the time the provisions were drafted was relevant and should
the interpretation.
support of that proposition, the respondent referred to authorities on the
interpretation of s 11 of the Act, including
Hancock v Sanctuary Farm Child
Care Centre & Kindergarten
Meat Industry (South Australia)
McCusker made the following observation in relation to s
to the enactment of s 11, in construing an award, the Court was required to
discover the intent of its author:...(citation
omitted)... thus alteration
effected by s 11 only concerns the scope of the evidence the Court may have
regard to in such an inquiry.
The provision says it should have regard to,
‘any evidence’. The words ‘when it was drafted’
indicates it
is restricted to ‘any evidence’, of the intention at
that time. But no more guidance is given by the provision as to
the order of
importance of the evidence.”
Meat Industry Award
decision, Judge Parsons, after summarising the
more general comments made as to s 11 of the Act in
following observations:
“Essentially, the interpretation of
an award is a contextual exercise. As was said by Burchett J in
Hercus Pty Ltd
(1993) 40 FCR 511 at 518, in many cases the clearest
guide to the meaning of a particular expression will be its immediate context
the entirety of the document in which it is found. That is the literal approach
referred to above. However, s 11(2), as it relates
to the interpretation of a
consent award, reinforces the significance of context by requiring the
interpreter to consider evidence
available about the purpose and object of words
chosen by the author and parties at the time the award was made. Such evidence
assist in determining whether the expression in issue was used to reflect
a particular commonly held historical meaning taken from
another industrial
instrument, or a customary usage in the relevant industry, or for some other
idiosyncratic reason, requires a
purposive rather than literal approach. In the
case of an ambiguity which cannot be resolved by the establishment of a common
pursuant to s 11, the purposive approach ascertained from the wider
context in which the award was made may yet assist in determining
the intended
meaning of a particular
expression.”
11(2) of the Act contemplates a two step process. First, the Court must have
regard to any evidence reasonably available to
it as to what the author of the
relevant part of the award and the parties to it intended it to mean when it was
drafted. That does
not involve an inquisitorial process. It is for the parties
to introduce any evidence of that nature if they wish the Court to have
to it. Such evidence may comprise evidence as to the presumed intention of the
parties determined objectively from their previous
dealings or from the
surrounding circumstances, or direct evidence from the parties purporting to
express their subjective intentions:
Police Association of South Australia v
South Australian Police
the Court must determine whether a common intention is ascertainable, and if so,
give effect to it. If the Court is unable
to discern a common intention, it must
exercise its interpretative function in accordance with accepted principles. As
observed above
by Judge Parsons in the
Meat Industry Award
case, that may
include a purposive approach informed by the wider context in which the Award
was made. It follows, in my view, that
to the extent that the evidence of the
author of the award or a party to the award as to subjective intention may allow
to appreciate that wider context, the Court may have regard to it,
despite no common intention being ascertainable. I do not interpret
said in either
Meat Industry Award
case to indicate
accept that Mr Shone may be considered to be, indirectly at least, an author of
the Team Leader provisions in the form in which
they came to be included in the
Award, given his evidence above as to their provenance. As such, I ruled that
his evidence as to
his subjective intention as to how the provisions in question
were intended to operate should be admitted even if a common intention
be ascertained.
declined to accept some aspects of Mr Shone’s evidence which in my view
amounted to no more than submissions in
support of his subjective view as to the
intended operation of the provisions.
regard to Mr Shone’s evidence as a whole, I accept that the negotiation of
the integrated wage structure included a co-ordinated
approach aiming for
uniformity and commonality in wording, effect and purpose, and that this
informed the development of the Team
Leader provisions which came to be included
in the Civil Construction Award, the Award and the Metal Industry Award. I
accept that
although different positions as to aspects of the provisions were
put forward from time to time, ultimately there was a common approach
content of the Team Leader provisions, which in the case of the State awards
approved by the Commission, extended to their
placement in Schedule 1 to
each award relating to pay
I also accept that the
Team Leader provisions were intended to operate in the same way across the
various awards in which they were
I am not assisted further by Mr Shone’s subjective intention as to the
intended operation of the Team Leader provisions
in question. That was not
supported by any other evidence to the effect that his intended meaning
reflected a commonly held historical
meaning, or a customary usage in the
relevant industry, or an intended operation of the additional payment provisions
for Team Leaders
in the particular circumstances which have now arisen.
result is that the interpretation of the Team Leader provisions must be
conducted in accordance with accepted principle as stated
above in the wider
historical context as described.
Interpretation principles
refer to some further general principles as to award interpretation which are
apposite to the interpretation issue central to this
case, both cited in the
Full Industrial Court decision of
City of Charles Sturt v Australian Services
Tempo Services Ltd v Robinson and
Justice White, in a
decision with which other members of the Full Supreme Court concurred, said the
“The approach to be taken to the interpretation of
an industrial award is well settled. An award is to be construed in the
way as a statute or a written contract, ie, by reading the document as a whole
and giving the words used in it their ordinary
and grammatical meaning. It is
necessary to bear in mind that many award provisions are inserted by the consent
of the parties and
have been drafted by laypersons without attention to the
niceties of form and drafting. In some cases, the award terms have been
in circumstances not conducive to attention to those niceties. Furthermore,
many awards are framed in the light of the parties’
own understanding of
the particular customs and work conditions in the industry to which the award
relates. These considerations
suggest that it is often appropriate to avoid a
too literal adherence to the strict technical meaning of the words used, and
to view the matter more
Madgwick in
Kucks v CSR
emphasised the search
for meaning in the context of a document framed in a practical way in the
following terms:
“It is trite that narrow or pedantic
approaches to the interpretation of an award are misplaced. The search is for
the meaning
intended by the framer(s) of the document, bearing in mind that such
framer(s) were likely of a practical bent of mind: they may
well have been more
concerned with expressing an intention in ways likely to have been understood in
the context of the relevant
industry and industrial relations environment than
with legal niceties or jargon. Thus, for example, it is justifiable to read the
award to give effect to its evident purposes, having regard to such context,
despite mere inconsistencies or infelicities of expression
which might tend to
some other reading. And meanings which avoid inconvenience or injustice may
reasonably be strained for. For reasons
such as these, expressions which have
been held in the case of other instruments to have been used to mean particular
sensibly and properly be held to mean something else in the document
at hand. But the task remains one of interpreting a document
produced by another
or others. A court is not free to give effect to some anteriorly derived notion
of what would be fair or just,
regardless of what has been written into the
award. Deciding what an existing award means is a process quite different from
as an arbitral body does, what might fairly be put into an award. So,
for example, ordinary or well-understood words are in general
to be accorded
their ordinary or usual
The relevant Award provisions
relevant Award clauses for contextual purposes, in addition to the Work Level
Definitions of cl 1.7 referred to above, include:
“PART 2 - RATES OF
Clause 2.1. Rates of Pay
2.1.1 Unless a different rate of pay is prescribed elsewhere in this award,
an employee must be paid at the rate of pay prescribed
in Schedule 1 for the
classification level in which the employee is employed.
2.1.2 An employee progresses by annual increment after each completed year of
service until the relevant maximum rate is reached for
the appropriate
classification.
Clause 3.2 Part-time Employment
3.2.1 An employee may be engaged by the week to work on a part-time basis for
a constant number of hours less than thirty-eight (38)
per week. An employee so
engaged must be paid per hour one thirty eighth (1/38) of the weekly rate
prescribed by this Award for the
work performed.
3.2.2 An employee engaged on a part-time basis is entitled to receive
pro-rata entitlement to sick leave, annual leave, bereavement
leave and public
Clause 3.3 Casual employment
3.3.1 A casual employee is not engaged to work on short term and/or variable
employment arrangements. Such an employee does not have
continuity of
employment.
3.3.2 A casual employee is paid per hour worked one thirty-eighth of the
weekly rate prescribed by this Award for the work performance
and a twenty (20)
per cent casual loading is also applied to the actual hours worked to compensate
for the lack of sick and annual
leave entitlements and payment of public
holidays not worked.
Clause 3.11 Mixed Functions
An employee who is engaged for more than two hours during one day or shift on
duties carrying a higher rate than the employee’s
ordinary classification
must be paid the higher rate for such day or shift. If engaged on higher duties
for two hours or less during
one day or shift, the employee must be paid the
higher rate for the time so worked.”
full text of Schedule 1 including the Special Arrangements is relevantly as
“SCHEDULE 1. RATES OF PAY
(i) Except as elsewhere provided in this award, an employee will be paid
at the rates of pay prescribed below for the classification
level in which the
employee is employed.
TRAINING LEVEL
[Levels 1 and 2 omitted]
HEALTH ANCILLARY EMPLOYEE LEVEL 3
1st. Increment
2nd. Increment
HEALTH ANCILLARY EMPLOYEE LEVEL 4
1st. Increment
2nd. Increment
[Levels 5 to 7 omitted]
(ii) An apprentice Cook must receive the following per centum of the 1st
increment of a Health Ancillary Worker Level 5.
1st year 37.5
2nd year 50.0
3rd year 67.5
4th year 85.0
Provided that as from 1st pp on or after 01/07/2015 an adult apprentice must
receive at least the State Minimum Award Wage of $668.80.
(iii) Special Arrangements
An employee who is appointed or who performs mixed functions in a higher
classification level as a Team Leader (as defined) will retain
their existing
incremental step in the higher level (i.e. translate ‘point to
point’ in the incremental steps).
Where an employee performs Team Leader activities for between eleven and
twenty employees such employee will be paid an additional
amount of $14.55 per
Where an employee performs Team Leader activities for twentyone or more
employees such employee will be paid a further additional
amount of $14.55 per
applicant submitted that the appropriate approach to the interpretation of the
Award was to first turn to the natural and ordinary
meaning of the words of
Schedule 1(iii). An employee who “performs” the Team Leader
activities “will be paid”
what is described as “an additional
amount” “per week”. The applicant submitted that the
entitlement to the
“additional amount” per week upon performance of
Team Leader duties was plain, and that the additional amount to be paid
could not be taken to be divisible. That is, the words used were indicative of
an intention to create an entitlement to
a specific fixed amount upon
performance of the relevant activities. The applicant accepted this must be a
material performance ascertainable
by reference to the Team Leader activities as
theme of the applicant’s contentions was that if the award maker had
intended otherwise, the award would have said so, and
that its proposed
interpretation was consistent with other parts of Schedule 1 and relevant
provisions in the Award as a whole.
respondent submitted that the literal meaning for which the applicant contended
was not open, as, in effect, it sought to substitute
the introductory word
“where” in paragraphs two and three of the Special Arrangements with
the word “once”,
so that any degree of performance of Team Leader
activities triggered the entitlement to payment of the additional amount per
underlying themes of the respondent’s submissions comprised two main
elements. One was the contention as to the positive
support to be drawn for its
proposed interpretation from the other provisions in Schedule 1, from the wider
context of the Award,
and from the wider industrial context including the
history of the negotiation of the integrated wages schedule leading to the
of the Award. These considerations in combination were contended to be
indicative of an intention to achieve uniformity and commonality
in wording,
effect, and purpose, including with respect to additional payments for
performing Team Leader activities.
other theme emphasised by the respondent was the alleged incongruity and
absurdity of an outcome where an employee appointed as
a Team Leader for eleven
or more employees, who performed such activities for a full working week, would
be paid an additional amount
for that increased responsibility which was the
same as that paid to an employee who performed those activities by way of mixed
for what might be a minimal period of time during a week.
deal first with the submissions as to the inferences to be drawn from the
placement of the Special Arrangements within Schedule
1 having regard to cl 2.1
of the Award and the introductory provisions to Schedule 1.
cl 2.1 and Schedule 1 are entitled “Rates of Pay”. Each provision
contains an introductory phrase which qualifies
the payment obligation which
follows. In cl 2.1, that phrase reads “Unless a different rate of pay is
prescribed elsewhere
in this award, ...” In Schedule 1(i) it reads
“Except as elsewhere provided in this award,...” The balance of each
provision is to the effect that an employee “must be” or “will
be” paid the rates of pay prescribed for the
classification level in which
the employee is employed.
was not in dispute that although the rates of pay prescribed in Schedule
are set out by reference to
amounts payable “per week”, they are divisible so as to create an
hourly rate of pay, given
that cl 3.2 of the Award relating to part-time
employment provides for pro-rata payment per hour for such work done at
of the prescribed weekly rate, and that cl 3.3 relating to
casual employment provides similarly with respect to the amount of the
applicant submitted that the concept of divisibility of Schedule 1 pay rates did
not extend beyond Schedule 1(i). The applicant
observed that a perusal of
various versions of the Award since it was initially approved by the Commission
revealed that the “Special
Arrangements” clause was not initially
numbered as cl (iii), or at all. Moreover, the very title of Schedule 1(iii),
Arrangements”, meant that the arrangements were
“special”, and were not necessarily to be applied consistently
other pay rates in Schedule 1, as indicated by the introductory words
“Except as otherwise provided in this award”.
It submitted that to
the extent the pay rates per week in Schedule 1(i) were to be understood as
divisible by hours worked, Schedule
1(iii) provided otherwise in relation to the
additional payments “per week”.
the applicant submitted that no implication contrary to its proposed
significance should be drawn from the placement of the Special
Arrangements in
Schedule 1, and that they should not be understood to have been so placed
through any intent that the additional
payments provided for be divisible as
contemplated by Schedule 1(i).
applicant acknowledged that there were provisions of the Award which expressly
contemplated pro-rata payments, or a payment with
reference to time worked, but
submitted they did not apply to the payment of the additional amounts per week
under Schedule 1(iii).
For example, cl 3.2 of the Award, referred to above,
under the heading “Part-time Employment”, provided for payment per
hour at 1/38
of “the weekly rate prescribed by this Award for
the work performed”. It was contended that this was to be taken to be
reference only to the rates of pay in Schedule 1(i), and not to contemplate
divisibility of the different rate of pay prescribed
in Schedule 1(iii). Similar
submissions were made with respect to cl 3.3 Casual Employment referred to
above, the shift allowance
provisions under cl 6.1.6, which set out an
entitlement to payment of a defined percentage above “the ordinary rate of
for various shift configurations, and the overtime provisions in cl
6.1.8.2. The applicant contended that there was no inconsistency
between the
application of such provisions to rates of pay under Schedule 1(i) and its
proposed interpretation of Schedule 1(iii).
applicant submitted that Schedule 2 of the Award, entitled
“Allowances”, illustrated that in certain circumstances
readily distinguished between amounts to be paid per week and amounts to be paid
per hour. Schedule 2 includes allowances
comprising a payment per event for
attendance on certain post mortem examinations, additional payments per hour or
part thereof for
an employee required to work in artificially cold temperatures,
a payment per hour for time worked in particular patient contact
situations, and
a flat payment per week to employees resident within a specified distance of
Whyalla and Iron Knob.
applicant submitted that the entitlement to additional amounts per week under
Schedule 1(iii) was similar to the concept of a
flat allowance payable once the
qualifying duties had been performed.
the same theme, the applicant referred to the provisions relating to payment of
a first aid allowance.
were to the effect that if one was engaged for three days or more in performing
first aid, there was an entitlement to payment
of the specified allowance per
week, whereas if one was engaged for less than three days, one would be provided
effectively with
of the weekly rate. The point was said to be
that two persons might be paid an allowance in the same amount notwithstanding
having been engaged for a very different number of hours in performance of
the duties which attracted the allowance.
applicant then contrasted the wording of the special arrangements clauses with
allowance clauses in the Metal Industry Award,
an instrument relied upon by the
respondent is indicative of a common approach to Team Leader
provisions.
In general terms,
they provided for payment of allowances on either an hourly or weekly basis. In
some cases provision was made for
payment of a specified amount per week in full
whether or not the employee concerned was exposed for all of that time to the
disability or circumstance that gave rise to the entitlement to
In other cases
provision was expressly made for payment by the hour only to the extent that the
employee was exposed to the particular
disability or
circumstance.
The contention was
that if it was intended that the additional amounts under the Special
Arrangements were to be paid only for the
hours during which the relevant Team
Leader activities were actually performed, the Award would have said so.
the applicant referred to the relationship between the “Special
Arrangements” in Schedule 1(iii) and cl 3.11
entitled “Mixed
Functions”. It contended that the contrast between an entitlement, on the
one hand, to payment for performance
of mixed functions by reference to the next
highest classification rate (cl 3.11), and the retention of the existing
incremental
step at that next highest level (Schedule 1 (iii) first paragraph),
and on the other hand, to payment under paragraphs two and three
of Schedule
1(iii) of an additional amount “per week”, was yet a further
illustration of the award maker’s intention
that the additional amount was
not to be divisible by hours worked in performance additional Team Leader
supervisory duties.
respondent contended that, as the Special Arrangements were inserted within
Schedule 1 “Rates of Pay”, rather than
elsewhere in the Award, they
are to be taken as forming part of the criteria for determining the appropriate
rate of pay for an employee
performing Team Leader functions which involve the
specified extra level of supervision.
contended the respondent, the Award contemplated that not only were Schedule
1(i) weekly wage amounts divisible by hours worked,
but where appropriate, so
too the minimum wage entitlements of an apprentice cook under cl (ii), so as to
accommodate such an employee
who was part-time, and the entitlement to an
additional amount “per week” under Schedule 1(iii). The intent of
was submitted to be that where an employee performs Team Leader
activities for less than 38 hours per week, the payment for that
performance
would be calculated on a pro-rata basis having regard to the hours during which
the activities were performed, and that
a provision to this effect was not
necessary, given that the concept of pay rates being reduced in proportion to
hours worked flowed
through each of placita (i), (ii) and (iii) of Schedule 1.
respondent then contended that the Special Arrangements in Schedule 1(iii) and
the classification structure in Schedule 1(i) were
more specifically
intertwined. There was said to be an implicit crossreference between the two
parts. The first paragraph of Schedule
1(iii) provided for an additional
payment through incremental step translation to those employees who perform Team
Leader activities
and who otherwise would have translated to a lower increment
level in the higher classification. This criteria required that regard
the rates of pay in Schedule
and the relevant increment
levels to ascertain which pay rate was applicable to an employee performing
activities in a higher classification.
The provision was submitted to require
modification of the application of the mixed functions clause which does not
provide for retention
of the incremental step. That is, the first paragraph of
Schedule 1(iii) specifies which pay rate in Schedule 1(i) is applicable.
addition, the respondent submitted that when activated, the provisions for
payment of an amount per week for Team Leader activities
under the second and
third paragraphs of Schedule 1(iii) also provided criteria for determining an
employee’s base rate of
pay. That is, if Schedule 1(i) can be taken to
specify an employee’s notional base weekly amount, paragraphs two and
of Schedule 1(iii) can be taken to provide that the notional base weekly
amount be increased by the additional amounts of either
$14.55 or $29.10. Thus
the employee’s base hourly rate should be taken to be the notional base
weekly amount together with
the Team Leader amount divided by 38 ordinary hours.
respondent contended that this approach was consistent with the application to
the employee’s hourly base rate of penalty
rates and overtime
entitlements, where appropriate, and with the calculation of normal weekly rates
of pay under the Award and the
Agreement by reference to hours worked. It
submitted that, on the applicant’s proposed interpretation, there was no
which to apply penalty rates or overtime entitlements to the
additional amounts payable to Team Leaders, as such amounts were said
relate to any particular hours worked.
accept that the cross-referencing exercise described by the respondent as
between Schedule 1(i) and 1(iii) must occur to identify
the appropriate
classification level and incremental step at which an employee performing mixed
duties as a Team Leader must be paid,
but that does not flow from the operation
of the first paragraph of Schedule 1(iii). The classification identity exercise
is required
by the terms of cl 3.11 which requires payment for mixed functions
at a higher level. The first paragraph of Schedule 1(iii) merely
requires that
the appropriate incremental step at the higher level mandated by cl 3.11 be
identified. The step retention provision
will have no impact in any event unless
the employee concerned is at the second of the only two applicable steps in each
of the classification
levels to which the Team Leader provisions apply. In my
view the limited need for cross-referencing to the classification levels
Schedule 1(i) has no implications for the categorisation of the additional
amount payable under paragraphs two and three of Schedule
1(iii). Those
entitlements are entirely unrelated to the classification level at which other
entitlements are to be calculated. The
connection for which the respondent
contends in this regard is somewhat strained.
same comment applies to the next submission that the additional amount per week
should be incorporated as part of the relevant
Team Leader’s notional base
weekly amount. It is one thing to derive a notional hourly pay rate by dividing
the weekly pay
rate applicable to a working week of 38 ordinary hours. It is
another to incorporate into that amount the full Team Leader payment
create a new notional base weekly amount as a basis for calculation of any
penalty rates and overtime which might apply
to Team Leader payments. There
seems to be an inherent contradiction in the proposed process of deriving an
increased notional base
weekly amount by a combination of the full additional
Team Leader amounts and the amount due for 38 hours given that the
respondent’s
position is that the amount of any Team Leader payment to be
incorporated into the base rate is itself dependent on the number of
worked on the specified Team Leader
activities.
do not consider that the Special Arrangements can be taken to form an integral
part of the divisible “pay rates” concept
which underlies the
application of Schedule 1(i), even accepting that the concept can be taken to
flow through to the apprentice
cook rates in Schedule 1(ii), as the respondent
contended. The provisions of Schedule 1(iii) create “Special
Arrangements”
pertaining to a specific category of activity involving Team
Leaders. Their juxtaposition with Schedule 1(i) of itself does not lead
implication as to divisibility. As will be seen below, however, that is not to
say that such an implication may not arise from
the terms of Schedule 1(iii)
turn to another aspect of the relationship between the Special Arrangements and
the Mixed Functions clause which illustrates in
more detail the anomaly of which
the respondent complains if the applicant’s interpretation is to be
one of Schedule 1(iii) makes reference to two categories of employee who perform
Team Leader activities. First, those who
are appointed as a Team Leader, and
thus perform Team Leader activities on an ongoing basis for the term of their
appointment and
not as part of mixed functions. They are entitled to a payment
at a higher classification for the duration of their performance of
activities in accordance with the Work Level Definitions clause noted
An employee who is in
the second category who performs Team Leader activities as part of mixed
functions is also entitled to payment
at the higher classification for the
performance of those activities. In addition, under paragraph one of Schedule
1(iii), both categories
of employees are to retain their existing incremental
step in the higher classification.
to the operation of cl 3.11 in relation to employees performing mixed functions,
each category of employee is entitled to
payments at these higher levels for the
duration of their performance of Team Leader activities, regardless of the
number of employees
for whom those activities are performed. That is, the
payment entitlements described arise if the activities are performed for ten
less employees, as well as for eleven or more.
the case of an employee who performs Team Leader activities as part of mixed
functions, the entitlement to the higher payment may
extend beyond the hours
during which the activities are actually performed, as they are higher duties
for the purposes of cl 3.11.
An employee engaged in such higher duties for more
than two hours during one day or shift must be paid at the higher rate for such
day or shift. However, if engaged on the higher duties for two hours or less
during one day or shift, the employee is only paid the
higher rate for the time
entitlement to the contentious additional amount per week then arises under the
second and third paragraphs of Schedule 1(iii)
where the employee performs the
Team Leader activities for eleven or more employees.
entitlement of an employee who performs mixed functions as a Team Leader to
payment at a higher classification ends upon cessation
of the performance of
those activities (subject to the extent to which the entitlement extends beyond
hours actually worked to the
end of a day or shift under cl 3.11), On the
applicant’s proposed interpretation, the entitlement to payment of the
amount per week continues for the week regardless of the number of
hours of performance. That is, in the case of a mixed functions
employee, the
period in relation to which payment must be made for undertaking the basic
responsibilities of Team Leader will be
confined to the duration of the
performance of those activities (subject to cl 3.11), whereas the period in
relation to which an
additional amount must be paid may extend well beyond the
period any responsibilities are exercised.
results in an apparent incongruity in the operation of the layered entitlements
of an employee performing mixed functions as
a Team Leader. However, care must
be taken not to be distracted from the application of principles of award
interpretation in seeking
to address a perceived anomaly or injustice. As Kirby
J cautioned in
Amcor Limited v Construction Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
undesirable to adopt a purely result-oriented approach which obscures the need
to give effect to the meaning of the relevant
document as expressed in its
words. Although there addressing the interpretation of an industrial agreement,
Kirby J’s observation
is equally apposite to the interpretation of an
, Madgwick J made a similar comment as to the apparent harshness of
an outcome which denied an employee the right to include a longstanding
shift allowance in his ordinary pay calculations consequent upon the termination
of his employment. He said that a conclusion
that the award makers were not
content with that outcome
“would require a weighing of the
award’s overall benefits to all employees and some comparison of those
benefits with
industrial standards...the job of an award-maker rather than an
award-interpreter.”
practical extent of the anomaly which will flow from the applicant’s
proposed interpretation may vary considerably, as it
depends on the extent to
which employees appointed as Team Leaders perform the specified duties for a
full week compared to those
who perform mixed functions for less than a week.
of the various matters referred to above are determinative of the issue. The
fact that I have not accepted that Schedule 1(iii)
is as intertwined in its
operation with Schedule 1(i) such as to lead to the conclusion that the
additional amounts must be considered
as divisible pay rates is but one factor
to be taken into account. Likewise the fact that the award maker could have
clarified the
entitlement by expressly stating it to be payable on an hourly
basis as has been done in the case of various allowances is but another
to be taken into account. Ultimately it is my view that not much assistance is
obtained for one interpretation or the other
by reference to the provisions of
the Award surrounding Schedule 1.
natural and ordinary meaning of the words in paragraphs
two and three of
Schedule 1(iii) is consistent with the interpretation for which it contends. As
examination of the words in the
context of the Special Arrangements gives rise
to questions in that regard.
first word of the second and third paragraphs is “Where...” The use
of this word leads to an ambiguity which would
not arise if alternatives such as
“Once...” or “When...” had been used. Either would have
provided more support
to the applicant’s contention that the duration of
the performance of the additional leadership responsibilities was not linked
the entitlement to the additional payment.
questions arise if one considers the use of the present tense of the active verb
“performs” in each paragraph
of Schedule 1(iii). The use of that
word connotes the concept of an ongoing performance of the duties in question in
order for an
entitlement to arise. This is the manner in which the provision
(where applicable) for the retention of the incremental step in the
paragraph of Schedule 1(iii) operates. That retention is temporally limited by
reference to the time of the actual performance
of the Team Leader duties as
mixed functions, except to the extent that the benefit of payment at the higher
rate and retained increment
level is extended to a full day or shift in the
circumstances outlined in cl 3.11. The use of the same word
in the second and third paragraphs of Schedule 1(iii)
implies the same correlation and thus supports the interpretation for which
respondent contends. It implies that the entitlement to the additional payment
arises only in proportion to the performance of
the extra duties which give rise
to the entitlement.
is then reinforced by the use of the word “activities” in the second
and third paragraphs. That is, the entitlement
arises where the employee
“performs” the “activities” for more than the stated
number of employees. The words
together connote the ongoing performance of
specific activities which attract the additional payment.
one must ask, in terms of the “additional” amount per week for which
paragraphs two and three provide, additional
to what? It is a payment additional
to the amount to which the employee is entitled for performing higher duties
under the mixed
functions clause and through retention of the incremental step
under the first paragraph of Schedule 1(iii) when performing the higher
duties. As already noted, that entitlement is limited to the period of
performance of the higher duties under cl 3.11 subject to
the qualification
noted above.
considerations, which derive from the ordinary and grammatical meaning of the
words used in the context of Schedule 1(iii),
favour the respondent’s
contention that the entitlement to the additional amount per week should be
understood to arise only
in proportion to the performance of the specified
activities.
mentioned above, I have had regard to the history of the insertion of the
Special Arrangements provisions into the Award and the
other instruments which
were negotiated and agreed around the same time. I accept that these provisions
were part of an integrated
wages structure developed for a number of State
Government awards covering weekly paid employees, including the Award, and that
general purpose behind them was to provide consistency across such awards. I
accept that the objective of consistency could be taken
to encompass the linking
of payment for work done to performance of work, accepting that there are
exceptions to a precise correlation
in certain circumstances, such as those
described with respect to cl 3.11.
all of the above into account, the question reduces to whether the
applicant’s position, which proposes that where there
is any material
performance of the specified activities during a week the employee is entitled
to payment of the full additional
amounts per week, involves a too literal
adherence to the strict technical meaning of the words used. Given the
considerations arising
from the relation between the words used in Schedule
1(iii) itself described above, it is my view that it does, and that paragraphs
two and three of Schedule 1(iii) should be read more broadly so at to provide
that the additional entitlement per week is to be paid
in proportion to the work
performed. Such an outcome is more consistent with the broad context in which
the Award was developed,
and is more likely to give effect to its evident
two and three of Schedule 1(iii) should be interpreted to mean that where an
employee performs the specified Team Leader
activities during a week that
employee is entitled to be paid the additional amounts per week on a pro-rata
basis by reference to
the number of hours per week such activities are
Drawn from a Statement of
Agreed fact filed for the purposes of these proceedings and uncontested written
and oral evidence.
Award Cl 1.8
– Book of Documents Tab 12 at p 98 (BD/12), Agreement Sch 4 – BD/13
Award Cl 1.7 –
“Work Level Definitions” – BD/12 at p 93; Agreement Sch 2.8 -
BD/13 at p 227.
Under Cl 3.11
– “Mixed Functions” and the first paragraph of Schedule 1(iii)
of the Award.
Exhibit R4 - Noting that as
expected the specified monetary amount has increased over time, and that the
third paragraph providing
for an additional payment for supervision of twenty
one or more employees appears to have been inserted at a later
Shone Statement R1 paras
[2000] SAIRC
[2003] SAIRC
[2004] SAIRC 13
Her Honour Judge Parsons at [44], [45] and
That is, Schedule 1 to each
of the Civil Construction Award, the Award and the South Australian Government
Services Award (R2); whilst
the Team Leader provisions in the Metal Trades Award
were also place in a clause relating to pay rates, it also included many other
provisions including provisions for payment of allowances and other types of
[2011] SAIRC
[2005] SASC 161
(2005) 91 SASR 439.
At [30] - footnotes
[1996] IRCA 166
(1996) 66 IR
The dollar figures and
percentages reproduced are taken from the copy of the Award contained in the
Book of Documents and may have
since been updated or altered. The precise
numbers are not relevant for present
Or more relevantly
now, in the Agreement at Schedule 2.8.
Schedule 2 (b) and (c)
– working in artificially cold environments; working in contact areas with
mentally or intellectually
disabled patients at Glenside Hospital and other
specified places; Schedule 2 (c) – working within a specified radius of
or Iron Knob.
Applicable to employees
subject to the Award by virtue of the reference in cl 19 of the Agreement to the
provisions for payment of
a first aid allowance set out in another public sector
The relevant provisions of
the Metal Trades Award commenced as cl 8 Wage Rates, and in particular were
contained in clauses 12 –
19 inclusive - Exhibit R1 Tab “DS8”.
For example, clauses 13,
13A, 15, 16, 18 and 19.
example, clauses 14 and 17. All 17, in relation to a Special Rates Allowance,
“For all hours worked in excess of or less than 38 per week, the
above-mentioned allowance shall be increased or decreased by
1/38th, whatever
the case may be, calculated to the nearest cent for each hour or part thereof so
As updated by reference to
the increased pay rates which now apply under Schedule 2.8 of the
Respondent’s outline para 31 and tr 76-77.
Clause 1.7 of the
[2005] HCA 10
(2005) 222 CLR 241
a separate judgment which agreed with the plurality as to allowing the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (201 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter