URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAEOT/2015/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:56:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
RAGLESS v OFFICE OF THE POLICE OMBUDSMAN [2015] SAEOT 2 (12 March 2015)
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
(District Court Administrative and
Disciplinary Division)
to comply with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting
publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person
using material in the judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed
to the Registry of the Court in which it was generated.
v OFFICE OF THE POLICE OMBUDSMAN
[2015] SAEOT
Judgment of His
Honour Judge Costello
HUMAN RIGHTS -
DISCRIMINATION
Complaint under the Whistleblowers Protection Act (WPA) and the Equal
Opportunity Act alleging victimisation by the respondent on
the ground that the
complainant had made an appropriate disclosure of public interest information
– public interest information
asserted to be a failure by the Firearms
Branch of South Australian Police to investigate properly an incident which
complainant
said occurred on the firearms range of his shooting club and the
allegedly illegal behaviour of some officials at his club –
complainant
asserted that, in turn, the respondent failed to properly investigate his
concerns – even on the assumption that
the information disclosed was
public interest information within the meaning of the WPA, it is not reasonably
arguable that the respondent
committed an act of victimisation in that any
detriment suffered was not caused on the ground of his disclosure.
HELD: Complaint dismissed.
Whistleblowers Protection Act 1993
Opportunity Act 1984
, referred to.
King v SA Psychological Board
(1998) SASC 6621
Rogers v Department
of Treasury and Finance
[2013] SAEOT 8
, considered.
OFFICE OF THE POLICE
[2015] SAEOT
Introduction
these proceedings the respondent has applied for an order dismissing the
Complaint. It has made its application upon the basis
that the complainant has
no reasonable prospect of success of making out his Complaint.
the particulars supplied in support of his Complaint to the Equal Opportunity
Commission, the complainant appeared to assert that
he was entitled to
protection under the
Whistleblowers Protection Act 1993
(‘WPA’) because he had made an appropriate disclosure of public
interest information within the meaning of the WPA.
The Statutory Scheme
of the WPA relevantly provides:
5—Immunity for appropriate disclosures of
public interest information
(1) A person who makes an appropriate disclosure of public interest information
incurs no civil or criminal liability by doing so.
(2) A person makes an appropriate disclosure of public interest information for
the purposes of this Act if, and only if—
(a) the person—
(i) believes on reasonable grounds that the information is true; or
(ii) is not in a position to form a belief on reasonable grounds about the truth
of the information but believes on reasonable grounds
that the information may
be true and is of sufficient significance to justify its disclosure so that its
truth may be investigated;
(b) the disclosure is made to a person to whom it is, in the circumstances of
the case, reasonable and appropriate to make the disclosure.
(3) A disclosure is taken to have been made to a person to whom it is, in the
circumstances of the case, reasonable and appropriate
to make the disclosure if
it is made to an appropriate authority (but this is not intended to suggest that
an appropriate authority
is the only person to whom a disclosure of public
interest information may be reasonably and appropriately made).
(4) For the purposes of subsection (3), a disclosure of public interest
information is made to an appropriate authority if it is
made to a Minister of
the Crown or—
(a) where the information relates to an illegal activity—to a member of
the police force;
(b) where the information relates to a member of the police force—to the
Police Ombudsman;
(c) where the information relates to the irregular or unauthorised use of public
money—to the Auditor-General;
(d) where the information relates to a public sector employee—to the
Commissioner for Public Sector Employment;
(e) where the information relates to a member of the judiciary—to the
Chief Justice;
(f) where the information relates to a member of Parliament—to the
Presiding Officer of the House of Parliament to which the
member belongs;
(g) where the information relates to a public officer (other than a member of
the police force or a member of the judiciary)—to
the Ombudsman;
(h) where the information relates to a matter falling within the sphere of
responsibility of an instrumentality, agency, department
or administrative unit
of government—to a responsible officer of that instrumentality, agency,
department or administrative
(i) where the information relates to a matter falling within the sphere of
responsibility of a local Government body—to a responsible
officer of that
(j) where the information relates to a person or a matter of a prescribed
class—to an authority declared by the regulations
to be an appropriate
authority in relation to such information.
(5) If a disclosure of information relating to fraud or corruption is made, the
person to whom the disclosure is made must pass the
information on as soon as
practicable to—
(a) in the case of information implicating a member of the police force in fraud
or corruption—the Police Ombudsman;
(b) in any other case—the Anti-Corruption Branch of the police
relevantly provides:
4—Interpretation
public interest information
means information that tends to
(a) that an adult person (whether or not a public officer), body corporate or
government agency is or has been involved...—
illegal activity; or
irregular and unauthorised use of public money; or
substantial mismanagement of public resources; or
(iv) in conduct
that causes a substantial risk to public health or safety, or to the
environment; or
(b) that a public officer is guilty of maladministration in or in relation to
the performance ... of official functions.
public officer
(a) a person appointed to public office by the Governor; or
(b) a member of Parliament; or
(c) a person employed in the Public Service of the State; or
(d) a member of the police force; or
(e) any other officer or employee of the Crown; or
(f) a member, officer or employee of—
(i) an agency or instrumentality of the Crown; or
(ii) a body that is subject to control or direction by a Minister, agency or
instrumentality of the Crown; or
(iii) a body whose members, or a majority of whose members, are appointed by the
Governor or a Minister, agency or instrumentality
of the Crown; or
(g) a member of a local government body or an officer or employee of a local
government body.
relevantly provides:
9—Victimisation
(1) A person who causes detriment to another on the ground, or substantially on
the ground, that the other person ... has made or
intends to make an appropriate
disclosure of public interest information commits an act of victimisation.
An act of victimisation under this Act may be dealt with
(a) as a tort; or
as if it were an act of victimisation under the
Equal Opportunity Act
but, if the victim commences proceedings in a court seeking
a remedy in tort, he or she cannot subsequently lodge a complaint under
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
and, conversely, if the victim lodges a
complaint under that Act, he or she cannot subsequently commence proceedings in
a court seeking
a remedy in tort. (my emphasis)
(4) In this section—
(a) injury, damage or loss; or
(b) intimidation or harassment; or
(d) threats of reprisal.
Equal Opportunity Act
act of victimisation under the WPA may be dealt with as if it were an act of
victimisation under the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
the purposes of this application the EOA relevantly provides:
93—Making of complaints
(1) A complaint alleging that a person has acted in contravention of this Act
may be made—
(a) by a person aggrieved by the act;
(1c) A complaint—
(a) must be in writing and set out the details of the alleged contravention;
(b) must be lodged with the Commissioner.
(2) A complaint must be lodged—
(a) if the alleged contravention is constituted of a series of acts—within
12 months of the last of those acts;
(b) in any other case—within 12 months of the date on which the
contravention is alleged to have been committed.
(2a) The Commissioner may, on application, extend the time for lodging a
complaint, even if the time for lodging the complaint has
expired, if the
Commissioner is satisfied—
(a) that there is good reason why the complaint was not made within the
stipulated time period; and
(b) that in all the circumstances it is just and equitable to do
95B—Referral of complaints to Tribunal
If, in respect of a complaint, the Commissioner—
(a) is of the opinion that the matter cannot be resolved by conciliation; or
(b) has attempted to resolve the matter by conciliation but has not been
successful in that attempt; or
(c) has declined to recognise the complaint as one on which action should be
taken and the complainant has, within 3 months of being
notified of the
Commissioner's decision, by notice in writing, required the Commissioner to
refer the complaint to the Tribunal,
the Commissioner must refer the matter to
the Tribunal for hearing and determination.
96—Power of Tribunal to make certain orders
(1) The Tribunal may, on determining that the respondent in proceedings under
this Part has acted in contravention of this Act, make
one or more of the
following orders:
(a) subject to this section, an order requiring the respondent to pay
compensation (of such amount as the Tribunal thinks fit) to
a person for loss or
damage arising from the contravention;
(2) The Tribunal may, at any stage of proceedings under this Part—
(a) make an interim order to prevent prejudice to a person affected by the
proceedings;
(b) make an order dismissing the proceedings.
may be seen from the above that in order for the complainant to succeed he must
demonstrate that:
(i) he has made
an appropriate disclosure of public interest information; and
respondent committed an act of victimisation against him in that it has caused
him detriment on the ground or substantially
on the ground that he has made or
intends to make an appropriate disclosure of public interest
information.
The Public Interest Information
public interest information which the complainant asserts that he disclosed is
related to an incident which occurred on the firearms
range at his local gun
club (the South Australian Field & Game Association Southern Branch) between
himself and the then club
secretary, Mr Peter Perry. He asserts that the
incident was serious and dangerous but that the members of SAPOL’s
Branch (FAB), to whom he disclosed this information, failed to
investigate his report. He also asserts that the FAB took action to
suspend his
firearms licence on the basis of a spurious or malicious report from officials
at his club designed to thwart his attempt
to be elected as Secretary at his
related proceedings
the complainant
outlined the incident in detail as follows:
I wish to lodge a formal complaint regarding an incident
at the Southern Branch at a two day shoot on 19/9/12.
The incident highlights abusive language and un-save (sic) practice by Secretary
of the branch and unfair and unreasonable treatment
paragraphs later the complaint said:
I was standing about four metres North West of the stand
and in a quiet conversation with Mark on rule interpretation interrupted
very loud, ‘STEVE, SHUT THE FUCK UP’.
I looked up and Peter had turned in the stand, appeared noticeable agitated and
angry and repeated, ‘JUST SHUT THE FUCK UP’.
I approached Peter and asked him to remove his shells from the gun, he turned to
face the stand and I repeated my request. He replied
that he was going to
When he left the stand I approached him and he said he did not want talk and
would discuss it in the clubhouse.
I insisted and made the following comment, ‘PETER, IF YOU TALK DOWN TO ME
OR ATTEMPT TO BELITTLE ME ONE MORE TIME, YOU WILL
NOT ENJOY YOUR DAY’.
Peter replied, ‘IS THAT A THREAT’? I repeated, ‘PETER, IF YOU
TALK DOWN TO ME OR ATTEMPT
TO BELITTLE ME ONE MORE TIME, YOU WILL NOT ENJOY YOUR
DAY’. Peter asked ARE YOU THREATENING ME?
I do not remember this but Ross said that I replied something like ‘If
that’s the way you take it then I am threatening
We then moved on to station four without incident and on the way to five Peter
wanted to get his hat and wanted us to start without
Allan was first up and on sighting the targets a branch that had been shot at
was obscuring the view of the tower target. Allen shot
the A target and put his
second barrel at the branch which fell a couple of feet. I commented that now it
obscured my view.
When Mark was in the stand he shot his first target and put his second shot into
the branch which fell. Peter commented, ‘AS
SECRETARY OF THIS CLUB AND
SQUAD REFEREE IT IS MY DUTY TO INFORM YOU, IF THERE IS ANOTHER INCEDENT (sic)
LIKE THAT I WILL REMOVE
YOU FROM THE SQUAD AND YOU WILL NOT SHOOT AT THIS CLUB
I shot the rest of the day and the last round on Sunday with Peter without
further incident but I am sorry to say that in twenty
three years of shooting
Sporting Clays Peter is only the second person I will never shoot, or associate
with again.
I was at the club from Friday night until about 4.30pm on Sunday and apart from
a very short comment stating he would get the story
from other members of the
squad I had no action taken by the President to what I consider a very serious
incident on a shooting range.
As I have stated the President did not ask for my
version or suggest I lodge a complaint even after hearing a version of the
from at least two other squad members.
An incident report lodged with the President resulted in written confirmation of
my version of the event from two of the squad members
and a statement that the
weekend was over and we all have to move on.
I believe there is no excuse for the treatment I received by both the President
and Secretary of this club.
have considered in those related proceedings whether this incident is capable of
constituting public interest information. In my
opinion it does not.
the essence of the disclosure of public interest information, which is asserted
in this Complaint, is not the incident itself.
The public interest information
here is alleged to fall into two categories. First, there is an asserted failure
on the part of the
FAB to investigate the disclosure properly.
the purposes of these proceedings I am prepared to assume that this information
is ‘public interest information’ as
defined, although, on the
material supplied, it is not entirely clear that it is.
other category of information relied upon by the complainant relates to the
conduct of certain club officials which he asserts
occurred in response to his
report to club president of the incident on the shooting range.
information was detailed by the complainant in a letter to the
Equal Opportunity Commission dated 12 February 2014. This letter
records the following:
The club procedure is to report the incident to the
branch president who has an obligation under the constitution to refer it to the
(Section 79)
for an enquiry into the incident and notification to
SAPOL under Section 21H if the incident was considered dangerous. Under this
process Mr Perry the other squad members and I would have had to attend a
meeting and comply with decisions made under the constitution
by the State
My verbal complaint to the Branch President (Mr Greg Dawes) was ignored so I
sent a detailed complaint my Email and followed it up
with phone calls. After
stating that he and Bryan Stokes supported Peter Perry and telling me I had lost
all credibility Greg Dawes
hung up on me and a day or two later I found out
he was planning to convince people I was in a state of Bi-Polar to protect Peter
Perry. I should point out that I had at this point declared I would stand
against Peter Perry at the imminent A.G.M.
Greg Dawes (Branch President), Bryan Stokes (Assistant Secretary) and Peter
Perry (Branch Secretary and Stokes’s personal paid
coach) coerced the
association lawyer John Bennett to assist them in convincing the State
President (David Rehn) and State Secretary
(Darian Stringer) to support
them. I had several communications with Darian Stringer who told me he was on
the Firearms Legislation
Advisroy Group with Angelo Pipos and warned me to
‘let the matter drop’.
When I sent an official complaint to Darian Stringer he contacted Angelo Pipos
in the Firearms Branch who on Darian’s request
sent out two of his police
staff to remove my licence and firearms. My licence and firearms were seized
under Section 27A of the
Firearms Act that requires a prescribed person to
report it after seeing me in their professional capacity. This did not happen
my Licence suspension was illegal.
Stringer had a two hour meeting with the Firearms branch who used this fale
information to order an illegal suspension of my licence.
To cover up this issue
and provide the Medical report required for my suspension, the Firearms Branch
directed Darian Stringer to
the Rose Park Clinic who supplied a report that
included false statements made by Stringer and then an amended report with all
accusations removed and signed on behalf of the physiologist by the
practice receptionist. These are dated 7/11/12, nearly a month
after my Firearms
were suspended...
I had a meeting with a psychiatrist who stated as it was a firearms related
issue she would have to monitor me over a three month
period before she could
offer her recommendations.
I continued with my election campaign and obtained seven nominations to replace
Dawes, Perry and Stokes.
At this time Stokes sent an Email out to all members that in the subject of my
action against Stokes for Defamation.
I have included this documentation and other information that indicates
victimisation from Stokes on behalf of other members of the
controlling
The next day I was notified of my immediate suspension from S.A.F.G.A and
notified I could not attend the A.G.M.. All of these actions
were completely
illegal under the Association constitution.
relation to this category of information I will also assume that it constitutes
public interest information.
as I indicated earlier, in order to succeed the complainant must demonstrate
that the respondent has caused him detriment
on the ground or substantially on
the ground that he has disclosed this public interest information.
question of what constitutes a ‘detriment’ for the purposes of the
WPA was considered by Bleby J in
King v SA Psychological
where his Honour
It is not necessary in these proceedings to determine
the full extent of the definition of ‘detriment’ contained in
Whistleblowers Protection Act 1993
. I am prepared to
assume, for present purposes, that it is wide enough to cover loss of reputation
and some forms of stress disorder,
although I doubt whether it covers
discrimination at large, given the limitation contained in paragraph (c) of the
definition requiring,
in the case of discrimination, relationship to a
person’s employment. I am also prepared to assume the allegations in the
of Complaint and Further Particulars of Victimisation and Detriment are
wide enough to include allegations of some form of stress
disorder and loss of
reputation. However, I should not be taken as conceding that the definition of
‘detriment’ is sufficiently
wide to cover the appellant’s
allegations. If, for example, the evidence were to show that he merely had some
grievance that
the respondent had not performed its statutory duty, I doubt
whether the appellant could be shown to have suffered ‘injury,
loss’, being the normal meaning of the word ‘detriment’ or
whether he could be shown to have suffered
detriment in the extended meanings
contained in the other paragraphs of the definition. However, for present
purposes I must assume
the most favourable case possible from the
appellant’s point of view, and I therefore assume that he has suffered a
with other aspects of this Complaint, it is not easy to distill the nature and
extent of any
detriment caused
to the complainant
a document entitled ‘Even Better Further and Better Particulars’ the
complainant says that the actions and inactions
of the respondent have
contributed to ‘major defamation and economic loss’.
his oral argument the complainant spoke of the distress he suffered due to a
failure on the part of the respondent to investigate
his concerns properly.
I will accept that the entire episode covering his proceedings against
other related parties is likely to
be the subject of some hurt feelings and/or
distress and that such distress is capable of amounting to detriment for the
of the WPA.
the question then arises as to whether the complainant has demonstrated that the
respondent has caused him that detriment
on the ground or substantially on the
ground of his disclosure.
to this issue Bleby J, in
The appellant must then allege that that detriment was
caused by the respondent and on the ground, or substantially on the ground,
he made the disclosure. In my opinion, that means that the respondent must have
caused the detriment by virtue, or substantially
by virtue, of the fact of the
disclosure in itself. In other words, it must be shown that because the
appellant made a disclosure
of public interest information to the Board, the
Board caused him some detriment. In effect, it must be some form of reprisal for
the fact of making the disclosure.
The difficulty for the appellant is that nowhere in the documents he has
provided does he make that suggestion. Merely because the
respondent failed to
hold a formal inquiry into the appellant’s complaint does not mean that it
did so by way of some form
of reprisal against the appellant for making the
complaint. The failure to conduct a formal inquiry is just as consistent with
Board having reached the view that the information properly before it did
not merit a formal inquiry. Far from suggesting that the
detriment (if there was
any) was caused by the Board on the ground, or substantially on the ground, that
the appellant had made the
disclosure, it is sufficiently clear from his
allegations that the losses which the appellant alleges are losses that can only
remedied not only by a proper investigation carried out by the respondent,
but by an investigation which brings about a particular
result. The
appellant’s real complaint is that the respondent has not carried out a
disciplinary inquiry that brought about
that result. Only that result will
alleviate his alleged detriment. The appellant does not even allege that the
investigation, if
properly conducted, would necessarily lead to the conclusion
that he desires. In paragraph 6 of his Notice of Complaint, the appellant
claims that the psychologist’s behaviour is contrary to several sections
of the Code of Professional Conduct and is contrary
Psychological Practices Act 1973
and s 257 of the
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1936.
By paragraph 13 of the same
particulars, he alleges that by failing properly to investigate these matters,
be corruptly involved in a scandalous cover-up of most
improper behaviour - and is involved in a gross denial of justice (my
Therefore, the appellant’s detriment (if there is any) is alleged to have
been caused not on the ground, or substantially on
the ground, that he made the
disclosure, but on the ground that the Board did not act on the disclosure, and
did not reach the conclusion
he wanted it to reach.
the present proceedings the respondent, after receiving his report, initially
informed him that a form of conciliation would take
conciliation did not take place, or at least not in the form which the
complainant anticipated i.e. with a Senior Officer from
the Internal
Investigation Section. Instead, he had a meeting with two officers from the
Firearms Branch. Needless to say the ‘conciliation’
unsuccessful.
failure to have a conciliation in the form which he anticipated seems to be at
the heart of at least part of his Complaint. Although
I have some sympathy with
his concerns in this regard, there can be no suggestion that this was done by
the respondent as some form
of reprisal for his disclosure. On the contrary, I
was informed that the meeting with officers of the FAB was arranged due to a
of resources within SAPOL.
any event, the fact that the conciliation expected by the complainant did not
take place was not the end of the matter.
respondent went on to consider his complaint and to respond, in my view, in an
appropriate manner. This response relevantly provided:
I refer to your complaint about the conduct of members
of SAPOL’s Firearms Branch (FAB), in particular: (i) that they failed
investigate a report you made about a ‘serious and dangerous’
incident at the SA Field and Game Association Monarto
Club on the
September 2012, and (ii) that they took action to suspend your
firearm licence on the basis of a spurious report from club officials.
suggest there was an ulterior motive for making the report, namely to thwart
your attempt to be elected as Secretary of the Club.
As you are aware the attempted conciliation of your complaint by Sergeant Gibson
was unsuccessful. I have since reviewed the file
in order to make a decision
the review I have determined
that your complaint not be referred for
investigation. I have made this determination pursuant to s 21(1)(f) of the
Police (Complaints
& Disciplinary Proceedings) Act 1985.
In terms of the merits of the suspension of your firearms licence, this is not
an issue I propose to express an opinion on. There
is a statutory scheme for
appealing decisions by the Registrar of Firearms, and in the event you believe
the decision was unfair
– because it was based on a malicious report or
for any other reason – then you need to avail yourself of those rights
review. The only comment I will make is that notwithstanding the motives of the
person making the report, it appears the psychiatric
report obtained following
your suspension recommended the continuation of the suspension.
In your correspondence you repeatedly make reference to the incident on the
September 2012, and the fact that it has not been investigated
by the FAB. You initially made the report to the president of the
club, and only
referred it to the FAB after you were unhappy with the response you received
from the president, and after your licence
was suspended.
You detail how there was some reluctance on the part of the club secretary,
Peter Perry, to move a target that was obstructed by
a power line, and that he
voiced his annoyance at your insistence that this happen. In the end the target
was moved prior to any
further shots being fired. You go on to state that
shortly after this, while you were discussing the interpretation of rules with
another member, Mr Perry angrily told you to ‘Shut the fuck up’
twice. You responded by approaching him and demanding
that he unload his gun.
He responded by ignoring you and proceeding to shoot the next target. You
then approached him again and warned
him that if he attempted to belittle you
one more time he would ‘not enjoy (his) day’. When Mr Perry asked if
threatening him you responded that you were (albeit you cannot recall
saying this yourself). You also refer to another issue that
arose over the
shooting of a tree branch, however it is difficult to see how this would warrant
further investigation by FAB.
While in recent contact with this office you have asserted that the issues you
raise are extremely serious, even suggesting that
you were in some way
threatened with a firearm, this is not how you framed your complaint to the
State Secretary back in September/October
2012. I refer in particular to the
second paragraph of your letter where you state: ‘The incident highlights
the abusive language
and unsave(sic) practice by the Secretary of the branch and
unreasonable treatment by the President’. It appears to me from
reports you made at the time that your grievance was related to the way you were
spoken to, and the attitude of Mr Perry towards
the power line issue, rather
than anything more serious.
In my view the way you were spoken to by Mr Perry that day is not something that
warranted an investigation by FAB. In terms of the
safety issue around the power
line, that was the subject of an investigation by members of the FAB. I have
sighted the report and
am satisfied the investigation conducted was carried out
appropriately.
It follows from what I have discussed about that I do not consider there to be
any evidence to support your assertions that members
of the FAB have failed to
respond appropriately to the matters you raise. While I appreciate you remain
unhappy with the action they
took, in my view no further action is
I shall now close this file.
my view, the observations of Bleby J in
are apposite to the facts of
this case and the conduct of the respondent. The gravamen of the
complainant’s concerns, apart
from the failure to hold a conciliation as
anticipated, are that the respondent did not agree with him that the FAB’s
investigation
was inadequate and nor did it inquire into the merits of his
firearms licence suspension.
to the latter, in my opinion, the respondent, very properly, declined to
investigate this aspect of the complaint. However, it
did not dismiss that part
of the complaint ‘out of hand’. Rather, it directed him to the
review processes available to
him if he felt aggrieved by the decision to
suspend his firearms licence. As to the former, the fact that the investigation
by the respondent did not produce the result sought by the complainant
does not mean that the respondent’s actions were in
some way calculated to
cause him detriment.
these circumstances, although I am prepared (but only for the purposes of this
argument) to accept that the complainant did make
an appropriate disclosure of
public interest information and arguably also suffered a detriment, I am quite
satisfied that the respondent
has not committed an act of victimisation because,
in my opinion, the detriment was not caused, on the ground or substantially on
the ground, of his disclosure.
Accordingly
and in summary, I am satisfied that ‘it is not reasonably arguable that
the complainant could succeed on the issues
upon which he would need to succeed
Accordingly,
the Complaint is
Ragless v Stokes
(1998) SASC 6621.
Rogers v Department of
Treasury and Finance
[2013] SAEOT 8.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (197 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter