URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACAT/2025/54.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:53:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
GJB v MVY [2025] SACAT 54 (10 July 2025)
NEUTRAL CITATION
[2025] SACAT 54
Deputy President Johns
10 July 2025
HEARING DATES
10 July 2025
SACAT FILE NO.
2025/SIR000103
ON REVIEW FROM
Member Rainford (26 March 2025, 2024/SA003637)
The applicant sought an internal review of a decision of the Tribunal to
approve a change of name for his child from a female first
name and the
father’s surname to a male first name and the mother’s surname under
Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act 1996
The applicant submitted that he disagrees with the change of name as it is
his view that the child is too young to make a decision
dysphoria and any decisions should be postponed until the child is 18 years old.
He said that he does not consider
the medical evidence provided by the
respondent in support of the application to be adequate because it was prepared
after one meeting
with the child. In relation to the child’s change of
last name, he submitted that although his contact with the child has ceased,
that he contributed significantly in the child's younger years and still cares
The respondent mother of the child said that the change of name was
necessary to enable the child’s participation in society
in accordance
with their gender identity. She said that the child’s mental health would
be adversely affected if a change of
name was not approved, and the child gave
evidence in the internal review hearing in support of this.
Held, affirming the decision under review:
The Tribunal now
has objective medical evidence that the child meets the medical criteria for
gender dysphoria and which supports
a view that it is in the best interests of
the child for their first name to be changed;
If the Tribunal
does not change the child’s first name, then the child’s name will
continue to be a barrier to the child
for their education, work and general
participation in society;
child’s first and second names were female and so if the child’s
first name is to be changed, it is a logical consequence
of that change, to
delete the child’s second name;
The Tribunal
does not consider that the proposed change of the child’s surname is
likely to have a material impact on their
relationship with the applicant;
The Tribunal
considers that it is in the child’s best interests for their name to be
changed and therefore, considers that the
original Order is the correct or
preferable decision.
Internal review – Births, deaths and marriages
Application to change a child’s name – Best interests of the child
– Child consents to the change of name
LEGISLATION CONSIDERED
Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act 1996
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
CASES CONSIDERED
[2018] SACAT 52
REPRESENTATION
The applicant appeared by telephone
The respondent appeared by telephone
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s decision pursuant to
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
. The parties and participants of the proceedings have been
de-identified in accordance with the Tribunal’s anonymisation policy.
Other facts and details that may lead to the identification of any person may
have also been anonymised or omitted. These changes
do not affect the
Tribunal’s decision or its reasons for decision.
REASONS FOR DECISION
The application
is an application seeking the review of an order made by the Tribunal on 26
March 2025 in matter number 2024/SA003637 (the original
the original Order the Tribunal dealt with an application by the respondent
(MVY, who is the mother of the child) seeking an order
under section 25(2)(c) of
Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act 1996
(the BDMR Act) to
change the name of the child from female first and second names and the
father’s surname to a male first
name and the mother’s surname. The
Tribunal made an order to change the child’s name to a male first name and
the mother’s
is the applicant and father of the child. He disagrees with the original Order,
and he has sought a review. An application for
review is made under section 70
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
SACAT Act).
Procedural issues
Additional evidence
parties have provided the Tribunal with written submissions in this matter. At
the direction of the Tribunal, the respondent
has also provided a report from Dr
Georgie Swift, Consultant Psychiatrist, dated 13 June 2025.
the suggestion of the Tribunal, the respondent has provided a written statement
from the child.
70(4) SACAT Act allows the Tribunal to take into account additional evidence in
the course of the review if the Tribunal considers
it is relevant and
appropriate to do so. I decided that those documents would be helpful to me in
making my determination about this
matter, and so I did accept them into
Tribunal attempted to provide those documents to the applicant before the
hearing. Unfortunately, he did not realise he had received
emails from the
Tribunal with those documents, and he was unable to open those documents. The
Tribunal resent documents to the applicant.
I also read those documents out in
the hearing. I offered to adjourn the matter for a few days to allow the
applicant an opportunity
to further consider the information in those documents,
and to provide a response, but he said that he did not consider that was
necessary, and he did address the contents of both documents in his oral
submissions in the review hearing.
The participation of the child in these proceedings
child chose to participate in the review hearing. In addition to their written
statement, the child made some oral submissions
in the course of the review
Findings of the Tribunal
child is 15 years old. The child was born in Singapore, and the name registered
on the birth certificate is a female first and
second name and the
father’s surname.
and MVY are named on the child’s birth certificate, as the child’s
separated shortly after the birth of the child.
respondent and the child lived in Singapore for a while, and then they returned
to Australia, and they now live in Adelaide.
child has always lived with the respondent. The child had some contact with the
applicant, but that ceased in 2019. Since then
neither the applicant nor his
family have had any contact with the child.
child told the respondent that they were transgender in 2023. The respondent and
the child have been seeking medical assistance
from the child’s GP and
they have had two appointments with the Women and Children’s Hospital
(WCH) Gender Diversity
to their situation of gender dysphoria, the child is not attending school,
studying or participating in any form of education
through Open Access and the
child is not in the paid
respondent made an application to change the child’s name and the Tribunal
made an order which permitted that to occur,
and that decision is contained in
the original Order of which the applicant has sought a review.
70 SACAT Act provides that on internal review, the Tribunal must make the
correct or preferable decision taking into account
the evidence available to the
Tribunal in the original hearing, giving appropriate weight to the original
Order, and taking into
account any other evidence the Tribunal considers is
relevant and appropriate to take into account in the course of the review. Any
application for review necessarily involves an application for leave.
25(2)(c) BDMR Act provides that an application for registration of a change of a
child’s name may be made by one parent
if the Tribunal approves the change
25(3) BDMR Act states that the Tribunal may, on application by a child’s
parent, approve a proposed change of name for
the child if satisfied that the
change is in the child’s best interests.
26 BDMR Act states that a child’s name must not be registered unless
either the child consents to the change of name
or the child is unable to
understand the meaning and implications of the change of name.
The evidence and submissions of the parties
summary, the applicant submitted that:
He disagrees
with the approach of the child and the respondent concerning the child’s
gender dysphoria because he considers
that the child is too young to make a
properly informed decision about the issue and the ramifications of such a
decision are unlikely
to be fully appreciated by the child at this age.
Therefore, he
also disagrees with the decision to change the name of the child which is
consequential to the choices being made about
the child’s gender
He does not
consider the report provided by Dr Swift is adequate evidence to support the
respondent’s and the child’s
views about gender dysphoria, and their
decisions which flow from that because Dr Swift only saw the child once and that
is not enough
for a proper assessment to be made about the child’s gender
In addition, he
considers that the child should be undergoing a course of counselling before any
decisions about the child’s
gender dysphoria are made.
His position in
relation to child support has been misunderstood.
Because of the
child’s young age, any decision arising in any way from the child’s
gender dysphoria (including a decision
postponed until the child is 18 years of age.
He also opposes
the application to change the child’s surname – he ceased having
the child’s grandmother made it
impossible for him to interact with the child alone, however, he has made a
significant contribution
to the child in the child’s younger years, and he
still cares about the child.
summary, the respondent submitted that:
After the child
informed her that they were transgender, she has been trying to seek medical
assistance, but it is difficult due to
the child’s age, and a shortage of
clinicians with expertise in the area.
However, they
have seen the child’s GP and they have had two appointments at the WCH
gender diversity clinic.
Her view is that
the child needs a male name to be consistent with their male identity, and to
enable them to participate in essential
life activities such as school or
There is no
interim practical solution which would address the issue for the next two years
until the child turns 18.
The applicant is
trying to use tactics of coercive control and intimidation to prevent the
child’s name being changed.
She is concerned
that the mental health of the child will be significantly adversely impacted if
the child’s name is not changed.
child asked to make submissions in the course of the internal review hearing,
and I permitted the child to do so. The child provided
their own written
submission.
relation to the change of their first and second names, the child said:
“I desperately require a name change to live my life as my true self, to
go to school or find employment without being distressed.
With no name change, I
will be behind on education and employment, receive no ATAR nor head-start to
capitalise off advantageous
employment opportunities from being a junior due to
sheer distress.”
relation to the change of their surname, the child said that they have always
lived with their mother; their mother has been the
person who has provided
comfort during their times of distress; their mother is the person who is
teaching them life skills; it has
been years since they have had any contact
with their father and they do not wish to have any contact with their father.
They consider
that the response of their father to their current situation is
unreasonable, unsympathetic, and does not place their best interests
The further evidence available to the Tribunal on
Notwithstanding
the fact that Dr Swift has only had one interview with the child, I found her
report to be very helpful. That report
states that:
a) The child meets the criteria for a gender diversity of adolescence –
which requires that a child meets at least two of
the criteria, and they must
have been present for six months. The criteria are:
incongruence between one’s experienced/expressed gender and primary and/or
secondary sex characteristics (or in young
adolescents, the anticipated
secondary sex characteristics).
A strong desire
to be rid of one’s primary and/or secondary sex characteristics because of
a marked incongruence with one’s
experienced/ expressed gender (or in
young adolescents, a desire to prevent the development of the anticipated sex
characteristics).
A strong desire
for the primary and/or secondary sex characteristics of the other gender.
A strong desire
to be treated as the other gender (or some alternative gender different from
one’s assigned gender).
conviction that one has the typical feelings and reactions of the other gender
(or some alternative gender different from
one’s assigned
b) In order to meet the criteria, the condition must be associated with
clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other
important areas of functioning and this is the case for the child.
c) The child experiences dysphoria in relation to various female aspects of
their body and has spoken about the changes in their
body which would occur with
testosterone therapy.
In conclusion, Dr Swift states that she fully supports the
application for the child to change their first name to a male name which
reflects their gender identity and expression because it would support the child
to return to school and to participate more generally
in society.
Conclusion and outcome
the original Order, Senior Member Rainford has referred to the legal principles
to be applied in a matter such as this, and he
has concluded that the
child’s names should be changed from their current names, to a male first
name and the mother’s
repeat the factors referred to in
by her Honour President
Hughes when dealing with an application to change the name of a child:
The welfare of
the child is the paramount consideration;
The short and
long term effects of any change of the child’s surname;
embarrassment likely to be experienced by the child if their name is different
from that of the parent with custody or care and
Any confusion of
identity which may arise for the child if their name is changed or is not
The effect which
any change in surname may have on the relationship between the child and the
parent whose name the child bore during
a marriage or relationship;
The effect of
frequent or random changes of name;
The advantages
both in the short term and in the long term which will accrue to the children if
their name remains as it is now;
The contact that
the non-custodial parent has had and is likely to have in the future with the
The degree of
identification that the children now have with each parent, and where relevant,
with any step-parent.
have formed the following conclusions about those factors on the basis of the
evidence and submissions in this matter:
a) The Tribunal now has objective medical evidence that the child meets the
medical criteria for gender dysphoria and which supports
a view that it is in
the best interests of the child for their first name to be changed. That
evidence also establishes that this
situation is not new for the child, and the
child has had detailed discussions about their gender dysphoria with Dr Swift
b) If the Tribunal does not change the child’s first name, then the
child’s name will continue to be a barrier to the
child for their
education, work and general participation in society. The child will be isolated
and will be unable to take up opportunities
which would otherwise be available
c) I accept that there is no practical interim solution which could be in place
and which would allow the child to participate in
formal activities such as
education, in a manner which is consistent with their gender identity.
d) If the Tribunal does change the child’s first name, it is likely that
the child will be able to resume participating in
society in a meaningful way
– pursuing their education, and getting work at some point.
e) If the Tribunal does not change the child’s first name, then the child
will continue to be distressed by their situation
and this is likely to have a
significant adverse effect on their mental health.
f) If the child’s first name is to be changed, it is logical to remove
the child’s second name (which is also female).
g) In relation to the issue of the change of the child’s surname, it is
not disputed that the applicant now lives in New South
Wales, and has not had
any contact with the child since 2019. It is also not disputed that the child
has always lived with their
mother, and the child has a close relationship with
their mother.
h) In the circumstances of this matter my assessment is that although the
applicant has said that he still cares for the child,
they do not communicate,
they have not communicated for about five years, and neither of them is trying
to change that situation.
Accordingly, I do not consider that the proposed
change of the child’s surname is likely to have a material impact on their
relationship.
all of the above reasons, I consider that it is in the child’s best
interests for their name to be changed from a female
first and second name and
the applicant’s surname to a male first name and the respondent’s
surname and therefore, I
consider that Senior Member Rainford’s decision
in the original Order, is the correct or preferable decision. Accordingly,
will affirm the original Order.
Orders of the Tribunal
Tribunal grants leave for the application to proceed.
Tribunal affirms the decision under
Pages 9-10 of the transcript
of the original hearing.
[2018] SACAT 52.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.24 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter