URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCFC/2025/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
LEGAL PROFESSION CONDUCT COMMISSIONER v FITZPATRICK [2025] SASCFC 1 (7 March 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Full Court)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
LEGAL PROFESSION CONDUCT COMMISSIONER v FITZPATRICK
[2025] SASCFC 1
Judgment of The Full Court
(ex tempore)
(The Honourable President Livesey, the
Honourable Justice S David and the Honourable Justice Stanley)
7 March 2025
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES - LAWYERS - COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE -
PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT AND UNSATISFACTORY PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT -
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES - LAWYERS - COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE -
PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT AND UNSATISFACTORY PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT - NEGLECT
This is an application by the Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner for an
order that the Practitioner’s name be struck off
the roll of legal
practitioners.
Following the commencement of four actions before the Legal Practitioners
Disciplinary Tribunal from 2017 to 2023, on 11 June 2024,
the Tribunal found
that the Practitioner had engaged in 12 instances of professional misconduct and
three instances of unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
The Tribunal found that the Practitioner’s misconduct comprised
repeated failures and breaches of rules relating to the conduct
practitioners, including, inter alia, repeated failures to respond in an
adequate and timely manner to requests for information,
failing to honour an
undertaking, failing to act in the best interests of clients, failing to deliver
services competently and diligently,
acting without instructions, making
dishonest statements to other solicitors, and failing to complete MCPD
requirements. The Practitioner
also breached an order of the Supreme Court on
two occasions.
In further reasons delivered on 19 June 2024, the Tribunal recommended that
disciplinary proceeding be commenced in the Supreme Court
in respect of these
The Practitioner has not held a practising certificate since June 2022, and
has since retired.
HELD (by the Court) striking the Practitioner’s name from the roll of
legal practitioners:
In light of the
extent and seriousness of the Practitioner’s conduct over a number of
years, the Practitioner is not fit to
practise law as a member of the profession
and his name should be struck off the roll.
In circumstances
involving charges of professional misconduct, it is necessary to protect the
public from legal practitioners whose
mental illness renders them unable to
adhere to recognised rudimentary professional standards.
Practitioners Act 1981
ss 82(6)(a)(v)
(5), referred to.
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v McCardle (No 2)
[2024] SASCFC
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v Radin
[2024] SASCFC 1
Council of the Law Society of NSW v Jafari
[2020] NSWCA 53
Society of New South Wales v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Clisby
[2012] SASCFC 43
Legal Practitioners Conduct
Board v Figwer
[2013] SASCFC 115
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v Hay
[2001] SASC 322
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v Cleland
[2021] SASCA 10
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v Kaminski
[2021] SASCFC 39
LPCC v Fitzpatrick
[2017] SASC 81
, considered.
LEGAL PROFESSION CONDUCT COMMISSIONER v
FITZPATRICK
[2025] SASCFC 1
Full Court – Civil: Livesey P, David and Stanley JJ
By Originating Application dated 7 August 2024,
the Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner (‘the Commissioner’) seeks
the following orders concerning John Mark Fitzpatrick (‘the
Practitioner’):
the name of the practitioner be struck off the roll of legal practitioners
maintained under the
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
the Practitioner pay the Commissioner’s costs of these
proceedings.
Commissioner’s application is made pursuant to ss 89(1), 89(1a) and 88A(2)
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
(‘the Act’) and the
inherent jurisdiction of the Court. It follows a protracted history of dealings
with the Practitioner,
involving a number of matters heard and findings made by
the Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal (‘the Tribunal’).
bringing the application, the Commissioner relies on the affidavit of Kathryn
Anne Caird dated 7 August 2024, and the attached
exhibits, being the findings of
the Tribunal and communications with the Practitioner.
11 June 2024, the Tribunal found that the Practitioner had engaged in
12 instances of professional misconduct and three instances
unsatisfactory professional
The Tribunal’s
Reasons (No 2)
recommended
that disciplinary proceedings be commenced in the Supreme Court in respect of
these findings, pursuant to s 82(6)(a)(v)
of the Act.
Commissioner invited the Court to adopt and act upon the findings of the
Tribunal without further inquiry, in accordance with
s 89(5) of the Act, but has
now accepted that this Court has the power to do so by reason of an implication
derived from s 89(1)
and its inherent
Introduction
Practitioner was first admitted to legal practice in South Australia on
15 December 1986. As of 19 June 2024, when the Tribunal’s
were delivered, the Practitioner was considered to be retired due to
ill-health. He has not held a practising certificate since 30
a period of seven years, four actions were commenced in the Tribunal in relation
to charges brought by the Commissioner against
the Practitioner. The particulars
of each proceeding are set out in the Tribunal’s
were delivered together on 11 June 2024. A brief overview of each Action is
provided below.
Overview of proceedings before Tribunal
Action No. 4 of 2017
23 February 2017, the Commissioner laid a Charge in the Tribunal against the
Practitioner alleging ten counts of professional
misconduct, comprising five
counts of failing to respond to requests for information by the Commissioner
(in relation to five separate
investigations into the Practitioner’s
alleged misconduct) and five counts of failing to respond to notices issued by
the Commissioner
under clause 4(1), Schedule 4 of the Act.
Charge was later amended by consent and with the leave of the Tribunal on 13
February 2018, prior to the hearing in 2018.
reasons unrelated to the proceedings in February 2018, whilst part-heard before
the Tribunal the matter was adjourned. At that
time, the Practitioner was
represented by counsel. The Tribunal’s inquiry recommenced in May 2024,
concurrently with the three
further proceedings relating to additional charges,
outlined below. The Practitioner was no longer represented, and did not attend
the inquiry in any capacity.
Action No. 7 of 2018
9 April 2018, a further Charge was laid in the Tribunal against the
Practitioner, which formed the substantive conduct underlying
five of the counts
previously laid in
Action No. 4 of 2017
. The Charge comprised allegations
of two counts of professional misconduct and two counts of unsatisfactory
professional conduct,
as follows:
Failing to lodge
a low-income sole practitioner Statutory Declaration for the 2014/2015 financial
year in breach of an undertaking
given by the Practitioner;
respond to requests by the Law Society Audit Officer to supply supporting
documentation for Mandatory Continuing Professional
Development
(‘MCPD’) for the 2014/2015 period;
Delay without
reasonable excuse in relation to the transfer of client documents to a
client’s solicitor; and
Failing without
reasonable excuse to respond to telephone messages and correspondence received
from a client’s solicitor in
relation to the transfer of
Action No. 9 of 2018
28 August 2018, a further Charge was laid in the Tribunal against the
Practitioner, alleging four counts of professional misconduct,
comprising two
counts of breaching a Supreme Court order and a condition on the
Practitioner’s practising certificate; swearing
a false affidavit; and
misleading the court.
conduct arose following an application by the Commissioner to the Supreme Court
for an order suspending the Practitioner’s
practising certificate on an
interim basis, pending the outcome of proceedings before the
The matter was heard by
Justice Nicholson, who declined to order the suspension, but imposed conditions
on the Practitioner’s
practising certificate pursuant to s 89A of the Act.
conditions imposed on the Practitioner required him to provide a report from his
treating psychiatrist as to his mental state
and progress to the Commissioner at
intervals of no less than two months. Following initial non‑compliance
from the Practitioner,
the order was varied to permit a report from his treating
psychiatrist
his General Practitioner.
Practitioner swore an affidavit dated 16 January 2016, in which he stated he had
informed his treating psychiatrist of the orders
and the requirement to provide
a regular report. The affidavit was filed in the proceedings and relied on in
Court. It was later
confirmed that his treating psychiatrist had not in fact
been informed of the orders or the requirement to provide a report, by the
Practitioner. This formed the basis for the allegations of swearing a false
affidavit and misleading the court.
Action No. 3 of
11 September 2023, a further and final Charge was laid in the Tribunal against
the Practitioner, alleging 15 counts of professional
misconduct, as follows:
Seven counts of
breaching duties to a client;
Three counts of
failing to respond to the Commissioner’s communications;
Three counts of
failing to comply with a Notice issued by the Commissioner under clause 4,
schedule 4 of the Act;
One count of
failing to be honest in all dealings in legal practice;
One count of
failing to comply with MCPD requirements; and
One count of
failing to return original documents and making a false and misleading
Other matters
the Tribunal’s
Reasons (No 2)
of 19 June 2024, the
Practitioner’s previous disciplinary history was noted, in particular a
finding of the Tribunal in 1999
in which it was found that the Practitioner had
engaged in ‘unprofessional conduct’ for failing to respond to
for information and statutory notices issued by the Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board, as it was then constituted. The Tribunal
Practitioner’s repeated failure to cooperate with the Commissioner’s
investigations suggests the Practitioner was
not sufficiently deterred by the
outcome imposed by the Tribunal in 1999. It appears that the Practitioner is
simply incapable of
dealing with the regulator. Stressful and unpleasant as
responding to complaints may be, it is an important responsibility which
legal practitioners must take seriously.
Tribunal’s Findings
Tribunal found the Practitioner’s misconduct comprised repeated failures
and breaches of the Australian Solicitors Conduct
Rules (‘ASCR’),
the Legal Practitioner Education and Admission Council (‘LPEAC’)
Rules, and the South Australian
Legal Practitioner Conduct Rules
(‘SALPCR’) including:
failures to respond in an adequate and timely manner, or at all, to requests
from the Commissioner for information and documents
in the course of
investigations, contrary to r 43 of the ASCR and cl (4)(1) of Sch 4 of the
honour an undertaking to the Law Society of South Australia contrary to ASCR r
respond to the Law Society of South Australia’s request for documentation
in relation to the Practitioner’s
MCPD obligations, contrary to LPEAC r
occasions, breaching an order of the Supreme Court;
failing to act
in the best interests of clients and failing to deliver services competently,
diligently and promptly as reasonably
possible, contrary to ASCR rr 4.1.1 and
provide clear and timely advice to a client, contrary to ASCR r 7.1;
acting without
instructions, contrary to ASCR r 8;
making dishonest
statements to other solicitors, contrary to ASCR r 4.1.2;
complete the MCPD requirements in 2020/2021, contrary to SALPCR r 43; and
return original documents to a former client or their solicitor, contrary to
addition to these breaches, it was found by the Tribunal that the Practitioner
delayed without reasonable excuse the transfer
of client documents; breached a
condition of the Practitioner’s practising certificate; behaved
discourteously by failing to
communicate with an opposing party’s
solicitors; misled a client; and made a false and misleading statement to a
former client.
Relevant Principles
to s 82(6)(a)(v) of the Act, the Tribunal may ‘recommend that disciplinary
proceedings be commenced against [a] legal
practitioner in the Supreme
Court’. The Practitioner is a ‘legal practitioner’ within the
meaning of s 5 of the
Act. Referral of a disciplinary matter to the Supreme
Court invokes the inherent jurisdiction of the Court by operation of s 88A
principles applicable to the exercise of the Court’s disciplinary
settled and were recently
confirmed in
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v McCardle (No 2),
which it was stated by the
The purpose of
this Court’s exercise of disciplinary powers concerning a practitioner is
for the protection of the public rather
than the punishment of a practitioner.
The protection of the public will require that any disciplinary sanction be
exercised having
regard to specific and general deterrence. In other words, so
as to make it clear to the practitioner and to the legal profession
Court will not tolerate misconduct.
By deterring misconduct and upholding professional standards, the Court
maintains public confidence in the legal profession; that,
indeed, is the
purpose of appropriate professional regulation and enforcement.
It will usually be necessary for this Court to have regard to the totality of
the practitioner’s conduct, as well as the character
of the practitioner.
Because the Court acts in the public interest, rather than with a view to the
punishment of a practitioner,
the personal circumstances of the practitioner and
any extenuating circumstances are generally of less importance. In cases of
wrongdoing, it will often follow that a practitioner’s good
professional conduct before or after professional misconduct will
secondary consideration.
Only those practitioners who can and do observe the minimum professional
standards expected of the legal profession should be permitted
to remain members
of that profession.
When considering whether to strike a practitioner’s name from the roll
there are usually three key considerations. First, the
public must be protected
from legal practitioners who are ignorant of or indifferent to the basic rules
and requirements of proper
professional practice. Second, to the extent that the
practitioner is not fit to practise, the entitlement to practise should either
be restricted or denied. Finally, and for so long as a practitioner’s name
remains on the roll, that practitioner is effectively
being held out by this
Court as fit to practise the profession of the law.
Ultimately, the question for this Court is whether the practitioner is at the
time of the determination of the application fit to
remain a member of the legal
profession.
(Citations omitted.)
Consideration and Findings
order sought by the Commissioner, that the Practitioner be struck from the roll,
requires the Court to determine whether the
Practitioner is fit to remain a
member of the legal
profession.
order removing the name of a practitioner from the roll, to the extent that the
practitioner is not fit to practise, is directed
at ensuring the entitlement to
practise is either restricted or
Commissioner acknowledges that the Practitioner does not currently hold a
practising certificate and has indicated that he has
retired, but submits that
allowing the Practitioner’s name to remain on the roll would not achieve
the objectives of protecting
the public and maintaining public confidence in the
proper regulation of the legal profession and administration of
although the Practitioner has not held a practising certificate for some years,
and is not able to effectively practise law
in that sense, it is necessary to
consider the underlying professional standard and public confidence placed in
those whose names
appear on the roll as members of the legal profession.
Court is required to consider the Practitioner’s fitness to practice at
the time of the hearing rather than at the date
the conduct
Practitioner had filed a notice of acting, however at the time of the hearing
before this Court, the Practitioner had not made
any attempt to submit material
in support of any contrary position to that of the Commissioner. There is no
evidence before the Court
to suggest that the Practitioner has gained insight
into his past conduct or that he has taken adequate steps to remedy the
deficiencies
in his behaviour and character.
when the matter was first due to come before the Court at callover on 23 August
2024, the Practitioner contacted the Court
Registry on 22 August 2024 to say
that he could not attend due to illness and would provide a note from his
treating medical practitioner.
Nothing further was received from the
Practitioner or any treating medical practitioner as to his non-attendance, and
the callover
proceeded in his absence.
is perhaps necessary to say something of the Practitioner’s mental health,
which was raised before the Tribunal as a contributing
factor to his conduct. It
was accepted by the Tribunal that the Practitioner suffered from a recognised
psychiatric illness for the
whole of the period of 2015 to 2016, and that he did
not receive effective treatment until about April or May 2017.
Tribunal commented in the
Reasons of Actions
No. 4 of 2017
, that ‘mental illness is not a defence to
professional misconduct (nor unsatisfactory professional conduct) ... [it]
impact whether the charge is proven. The test for the standard of
conduct expected of a legal practitioner is an objective one. Mental
cannot provide a defence to liability, no matter how
debilitating.’
Practitioner’s mental health was addressed by the Tribunal in its Reasons
of 19 June 2024, as
to which [the Practitioner’s] depression contributes to his inability to
manage the responsibilities of being a member
of the profession at the present
time is unclear on the evidence available to us. However, we are troubled by the
fact that when
the Supreme Court imposed conditions on the Practitioner’s
practising certificate requiring regular reports as to his mental
failed to comply.
illustrated by the findings of the Tribunal, the Practitioner’s conduct
represents a gross departure from proper professional
standards. As this Court
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v
in circumstances
involving charges of professional misconduct, ‘it is necessary to protect
the public from legal practitioners
who lack personal integrity and who are
indifferent to rudimentary professional standards.’ Likewise, it is
necessary to protect
the public from legal practitioners whose mental illness
renders them unable to adhere to rudimentary professional
Tribunal commented ‘that if the Practitioner was to return to legal
practice, he would pose a risk to members of the
Commissioner similarly submits that:
The totality of the
Practitioner’s conduct, as found by the Tribunal, demonstrates that the
Practitioner lacks the qualities
of character and integrity which are essential
attributes of a person entrusted with the rights and responsibilities of a legal
practitioner.
Commissioner contends that the only appropriate course of action is to now
strike the name of the Practitioner off the roll.
Any discipline or reprimand
otherwise available to the Court in this disciplinary jurisdiction, would be
inadequate in the circumstances.
order imposing conditions on or suspending a practising certificate where a
practitioner does not hold a current practising certificate
would be clearly
inadequate. Similarly, imposition of a reprimand such as a monetary fine or
prohibition on practising in a certain
area, would be of minimal effect, not
only given the Practitioner’s ongoing and blatant disregard for his
professional responsibilities,
but because he is said to have retired.
light of the extent and seriousness of the Practitioner’s conduct over a
number of years, resulting in the Tribunal’s
findings of professional
misconduct and unsatisfactory conduct, we are satisfied that the Practitioner is
not fit to practise law
as a member of the profession and his name should be
struck off the roll.
the Practitioner’s name be removed from the roll of legal practitioners
maintained by this Court.
the Practitioner pay the Commissioner’s costs.
Actions No. 4 of 2017 & 7
Reasons in the matter of John Mark Fitzpatrick
Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal 11 June 2024; Action No. 9 of 2018,
Reasons in the matter of John Mark Fitzpatrick
Legal Practitioners
Disciplinary Tribunal 11 June 2024; Action No. 3 of 2023,
Reasons in the
matter of John Mark Fitzpatrick
Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal 11
Reasons (No. 2)
Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal 19 June 2024.
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v McCardle (No 2)
[2024] SASCFC 4
(Livesey P,
S Doyle and David JJ).
LPCC v Fitzpatrick
[2017] SASC 81.
Reasons (No. 2)
Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal 19 June 2024 at [8].
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v McCardle (No 2)
[2024] SASCFC 4
(Livesey P, S Doyle and David JJ), see also
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Cleland
[2021] SASCA 10
, [41]-[44] (Livesey J, Kelly P and
Bleby J agreeing).
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Cleland
[2021] SASCA 10
, [45] (Livesey J, Kelly P and Bleby J
Law Society of New South
Wales v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
; (1994) NSWLR 808, 471
(Mahoney JA).
Legal Practitioners Conduct
Board v Figwer
[2013] SASCFC 115
(Kourakis CJ, Peek and Stanley
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v McCardle (No 2)
[2024] SASCFC 4
(Livesey P, S Doyle and David JJ) citing
Council of the Law Society of
NSW v Jafari
[2020] NSWCA 53
Actions No. 4 of 2017 &
Reasons in the matter of John Mark Fitzpatrick
Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal 11 June 2024 at [25]-[26].
Reasons (No. 2)
Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal 19 June 2024 at [9].
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Radin
[2024] SASCFC 1
(Livesey P, Bleby and David
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v Clisby
[2012] SASCFC 43
(Doyle CJ and Stanley J, Anderson J agreeing).
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Kaminski
[2021] SASCFC 39
, [11] (Livesey P, Bleby and
S David JJ).
Reasons (No. 2)
Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal 19 June 2024 at [7].
Applicant Submissions, [23]
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v Hay
[2001] SASC 322
(2001) 83 SASR 454
(Prior ACJ, Bleby and Martin JJ).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (390 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter