URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SALC/2025/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:00:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Elliston Apartments v Young Grey Nomads Pty Ltd (t/as Elliston Hotel) [2025] SALC 1 (9 January 2025)
Elliston Apartments v Young Grey Nomads Pty Ltd t/as Elliston Hotel
[2025] SALC 1
LICENSING COURT OF SOUTH
ELLISTON APARTMENTS
YOUNG GREY NOMADS
PTY LTD T/AS ELLISTON HOTEL
Referral from Commissioner
LC-24-00119
HEARING DATE:
9 and 10 December 2024
JUDGMENT OF:
His Honour Judge BP Gilchrist
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Referral of a noise complaint by the Liquor
and Gambling Commissioner – The primary complainant purchased apartments
the road from the Elliston Hotel and complains about the noise emanating
from the Hotel and in particular about noise from a speaker
playing recorded
music in a beer garden which routinely ceases around midnight – The Hotel
had ceased trading for some time
and resumed trading with new proprietors about
a year before the complainant purchased the apartments – The complaint is
by the complainant’s husband and the former owners of a caravan
park situated about 350 metres away from the Hotel –
owners of the caravan park no longer reside in Elliston – The complainant
and her husband have been longstanding
residents of Streaky Bay and their
evidence as to how much time they spend in Elliston was not clear or consistent
– The meaning
of the expression “resides, works or worships in the
vicinity of licensed premises” as used in s 106 of the Act considered
and discussed –
that it involves a judgment as to the
sufficiency of the connection with the relevant community, be it other
residents, workers, or
worshippers that is a question of degree, that takes into
account matters such as the amount of time spent at the place, the connection
with the place, and the nature of the relationship with the relevant community,
must be considered –
that the former owners of the caravan
park are not residents because they no longer reside in Elliston –
that the evidence does not enable a finding that the primary complainant and
her husband are residents in the relevant sense such
that the complaint must be
dismissed –
that in any event the complaint that the noise
emanating from the Hotel is undue has not been made out as the complaints do not
contemporary community standards –
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
Environment
Protection Act 1993
Taylor v Public Service Board
[1976] HCA 36
(1976) 137 CLR 208
[1979] HCA 29
(1979) 141 CLR 432
Australasian
Temperance and General Mutual Life Assurance Society Ltd v Howe
[1922] HCA 50
Boettcher v Bacchus Wine Bar Pty Ltd
[2024] SALC
Cavan Trading Pty Ltd t/as Cavan Hotel
[2023] SALC
McCarthy v Barbara Anne & Graham John Cox t/as Lord Exmouth Hotel
[2024] SALC 22
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant:
Ms I Stewart
Licensee Mr G Coppola
Australian Hotels Association,
is a complaint made under s 106(1)(a) of the
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
(the Act) that contends that the noise emanating from licensed premises known as
the Elliston Hotel (the Hotel) and the behaviour
of persons making their way to
or from those premises is unduly offensive, annoying, disturbing or
inconvenient. That provision permits
a person who resides, works or worships in
the vicinity of licensed
who claims to be adversely affected by such matters to lodge a complaint with
the Liquor and Gambling Commissioner.
the ordinary course the Commissioner will attempt to resolve the complaint
through conciliation between the complainant and the
licensee. In cases where a
conciliation is conducted, resolution by agreement is not always possible. In
such cases the parties may
request the Commissioner to determine the matter.
Absent such a request, the matter must be determined by this Court.
Ordinarily,
the complainant must be authorised to make the complaint by at least ten other
persons who reside, work or worship in
the vicinity of the licensed premises.
However, if the Commissioner is satisfied that the nature of the complaint is
sufficiently
grave, the Commissioner may proceed with the complaint without that
authorisation.
this case, Ingrid Stewart lodged a complaint under
of the Act. Her complaint was supported by her husband Don Stewart, and Maryann
Van Dyk and Michael Slape, the former owners of the
Waterloo Bay Tourist Park
(the Tourist Park).
Stewart requested that the complaint proceed notwithstanding that they were not
authorised to make the complaint by at least ten
other persons. A delegate of
the Commissioner was satisfied that the nature of the complaint was sufficiently
grave that it should
proceed without that authorisation. No explanation was
provided by the Commissioner as to why that decision was made.
licensee of the Hotel is Young Grey Nomads Pty Ltd. The Australian Hotels
Association acts on its behalf.
an unsuccessful attempt to resolve this matter by conciliation, the matter was
referred by the Commissioner to the Court.
the hearing of a complaint, the Commissioner or the Court, as the case may be,
can dismiss the complaint or make an order against
the licensee. That order may
add to or vary the conditions of the
determining the complaint, the Commissioner or the Court must take into account
the following matters prescribed by s 106(6) of
(i) the relevant history of the licensed premises in relation to other premises
in the vicinity and, in particular, the period of
time over which the activity,
noise or behaviour complained about has been occurring and any significant
change at any relevant time
in the level or frequency at which it has occurred;
(ii) the unreasonableness or otherwise of the activity, noise or behaviour
complained about; and
(iii) the trading hours and character of the business carried out by the
licensee on the licensed premises; and
(iv) the desired future character of the locality in which the licensed premises
are situated as stated in any relevant provision
of the Planning and Design Code
Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
(v) whether or not any environment protection policy made under
Environment
Protection Act 1993
, or guidelines published by the Environment Protection
Authority established under that Act, applicable to the provision of live
on the licensed premises have been complied with; and
(vi) any other matter that the Commissioner or the Court considers relevant.
with all matters to be decided under the Act, regard must be had to the objects
of the Act.
Those objects include facilitating “the responsible development of the
licensed liquor industry and associated industries,
including the live music
industry, tourism and the hospitality
Some general observations about Elliston and relevant premises
is a small coastal town with a population of about 300 or so, on the west coast
of the Eyre Peninsula, about 170 km northwest
of Port Lincoln, about 125 km
south‑east of Streaky Bay, and about 640 km west of Adelaide. Its
numbers swell over the summer
months. It is connected to other parts of the
State by the Flinders Highway, which links Port Lincoln to Streaky Bay.
main centre of the town is in the general vicinity of the intersection of Beach
Terrace, which connects the town to the beach,
and Little Bay Road/Memorial
Drive which abuts the Flinders Highway.
not strictly geographically accurate, for convenience, I will treat Beach
Terrace as running from east to west and Little
Bay Road/Memorial Drive as
running from north to south.
on these directions, the Hotel is on the south eastern corner of the
intersection of Beach Terrace and Little Bay Road/Memorial
Drive. The beer
garden of the Hotel is to the south and faces west into Little Bay Road/Memorial
the nearest point, about 50 metres to the west of the Elliston Hotel, on the
southern side of Beach Terrace, near the intersection
of Beach Terrace and
Little Bay Road/Memorial Drive, is the Elliston Apartments.
the nearest point, about 350 metres to the west of the Elliston Hotel, on the
northern side of Beach Terrace, a few hundred metres
east of the beach, is the
Tourist Park.
is common ground that the Hotel is the only hotel in Elliston and the nearest
hotel is in Port Kenny over 60 kilometres away. It
is the only licensed
facility in Elliston that sells take away liquor. It is authorised to trade
until midnight from Sunday to Thursday
and until 2.00am on Friday and
The evidence
Stewart gave evidence on her own behalf and called her husband, Mr Stewart,
Ms Van Dyk, Mr Slape, and a guest of the Elliston Apartments,
Stewart said that she and her husband purchased the Elliston Apartments in
October 2023. She said that she lodged the complaint
because of the persistent
noise disturbances from the Hotel. She said that the primary source was its use
of a JBL PartyBox 310 speaker,
playing music. She said that at times the music
has been so loud that she cannot hear her television. She said that it not only
her, but it also impacted her paying guests who had come to the
Elliston Apartments expecting a peaceful and comfortable stay. She
said that the
noise was not just inconvenient, it was also potentially dangerous because
guests who are unable to sleep are often
travelling long distances the next day
putting themselves and others at risk. She said that the constant bass from the
Hotel speakers
had a particularly severe effect making her feel physically ill
in the evidence was a text message sent at 9.26pm on a Friday night by Ms
Stewart to the Hotel complaining about noise about
noise, and another sent at
10.03pm on a Saturday night.
Stewart outlined the relief that she seeks. She seeks a condition on the licence
forbidding the Hotel’s use at any time of
the JBL PartyBox 310
speaker or similar equipment for outdoor music, and a restriction on the maximum
volume level at which any speaker
may be used indoors, ensuring compliance with
acceptable noise standards.
cross-examination it was put to her that one of the attractions to people
staying at the Elliston Apartments was the proximity
of the Hotel. She stated
that she could not say yes or no. She was then taken to advertising material
relating to the Elliston Apartments
that spoke of exploring “the
town’s vibrant offerings with ease as our apartments are just steps away
from the local
supermarket, bakery, hotel, pizza shop and the inviting shores of
the beach” and stated: “Yes, we do advertise it, by
Stewart was asked some questions about how often she stays at the Elliston
Apartments. At one point she said: “We live there
sometimes”.
Later she said
that she had recently moved back to Streaky Bay “for a few nights a
was put to Ms Stewart that the music usually ameliorated well before midnight.
She disagreed, stating that it went to 1.00am or
2.00am in the morning. When
asked when this occurred, she said that it was probably in April. She later
accepted that it does not
now play beyond midnight but added: “And
who’s to say it’s not going to
Stewart said that he and Ms Stewart had lived and resided in Streaky Bay for the
last 34 years. He said having that purchased the
Elliston Apartments on the
first weekend he was there, excessive noise came from the Hotel that went on
until 1.45am.
Stewart spoke of complaints by those staying at the Elliston Apartments. He
But it makes it hard to run our business because we’re losing guests
because of the noise so loud. They cannot relax at night.
They can’t do
anything. They can’t get away from the noise, and I’m embarrassed in
the morning. I’m embarrassed
to talk to the guests as they’re
leaving, having to say sorry. I feel like giving them their money back,
it’s that bad.
It’s embarrassing, and that’s one event, but
there’s been several events. Every time there’s loud music I
in the morning, and I’m embarrassed to deal with my customers,
“I’m sorry about
Stewart said that the noise problem had lessened since these proceedings had
commenced. He said:
The noise, the last – since the court proceedings started, it’s been
very pleasant. There has been a few scattered Friday,
Saturday nights where the
music has been loud, but nowhere near how loud it was last summer, or even March
– April last year.
Stewart then added: “This music, it can’t happen, it’s too
loud. We can’t run our business with a doof-doof
music to the extent at
cross-examination Mr Stewart agreed that he and Ms Stewart have a house in
Streaky Bay and spend most of their time there. Having
said that the music
coming from the Hotel was so loud “it’s rattling
everything”,
was asked to identify what type of music it was, to which he replied:
When asked if he
could name a song, he said that he does not know any music songs that go
“doof-doof”.
added that he hates the music.
Van Dyk said that she had been a co-owner of the Tourist Park. She said that in
the first twenty years she was at the Tourist Park
she had spoken only once to
the then proprietor of the Hotel about noise. She said that in the last two
years there had been several
noise disturbances. She said that it kept her and
her partner, Mr Slape, awake. She said that she left Elliston on 31 October
Van Dyk said that she kept notes in connection with excessive noise coming from
the Hotel. There were entries on 28 and 30 December
2022, and 1, 2 and 3 January
2023. When it was put to her that there had been no real problems for about 15
or 16 months, she said
“possibly”.
seemed to accept that it was Ms Stewart’s idea to lodge the noise
complaint and that she probably would not have independently
Slape said that the noise coming from the Hotel was loud enough that he could
hear it over the TV. He said that the excessive noise
was seasonal and mainly
from Christmas through to April and May. When asked why he joined in the
complaint he said: “Because
it’s unfair to the new owners that this
is continuing”.
that if he had his time over again he would have simply closed the Tourist Park.
Because Maryann had enough of the noise; she can’t sleep. Worked seven
days a week for a lot of years, and she’d had
enough, so it was only me
that kept it open. She was quite happy just to close it, just
Crowe has been a visitor to Elliston for the last eighteen years. He used to
stay in a caravan park but for the last six years
he has stayed at the Elliston
Apartments. He said that he usually visits in the middle of March.
said that until a couple of years ago it was very peaceful. He said that now the
Hotel is very noisy and the bass from its noise
machine is very disruptive. He
said that it gets cranked up around 8.30 to 9.00pm and never stops until
midnight and sometimes not
until 1.00 or 2.00am. He said that in April 2024 it
was loud for four or five nights in a row. He spoke of an occasion when he went
to the Hotel to complain. He said:
Because we were getting pretty tired. What happens, the bass on the music
really, really vibrates, it’s so rumbly that you
can’t sort of watch
TV, you can’t read a book, and you can’t sleep, and after three or
four nights like that, I
thought it was fair enough to go
licensee called Matthew Lypis. He is a director and shareholder of Young Grey
Nomads Pty Ltd. He said that the company commenced
leasing the Hotel in
September 2022, prior to which it had been closed for about six to eight months.
He said that prior to his taking
over, the Hotel’s keg turnover was less
than four kegs a week. He said that it is now turning over between six to eight
in winter and up to 13 kegs a week from mid‑December to the end of
January. He said that meal turnover is up more than 80%
and he has spent about
$160,000 putting in a new kitchen. He said that he and his partner live at the
Hotel. He said that he has
plans for further renovations.
Lypis said that he purchased the speaker for use at the Hotel and from his
description it would seem that it operates through Bluetooth.
He said that
sometimes patrons attempt to log on to the speaker and play their own music but
when they do, he shuts them down. He
said that the Hotel has its own playlists
that comprise of a range of genres, including country and rap music. He said
that the music
is not so loud that patrons cannot have a conversation. He said
that the speaker is placed outside because that is where the patrons
said that having been made aware that for some, noise emanating from the speaker
was an issue, since November 2023 it no
longer remains outside after
Lypis said that he has been involved in the hospitality industry for
35 years and has managed several hotels. He said that the
level of music
played at the Hotel was the same as what might be expected of any hotel in South
Lypis said that the Hotel raises money for various charitable pursuits within
Elliston and it is committed to being part of the
local community.
Submissions
complainant contended that the noise emanating from the Hotel is excessive and
that it is having a deleterious effect on her and
her husband, and on the
customers that use their apartments. She submitted that it was unreasonable to
have a speaker playing outside
at any hour and that this Court should direct
that the speaker be placed inside with a condition that the level of noise that
generates be at an acceptable level.
licensee challenged the complainants’ standing. It submitted that as Ms
Van Dyk and Mr Slape no longer reside in Elliston
they do not reside in the
vicinity of the licensed premises. It submitted that Ms Stewart and Mr Stewart
established no more than
that from time to time they stay at their apartments.
It submitted that more was required to establish that they “reside”
or “work” in the vicinity of the Hotel, for the purposes of
s 106(1) of the Act.
it contended that the evidence fell well short of establishing that the noise
emanating from the licensed premises was “undue”.
It submitted that
I should approach the evidence given in support of the complaint with caution as
the evidence of all of the complainant’s
witnesses revealed undue
sensitivity to sound, and a propensity to exaggerate how loud the music was. It
asked me to note that Ms
Stewart had complained through texts message about
noise as early as 9.26pm on a Friday night. It asked me to note that despite Ms
Van Dyk’s evidence of ongoing issues about noise from the Hotel, the only
recorded notes that she made were on a few occasions
between November 2022 and
early January 2023. It asked me to reject Mr Slape’s evidence that
suggested that a factor that influenced
their decision to leave the Tourist Park
was noise emanating from the Hotel. It submitted that it was striking that Ms
Van Dyk gave
no such evidence. It added that given that the Tourist Park was 350
metres away from the Hotel, the notion that the noise emanating
from the Hotel
was causing any problem there, was implausible, and the idea that it was so bad
as to force the owners to leave, was
preposterous.
licensee submitted that there has been no prior complaint about the activities
at the Hotel, including in the period after it
began operating the Hotel and
before Ms Stewart purchased the Elliston Apartments. It asked me to note that
once it became aware
that for some noise was an issue, it took steps to reduce
the disturbance by moving the speaker inside no later than midnight.
submitted that it was trading within its authorised trading hours and that that
the level of noise was consistent with what could
reasonably be expected of a
submitted that the Hotel is of significant benefit to the town of Elliston, in
that it provides jobs, puts money back into the
community and provides locals
and visitors with a place to eat and socialise, in a town that otherwise has
very limited facilities.
submitted that the complaint should be dismissed.
Consideration
the ordinary course of events, members of the general public who allege that
they are being unduly impacted by noise from a neighbour
have limited recourse.
A complaint could be made to the police, who might ask the neighbour to quieten
down, but it is unlikely that
the matter would be taken further. Other than
that, an action could be taken in the common law courts alleging the tort of
nuisance. For most, this would be a daunting and expensive process. If
nuisance is made out, which is no easy feat, the primary remedy
is damages upon
proof of material injury. The grant of an injunction to prevent future
interference would only be granted upon proof
of substantial interference that
is causing damage and a likelihood that the interference and consequential
damage will continue
in the future. Again, that would not be easy to
such, the ability for a resident, worker or worshipper to make a complaint under
s 106 of the Act in connection with licensed premises
must be seen as a
conferring very generous rights of complaint that are not available to general
members of the public in respect
of premises that are not licensed under the
Act. If the Commissioner accepts the complaint, the complainant has immediate
to the Commissioner and potential conciliation with the licensee. Failing
resolution, that person has the right to a hearing before
the Commissioner or
the Court that may result in the imposition of conditions upon the licence. In
neither case, are any lodgement
fees involved, and absent unreasonableness in
the pursuit of the complaint, there is no exposure to an adverse ruling as to
is also significant that when a complaint is made by someone other than the
local council or the police, s 106(3)(a) carries with
it the expectation
that the complaint will be supported by at least another nine residents, workers
or worshippers, as the case may
be. Section 106(1) should not be read in
isolation. The meaning of the words used in it, “must be read with and
accommodated
to the rest of the
collectively, s 106(1) and s 106(3)(a) must be “given a
construction that will render them
harmonious”.
indicates that s 106, when read as a whole, is focussed on enabling members
of the relevant community, be they residents, workers
or worshippers, to voice
their complaint because it is a community concern, not just an
individual’s concern. In my opinion,
this informs how the words
“resides, works or worships in the vicinity of licensed premises”
should be construed.
one extreme, persons who live in a family at the one address and who are
immersed in the local community, plainly reside in that
community for the
purposes of the Act. If such persons have issues with local licensed premises
nearby, they would clearly be persons
who reside in the vicinity of licensed
premises for the purposes of s 106 of the Act. The fact that they might
from time to time
be away from their home, would not render them unable to
invoke the provision.
same would also be true of persons who routinely work at a particular place of
employment and are associated with that place.
Those persons would be taken for
the purposes of the Act to work at that place, and that would remain so, even if
they occasionally
worked elsewhere.
too would it be true of members of a particular congregation who routinely
worship at a particular place, who might occasionally
worship elsewhere.
the other extreme, transient visitors, workers or worshippers who during that
transient encounter have issues with licensed premises,
would not be regarded as
residing, working, or worshipping for the purposes of the Act, and therefore
could not invoke s 106 of the
these two extremes, there is no bright line in determining whether the requisite
connection has been established. In the end,
a judgment must be made as to the
sufficiency of the connection with the relevant community, be it other
residents, workers, or worshippers
residing, working or worshipping in the
vicinity of the licensed premises. This is a question of degree that in the case
of residents
includes a consideration of matters such as the amount of time
spent at the place, the connection with the place, and the nature
relationship with the relevant community.
important observation to make about s 106, is that it is there to protect
individuals as residents, workers or worshippers,
not the businesses that they
Australasian Temperance and General Mutual Life Assurance Society Ltd
the High Court held
that the words “residents” and “resident” in
Constitution
mean natural persons and not corporations. In
that case Higgins J described residence in terms of its ordinary meaning as
place of “sleep, shelter and home, and not to carrying on
By the same
process of reasoning, in a case such as this, in my opinion the beneficial reach
of s 106 of the Act is confined to offence,
annoyance, disturbance or
inconvenience caused to the person as a resident, not as a person running a
evidence from those who might occupy the Ellison Apartments from time to time,
such as Mr Crowe, can only be relied upon as
evidence of the degree of noise and
the degree of offence, annoyance, disturbance or inconvenience experienced by
the complainants
as residents. The fact that he and others renting the
apartments might personally feel offence, annoyance, disturbance, or
inconvenience
and that this might embarrass Ms Stewart and Mr Stewart or cause
them loss in their capacity as proprietors of the apartments, is
irrelevant.
this case, by the time the complaint came to be heard by this Court, Ms Van
Dyk and Mr Slape had left Elliston and as of now, they
are plainly not persons
residing in the vicinity of the Hotel. They therefore have no standing as
complainants in these proceedings.
That is not to say that if the complaint is
otherwise validly before this Court, they cannot give evidence. In that event,
competent to give evidence of their observations of the activities of
the Hotel based on their time when they were residents of Elliston.
respect of Ms Stewart and Mr Stewart, they clearly have a residence in Streaky
Bay and have resided there for many years. I accept
that a person can reside in
more than one place and that this can be so in respect of the requisite test of
qualification under s
106 of the Act. But where a person has been a
longstanding resident of one place, and continues to occupy that residence, the
that the person has acquired another place in another town and may stay
there from time to time, does not, to my mind, of itself,
establish that the
person is a person who “resides” in that other place for the
purposes of s 106 of the Act.
this case, the evidence does not enable findings as to how much time Ms Stewart
and Mr Stewart spend in Elliston. Their evidence
in respect of this was not
clear and there were some inconsistencies. Ms Stewart spoke of living in
Elliston sometimes, but later
gave the impression that it was more permanent
having said that she had recently moved back to Streaky Bay for a few nights a
In contrast to this Mr Stewart said that they spend most of their time in
Streaky Bay.
Stewart and Mr Stewart clearly have a connection with Elliston because they own
and operate the Elliston Apartments. But it is
not clear to me as to how much of
this is in person and how much is done online, or by telephone. There is some
evidence that Ms
Stewart and Mr Stewart have some involvement in the local
community, but it is short on detail.
complainant under s 106 of the Act has the burden of proving that he or she
is a person who resides, works or worships in the vicinity
of the licensed
premises. Whilst the evidence establishes that Ms Stewart and Mr Stewart
might be persons who reside in vicinity
of the Hotel in the relevant sense, I
cannot put it any higher than that. The evidence does not enable me to make a
positive finding
that they are persons who reside in the vicinity of the
Elliston Hotel, for the purposes of s 106 of the Act. On that basis alone,
the complaint must be dismissed.
if it were otherwise, I would come to the same conclusion.
determination of a complaint under s 106 of the Act by a resident involves
weighing up the right of licensees, subject to compliance
with the Act and the
conditions of the licence, of being able to run their business as they see fit;
and the right of nearby residents
to expect the quiet enjoyment of their
In deciding where that
balance should be struck it must be accepted that all licensed premises can
reasonably be expected to generate
disturbance;
of all types of
licensed premises, the level of noise and disturbance emanating from a
traditional hotel can reasonably be expected
and that hotels
generally, and especially those in small country towns, can provide a
significant community service.
As a result of this, “otherwise legitimate grievances by individual
members of the relevant community might need to yield for
Hotel is plainly an important facility serving the needs of those who reside in
Elliston and those who visit there. It is reasonable
to draw the inference that
the playing of music over a loud speaker in the beer garden of the Hotel is
appreciated by its patrons
and adds to the Hotel’s attractiveness and its
think it is telling that the Elliston Apartments relies upon its proximity to
the Hotel as part of its sales pitch to attract customers.
It fortifies me in
drawing the inference that the Hotel in its present form and under its present
trading model, is adding to the
attractiveness of Elliston as a tourist
destination.
I can accept that Ms Stewart and Mr Stewart might find the playing of music up
to midnight annoying, I approach the evidence
adduced in support of the
complaint with some caution as some of it seemed quite exaggerated.
there was the evidence of Ms Stewart that sometimes the constant bass from the
Hotel made her physically ill. Then there was
Mr Stewart’s evidence
of the music coming from the Hotel being so loud “it’s rattling
everything.”
Descriptions
such as these might be expected of highly amplified live music in a confined
location. But they hardly seem apt to describe
music from a speaker in a beer
garden at least 50 metres away that I find has a noise level which permits
those in its vicinity to
have a conversation.
for Mr Slape, I agree with the submission that his evidence that in hindsight he
should have walked away from the Tourist Park
because of the noise from the
Hotel seems preposterous.
evidence of Ms Van Dyke and Mr Stewart is consistent with there being a
noticeable lowering of the noise emanating from the Hotel,
which in turn is
consistent with the evidence of Mr Lypis, that since November 2023, the outside
speaker has routinely been brought
inside before midnight.
was observed in
McCarthy v Barbara Anne & Graham John Cox t/as Lord
Exmouth Hotel
determining whether the noise emanating from licensed premises is undue
involves an objective test.
is reasonable to draw the inference that the fact of this complaint and these
proceedings would be matters of some notoriety in
a small country town. The
Hotel’s business model was in place well before Ms Stewart purchased
the Elliston Apartments. If
the level of noise is as extreme as Ms Stewart would
have it to be, it might be expected that many living in Elliston would be
by it. It is telling that apart from Ms Van Dyke and Mr Slape, no
other permanent residents of Elliston have given evidence in support
I add to this the fact that Ms Stewart thought it reasonable to complain about
noise emanating from the Hotel at 9.26pm on a
Friday night and 10.03pm on a
Saturday night, I am left with the firm impression that her complaints about
excessive noise do not
conform with contemporary community standards. Those
community standards accept that hotels can be noisy places and that people who
reside in the vicinity of a hotel are expected to put up with noise at times and
at levels that would be regarded as intolerable
in other places away from the
hotel. Those community standards also accept that in respect of residents who
have recently moved into
the vicinity of licensed premises, unless the level of
noise and disturbance emanating from those premises has increased after their
arrival, principles along the lines of “let the buyer beware”
activities complained of are occurring within the Hotel’s authorised
trading hours.
are no adverse considerations arising by reference to the Planning and Design
Code under the
Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
Environment
Protection Act 1993
this case, viewed objectively, I find that the degree of offence, annoyance,
disturbance, and inconvenience that Ms Stewart is
being subjected to by the
noise emanating from the Hotel falls short of being undue for the purposes of
s 106 of the Act.
these reasons, the complaint is
Section 106(3) of the Act.
Section 106(6a) and (7) of the
Section 3(2) of the Act.
Section 3(1)(d) of the Act.
Exhibit R12.
Exhibit A15.
Transcript (Tr) at 14.
Taylor v Public Service
[1976] HCA 36
(1976) 137 CLR 208
at 213 per Barwick CJ.
(1979) 141 CLR 432
at 440 per Gibbs J.
[1922] HCA 50
(1922) 31 CLR 290.
Ibid at 334.
Boettcher v Bacchus Wine
Bar Pty Ltd
[2024] SALC 131
Bacchus Wine Bar
Ibid at [71].
Ibid at [97].
Ibid at [98]. See also
Cavan Trading Pty Ltd t/as Cavan Hotel
[2023] SALC 89
Boettcher v Bacchus Wine
Ibid at [98].
[2024] SALC 22.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (280 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter