URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACorC/2025/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:54:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HARTUNG, Herbert August ([2025] SACC 7) [2025] SACorC 7 (17 April 2025)
CORONERS COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
HERBERT AUGUST
[2025] SACC 7
Inquest Findings of his Honour State Coroner
17 April 2025
CORONIAL INQUEST
Examination of the cause and circumstances of the death of a 53-year-old man
who drowned after driving his car into the water at the
West Beach boat ramp
while extremely intoxicated. The inquest focussed on CCTV footage of the boat
August Hartung, aged 54 years of Alice Springs, died at West Beach on 4 August
2022 as a result of attributed to drowning.
Circumstances
of death as set out in these findings.
No recommendations made.
This judgment contains discussion of suicide and may be
distressing to some people
There is always help available
If you need support, contact
Lifeline Australia
Call 13 11 14 or Text 0477 13 11 14
or chat online at www.lifeline.org.au/crisis-chat
Aboriginal & Torres Strait Islander Support
Call 13YARN (13 92 76)
Kids Helpline
Call 1800 55 1800
MensLine Australia
Call 1300 78 99 78
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
HERBERT AUGUST
[2025] SACC 7
Introduction
August Hartung was born on 25 November 1970 and died on 4 August 2022 at the age
of 54 years.
Hartung had suffered abuse while he was growing up at the hands of his father
who had been a prisoner of war during World War
As an adult, he had three
children and expressed a desire to be a good father to them. He was always a
social drinker, but throughout
his marriage he began to rely on alcohol more and
more until it developed into alcoholism, which was particularly intense from
His marriage broke
down in July 2015 when he became increasingly unreasonable, abusive and
demanding. He moved to Alice Springs
to live with his
He told his wife in May
2017 that he could not control his alcoholism and that he would not be returning
to the marriage.
A divorce was
finalised in September 2021
family home was sold in July 2021 with Mr Hartung receiving
was a licensed plumber and gas fitter but ceased working in April
In the lead up to that time,
Mr Hartung’s brother was trying to sell their mother’s home so
that she could move into
a nursing home, but Mr Hartung lived in the house
and was resisting it. In early 2021 their mother moved into a nursing home and
Mr Hartung ceased being her
his last two years of life Mr Hartung had been diagnosed with alcoholic
hepatitis, diabetes, osteoporosis and digestive system
lesions for which he had
surgery in April 2022.
seen medical professionals about mental health
although his former wife
says that she was concerned about him due to the combination of illogical
thinking and that Mr Hartung had
events prior to Mr Hartung’s death
June 2022, Mr Hartung left Alice Springs and travelled to Canberra. There
he purchased a Landcruiser and meandered to Adelaide.
He was living out of his
vehicle or in caravan parks while he was travelling. He had ordered an off-road
caravan which was being
custom built for $75,000 and he told a friend that he
was going to bring it back to Alice Springs and live in it on a friend’s
property and do some travelling.
Mr Hartung’s
former wife was concerned about his wellbeing and texted him every four or five
days to check on him. She said
that he continued to be illogical and skittish,
raising ideas such as investing in a café or buying a charter
He had become
disconnected from his children, only speaking with them occasionally by text,
although he had visited his son in Wagga
Wagga after purchasing his vehicle. He
had become disconnected from most of his long-term friends. One long-standing
remained in contact with spoke to him on 2 August 2022. He was in
good spirits, speaking of his plan to return to Alice Springs
He did mention that he
had visited his in-laws who had asked him not to come back, which he had taken
events of 4 August 2022
the early hours of 4 August 2022, a witness, Mr Vicky Chopra, was parked at the
West Beach boat ramp carpark.
He was travelling throughout Australia and filming his journey with a camera.
Mr Chopra sat, drank whisky and listened to music
while watching the water.
At 1:15am, approximately 15 minutes after Mr Chopra’s arrival,
Mr Hartung drove to the boat ramp
carpark and parked his vehicle. About 30
minutes later Mr Hartung exited his vehicle and walked down to the
approaching
Mr Chopra. He asked if Mr Chopra was alright, as
Mr Chopra’s vehicle’s hazard lights were
Mr Hartung said he was
not a police officer and the two shared a laugh. He introduced himself to
Mr Chopra and told him that he
liked the music that was playing and that he
had come to watch the water. Mr Chopra offered him a drink. They sat on
the ramp wall
and talked.
Mr Chopra’s camera recorded the conversation. Mr Hartung
appeared to be in very good
poured Mr Hartung three fingers of neat whisky. Throughout the
conversation, Mr Hartung poured two more drinks of about
blocking boat ramp users and that he should move
Mr Chopra moved his
car and parked next to Mr Hartung’s car. They continued chatting for
another 20 minutes. They agreed
to meet up the following
Mr Chopra then
decided to return to his cabin at the West Beach Caravan Park. As he was
backing out of the car park he lost control,
and the car rolled backwards down
the ramp and into the water.
Mr Hartung came and asked if he was okay. Mr Hartung said he did not
have any winch straps. While he was trying to get his car
out of the water,
Mr Chopra lost his phone. Mr Chopra then thought he would walk to the
caravan park and tell reception staff that
his car needed to be
He left his keys in the
car in case someone needed to move the car before he got back. As he left,
Mr Hartung was sitting in his
own car. Mr Chopra returned to the
caravan park and saw that the reception was closed. He then went to his cabin
and went to sleep.
He said he was ‘very
boat ramp user, Paul Forrest, arrived at the boat ramp at about
Mr Chopra’s car in the southern bay and also the roof of another car
in the central bay. SAPOL were called at 6:05am,
arriving at
They found a Mitsubishi
partly submerged in the water at the southern bay, facing towards the
water’s edge.
windows were open and the keys were in the ignition. This was
Mr Chopra’s car. The car which was said to be in
the central bay,
Mr Hartung’s car, was not visible by that time; it was fully
officers found two glasses on the ground near the southern pontoon; one with
drink still in it, the other
a nearly empty one litre
bottle of Johnnie Walker Double
, a bottle of Crown Lager,
a lighter, a packet of cigarettes and two containers of food which were
partially eaten.
Water Operations attended at about 8am and located Mr Hartung’s
vehicle in the central bay, near the end of the pontoons,
at 3.7 metres
It was facing away from
the water’s edge. Mr Hartung’s body was in the driver’s
seat area without a seatbelt
his feet were protruding from the driver’s side window, which was mostly
The driver’s side
door was also open. The key was in the ignition and the car was in
SAPOL officers put the
car into neutral and closed the door. The car was then towed out of the water.
Tyre marks were tracked
back over the bridge and through the car park to rocks
opposite the ramp.
Cause of death
post-mortem examination was conducted by Forensic Science South Australia senior
specialist forensic pathologist, Dr Karen
who concluded that
Mr Hartung’s cause of death was drowning. His post-mortem blood
alcohol concentration level was
which would have been
lethal in an alcohol naive individual, but non-lethal in a person with
significant alcohol tolerance.
None of the evidence collected throughout the investigation puts in doubt the
cause of death given by Dr Heath, and I find ‘drowning’
Mr Hartung’s cause of death.
Closed circuit
television footage
investigators seized from the scene CCTV recorded from a camera overlooking the
boat ramp mounted on the SA Sea Rescue Squadron
building. The system records
sound, but no relevant sounds were captured. It only records when it detects
motion, so is not a complete
record of what occurred at the
The relevant footage was
played in the courtroom. The footage appears to freeze as the system stopped
and started recording, but
the relevant clips, which occupy about 10 minutes,
show the following:
File 01_03 shows
Mr Chopra reversing down the boat ramp with his hazard lights on at 5:01am.
It then shows Mr Hartung commencing to
drive slowly at 5:26 am.
File 01_04 shows
Mr Hartung driving the front wheels of his car into the water in the
central bay at 5:26am before slowly reversing
up the ramp and slowly mounting a
rock embankment behind a kerb at
The car engine began
heavily steaming and the car remained sitting on the embankment.
shows, about 13 minutes later at 5:47am, Mr Hartung’s car rocking
forward, then dislodging from the embankment and
kerb and travelling at steady
speed into the water.
attempt at escape is seen on the footage, but the image is not so clear that a
great deal of detail can be made out. The car
then floated away from the
water’s edge. The witness who called police is shown on the footage to
have arrived about five
minutes later at 5:53am.
Conclusions
accept the account by Mr Chopra of his interaction with Mr Hartung,
and that Mr Chopra left the boat ramp not long after accidentally
drunkenly driving his car into the water shortly after 5am. I find that by the
time Mr Chopra left the boat ramp, Mr Hartung
was extremely
intoxicated. In his intoxicated state, for reasons unknown, Mr Hartung
drove his car slowly down the ramp partially
into the water, and then reversed
all the way up over a kerb, where his vehicle apparently became stuck on a rocky
embankment. Thirteen
minutes later Mr Hartung dislodged the vehicle from
where it was stuck on the embankment and it rolled down into the water, where
gradually sank in 3.7 metres depth of water. Mr Hartung did not escape
from the cabin of the vehicle and drowned.
evidence does not allow me to find on the balance of probabilities that
Mr Hartung intentionally drove into the water and that
he intended to take
his life by drowning. He did not express to Mr Chopra any interest in
taking his own life and it is not known
that he had done so earlier to any
person. He had plans which included completing the purchase of an off-road
caravan and returning
to Alice Springs to do some travelling. He had made
immediate plans to meet Mr Chopra the next night.
Mr Hartung drove his vehicle he was plainly so intoxicated as to be
incapable of exercising effective control of it. There is
no way of knowing what
he had in mind when he first drove the vehicle partly into the water. Having
reversed back out of the water
Mr Hartung got the vehicle stuck on a rock
embankment behind a kerb. Mr Hartung managed to drive his vehicle off the rock
and kerb, and the vehicle either rolled or was deliberately driven
slowly down the ramp. I am unable to conclude whether Mr Hartung
unintentionally allowed the vehicle to roll into the water, incapable of
applying the brakes due to the effects of alcohol, or whether
he deliberately
drove it into the water. The evidence is insufficient to allow any conclusion
to be drawn. When found, the driver’s
window was mostly down, Mr
Hartung’s legs were out the window and the door was partly open, which
might suggest Mr Hartung
was trying to escape. Even if Mr Hartung
deliberately drove into the water, there is insufficient evidence to allow me to
that he did so intending to take his own life, rather than simply
engaging in drunken, illogical behaviour with no such intention.
standard of proof to be applied in making coronial findings is the civil
standard, the balance of probabilities. In considering
making findings which
imply or express criticism of individuals, I am guided by the principles
enunciated in
Briginshaw v
and I shall not
make such a finding unless the evidence leads me to a comfortable level of
satisfaction that the finding should be
order to make a finding that Mr Hartung died by suicide I would need to find it
proved that Mr Hartung intentionally drove into
the water and that in doing so
he intended to end his own life.
Mr Hartung was an alcoholic and his former wife was concerned about his welfare,
there is evidence causing me to lean to
the conclusion that Mr Hartung’s
death was not suicide. One entirely logical explanation for what occurred is
that it was a
drunken accident. Neither his former
nor his friend Trevor
spoke of Mr Hartung
having expressed suicidal intentions. To Mr Chopra, who thought Mr Hartung
seemed very happy when he left him,
Mr Hartung gave no hint of being interested
in taking his own life. Mr Hartung apparently had some money and had bought a
custom-built
caravan which he had not yet collected. He had plans to collect the
van from Brisbane and go back to Alice Springs.
conclusion, I find that Herbert August Hartung died on 4 August 2022 at West
Beach in the State of South Australia after accidentally
driving his car into
the sea at the West Beach boat ramp whilst heavily intoxicated with alcohol,
thereafter drowning when he was
unable to escape the vehicle.
make no recommendations.
Keywords: Drowning
Exhibit C5 at
Exhibit C5 at [4]; Exhibit
Exhibit C6 at
Exhibit C5 at
Exhibit C5 at
Exhibit C5 at [20]; Exhibit
Exhibit C5 at
Exhibit C5 at [21];
Exhibit C6 at [4]
Exhibit C5 at
Exhibit C10 at
Exhibit C5 at
Exhibit C5 at
Exhibit C5 at
Exhibit C6 at
Exhibit C6 at
Exhibit C4 at
Exhibit C4 at
Exhibit C4 at
Exhibit C4 at
Exhibit C4 at
Exhibit C4 at
Exhibit C4 at
Exhibit C4 at
Exhibit C4 at
Exhibit C4 at
Exhibit C8 at [8];
Exhibit C7 at [5]
Exhibit C7 at [12];
Exhibit C8 at [4]-[5]; Exhibit C9 at [5]; Exhibit C10 at
Mr Hartung’s
fingerprints were later detected on the empty
Hartung’s and Mr Chopra’s fingerprints were detected on the bottle;
Exhibit C11 at [22]
C6 at [6]; Exhibit C10 at
Exhibit C9 at
Exhibit C10 at
Exhibit C9 at
Exhibit C10 at
Exhibit C12, page
Exhibit C12c,
BOATRAM-01_03.mxg and
BOATRAMP-01_04.mxg
C12c, BOATRAMP-01_06.mxg
[1938] HCA 34
[1938] 60 CLR 336
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (255 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (216 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter