URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRComm/2017/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:00:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Public Service Association v Department of Premier and Cabinet (Department of Child Protection) [2017] SAIRComm 8 (13 June 2017)
Public Service Association v Department of Premier and Cabinet (Department
of Child Protection)
[2017] SAIRComm 8
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION (SA)
PUBLIC SERVICE ASSOCIATION OF SA INC
DEPARTMENT OF THE PREMIER AND CABINET (DEPARTMENT FOR CHILD PROTECTION)
S 202 Referral to the Commission
277 of 2017
HEARING DATES:
31 March 2017
JUDGMENT OF:
COMMISSIONER MCMAHON
DELIVERED ON:
13 June 2017
CATCHWORDS:
Industrial Dispute - Referral to the Commission for determination of the
subject matter –Whether the undertaking provided by
the employer in
relation to consultation was in relation to this matter only or for the
dispute.- Has the employer satisfied the
terms of the consultative process
– Consideration of the Royal Commission Report -
Employer undertaking provided for the dispute not just this matter- Employer is
found to have met their obligations in relation
to consultation - Cl 26 South
Australian Public Sector Wages Parity Enterprise Agreement: Salaried 2014
Fair Work Act 1994
Amcor Ltd v Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union and Others
[2005] HCA 10
Australian Meat Industry Employees Union v Golden
Cockerel Pty Ltd
[2014] FWCFB 7447
City of Wanneroo v Holmes
[1989] FCA 369
(1989) 30 IR 362
Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering and Kindred
Industries Union v Holden Ltd
Independent Education Union of
Australia v Mowbray College
[2010] FWA4824
Communications, Electrical,
Electronic, Energy, Information, Postal, Plumbing and Allied Services Union of
Australia v QR Limited
2010] FCA 591
The Life They Deserve- Child
Protection Systems Royal Commission Report
Stewart's Guide to
Employment Law
Redundancy and Interpretation in Industrial Agreements:
The Amcor Case
Sydney Law Review Volume 26
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr P Moloney
Respondent: Mr A
Solicitors:
Applicant: Moloney and Partners
Respondent: Minter
matter relates to the decision of the Chief Executive of the Department of Child
Protection (“DCP”) who announced
10 January 2017 her
intention to introduce a psychometric assessment process to its existing
employees working in residential care.
Currently the only employees required to
undergo a psychometric assessment process within DCP are those employees seeking
opportunities with the DCP. It is part of the DCP pre-employment
process for all prospective employees to undergo a psychological
20 January 2017 the Public Service Association of SA Inc (“PSA”)
made an application to the South Australian Industrial
Relations Commission
(“SAIRC”). In short, the principal relief sought by the PSA was that
genuine consultation was required
prior to the implementation of a psychometric
assessment process to the existing DCP residential care workers, that the status
is maintained until appropriate consultation had occurred and that the PSA
member’s industrial rights are protected.
dispute has been the subject of a number of voluntary conferences, the last was
held on 29 March 2017. It was clear at that conference
that the matter would not
resolve through conciliation and a compulsory conference was held to allow for
discussion to occur in relation
to the reference of question for determination
by the SAIRC.
consent of the parties it was agreed to refer the following questions for
determination by the Commission:
“1) Does the current enterprise agreement, the South
Australian Public Sector Wages Parity Enterprise Agreement: Salaried 2014,
to the DPC’s decision to extend the psychological assessment process to
all DCP employees working in residential care?
yes to question 1, the Commission is to determine the issue of whether DCP have
satisfied the terms of clause 26-Consultative Process
and that the issue be
set down for Arbitration on Friday, 31 March 2017 commencing at
The Hearing
Preliminary Matters
preliminary matters were flagged at the compulsory conference held on 29 March
2017. The first matter related to the first question
for referral and at the
compulsory conference the DCP gave an undertaking that was reflected in the
statement issued on 30 March
undertaking was recorded as follows:
“It is noted that for the
purpose of this dispute and with a view to promoting an early resolution to this
matter the DCP accepts
for the purpose of this dispute the relevant enterprise
agreement applies and arising from that, clause 26 of the enterprise agreement
DCP’s position that the undertaking related to this matter only was
objected to by the PSA in that it was their view the
undertaking related to the
this matter I found that the DCP did give an undertaking that for the purpose of
the dispute that the
South Australian Public Sector Wages Parity Enterprise
Agreement: Salaried 2014
, applies to the DCP decision to extend a
psychological assessment process to all DCP employees working in residential
second matter arose as both parties were of the view that it was appropriate for
the other party to go first at the hearing and
a ruling on the matter was
sought. It was the PSA’s view that as the DCP was seeking the arbitration
of this matter, they should
go first. The DCP's view was that as the application
was made by the PSA, it was their view that the PSA should go first.
considered the questions for referral and having acknowledged the DCP’s
undertaking in relation to Question
Commission’s view that the matter for determination is whether the DCP has
satisfied its obligations in relation
to Clause 26 - Consultation. The PSA does
not agree that the DPC has satisfied their obligations and as such it is the
Commission’s
view that in the interest of fairness and practicability it
is appropriate for the PSA to put their position first.
Short, for the DCP, raised a further matter that Ms Kathy Taylor, the Chief
Executive Officer of DCP was at the hearing because
of the importance of this
matter and was available to give evidence if it would assist the Commission. In
the voluntary conference
it was put by the PSA that if Ms Taylor gave evidence
they would seek to comprehensively cross examine her and indicated that the
matter would not be heard in one day.
the request by the DCP that the Commission provide a decision as expeditiously
as possible, it was the view of the Commission
Ms Taylor did
provided evidence it would more than likely slow the process down considerably.
It was the Commission’s view that
the matter could be decided on the
documents and submissions from the parties. On that basis the DCP agreed not to
have Ms Taylor
provide evidence but sought to record her preparedness to do so.
relation to the substantive matter, the PSA submitted that they do not agree
that DCP have met the requirements of cl 26 but even
if it is found by the
Commission that they have, that may not resolve other issues broadly described
as the industrial rights of
the PSA members in the DCP. It is DCP's position
that this is the full dispute and if the Commission finds that consultation has
been met, that would resolve the dispute.
there is no other application before the Commission, it is not possible to
pre-empt the Commission’s position regarding any
other potential future
matter but acknowledges the PSA position that other industrial matters may arise
if the psychological assessment
process is extended to existing employees.
PSA submit that this dispute relates principally to Clause 26-Consultative
Process. A close examination of its text is required.
Clause 26 states:
26. CONSULTATIVE PROCESSES
26.1 The parties commit to the following consultative principles.
26.1.1 Consultation involves the sharing of information and the exchange of
views between employers and persons or bodies that must
be consulted and the
genuine opportunity for them to contribute effectively to any decision making
process. This includes consultation
with the applicable Union whose members are
26.1.2 Employers and Agencies consult in good faith, not simply advise what
will be done.
26.1.3 It is an accepted principle that effective workplace relationships
can only be achieved if appropriate consultation between
the parties occurs on a
regular basis.
26.1.4 Workplace change that will affect a significant number of employees
should not be implemented before appropriate consultation
has occurred with
employee representatives.
26.1.5 Employee representatives will be given the opportunity to adequately
consult with the people they represent in the workplace,
in relation to any
proposed changes that may affect employees’ working conditions or the
services employees provide.
26.2 In relation to significant issues of public sector wide reform, the CPSE
will consult with the “SA Unions” (i.e.
formerly known as the UTLC)
in accordance with the above principles.”
PSA submit that this is the consultation clause that we are dealing with. There
is a common misconception that consultation occurs
after the decision has been
made which is a common clause in many federal agreements. In this matter what
the DCP has done by announcing
the decision and then consulting afterwards is
clearly wrong and is not what is reflected in this agreement. That is why the
got off on the wrong foot and has been on the wrong foot ever since. This
was not about a proposed change; it was about the implementation
of a decision
already made. The PSA submit that until the decision is withdrawn, it is fatally
flawed and consultation cannot occur
appropriately in accordance with
this matter I am of the view that the decision made by the CEO on
2017 would have been better suited to have proposed the decision to introduce
the psychometric assessment process for existing
employees rather than simply
announcing its introduction.
question now is whether the consultation that has occurred since the
“announcement” is capable of meeting the requirements
of cl 26 or is
it fatally flawed as stated by the PSA.
DCP submits that since the announcement was made, there has been extensive
discussions that have occurred and we are not dealing
in a vacuum on this
matter. This considerable level of consultation that has occurred since the
announcement must be considered when
the decision as to whether appropriate
consultation has occurred is determined.
PSA submit that the role of the Commission in this matter is to interpret cl 26
and look at its apparent purpose and that apparent
purpose is to require
consultation before a decision is made with a view to minimizing industrial
disputes arising from the decision.
The PSA submit that here is a very good
example of what happens when you do not comply with the consultation clause.
Despite the
consistent urgings of the PSA from the commencement through to
today, the DCP has chosen not to rescind its decision to allow the
consultation
clause to be properly utilised.
PSA assert that cl 26 was not complied with by the DCP. The PSA sought to
highlight the DCP’s inadequacies in dealing with
cl 26. The underlined
sections from cl 26 are the PSA’s emphasis:
The parties commit to the following consultative principles
26.1.1 Consultation includes
the sharing of information
exchange of views between employers and persons or bodies that must be consulted
genuine opportunity for them to contribute effectively to any
decision making process.
This includes consultation with the applicable
Union whose members are affected.”
was no consultation; the DCP simply announced that the CEO had decided to
implement the decision to introduce psychometric testing
to its existing
employees. Although the clause provides that a genuine opportunity be provided
for the employees to contribute effectively
to any decision making process, no
opportunity was provided and DCP simply announced the decision. The clause also
requires the employer
to ensure that the union, in this case the PSA, whose
members were effected were to be consulted. None of the above occurred, simply
the members and the union were advised of the announcement to introduce a
psychological assessment process.
“26.1.2 Employers and
consult in good faith, not simply advise what will be
has been no consultation in good faith, the employer simply made the decision to
introduce the testing and advised its employee
accordingly:
“26.1.3 It is an accepted principle that
effective workplace relationships can only be achieved if appropriate
consultation
between the parties occur on a regular basis
26.1.4 Workplace change that will affect a significant number of employees
should not be implemented before
appropriate consultation has occurred with
employee representatives”
introduction of a psychometric assessment process for existing employees does
affect a significant number of employees, it affects
all of DCP’s
employees providing residential home care. It should not have been announced
before appropriate consultation had
occurred with employee
representatives.
“26.1.5 Employee representatives will be
given the opportunity to adequately consult with the people they represent in
in relation to any proposed changes that may affect
employees’ working conditions or the services employees
opportunity was provided for the employee representatives to adequately consult
with the members they represent in the workplace
may affect employees working conditions or the services employees provide.
PSA referred to
Stewart's Guide to Employment Law
at para 9.15
Interpretation of awards and agreements, which provides the following:
“Where an issue arises as to the meaning of the award or
enterprise agreement, the court or tribunal that has to interpret it
regard to the context in which it was made. That includes the ‘industrial
realities’ of whatever situation
led to the making of the relevant
provision...
It has often been said that, while effect should be given to the
‘ordinary’ meaning of the words used in an industrial
instrument, a
‘strictly literal’ or ‘pedantic’ approach should be
avoided where that would produce a result
at odds with the apparent intention of
those who framed it.”
PSA submit that in this matter, the simple reading of cl 26 is that consultation
should occur before a decision is made but that
did not occur and the approach
taken by the DCP is at odds with the intention of cl 26. On this matter I agree
with the PSA's interpretation
of this authority that when interpreting an award
or agreement the court will have regard to the context in which it was made and
the parties should avoid a “pedantic” approach where that would
produce a result at odds with the apparent intention
of those who framed
PSA referred to the High Court decision of
Amcor Ltd v Construction,
Forestry, Mining and Energy Union and
para 96 it provides the following:
“The nature of the document, the manner of its expression,
the context in which it operated and the industrial purpose is served
suggest that the construction to be given to cl 55.1.1 should not be a strict
one but one that contributes to a sensible
industrial outcome such as should be
attributed to the parties who negotiated and executed the Agreement. Approaching
the interpretation
of a clause in that way accords with the proper way, adopted
by this Court, of interpreting industrial instruments and especially
agreements. I agree with the following passage in the reasons of Madgwick J in
Kucks v CSR Ltd,
where his Honour observed:
‘It is trite that narrow or pedantic approaches to the interpretation
of an award are misplaced. The search is for the meaning
intended by the
framer(s) of the document, bearing in mind that such framer(s) were likely of a
practical bent of mind: they may
well have been more concerned with expressing
an intention
in ways likely to have been understood in the context of the
relevant industry and industrial relations environment than with legal
. Thus, for example, it is justifiable to read the award to give
effect to its evident purposes, having regard to such a context,
despite mere
inconsistencies or infelicities of expression which might tend to some other
And meanings which avoid inconvenience or injustice may reasonably
be strained for’.
the emphasis is on the intended meaning of the framers, it is justifiable to
read the award (or in this instance the enterprise
agreement) to give effect to
its evident purpose having regard to such context.
by the PSA was made to an article by Andrew Fraser titled
Redundancy and
Interpretation in Industrial Agreements: The Amcor
heading Interpretation of
the following:
“The approach used in the interpretation of
awards and agreements is anything but uniform, but has tended to adopt a similar
approach to that used in statutory interpretation. It has long been accepted
that literalism is not appropriate, and that the interpreter
should read an
award ‘broadly’ with the aim of giving effect to its intended
operation as far as the ‘general intention
of the parties can be gathered
from the whole award’.”
goes on to say;
“Awards and agreements are also treated
‘generously’ since they are often framed by non-lawyers with their
operation in mind.”
PSA referenced the
Australian Meat Industry Employees Union v Golden Cockerel
again emphasises the ordinary meaning of the words when considering the
construction of awards and the narrow approach to interpretation
20 of that authority provides:
“To this we add the oft-quoted observations of Madgwick J in
Kucks. v CSR Limited
that a narrow pedantic approach to interpretation
should be avoided, a search of the evident purpose is permissible and meanings
which avoid inconvenience or injustice may reasonably be strained
para 22 the authority quotes French J in the
as follows:
“The fact that the instrument being construed is an
enterprise agreement is itself an important contextual consideration. As
J observed in
‘It is of course necessary, in the construction of an award, to remember,
as a contextual consideration, that it is an award
under consideration. Its
words must not be interpreted in a vacuum divorced from industrial realities-
There is a long tradition of generous construction over a strictly literal
approach where industrial awards are
concerned’."
PSA referred to the decision of the
Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering and
Kindred Industries Union v Holden
which stated
at paragraph 46;
“...Further, in our view the expression
should not be narrowly construed. In this context we agree with the observation
Full Bench in
Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees Association v
Big W Discount Department Stores
‘... what comprises a dispute over the application of the agreement
should not be narrowly construed; to do so would be contrary
to the notion that
certified agreements are intended to facilitate the harmonious working
relationship of the parties during the
operation of the
agreement’.”
this matter the PSA is of the view that the Commission should take a broad
approach to look at what the dispute is really about.
Clearly the purpose of the
clause we are dealing with here is to ensure there is a consultative approach to
significant workplace
PSA referred to the decision of
Independent Education Union of Australia vs
Reference was made to Logan J in
Communications, Electrical, Electronic,
Energy, Information, Postal, Plumbing and Allied Services Union of Australia v
that decision Logan J referred to the much cited statement of Commissioner
“Consultation is not perfunctory advice on what is
individual, or other relevant persons, with a bona fide opportunity to influence
the decision
PSA submit that in this instance the PSA or its members were not given an
opportunity to consult in relation to the decision.
is significant precedent to rely upon which supports the PSA’s position
that consultation should occur before a decision
is made to ensure that the
affected unions and their members are provided an opportunity to engage in
genuine consultation prior
to the decision being made.
PSA submitted that from the outset they were opposed to the decision of the CEO
when she wrote to all employees in residential
care on 10 January 2017 advising
them that the decision was made to introduce a psychometric assessment process.
From that time onwards
the PSA invited DCP to withdraw the decision and to
commence genuine consultation which was resisted by DCP. Throughout the ensuing
period DCP maintained the same position and would only discuss with the PSA the
implementation of the assessment process but indicating
they would not
reconsider the decision.
PSA referred to the Nyland J report “
The life they deserve”
This was a report arising from a Royal Commission into the adequacies of the
laws and policies relevant to South Australia’s
child protection system
for children at risk or harm. Chapter 12 deals with caring for children in other
environments. In the report
the Commissioner refers to the psychometric testing
conducted during the employment process. She stated the individual testing of
employees by experts qualified in forensic and clinical psychology is a strategy
that is both appropriate and necessary. She also
recommended the assessment of
employee suitability should not cease at the point of employment but should be
an ongoing process.
this matter the PSA were critical of the CEO who in her letter of
2017 indicated that psychological testing was appropriate as a general strategy
in relation to all employees, including
current employees. The PSA argue this
was misleading as the Commissioner recommended the ongoing assessment for new
staff not current
Commissioner Nylan stated was that the:
“Assessment of the
suitability of an employee for the youth worker role should not cease at the
employment.”
She then goes on to say:
“An ongoing process of assessment of
the suitability of carers should continue past initial employment. It is
recommended that
the employment of all new employees be subject to an initial
probationary period of at least six months. A comprehensive review of
performance should occur immediately before the conclusion of the probationary
period and an assessment made about the suitability
of the employee for
employment.”
the PSA submit that the Commissioner did not recommend the assessment of
employee suitability continuing past the probationary
period which is what the
CEO stated in her letter.
employer refutes this and argues that the report states:
Commission is satisfied that individual testing conducted by qualified experts
in organisational psychology is an appropriate
and necessary strategy. This
method is key to understanding a holistic assessment of an individual to
properly affect their potential
suitability for a role in the residential care
setting. The Commission emphasizes that psychometric psychological assessments
only be conducted by experts with appropriate
qualifications.”
proposal DCP is putting forward is to apply this recommended and established
process to those working in residential care that
have not been assessed to that
recommended standard. The established process already in place is recommended by
Commissioner Nyland.
It has been dealt with by the Nyland Commission and is
found to have already worked.
DCP submit that logically, it would follow that if you have not already been
assessed to that standard then you should be. That
is a measure that would
enhance the safety of children. Once you have been assessed to that standard
then sometime in the future
you should again be assessed to check that you are
still psychologically suited and fit to work with children in care.
the Commissioner referred to the ongoing process of assessment for the
suitability of carers, she was referring to a comprehensive
review of the new
employee’s performance prior to the conclusion of the probationary period.
However, on this matter I agree
with the respondent that it was evident the
Commissioner supported the use of a psychological assessment process and it is
to ignore the rationale of the DCP that if the Commissioner found that
a psychological assessment process was suitable for new employees,
it stands to
reason that existing employees should also be assessed to that standard.
submit that it is treating the welfare of children as a matter of paramount
concern and no apology is made for that. It is what
the community expects and
requires. The CEO was at the hearing because of the importance of this matter
and because of its urgency.
There are hundreds of carers. They are a committed
workforce seeking to advance the interest of children but, as history has shown,
there are carers who have abused their positions and engaged in criminal
conduct. Steps that can be taken to weed out unsuitable
carers should be taken
and this is one such measure. If the answer comes back from this process that
everyone is suitable, that will
give the community, DCP, workers and those in
care, comfort. If the people who are presently in DCP who have not been assessed
this standard and are identified as unsuitable to work with children in care,
then we would say that is a good and appropriate finding.
It will make children
safer. It is not the case that those working in the DCP who have not been
assessed to that standard have proven
that they are already fit. Abusers don't
always come out and say they're abusing before they are caught. This matter is
welfare of children. It is an important matter. None of us want to
wake up in the morning and find out on the front page of the paper
that someone
has now been detected having been abusing children in care, who could have been
caught at an earlier stage if this process
was already implemented. It is
acknowledged by DCP that this is not a silver bullet; it is just one important
measure to make those
children safer. The CEO is following the Commissioner's
the CEO announced the decision, the PSA argue the information provided by DCP
has raised more questions than answers. Examples
of which are; the statement
that the actual assessment being conducted for residential care has been
endorsed as best practice and
industry standard. If so, by whom? What is the
body of research confirming that psychological assessment significantly
contributes
to the understanding and identification of suitable profiles for
work in child protection?
PSA submit that throughout the ensuing period after the decision was made, the
DCP have continued to change their position on
a range of matters. One example
of this is that DCP had changed their view in relation to those employees found
not suitable to work
with children; initially they were only going to be
provided with a short summary of the recommendations. Now DCP have indicated
they will be provided with a copy of the full report. Another example of this is
the frequency of the assessment process once introduced.
Initially DCP's
position was every three years, but now it is unclear how often the assessment
process will be repeated. The proposal
is constantly changing and the PSA
believe it is clear that consultation has not concluded.
DCP’s position on this matter is the opposite to the PSA. DCP’s
willingness to change their position indicates that
the employer has been
prepared to listen to the PSA on this matter and have been willing to change its
position where it sees it
is appropriate. Having listened to the PSA's concerns
and having changed their position on a number of matters raised by the PSA
evident that genuine consultation has occurred.
submit that children in care are among the most vulnerable members of our
community and many have been abused physically, sexually
and psychologically.
They are entitled to be safe and that it is incumbent upon DCP to take all
reasonably practicable steps to ensure
that they are. As a matter of history it
is known that children in care in South Australia have been abused by those
entrusted with
their care. The recent Royal Commission that Commissioner Nyland
recently held provided the report titled “the life they deserve”
DCP. It supports psychometric testing. It is the DCP’s view that all
reasonably practical steps should be taken to protect
children from abuse and
that one of those steps is the proposed psychometric assessment process for all
view is that it is apparent from the history that the parties are never going to
reach agreement on this proposal and
the PSA has an interest in protecting its
members. Regrettably, some of those may be identified as unsuitable. DCP is
placing the
welfare of children as paramount so the parties are coming at this
question from a different direction. The PSA’s position
seems to be that
the requirement to consult involves sharing any information requested and
answering to its satisfaction all questions
with some of those questions not
being raised until months afterwards. It is the DCP’s view that the PSA
will never be fully
satisfied and this is evident in their correspondence. The
DCP believes it has satisfied the consultative process clause and it is
implement the psychological assessment process. It must be remembered that cl
26.1.4 requires that “appropriate”
consultation occurs. Appropriate
consultation does not mean having to answer a list of questions that are never
the report by Commissioner Nyland, it indicated the testing of employees by
experts was a strategy that was appropriate and necessary
and should not stop at
the point of employment but should be an ongoing process. While it is agreed
this comment was in relation
to new employees on commencement and at the end of
their 6 month probationary period, on this matter I agree with the DCP that the
logic is inescapable. If it is good for those new employees, it must be
reasonable for employees already in the organisation particularly
given that the
Commissioner identified that previous employment and recruitment processes were
flawed. The same processes that would
have resulted in a number of existing
employees gaining employment in DCP. The CEO when making the announcement was
merely seeking
to implement the process already identified for new applicants to
be extended to existing employees currently working in residential
care. It was
the position on
10 January 2017 and has remained the same ever since. It is
not something new that the PSA has no knowledge or familiarity of. They
process as it is already in place for new employees.
DCP submits that the CEO’s letter dated 10 January 2017 invited the PSA to
meet and discuss any issues relating to the psychometric
assessment process.
Having accepted that cl 26 applies, the DCP submits that the test for cl 26 is
as of today. Having the terms
of cl 26 been satisfied and if that is the case,
let's move forward. It is not a matter of some historical assessment. The
should take past communications and discussions into account in
assessing as of today whether the DCP has done enough so that it
forward or has it not.
relation to the cl 26 itself, cl 26.1.1 helpfully identifies what consultation
involves and that is the sharing of information.
The DCP’s book of
documents identifies that a considerable amount of information has been
exchanged between the parties. Although
there is no requirement there has been
agreement reached on a number of matters. There has been a genuine opportunity
for the parties
to contribute to the decision making process.
DCP is concerned that the PSA has acted in an obstructive manner and the last
letter of the PSA on 29 March 2017 has nine pages
of questions on matters that
seem far removed from the gravamen of the dispute and some matters have never
been raised over the last
ten weeks until now. This causes the DCP considerable
concern about whether there is a genuine desire to move forward and to engage
26.1.4 indicates that implementation should not occur before appropriate
consultations have occurred with employee representatives.
It must be noted that
until now no change has been implemented. Clause 26.1.5 is about the
opportunity to consult in relation to
changes that may affect working conditions
or services employees provide. No working conditions or services will be
affected by the
test itself. The term “adequate” consultation is of
note. It is not absolute, it is adequate. It is clearly not setting
high as the PSA would have it. It is not a requirement that every question has
been answered; it can be an ongoing process.
If it was the case then the PSA
could rely upon the status quo remaining until every question has been asked
which is clearly untenable
in an industrial context. There is nothing that says
the parties cannot keep consulting after the DCP has the right to move
Commission has chaired six voluntary conferences that have involved an exchange
of many views and positions between the parties.
That is only part of it. There
have been numerous communications between the parties and meetings that have
occurred outside of the
Commission. The letter of the DCP on 11 January 2017 and
the meeting that occurred on 16 January 2017 explained why the DCP was applying
a multifaceted approach to increase the safety of children. A number of measures
have been put forth that include induction processes,
formal care
qualifications, enhanced training, development measures, Department for
Communities and Social Inclusion screening improvements,
supervision and a
performance development process. The psychological assessment process, whether
for new or existing employees is
just one further measure.
submit that as part of the offer to share information with the PSA, the CEO
offered the PSA an opportunity to meet for a briefing
Mr Luke Broomhall
an Adelaide based forensic psychologist whose company, PsychCheck, is the
external company that the DCP has chosen
to provide the psychological assessment
process. The PSA objected on the grounds that the DCP was outsourcing its
consultative processes.
is my view that this was not the intention of the DCP but was simply an
opportunity for the DCP to provide the PSA with a greater
insight into the
proposed psychological assessment process. It was an attempt by the respondent
to provide greater detail to the
PSA about the assessment process.
respondent submits that throughout the process the CEO confirmed her view that
the welfare of children is paramount and in the
letter dated 17 February 2017
the CEO having considered the concerns of the PSA, confirmed her view that the
case for progressing
the psychological assessment process was compelling. She
was unaware of any valid reason to defer the process. What the letter does
clear is that Ms Taylor gave further consideration in relation to the matter but
retained the view that the process should progress
as a matter of urgency. At
all times the CEO sought genuine consultation with the PSA and it was always her
preference to see the
matter move forward positively with common ground if
the recommendations put by the Commission on 16 March 2017 it was put that the
DCP reconsider their position as expressed at the
conference on the previous
day. Their view then was that consultation had finished. As recommended, the DCP
did reconsider their
position and advised the PSA that it was open to further
consultation. This was despite the DCP feeling severely frustrated with
process. I agree with DCP that it was a further example of the DCP’s
willingness to genuinely consult.
DCP is firmly of the view that the PSA will continue to raise new matters as
long as they are able to in an effort to frustrate
the implementation of a
process that is designed to enhance the safety of children in residential care.
The DCP is confident it has
met its obligations under cl 26 and seeks to have
the Psychological Assessment Process implemented for existing employees as soon
as possible. It believes it has consulted appropriately as is required by cl 26.
Until this process is implemented there is a greater
chance of someone in the
existing workforce who is a risk to children of offending. It is an important
matter and it is a matter
where children continue to be at
Considerations
already stated I am of the view that it would have been more appropriate if the
DCP had proposed the decision to extend the psychometric
assessment process to
its existing employees rather than to have just simply announced it. Having
decided to announce the decision,
a significant number of its employees and the
PSA immediately felt that they had not been able to effectively contribute to
the discussion
in relation to this matter. It had the effect of putting its
employees offside from the commencement. However, in considering whether
provisions of cl 26 have been met by the DCP, it is undisputed that since the
announcement by the CEO on 10 January 2017 that
the decision to implement
psychometric testing has not been implemented but since that time there has been
an extensive amount of
consultation.
was put by DCP that during the ensuing period after
10 January 2017, the CEO
has had time to reflect on the concerns of the PSA. While she did consider
withdrawing the decision she did
not do because she was of the view that it was
an appropriate measure to take. Instead she chose to continue to consult with
on the matter. The point being made is that if the DCP had announced the
decision in the form of a proposal, having considered the
views of the PSA and
its members, the decision of the CEO would not have changed.
matter is unique in that DCP is charged with the protection of the state's most
vulnerable children, those at risk of physical,
sexual and psychological abuse.
It is undisputed that recently there have been serious incidents of sexual abuse
of children in residential
care in South Australia. It was on that basis that
the Royal Commission into child protection was created. It is a serious matter
that cannot be overlooked. Chapter 12 of the report “The life they
deserve” identified faults in the assessment process
for employees working
in residential care and it found that a psychological assessment process was a
useful tool in assessing the
suitability of employees to work in DCP.
PSA correctly identified that the reference to an ongoing psychological
assessment process in the report related to the probationary
period of new
employees. However, on this matter I support the view of the DCP that if the
psychological assessment process is a
worthy measure for new employees it stands
to reason that it would also be a worthy measure for existing employees.
decision of the
Australian Meat Industry Employees Union v Golden
referred to by the PSA emphasises the ordinary meaning of the words when
considering the construction of awards and the narrow approach
to interpretation
should be avoided. At para 22 the authority quotes French J; in the
case as follows:
“The fact that the instrument being construed is an
enterprise agreement is itself an important contextual consideration. As
J observed in
‘It is of course necessary, in the construction of an award, to
remember, as a contextual consideration, that it is an award
consideration. Its words must not be interpreted in a vacuum divorced from
industrial realities. ...
There is a long tradition of generous construction over a strictly literal
approach where industrial awards are
concerned’."
case, this matter should not be considered in a vacuum
divorced from industrial reality. The reality is that since the announcement
is undeniable that extensive consultation has occurred and that the consultation
that has occurred since the announcement should
not be disregarded.
situation is unique in that the benefits of the psychometric assessments of
employees were raised in the Royal Commission report.
The Commission found that
they were beneficial. The role of the Royal Commission was to help identify ways
to ensure that children
are safe in residential care. From the commencement of
the dispute the DCP has been consistent in their position that extending the
psychometric assessment process to all existing employees is not the silver
bullet but it is one important measure to ensure that
children in residential
care are safe.
position of the PSA is that the subject matter of the consultation should not be
a consideration in this matter. I disagree with
this on the basis that a Royal
Commission has made recommendations in relation to this matter. It is a matter
of the most paramount
importance and should be considered when determining
whether appropriate consultation has occurred. If it was a matter with less
significance then a different weight would be given to the significance of the
subject matter.
cl 26 been satisfied? In cl 26 the parties agreed to the sharing of information
and not just being told what will happen. It is
agreed that the DCP did not do
this in the first instance but since the announcement the DCP has entered into
long and protracted
consultation on the matter. During the process DCP has
advised that it did reconsider the position but the matter of the psychometric
testing was too important to be withdrawn. On that matter I accept that during
the consultation in the face of strong resistance
from the PSA and its members
the DCP through its Chief Executive did reconsider their position. Having done
so they again formed
the view that psychometric testing for existing employees
was the appropriate decision to make.
that matter of whether appropriate consultation has occurred, the meetings,
Commission hearings, exchanged letters between the
parties and the significant
number of FAQ’s issued by the DCP must be considered in determining the
matter and it is an inescapable
conclusion that significant consultation has
occurred and as a consequence I find that the employer did consult with the PSA
matter and that the PSA had an opportunity to genuinely consult with its
members prior to the implementation of the psychometric
the consultation occurred after the initial announcement, it was prior to the
introduction of the psychometric testing which
has not been introduced to this
day. I find that although the consultation occurred after the announcement, the
respondent genuinely
consulted with the PSA and its members and that the
consultation was appropriate.
find that the respondent has met its obligations in regard to the requirements
of Clause 26 – Consultation in relation to
the introduction of the
psychological assessment process for existing employees.
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
It is the practice of this Commission to publish its reasons for decision in
full on the Internet. If any party or person contends
that these reasons for
decision should not be published in full the party or person must make an
application within seven days of
the delivery of these reasons. The application
shall be by an Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should
addressed to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within
the time specified these reasons will be published
in accordance with the
Commission’s usual practice.
Recommendations and Orders dated 30 March 2017
Recommendations and Orders dated 30 March 2017
Recommendations and Orders dated 30 March 2017
Review Volume 26 page 242
Page 251 of the
Sydney Law Review Volume 26
[2014] FWCFB
City of Wanneroo
[1989] FCA 369
(1989) 30 IR 362
Page 335 The
life they deserve
Page 335 The
life they deserve
Page 334 The
life they deserve
[2014] FWCFB
Wanneroo v Holmes
[1989] FCA 369
(1989) 30 IR 362
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (185 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter