URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SALGCmr/2010/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:01:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Amtek Services [2010] SALGCmr 1 (25 May 2010)
GAMING MACHINES ACT, 1992
ORDER OF THE LIQUOR AND
GAMBLING COMMISSIONER
Application No:
60391 (supp.)
Licence No:
AMTEK SERVICES PTY LTD
LEVEL 1/123 CAMBERWELL ROAD
HAWTHORN EAST 3123
AMTEK SERVICES PTY LTD
Effective Date:
25 May 2010
APPLICATION FOR A GAMING MACHINE SERVICE
This is an application by
AMTEK SERVICES PTY LTD
(Amtek), for a gaming
machine service licence under
section 14(1)(e)
Gaming Machines Act 1992
(the Act). This class of licence authorises the licensee to install, service
and repair approved gaming machines, prescribed gaming
machine components and
gaming equipment.
When the Act came into operation on 1 July 1994, under
could only be one such licence, the State Supply Board (the Board) being the
only entity eligible to be granted that licence,
as prescribed by section 26 of
the Act. The Board appointed, with the approval of the Liquor and Gambling
Commissioner, Bull HM
Information Systems Australia Pty Ltd (Bull) as the sole
agent for the performance of its functions as a licensee. In 1995 Bull’s
operations in this State were taken over by Wang Australia Pty Ltd (Wang).
Wang’s contract expired in 1998.
Following the expiry of Wang’s contract, the Board appointed, with the
approval of the Commissioner, two service agents, Wang
and AWA Gaming Services
Pty Ltd, trading as Jupiters, I am advised in order to introduce a degree of
competition into the market
and to provide gaming machine licensees with a
choice of service agents. Wang subsequently became Getronics Australia Pty Ltd
(Getronics).
The latter’s contract was not renewed and Bytecraft Systems
Pty Ltd (Bytecraft) was appointed, with the approval of the Commissioner,
service agent from 1 July 2003. In June 2005, Jupiters was purchased by
In July 2006 the Act was amended by removing the Board as the holder of a
single service licence and providing for the grant of gaming
machine service
licences to suitable applicants. A licence of this class was subsequently
granted to Bytecraft, which was the primary
gaming machine service provider
until February 2010 when a licence of this class was granted to Maximum Gaming
Pty Ltd (Maximum).
I note that Maximum’s application was not
Amtek’s application was received on 16 March 2010 and on 14 April 2010
an objection to the application was received from Maximum.
The application was
listed for hearing on 28 April 2010, and on that date was adjourned to Friday 7
May, where it was adjourned
for a contested hearing on Tuesday 25 May at 10am.
At the hearing on 7 May, I directed that the objector provide the applicant with
details of the grounds for its objection, including any affidavit evidence upon
which it intended to rely, by close of business on
Friday 21 May 2010. That
information was subsequently provided on the due date.
The grounds for the objection are as set out in a document – exhibit 3,
which are detailed as follows:
application must be refused under
section 44A(2)
of the Act because there is a
prohibited link in terms of
section 44A(1)(c)
, between the applicant and a
gaming machine dealer’s licensee, namely Transcity Pty Ltd (Transcity).
The Objector relies in
support of this ground on the provisions of
44A(4)(c)(iii)
grant the application would involve both the applicant and Transcity being in
section 44A(1)
of the Act.
application should be refused in the proper exercise of the Commissioner’s
unqualified discretion under
of the Act, as it would be both contrary
to the public interest as well as the scheme of the Act (including the
provisions and spirit
section 44A)
to grant a Gaming Machine Service Licence
to the applicant at the current time when the gaming industry in South Australia
and adequately serviced by the two existing gaming machine service
licensee companies (without prohibited links with a gaming machine
dealer’s licensee company).
The applicant was represented at the hearing by counsel, Mr Jack
Costello, barrister with Ms Karen Thomas of Fisher Jeffries, the
represented by Mr John Firth, barrister, with Mr Sam McGrath of Cowell Clarke.
In support of the application, Mr Costello
called Mr Nestoras Diamantopoulos, a
director and shareholder of Amtek Services Pty Ltd. An affidavit by Mr
Diamantopoulos relating
to the grounds for objection was lodged on 7 May –
exhibit 2. During his opening address, Mr Costello produced an extract
Hansard (House of Assembly, Wednesday 15 September 2004, pp46-47) –
exhibit 6, wherein the following at p47 was highlighted:
The Gaming Machine Service Licence authorises the licensee to install,
service and repair approved gaming machines, their components
and related
equipment. As required by the
Gaming Machines Act
the single licence is
currently held by the State Supply Board. The Board fulfils the role of this
licence through the appointment
of agents approved by the Liquor and Gambling
Commissioner, which carry out the work on the Board’s behalf.
On 7 March 2003 the Government announced its support of an amendment to
Gaming Machines Act 1992
to remove the State Supply Board as Gaming Machine
Service Licensee and replace it with a more competitive arrangement. This
was consistent with a finding of the national competition policy review
of the Act, which found that the existing sole service licence
held by the State
Supply Board was inconsistent with competition policy principles. The National
Competition Council has stated
that this amendment is necessary to meet
competition policy requirements.
The provisions of this Bill provide for Gaming Machine Service Licences to
be issued to suitable applicants. The Liquor and Gambling
Commissioner will
issue licences subject to normal suitability assessments.
In setting out the Hansard extract, I have included several subsequent lines
which, although not highlighted in the exhibit, I find
to be relevant to this
matter. I do so under
section 7(1)(b)
of the Act.
I note from Mr Diamantopoulos’ affidavit, and his evidence, his
contention that dealings between Amtek and Transcity do not
prohibited links under
section 44A
of the Act, that in the past Transcity and a
subsidiary, Tektronik Pty Ltd (Tektronik) have purchased from and supplied
to Amtek Corporation Pty Ltd (Amtek Corp) related to Amtek (the
applicant) on an ad hoc basis, the relationship being that of customer
In relation to Amtek Corp’s website listing Transcity as a partner, the
term according to the applicant is being used loosely
and not denoting a legal
partnership, describing Transcity and other entities with which Amtek Corp works
and with which it engages
from time to time for the supply and receipt of goods
and services.
Mr Diamantopoulos’ sworn evidence is that;
there is no
exclusive arrangement between the applicant and Transcity, and
neither Amtek
Corp or Amtek will be involved with Transcity in the future.
Mr Firth called David William Hole and David John Bolton to give
evidence in support of the objector and their affidavits –
exhibits 4 and
5 respectively. I note from Mr Bolton’s evidence that Maximum, since
becoming licensed in February this year
has 90 service contracts in place, that
Maximum has about 30% of the service market and looks forward to increasing that
market share
to 40%. Mr Bolton’s evidence is that given the number of
gaming venues and gaming machines in this state, the latter reducing
as a result of a legislative cap put in place in 2004, there is no need for a
third service licence.
To summarise the affidavits of Messrs Hole and Bolton, the former’s
relates to allegations of a commercial arrangement between
Transcity and Amtek,
as a result of which Transcity could only supply parts to Amtek. Mr
Bolton’s affidavit centres around
concerns about the commercial viability
of a third service licensee entering the South Australian gaming machine market,
“unwanted economic hardship to Maximum and Bytecraft”.
In his final address, Mr Firth highlighted an association or link between
Transcity and the applicant, reminding me that I must refuse
this application if
the grant would result in a contravention of
section 44A
of the Act, if I
can’t be satisfied that there will be no ongoing relationship between the
two parties. Mr Firth urged me
to use my unqualified discretion under
of the Act to refuse the application, arguing that it is admissible to hear
public interest evidence about the economic effect of
the grant of a licence,
that the economic effect is relevant and in this case would upset the balance in
the service industry.
Mr Costello submitted that Parliament’s intention in amending the Act
in 2006 was clear in removing exclusivity in the service
licence class. Mr
Costello also submitted that the applicant will not continue to trade with
Transcity if licensed, in breach of
section 44A
of the Act, that Maximum itself
would have traded with Transcity if it were possible. Mr Costello submitted
that I should not be
concerned with past links and that there is no proper basis
for an assumption that the Act will not be complied with if this application
I find that the whole purpose of the 2006 amendment to the Act relating to
removing the Board’s monopoly, was to open up the
gaming machines service
market to competition. That being the case, I reject the view that it would be
in the public interest to
limit the number of such licences. That option was
available to Parliament in 2006.
In relation to the alleged association between this applicant and Transcity,
the holder of a gaming machine dealer’s licence,
there are no corporate
links and I find, although Transcity and Tektronik has purchased from and
supplied services to Amtek Corp
in the past, there is no evidence that there
will be in place any agreement, arrangement or understanding between Amtek and
which would be contrary to the Act. To the extent to which there have
been any past dealings, I accept the applicant’s evidence
that should it
become licensed under the Act, no further trade will occur between the parties,
that would contravene
section 44A
of the Act.
The application will be granted.
Deputy Liquor And
Gambling Commissioner
(WL/BR) Date of Order: 25 May
Melbourne Vic 3204
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (53.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter