URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SALC/2025/88.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:01:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Australian Hotels Association (SA Branch) v Mark Richard Jones t/as Draft & Drift Bar [2025] SALC 88 (9 September 2025)
Australian Hotels Association (SA Branch) v Mark Richard Jones t/as Draft
& Drift Bar
[2025] SALC 88
LICENSING COURT OF SOUTH
AUSTRALIAN HOTELS ASSOCIATION (SA
JONES, Mark Richard t/as DRAFT & DRIFT
S 120 Disciplinary Matter
LC-25-00050
HEARING DATE:
6 June 2025
JUDGMENT OF:
Judge BP Gilchrist
DELIVERED ON:
9 September
CATCHWORDS:
Application for review of a decision of
a delegate of the Liquor and Gambling Commissioner to grant an on premises
license for proposed
premises in Whyalla. The applicant’s proposed
business model contemplated a boutique cocktail bar – The Australian
Association of SA (AHA) opposed the application on the grounds that the
social problems relating to alcohol consumption in the Whyalla
area were well
known; the area has a relatively high unemployment rate, a relatively large
number of Indigenous persons and that
it rates very low in terms of social
disadvantage: the locality already has around 60 licensed premises such that a
further licensed
venue was not in the community interest; the asserted
employment opportunities and additional tourist appeal would be limited; and
that the community consultation was not conducted with appropriate rigour
– The delegate commenced her reasons with a summary
of the AHA’s
submissions – The delegate then found that because in the locality there
was no dedicated cocktail bar,
one might be thought to be desirable – The
delegate then found that the proposed premises would have positive economic
by providing additional employment opportunities and potentially drawing
customers, including visitors and tourists into the main
commercial area of
Whyalla which hosts a number of other small local businesses – The
delegate found that the applicant had
a sound understanding of the legislative
requirements of operating a licensed premises – Collectively these matters
delegate to find that the grant of the application was in the community
interest and the public interest – On review the AHA
submitted that the
delegate’s reasons were legally inadequate; that she erred by seemingly
applying the ‘needs test’
in deciding that the application should be
granted because in the locality there was no dedicated cocktail bar, and one was
to be desirable; the delegate erred by effectively finding that here
were no opportunities for patrons to buy cocktails within the
locality; the
delegate had no justification for finding that proposed venue would have
positive economic impacts by providing additional
employment opportunities and
potentially drawing customers, including visitors and tourists into the main
commercial area of Whyalla;
it challenged the delegate’s finding that the
applicant had a sound understanding of the legislative requirements of operating
a licensed premises; and it submitted that the delegate erred because she
provided no explanation as to why she ignored SEIFA data
that showed that the
locality has a high unemployment rate, is socially disadvantaged and has a high
Indigenous population –
that it is reasonable to construe the
delegate’s reasons as indicating that she regarded the range of liquor to
be available
at the proposed premises was likely to be different to what was on
offer at other licensed facilities in the locality, that some
would find it
attractive and that this was a relevant consideration –
the delegate was right to take this into account as the expectations and
aspirations of the community in respect of the sale
and supply of liquor –
that the AHA was right to complain that the delegate did not deal
with its submissions regarding the SEIFA data and this failure rendered
reasons legally inadequate –
that whilst the SEIFA data was
important and paints a bleak picture of Whyalla, this Court is also permitted to
know that the cost
of liquor in a cocktail bar is likely to act as a
disincentive for those who are socially and financially challenged from
such premises, and if they do, that cost is likely to limit the amount
of liquor that they might purchase there, such as to have
a minimising impact of
alcohol related harm –
on balance, the positive aspects of the
application outweigh the negative aspects –
that in the public
interest, conditions needed to be imposed upon the licence to ensure that the
premises continue to trade under
the proposed business model –
Licensing Act 1997
Woolies Liquor Stores Pty Ltd
[2018] SALC
Mansfield Park Hotel (SA) Pty Ltd
[2023] SALC 83
Corporation v Munzer
[2016] SASCFC 15
Fairview Park Cellars
2023] SALC 18
Hove Sip n Save
[2021] SALC 7
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr G Coppola
Hotels Association, SA Branch
Respondent: Mr J Ryan
is an application by the Australian Hotels Association of SA (AHA) seeking a
review of a decision of a delegate of the Liquor
and Gambling Commissioner (the
delegate) to grant an on premises licence to Mark Richard Jones to permit him
operate a boutique-style
cocktail bar in Whyalla, to be known as the Draft &
application for an on premises licence is a designated
application
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
(the Act). Such an application can
only be granted if the relevant licensing authority determines that it is in the
community interest
to do so. This involves an evaluative judgment that weighs
the positives and negatives of the application.
respect of such an application an applicant must comply with the Community
Impact Assessment Guidelines (the Guidelines) in establishing
that the grant of
the application is in the community interest. They also provide that in
evaluating the application the licensing
authority must:
regard to that nature of the business conducted or to be conducted under the
identify the
relevant locality, as this informs what is the relevant community;
consider the
harm that the grant of the application might cause to the community as a whole
or a group within the community due to
excessive or inappropriate consumption of
have regard to
the cultural, recreational, employment or tourist impacts that the grant of the
application might have;
reflect upon the
social impact that the grant of the application might have in the locality and
the impact that it might have on the
amenity of the locality; and
have regard to
the objects of the Act.
Guidelines provide that the following must be considered in identifying the
relevant locality:
the area around
the applicant’s premises/proposed premises which is most likely to be
affected by the grant of the application,
the area from
where the applicant draws or expects to draw their customers, having regard to
the nature of the premises/proposed premises.
Guidelines then go on to provide that when considering the area from where the
premises/proposed premises draws or expects to
draw their customers, applicants
should consider:
customer groups or identifiable customer base and the areas they reside in;
anything that
may attract customers to the premises/proposed premises and the areas from which
these customers may be based, for example
– where a premises/proposed
premises is located/to be located on a main road, applicants may need to
consider any areas which
are serviced by that main road and include those areas
in their locality, or – where a premises/proposed premises is located/to
be located in or near to a shopping complex, applicants may need to consider the
customer base of the shopping complex and where
those customers reside and
include those areas in the locality of their premises/proposed
Guidelines then state that as a guide, the locality of a premises in the
Adelaide Metropolitan Area would generally be considered
to be the area within a
two kilometre radius of the site of the relevant premises. In respect of
premises outside of the Metropolitan
Area, that in country cities, towns or
communities, unless remotely located, the locality of the premises would
generally be considered
to be the area within a five kilometre radius of
the site of the relevant premises.
licensing authority must also be satisfied that the pre‑requisites of
of the Act have been met.
concerns matters such as the
suitability of the premises; the potential for them to cause undue offence,
annoyance and the like to
nearby workers, residents and worshippers in their
vicinity; prejudice to the safety or welfare of children attending nearby
kindergartens
and schools; and whether the appropriate approvals, consents and
the like, pertaining to the proposed premises have been granted.
understand these matters to be at issue in this case.
the applicant needs to satisfy the licensing authority that the grant of the
application is in the public interest. This
recognises that notwithstanding that
the grant of the application may be in the community interest, there is some
feature of the
application that is of concern to the wider public interest and
the application must be refused on that basis.
applicant’s business model contemplated creating an intimate and
sophisticated experience that comprised of a rotating menu
of cocktails, a
handpicked list of quality wines, and a small selection of craft beers, all for
on premises consumption, with a mix
of standing and seating options for patrons.
applicant identified the relevant locality as comprising of the area with a
0.5 kilometre of the proposed premises. He did so
on the basis that this
area aligned with where locals gather. He then identified a small number of
hotels, clubs and a café
within his proposed locality.
applicant stated that his business will offer a “unique social venue that
complements the existing hospitality scene rather
than competing with larger
pubs and hotels” and that it would provide “an inviting alternative
for couples, small groups,
and professionals looking for a refined yet relaxed
atmosphere”.
applicant identified the customer base as including local residents looking for
a stylish venue in which to have after work drinks,
date nights or small
gatherings, as well as visitors and tourists, business travellers and
professionals, and locals looking for
a point of difference and the opportunity
to patronise a small bar of the type that they might have experienced in the
Adelaide CBD.
applicant stated that he intended to provide small, packaged bar snacks, such as
nuts and savoury snacks, cheese, salami sticks,
olives, chocolate, dried fruit
and caramelised popcorn.
applicant stated that he intended to provide background recorded music and the
occasional live acoustic performance, with no DJs
or loud live bands.
applicant set out his proposed security measures which included things like CCTV
surveillance, security alarms, well placed interior
and exterior lighting, staff
trained in the responsible service of alcohol, anti‑theft measures, and
emergency exits and procedures.
applicant proposed strict age verification policies, the monitoring of alcohol
consumption, making low alcohol and non-alcoholic
beverages available, free
drinking water, and clear policies about refusing service to those affected by
alcohol or behaving offensively.
applicant submitted that because of the venue’s emphasis on craft
cocktails, fine wine, and a relaxed atmosphere, it would
promote the responsible
consumption of alcohol.
applicant noted that there is a 24‑hour taxi service available within
Whyalla, and police and hospital services are nearby.
applicant submitted that the proposal would enrich Whyalla’s cultural
landscape by offering a unique social space, and a
cultural experience
showcasing South Australian, wines, beers and spirits; and that it would enhance
the local recreational scene
by providing locals and visitors with a relaxed,
upscale venue.
applicant used a Facebook page to garner support for the application, that
included posts such as: “Love this, I’m
sure it’ll be a great
success”; “When in Whyalla I will go”; and “Sounds
amazing! Can’t wait
til it’s up and running”.
applicant sent circular letters to neighbouring businesses and received
notations of support from several, such as the Plaza Business
Association, Bloom
Pilates, SRG Global, Colding Contracting, Whyalla Gifts Accessories, Snap
Fitness Whyalla, and Peter Callis Real
applicant also included, what appear to be the results of some type of internet
voting platform, that recorded 185 positive responses
to the question: Do you
support the opening of “Draft and Drift” a boutique cocktail and
wine bar wishing to open in
Whyalla City.
application was opposed by the AHA. It submitted that the relevant locality was
a little further than the five kilometre radius
suggested in the
Guidelines. It submitted that the social problems relating to alcohol
consumption in the Whyalla area were well
known. In support of this, it included
SEIFA data that showed that Whyalla has a relatively high unemployment rate, a
large number of Indigenous persons, and that it rates very low in
terms of social and economic disadvantage. It contended that within
the relevant
locality there were already around 60 licensed premises, such that a further
licensed venue was not in the community
interest. It added that the application
provided “nothing of real worth” in relation to harm minimisation,
real data regarding staff numbers etc., the asserted employment
opportunities and additional tourist appeal would be limited, and
community consultation was not conducted with appropriate rigour.
applicant responded to these submissions by contending that the suggested 0.5
kilometre radius was appropriate, because the premises
was focussed on customers
from the immediate commercial precinct. It added that in any event, there was no
reason to extend the locality
beyond the five kilometre benchmark.
applicant countered the submission that there were already enough licensed
venues in Whyalla by submitting that the proposed premises
would “provide
a differentiated experience”, by introducing a boutique bar.
applicant refuted the assertion that he had provided “nothing of real
worth’ in relation to harm minimisation. He
submitted that he is committed
to best‑practice harm minimisation strategies by having a smaller
controlled environment with
trained staff, no gaming machines or high volume
alcohol promotions, and focussing on high‑quality drinks attracting a
responsible clientele.
The delegate’s decision
delegate commenced her reasons by summarising the AHA’s submissions.
delegate then noted that the applicant had identified a 0.5 kilometre
radius as the appropriate locality. She stated that she
agreed with the AHA that
because this was a regional area, it ought to be extended. She then said that
she did not agree with the
submission that the locality is necessarily well
served for liquor outlets before stating that:
Whilst there is a responsibility on the Licensing Authority to prevent
saturation of liquor outlets, this needs to be balanced with
the requirement to
support unique opportunities such as these that provide different offerings to
the community and support associated
industries such as tourism and hospitality.
delegate then noted that the AHA rightfully pointed out that Whyalla is
currently experiencing issues relating to anti‑social
behaviour because of
alcohol consumption. But she appears to have dismissed any concern about this
because the application was for
an on premises licence that does not enable
liquor to be sold for off premises consumption.
delegate then added:
Just because there are anti-social issues in this area does not automatically
mean that all applications for a liquor licence ought
to be refused and that the
industry should grind to a halt in terms of development.
delegate then stated that:
The applicants provided well thought out responses to the questions surrounding
harm minimisation and showed a clear understanding
of the responsibility they
will take on operating a licensed venue in this locality. The applicant sets out
his extensive experience
in compliance and safety roles and the liquor industry
and the extensive experience of the venue manager. The applicant has set out
clear methods in which they will address common issues such as theft,
intoxication and supply to minors. The applicant also points
out that both the
Police station and local Hospital are both within 1km of the proposed premises.
delegate concluded her reasons by identifying what she regarded as the positive
aspects of the application:
is a unique offering with no other boutique cocktail bars in the 6km locality,
therefore they would be providing a truly unique
offering to the community.
will not be selling liquor for consumption off, and their proposed offerings for
consumption on the licensed premises will be
focused on premium products, rather
than a full bar, reducing the potential impact the premises may have on
vulnerable people.
proposed venue would have positive economic impacts by providing additional
employment opportunities and potentially drawing customers,
including visitors
and tourists into the main commercial area of Whyalla which hosts a number of
other small local businesses.
applicant has demonstrated a sound understanding of the legislative requirements
of operating a licensed premises as well as an
appreciation of the additional
responsibility of operating a licensed venue in an area currently experiencing
alcohol related anti‑social
then stated that the granting of this application would be in the community
interest and that the granting of the application
was not contrary to the public
The complaints made by the AHA on review
review the AHA submitted that the delegate’s reasons were legally
inadequate. It submitted that in a case such as this it
might have been expected
that the reasons would been more structured in explaining to the AHA why the
case succeeded and why its
submissions were rejected.
submitted that contrary to this, the delegate commenced by setting out its
opposing submissions, thereby creating the impression
that she approached the
case from the premise that if she rejected its submissions, the application
succeeded. It submitted that
this effectively reversed the burden of proof.
it said that the delegate appears to have reasoned that because in the locality
there was no dedicated cocktail bar, and one
was thought to be desirable, the
application should be granted. It submitted that this appears to have been a
‘needs test’.
then submitted that the delegate erred by effectively finding that there were no
opportunities for patrons to buy cocktails within
the locality, when there was
no such evidence and the inference was that any one of the many hotels in the
locality could meet a
demand for cocktails.
submitted that there was no justification for the delegate’s findings that
proposed venue would have positive economic impacts
by providing additional
employment opportunities and potentially drawing customers, including visitors
and tourists into the main
commercial area of Whyalla which hosts a number of
other small local businesses.
challenged the delegate’s finding that the applicant had a sound
understanding of the legislative requirements of operating
a licensed premises.
It submitted that his insistence that the relevant locality was within a 0.5
kilometre of the proposed premises
demonstrated that he had no proper
understanding of the concept of locality.
submitted that the delegate provided no explanation as to why she ignored SEIFA
data that showed that the locality has a high unemployment
rate, is socially
disadvantaged and has a high Indigenous population. It submitted that this was
important information, and that
it is data that the Guidelines require to be
considered.
added that on the face of the delegate’s order there would be nothing to
prevent the applicant, or a subsequent licensee,
trading as a sports bar, a gin
bar or a beer bar serving only tap beer, or any number of alternate
non‑cocktail bar trading
Consideration
do not consider there is anything in the complaint by the AHA that the delegate
commenced her reasons by setting out its opposing
submissions.
writing is very much a matter of individual style. It is not uncommon for
judgment writers to adopt a style that sets out
the losing party’s case
before setting out why that case is rejected. This is so because often the flaws
in the losing party’s
case reflect the strengths of the winning
party’s case, such that the exposition of those flaws effectively sets out
the winning
party’s case. Some judgment writers believe that this style
avoids unnecessary duplication.
to for the AHA’s submission that the delegate’s reasons should have
been more structured, I reiterate my observation
that judgment writing is very
much a matter of individual style. I also take on board the note of warning
issued by Lovell J in
Resi Corporation v
where he said:
It is not the function of an appellate court to set standards as to the optimal,
or even desirable, level of detail required to be
revealed in reasons for
judgment. The function of the appellate court is to determine whether the
reasons provided have reached a
minimum acceptable level to constitute a proper
exercise of the judicial power.
said, cases involving designated applications are not straightforward. They call
for a close consideration of the matters contained
in the Guidelines and there
is a risk that important matters may be overlooked. As such, a decision
concerning a designated application
that commences with a summary of the
pre-requisites to the application, followed by a summary of the competing
contentions, findings
as to locality and any contentious matters, and an
explanation as to why in light of those contentions and findings, the
application
is or is not in the community or public interest, has much to
commend it.
now to the other complaints made by the AHA, I do not consider that there is any
merit in its complaint about the delegate’s
finding that the applicant had
a sound understanding of the legislative requirements of operating a licensed
premises. It must be
accepted that he was wrong to assert that the relevant
locality was within a 0.5 kilometre of the proposed premises. But given the
repeated statements by this Court and the Supreme Court that in connection with
the Act that locality “is an elusive concept
that defies precise
definition”
that error can
scarcely be regarded as irrefutable evidence of a lack of understanding of the
legislative requirements of operating
a licensed premises.
respect, the delegate’s statement that she did not agree with the
submission that the locality is necessarily well served
for liquor outlets
because in the locality there was no dedicated cocktail bar, might have been
better expressed. But it is clear
enough what she was saying. The delegate was
plainly aware that Whyalla has many licensed facilities. After all, she listed
the various
categories of licenses with the locality. It is reasonable to
construe her reasons as indicating that she regarded the range of liquor
available at the proposed premises was likely to be different to what was on
offer at those other licensed facilities, and
that this was a relevant
consideration.
connection with this, the AHA might be right to contend that cocktails might be
available at one of the many hotels in the locality.
And, again with respect, it
might have been better for the delegate to have dealt with this. But for her,
what was significant, was
not just the range of liquor, but also was the fact
that there were no other dedicated boutique cocktail bars in the locality, and
that the proposed premises would provide a unique offering to the community. She
was entitled to take that view.
also reject the submission that the delegate applied the “needs
test”. To be clear, that test no longer applies. But
that does not mean
that the expectations and aspirations of the community in respect of the sale
and supply of liquor are irrelevant.
Quite to the contrary, the objects of the
Act indicate that they are relevant
considerations.
for the complaint about the findings of additional employment opportunities and
potentially drawing customers, including visitors
and tourists into the main
commercial area of Whyalla, I agree with the submission advanced by the AHA that
people are unlikely to
make a special trip to Whyalla to visit a cocktail bar.
But that does not mean that the venue will have no potential tourist benefit.
is reasonable to infer that people visiting, or passing through Whyalla, might
be attracted to a cocktail bar. That is sufficient
to draw the inference that it
may provide some tourist benefit. The proposed premises will plainly involve
some construction and
upon completion, staff will need to be engaged. This is
sufficient to draw the inference that the grant of the application will provide
additional employment opportunities.
is, however, substance in the AHA’s complaint about other aspects of the
delegate’s reasons.
Mansfield Park Hotel (SA) Pty
this Court stated in
respect of the Commissioner’s reasons:
For Commissioner’s reasons to be legally adequate, they must disclose
material findings of fact and conclusions of fact. If
he rejects or finds
immaterial evidence that has been adduced, he must explain why he formed that
view. In respect of submissions
and arguments put, the reasons must reveal that
they have “been understood and, either accepted, or, if rejected, that the
rejection was based on a clear and rational process of
reasoning.”
AHA is right to complain that the delegate did not deal with its submissions
regarding the SEIFA data. The delegate’s failure
to refer to this data
creates the impression that she failed to take it into account. If she did take
it into account, she provided
no adequate explanation as to why she thought it
was of no importance.
delegate’s failure to mention this renders her reasons legally inadequate.
the results of that data were not decisive of the fate of the application, they
were important considerations. Had they been
taken into account, it should have
alerted the delegate to the need to put in place some protective measures should
the application
be granted. I shall return to this shortly.
conclusion that the delegate’s reasons were legally inadequate requires me
to deal with the application on the merits.
Considering
the business plan that has been elaborated upon in the papers before the
delegate, there is every reason to think that
the proposed premises will draw
custom from all over Whyalla and perhaps beyond. Therefore, the rule of thumb
contained in the Guidelines
of a locality of a five kilometre radius seems
more precise than that.
for the complaint about a lack of rigour in respect of community consultation, I
have previously expressed my concern about the
value of and shortcomings of
But given that the
Guidelines expressly state that evidence of consultation may include petitions,
survey results and/or letters
of support, I must put those concerns to one side.
In this case, I find that the Facebook posts, the responses to circular letters
to neighbouring businesses, and the results of the internet voting platform,
provide adequate evidence of community consultation.
it is true that all of the licensed premises in the locality have to be
considered, subject to what I will later say about
subjecting the licence to
conditions, the unique nature of the business is a relevant factor. This Court
is permitted to rely upon
its accumulated experience to observe that in terms of
harm from alcohol consumption, there is a significant difference between a
country hotel, with multiple bars and a large drive through bottle department,
and a boutique offering, selling up‑market
liquor for on premises
consumption only.
SEIFA data is important. It paints a bleak picture. It confirms what is
self-evident from a visit to Whyalla, that is, that it
is a socially and
economically challenged community that can be expected to have more than its
fair share of persons vulnerable to
harm from alcohol consumption.
this Court is also permitted to know that the cost of liquor in a cocktail bar
is likely to act as a disincentive for those who
are socially and financially
challenged from attending such premises, and if they do attend, that cost is
likely to limit the amount
of liquor that they might purchase there.
matters enable the finding that those that live in the Whyalla area who are
experiencing the social and economic disadvantage
reflected in the SEIFA data,
are unlikely to be affected by the grant of this application, at least whilst
its proposed business
model remains.
proposed premises promise to be an attractive licensed facility appealing to a
niche market. For the reasons explained above,
it is reasonable to draw the
inference that the application, if granted, would provide some additional
employment and it might have
some positive impact upon tourism in the area.
on the proposed business model the grant of the application is unlikely to have
a negative impact upon the community. That being
so, on balance, the positive
aspects of the application outweigh the negative aspects.
to what I am about to say, I find that the grant of the application is in the
community interest.
now turn to consider the public interest discretion.
powerful public interest consideration is the potential for a ruling to create
an undesirable precedent.
correctly submits that in its present form, the licence does not prevent the
applicant from trading under a revised business
model that may not be as
protective from the potential harm from excessive alcohol consumption that I
find is a characteristic of
the current proposed business model. To preserve the
integrity of the licensing authority, and to discourage applicants from applying
for licences based on an assumed business model that later changes, it was
appropriate to impose conditions on the grant of this
application to prevent
that change from occurring. In my respectful opinion, the delegate erred in not
foreshadowed that this might be a possible outcome, and encouraged the applicant
and the AHA to discuss the matter.
following are agreed orders and conditions that were endorsed by this
The decision of the Commissioner dated 9 April 2025 is varied by imposing the
following conditions on the licence:
Licensee cannot sell or supply beer from a keg.
Licensee (or any other person for or on behalf of the licensee) will not promote
the premises in any way whatsoever (either at
the premises – including by
way of any art display – or in any external or online advertising or
promotion) as a Hotel,
Tavern or Pub.
service model will focus on the service of:
a) Cocktails: a rotating menu of mixed cocktails using premium spirits and fresh
ingredients.
b) Wine Selection: a handpicked wine list of quality wines, including South
Australian varietals, to appeal to wine enthusiasts.
c) Craft Beers: a selection of craft beers, not main stream beers and not to be
available from a keg.
Licensee shall provide a range of pre-packaged snacks to complement the drink
offering e.g. nuts, cheese, crisps and cured meats.
Licensee shall install CCTV cameras at the premises.
live entertainment is limited to acoustic solo and duo performances.
of the Act.
[2016] SASCFC 15.
Ibid at [71].
Woolies Liquor Stores Pty
[2018] SALC 40
Section 3(2)
of the Act.
[2023] SALC 83.
Ibid at [51].
Fairview Park Cellars
2023] SALC 18
Hove Sip n Save
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (233 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter