URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRC/2017/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mugan v John Holland Pty Ltd (t/as John Holland Group) [2017] SAIRC 8 (28 February 2017)
Mugan v John Holland Pty Ltd (t/as John Holland Group)
[2017] SAIRC
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT (SA)
JOHN HOLLAND PTY LTD (t/as JOHN HOLLAND
Monetary Claim
HEARING DATES:
On the papers
JUDGMENT OF:
Industrial Magistrate M Ardlie
DELIVERED ON:
28 February
CATCHWORDS:
Applicant claims payment in lieu of
notice - Respondent alleges no contract of employment entered into - If there
was a contract it
was repudiated by the applicant and terminated at the election
of the respondent, prior to the commencement of any employment relationship
: Applicant by email expressed an unwillingness to abide by the
terms of the contract and sought a variation of the same - Performance
contract did not occur - Respondent accepted the repudiation and terminated the
contract - Application dismissed.
Associated Newspapers Ltd v
[1951] HCA 24
(1951) 83 CLR 322
Mersey Steel and Iron Co Ltd v Naylor, Benzon
(1884) 9 LR 9 App Cas 434
Freeth v Burr
(1874) LR 9 CP
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr G Mugan
Respondent: Ms
Z Adams-Lau
Solicitors:
Applicant: N/A
Respondent: N/A
Introduction
parties elected to make written submissions in relation to this matter.
applicant in his written submissions maintains that a contract of employment was
entered into. He asserts that the contract was
established in part 8 June 2016
and in full on 8 July 2016.
applicant in his written submissions makes reference to certain key
7 May 2016 application made to the respondent
1 June 2016 interview details received
6 June 2016 interview held
8 June 2016 clarification made by respondent regarding certain particulars to
be entered into contract of employment
16 June 2016 to 26 July 2016 applicant overseas
24 June 2016 offer of employment issued by respondent
29 June 2016 applicant signs contract of employment
30 June 2016 applicant raised issues to be clarified on certain terms and
conditions of the contract
8 July 2016 indications from respondent that it did not change its terms and
conditions however will discuss
29 July 2016 email sent to respondent highlighting issues surrounding
30 July 2016 logistics issues discussed with respondent
31 July 2016 email sent by applicant to respondent requesting consideration
be made regarding logistics issues – seemingly not
being fully appreciated
and not reflected in the contract of employment
1 August 2016 applicant unable to take flight to Hobart due to feeling unwell
– discussions held with respondent to establish
close out on points of
concern related to logistics
2 August 2016 email by applicant to respondent with concerns related to
3 August 2016 follow-up email sent and phone call follow-up made on the
evening of the same date to respondent due to no response
to email follow-up
4 August 2016 email received from respondent terminating employment
5 August 2016 email from applicant to respondent seeking assistance in the
applicant was due to commence his employment on 1 August 2016. In his written
submissions he indicates the following:
“My first day of employment was hindered by events
leading up to this date relating the pressures placed upon my partner and
resulting in my being ill on what was to be my first day on the job/project.
Although I did not make the morning flight at 6 AM
on the first day of work
was instructed to hold off from flying out until the outstanding matter of
logistics was sorted out between JHG and myself which
was portrayed as a mere
(emphasis added)
respondent, in its written submissions, denies the applicant’s assertion
that on the morning of 1 August 2016 he “was
instructed to hold off from
flying out until the outstanding matter of logistics was sorted out between JHG
and myself which was
portrayed as a mere formality”. In relation to this
statement, which the applicant has attributed to the respondent’s
personnel, the respondent says:
The applicant
has not identified who on behalf of the respondent allegedly made the statement
The respondent
denies that any of the employees who had dealings with the applicant made the
statement to the applicant.
On 1 August 2016
by email at 10.01am Mr Wade Harrison (Project Director for the redevelopment of
the Royal Hobart Hospital) advised
the respondent’s resourcing team that
“I do not intend to have any further discussions with Gerard”.
In the morning
of 1 August 2016 Mr Phillip Tillyer (Contracts Manager Building) telephoned and
left messages on both the applicant’s
mobile and home phone asking the
applicant to call him.
On 1 August 2016
at approximately 4.00pm the applicant telephoned Mr Tillyer. Mr Tillyer
says he did not make the statement the applicant
attributes to someone from the
respondent during his conversation with the applicant.
On 9 August 2016
Mr Tillyer produced a file note at the request of the respondent’s HR
“Gerard called me back about 4pm that same day,
and I spoke with him for 30-40 minutes. I was trying to get clear reasons for
him not showing up on his first day (being 1/8). I ended up asking him to send
me an email with simple bullet points of the reasons
why he didn’t start
(i.e. our discussions didn’t really clarify his reasons, there were points
raised that I didn’t
understand, so for simplicity I said put it in
conflict between the applicant and the respondent, as regards the statement the
applicant attributes to someone from the respondent
on 1 August 2016, needs
to be considered in the context of the significant email the applicant forwarded
to the respondent on 31
July 2016. That email is set out below in
“Hello Wade,
I will contact you via phone during tomorrow morning to discuss the below.
After due consideration with all family members concerned and review of the
employment contract terms and conditions the terms and
conditions of employment
extended respectfully cannot be accepted.
I note the timing of such a decision however under the circumstances it has been
a hard decision to make.
In short the terms and conditions of employment raised previously provided no
flexibility, the extent of logistics setup and travel
costs left to bare is too
high for us to accomodate (sic) and the return to Adelaide at least twice
monthly has become a significant
issue relating to facilitation of same
departing Friday’s and returning Sunday/Monday’s. This has become
more evident
in trying to book flights from Adelaide at particular times of the
week and times during the day.
While flights and accomodation (sic) booked between yesterday and today will
need to be cancelled, the extent of planning needed
for this opportunity would
certainly need more time to accomodate (sic) all parties. Our time away, while
proactive in seeking accomodation
(sic) opportunities in Hobart, did not provide
a successful outcome.
So that you are aware, I had previously placed a preference on working in
Adelaide with John Holland, however did not discount Hobart
and was considered a
real prospect under the right circumstances. Since that time I have seen one to
two positions of interest awarded
in Adelaide with John Holland.
A lot of time and effort has gone into getting this far by all parties concerned
and if a resolution could be found that was suitable
maybe then a preferred
option fully agreeable to all could be found.
I need to consider my two sons (20 and 15 years) here in Adelaide. Therefore
regular visits to Adelaide is important however comes
at a great cost which has
not been factored in. My eldest son has a particular medical condition which
causes some concern from
time to time.
This said i (sic) will contact you tomorrow to discuss and apologies for the
lateness in conveying the above information.
Kind regards
Gerard Mugan”.
followed a further email on 2 August 2016 after the conversation with Mr
Tillyer.That email is set out below:
“Hello Phil,
Having received a renewed contract of employment and subsequent organisation of
flights and temporary accomodation (sic) the realisation
of the extent of
personal cost and time associated with relocating to Hobart has been realised.
Previously I had discussions with
John Holland surrounding flexibility with
relocation arrangements however there seems to be a gap in communication around
and accomodation (sic) allowances included as provision in my letter of
offer. Consideration for the fact that my home base is in
Adelaide and will
remain the case for the foreseeable future. Commitments in Adelaide include my
two children aged 20 and 15 and
the family home. Having booked flights to
Hobart, temporary accomodation (sic) and car hire for a small number of days and
forecasting
this expense over the coming months we cannot possibly finance the
start to a position in Hobart as I’m sure can be appreciated
at your end.
I propose that the following be considered and included by John Holland to
offset any out of pocket expenses both up
front and for the duration or period
of time required or as noted below in Hobart;
Relocation items;
initial and upon
conclusion of project – flights for two people to relocate to and from
accomodation
(sic) including temporary at first leading to a more permanent – temporary
arrangement for unto 3 months. It may
also be required that for packing and
readiness of household goods that temporary accomodation (sic) for unto
1 week may be needed
in Adelaide for departure and return to Adelaide
flights per month for two people between Hobart and Adelaide (needs to be
flexible with family members travelling e.g.:
school holidays my sons travelling
to Hobart in place of my partner and myself)
relocation of
personal effects – furniture/household goods and personal effects
including professional belongings (work related
books and reference documents)
to and from Hobart
storage expenses
in Hobart for up to a 3 month period
coverage for packing, removal, transportation and storage of
household/personal/professional effects to and from Hobart
internal clean of home in Adelaide following household goods being removed
connection fees for water, gas, electricity and landline telephone once in
permanent-temporary accommodation in the new location
services via a relocation service provider, which includes the following;
airport transfers, partner career support service,
city orientation, rental/new
engagement of a
tax agent to cover independent financial advice regarding personal circumstances
relating to old and new location
Additionally consideration
time; the extent
of travel involved and the duration for same between Adelaide and Hobart would
necesitate (sic) flight departure
from Hobart to Adelaide on the Friday Morning
and returning on the Monday morning roughly 12 noon to 12 noon on flights that
an overall travel and connection not exceeding 3.5 hours (currently virgin
Australia meets this criteria)
transfer to and
from each airport to final destination
Contract of Employment – terms and
conditions;
while it has
been explained, generally speaking, that the terms and conditions are set I
still have reservations surrounding clauses
1.1, 4, 13.2, 23.5 and 24 and 24.5
in the contract. However I am satisfied that certain flexibility will be shown
so as not to introduced
(sic) lack of work/life balance and hardship.
As to the above relocation items are recognised
reimbursable expenses for John Holland with the ATO I would seek for all above
to be managed through John Holland with no term or condition for
reimbursement by myself to John Holland for same included in my
Again, apologies for the timing of this information being discussed and as
mentioned the level of details and logistics to be organised
has not been fully
realised until the actual booking been made. As mentioned we have had to cancel
intended flights, hotel and car
hire and are now working with our insurer for
reimbursement over and above our excess value of $250.00. I mention this to
transparency of my/our position and commitment to relocating for John
Holland. Should any of the above be read as too direct please
accept that this
is not my intention nor is it my intention to introduce last minute terms and
conditions merely a result of the
challenge set to organise and fund relocation
I look forward to hearing from you and hopefully we can reach an agreement.
Kind regards,
Gerard Mugan”.
Tillyer makes no reference to the applicant being too ill to travel and the
applicant does not refer to this fact in his emails
of 31 July, 1 and
2 August 2016. An examination of the applicant’s emails set out above
reveal a detailed attempt by the applicant
to re-negotiate certain terms of his
applicant did not attend for work on 1 August 2016.The content of his email of
31 July 2016, the day before, clearly indicates
an unwillingness on the part of
the applicant to perform his contractual obligations (attend to commence work).
His conduct is clearly
a breach and amounts to repudiation. The respondent
accepted the repudiation and by email 4 August 2016 terminated the
High Court in
Associated Newspapers Ltd v
when discussing the
topic of rescission of contract referred to the test laid down by Lord Selbourne
Mersey Steel and Iron Co Ltd v Naylor, Benzon &
“I am content to take the rule as stated by Lord
Coleridge in
Freeth v Burr
which is in substance, as I understand it, that you must look at the actual
circumstances of the case in order to see whether the
one party to the contract
is relieved from its future performance by the conduct of the other; you must
examine what that conduct
is, so as to see whether it amounts to a renunciation,
to an absolute refusal to perform the contract, such as would amount to a
rescission if he had the power to rescind, and whether the other party may
accept it as a reason for not performing his part; and
I think that nothing more
is necessary in the present case than to look at the conduct of the parties, and
see whether anything of
that kind has taken place
The applicant failed to attend for the commencement of his employment.
Clearly he was trying to re-negotiate the contract. I do
not accept that he was
too ill to fly to Hobart in the absence of any email or telephone attendance by
him to advise of such illness.
Such a failure to commence work went to the root of the contract and gave the
respondent the right to treat the contract as at an
All of the evidence points to the refusal by the applicant to perform the
applicant relies upon
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth).The wording
s 117(3)(a)
assumes an employee has a period of service with the employer.
There was no service.
applicant’s claim is without foundation. He is not entitled to payment of
wages in lieu of notice. His claim is dismissed.
will hear the parties further as to the issue of costs. This matter is listed
for a telephone directions conference on Wednesday
15 March 2017 at
PUBLICATION OF THESE
It is the practice of this Court to publish its reasons
for decision in full on the Internet. If any party or person contends that
reasons for decision should not be published in full the party or person must
make an application within seven days of the
delivery of these reasons. The
application shall be by an Application for Directions with a supporting
affidavit and should be addressed
to the presiding member(s). If no such
application is lodged within the time specified these reasons will be published
in accordance
with the Court’s usual practice.
[1951] HCA 24
(1951) 83 CLR 322
at pp 338-340
per Dixon, Williams, Webb, Fullagar and Kitto JJ.
(1884) 9 LR 9 App Cas 434 at
(1874) LR 9 CP 208.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (110 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter