URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCT/2015/66.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Larner v EML (Futuris Automotive Interiors (Australia) Pty Ltd [2015] SAWCT 66 (22 December 2015)
Larner v EML (Futuris Automotive Interiors (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2015] SAWCT 66
WORKERS COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
LARNER, Dallas
EMPLOYERS MUTUAL LIMITED (Futuris
Automotive Interiors (Australia) Pty Ltd)
Application for disclosure and production of video surveillance
550 of 2015
HEARING DATES:
December 2015
JUDGMENT OF:
His Honour Deputy President P D
DELIVERED ON:
21 December 2015 with respect to submissions
on 4 December 2015 and decision delivered 7 December
CATCHWORDS:
Application for orders for disclosure
and production of video surveillance film before commencement of hearing -
Whether circumstances
arose allowing for an exercise of a discretion to order
disclosure and production under the Workers Compensation Tribunal Rules 2009
Whether the conduct of the compensating authority waived privilege - Application
allowed in respect of video film shown to a treating
general practitioner -
Application refused as to later video film - Rule 22(5)(g) of Workers
Compensation Tribunal Rules 2009
Cherini v South Australian
Water Corporation
[2004] SAWCT 113
Wadsworth v Woolworths (SA) Pty Ltd
[2006] SAWCT 23
Big W Monarto Warehouse/590 Regional
Distribution Centre
[2006] SAWCT 99
Bennett v Advertiser Newspapers
[2007] SAWCT 69
Waldron v Catholic Church Endowment Society Inc
[2008] SAWCT 6
Reade v Southern Cross Care (SA and NT) Inc
Goldberg v Ng
Hango Holdings Pty Ltd
[1995] HCA 39
Mann v Carnell
[1999] HCA 66
Cole v Dyer
[1999] SASC
Clipsal Australia Pty Ltd v Cuadra
[2008] SAWCT
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Dr
Respondent: Ms De Palma
Solicitors:
Applicant: Paul Alvaro
Respondent: Sparke Helmore Lawyers
Larner (“the worker”) sought production and disclosure before trial
of video surveillance film in the possession of
South Australia (“the Corporation”). The trial concerned a dispute
over the extent of the
worker’s alleged incapacity for work arising from a
compensable injury. Some of the film was shown to his treating general
practitioner before the disputed determination was made. The remainder was
apparently taken subsequently, and was not shown either
to the worker or to any
third party, apart from the production to the worker of some
“stills” from the subsequent film
in the course of an interview
relating to a fraud investigation by the Corporation into matters relating to
the worker’s claim.
worker contended that the circumstances in which the interview was held were
such that the Corporation should be taken to have
waived professional privilege
with respect to any of the video film in its possession or that of its agent,
Employers Mutual Limited
(“the compensating authority”). Further,
that in the circumstances, the Tribunal should order that there be production
and disclosure before trial having regard to its powers under r 22(5)(g)(ii) and
Workers Compensation Tribunal Rules 2009
factual matters set out below are taken from objective records in the Trial
Book, from an affidavit filed by Mr Clift, solicitor
for the worker, and from
undisputed factual assertions made by counsel during submissions.
worker suffered an injury on 31 January 2006. He suffered periods of total or
partial incapacity as certified by his general practitioner,
Dr Nitchingham, who attended upon him on numerous occasions between July
2006 and September 2014. It would appear that from about
December 2009 until
September 2014, the worker was continuously certified by Dr Nitchingham or other
doctors at the same practice
to be totally incapacitated for work. He received
ongoing weekly payments during that period and beyond on the basis that he had
no current work capacity.
Nitchingham’s medical notes indicate that on 17 September 2014, the
compensating authority presented some material to him,
which he described as
“evidence” of the worker working in a hotel apparently owned by a
family business. There appears
to be no dispute that this material comprised, or
at least included, video film. I was not informed whether what was shown to Dr
Nitchingham was all of, or only selected parts of, video film taken of the
worker up to that time.
the same day Dr Nitchingham completed a certificate stating that he had
reassessed the capacity of the worker, and that the worker
was capable of
performing light duties, and in particular, “bar work”, with the
number of hours of work to be negotiated
based on current
Nitchingham’s notes dated 11 November 2014 record that, on that date, he
advised the worker of the fact that video film had
been shown to him on 17
September 2014, and that in his view it indicated the worker had “done
some work”.
Notwithstanding
the change in Dr Nitchingham’s certification as from 17 September
2014, the worker continued to receive income
maintenance payments on the basis
of no current work capacity until they were discontinued upon 13 weeks notice
after service upon
him of a determination dated 15 December 2014 made under ss
35B(1), 35B(6) and 36(1)(i) of the Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
1986 (“the Act”). The changed certification of Dr Nitchingham was
not relied upon as a ground for the discontinuance.
worker disputed the determination. I was informed that at neither the
conciliation stage nor subsequently, after referral of the
dispute for judicial
determination, was the existence of video film disclosed by the compensating
authority as required by s 92 of
the Act or its general discovery obligations.
Trial orders were made on 13 August 2015 including that the matter be listed for
on Wednesday 9 December 2015. Witness statements of the worker and his
partner, were signed on 29 October 2015 and, as far as I am
aware, were served
on the respondents at or shortly after that date.
11 November 2015 the worker, his partner and his legal representatives, met with
representatives of the Corporation in relation
to investigations by the
Corporation into alleged fraud. The Corporation informed the worker that it was
in possession of video film
of him “at work” on a number of dates in
Some still images of the
video were shown to the worker and his representatives at the interview, and
some other documents were referred
to. The worker contended that at no stage was
privilege claimed with respect to the still shots of the video or the video
Subsequently
Mr Clift inspected Dr Nitchingham’s medical records and became aware
that video film had been shown to Dr Nitchingham
in 2014. The worker confirmed
to Mr Clift that he had discussed that film with Dr Nitchingham.
revelations led to discussions between the parties as to whether or not video
film taken of the worker would be disclosed prior
to trial. These discussions
occurred in the context that the worker did not wish to postpone giving evidence
at the hearing on 9
December 2015 pending the outcome of the fraud
investigations, and any charges that might follow.
the compliance conference on 2 December 2015, the respondent advised that it did
not have instructions to disclose and produce
any of the video film. Accordingly
the worker applied for an order for immediate disclosure and production. The
application was heard
on 4 December 2015. I reserved my decision until Monday 7
December 2015, when I ordered that the video film shown to Dr Nitchingham
on 17 September 2014 be disclosed and produced to the worker forthwith, and
dismissed the application for production of any later
video film. My reasons for
that decision follow.
The legal framework
the promulgation of the predecessor of r 22(5)(g) of the
the approach taken to an
application before trial with respect to disclosure and production of video film
was summarised in
Cherini v South Australian Water
Corporation
concerned an application for production of a report of a medical expert engaged
by a compensating authority following a
review by that expert of surveillance
reports and video film. The expert did not attend upon the worker for the
purpose of the report.
The worker contended that there was an obligation under
the Act or Rules to disclose the video film, or that alternatively, production
of it to the medical expert constituted an implied waiver of legal professional
privilege attached to the film.
application for production and disclosure was declined. The Full Tribunal
observed that procedural fairness required that a party
be given a reasonable
opportunity to present its case, including to test, correct or contradict the
evidence of the opponent through
cross-examination. In this context, the
Tribunal stated that it was well settled that surveillance film of a
worker’s activities
would be excused from production until after the
worker had been cross-examined about his or her physical capacities in all but
exceptional case. It held that the matter before it did not constitute an
exceptional case.
general approach must now be modified in light of r 22(5)(g) of the Rules which
“22(5) In dealing with an application for
directions the Tribunal may make any order reasonably required to facilitate the
and expeditious hearing of a matter and...may:
(g) order that a video film be disclosed and produced to the other parties to
the dispute. Such order shall not be made unless:
it is made by consent;
the video film has previously been shown to the worker’s treating medical
the disputed determination relies upon a medical opinion that was wholly or
predominantly based upon the video film;
the video film has previously been shown to the worker’s current
rehabilitation provider;
the Tribunal is satisfied that in the interests of justice there are special
reasons that require that the video film be disclosed.
Sub-Rule (g) hereof cannot be relied upon to override the discretion conferred
upon a Conciliator pursuant to s 92 of the Act.”
rule provides that a disclosure order “shall not be made unless” one
of the enumerated circumstances applies, and
even if one or more does, the
Tribunal retains an overriding discretion as to whether or not to make an order,
given the preamble
in r 22(5). The effect of the rule on the treatment of
surveillance film has been considered and discussed in a number of decisions
single members of the Tribunal:
Wadsworth v Woolworths (SA) Pty
Paech v Big W Monarto
Warehouse/590 Regional Distribution
Bennett v Advertiser
Newspapers Ltd;
Waldron v Catholic
Church Endowment Society Inc;
v Southern Cross Care (SA and NT)
general view expressed in these decisions was that whilst r 22(5)(g) empowers
the Tribunal to exercise a discretion as to whether
or not to order disclosure
and production of film if any of the circumstances set out in (i) to (v) are
considered to apply, it does
so in the context that a party in possession of
video surveillance film is not otherwise to be required to produce it before
cross-examination.
Four of the circumstances describe specific factual
scenarios, and the fifth is a more general proviso that the Tribunal be
“satisfied”
that in “the interests of justice” there are
“special reasons” that “require” that the video
disclosed. As observed in Bennett, there may be “special reasons”
when there is something “extraordinary,
unusual or atypical” in the
circumstances so as to clearly distinguish a particular matter from the general
run of cases.
Consideration
worker contended that the video film taken by 17 September 2014 should be
produced having regard to the fact that it was shown
to the worker’s
treating general practitioner, and to the discussions which followed as to the
content of that disclosure as
between the worker and Dr Nitchingham.
to disclosure of the subsequent video film, the worker submitted that the
presentation to him of selected “stills”
from the film during the
interview on 11 November 2015, in the context of advice that there was video
film taken over a range of
unspecified dates in 2015, should be taken to be a
waiver of any such privilege, given the absence of any assertion at the time of
ongoing privilege. The worker submitted that there was unfairness in the
selective presentation of still photos taken from the video
film, and general
unfairness due to the failure of the compensating authority to properly disclose
the existence of the film when
required during the earlier conciliation and
judicial determination proceedings.
video film taken before 17 September 2014 was shown to Dr Nitchingham in
circumstances that fall within r 22(5)(g)(ii). Having
regard to the fact that Dr
Nitchingham had been attending on the worker regularly since July 2006, as
indicated by the many medical
certificates issued from that time up to September
2014, it was a significant disclosure which had consequences for the view taken
by Dr Nitchingham as to the extent of the worker’s incapacity. In my
view that is the position whether or not Dr Nitchingham
was shown all or only
part of the video film then in the possession of the compensating authority.
Whatever the case, I find it
would be unfair to the worker to not be able to
view all of that video film to allow him to further explore with Dr Nitchingham
reasons for his change of view as to the extent of the worker’s
incapacity for work.
the same time any unfairness to the compensating authority in being required to
produce the film would be minimal in that it can
be inferred from the
discussions about the film between the worker and Dr Nitchingham that any
forensic advantage previously held
by the compensating authority in withholding
that film has been substantially diminished. Even if it be the case, as
contended by
the compensating authority, that Dr Nitchingham’s involvement
in the subsequent treatment of the worker was peripheral, I do
not consider that
fact weighs against the making of a disclosure order.
subsequent film may only be required to be disclosed if it is considered there
are special reasons to so order under r 22(5)(g)(v).
In considering whether
there are special reasons, I have had regard to the contention of the worker
that there has been an implied
waiver of privilege over that film in the
circumstances of the interview of the worker on 11 November 2015.
principles in regard to implied waiver of legal professional privilege are set
out in the High Court authorities of
Goldberg v Ng Hango Holdings Pty
and were adopted in
Whether there is
inconsistency or unfairness in maintaining a claim of privilege are relevant
considerations in this context. Such
considerations must be evaluated having
regard to the fact that, as observed above, the starting point for a
consideration of procedural
fairness relating to disclosure and production of
video surveillance film is that, subject to the Rules, the party in possession
of the film is not required to produce it before cross-examination.
is to be noted that whether or not the party holding the privilege intended to
waive it by its actions is not the criterion. The
test is whether any particular
act is inconsistent with the maintenance of privilege, or otherwise unfair,
whatever the intention
of the party holding the privilege. Such an inconsistency
can be clearly seen in circumstances where, for example, a person makes
based upon, or gives evidence as to, privileged communications with a formal
legal adviser in proposed or ongoing proceedings
either against that legal
adviser, or founded upon alleged advice given by that adviser, and yet by virtue
of a claim for legal professional
privilege, seeks to prevent another party with
a proper interest in the litigation from gaining access to the legal
version of events by invoking privilege.
these matters in mind, I do not consider that the circumstances of the very
limited disclosure during the course of the interview
on 11 November 2015
give rise to inconsistency with the maintenance of the claim for privilege with
respect to the undisclosed video
film. I consider this to be so despite that the
disclosure was made by the Corporation in the course of fraud investigations
conducted separately from the dispute proceedings in this Tribunal by the
compensating authority on behalf of the Corporation. Further,
I do not consider
it assists the worker to contend that waiver can be implied due to the absence
of any claim for privilege in relation
to the video film at the interview.
Conversely, the implication of the disclosure of still pictures in the context
of there being
much more extensive film which remained undisclosed is that the
claim for privilege was maintained rather than waived. Consistently
the disclosure of the still pictures would have done little, if anything, to
diminish the forensic advantage the compensating
authority seeks to maintain by
withholding production of the film, in contrast to the consequence of showing
the film seen by Dr
Nitchingham in September 2014.
do I consider that the limited disclosure of still pictures gives rise to an
implied or imputed waiver by reference to fairness
in all the circumstances of
the case. As observed by
Doyle CJ in Cole v
where he summarised
the majority view in Goldberg, the ultimate question is whether the manner in
which a party has used or disclosed
privileged material requires as a matter of
fairness that privilege in relation to that material be treated as having been
is no suggestion in the present circumstances that the holder of the privilege
was seeking to abuse that privilege by using
the limited disclosure to create an
inaccurate perception of the protected surveillance materials. I do not
consider that there
are grounds for concluding that privilege should be taken to
have been waived having regard to fairness between the parties.
the failure of a compensating authority, if there be one, to comply with its
disclosure obligations under s 92 and the Rules
may cause significant prejudice,
depending on the circumstances, and may have adverse consequences for the party
in breach of its
disclosure obligations terms of costs and other procedural
orders, any such failure does not in itself provide grounds for an order
production of otherwise privileged material:
Clipsal Australia Pty Ltd v
I add however, that
if, as was suggested in submissions, those representing the compensating
authority knew of the fraud investigations,
but did not know of the existence of
video film, it suggests that the integrity of the discovery process was not
maintained, and
that either or both of the compensating authority and the
Corporation may require some instruction as to their responsibilities in
regard in the terms suggested in
the circumstances, I did not consider that the conduct of the Corporation in
relation to the video film taken after 17 September
2014 gave rise to
“special reasons” for the purposes of r 22(5)(g)(v), or that even if
did, that they were such as to
“require” that “in the
interests of justice” an order for production be made.
light of the above considerations, I ordered that the video film taken before 17
September 2014 be disclosed and produced forthwith,
but declined to make any
order for production and disclosure of subsequent video
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are advised that if a party wishes to appeal against any part of this
decision which is appealable pursuant to s 86(1) of
the Act such appeal must be
filed with the Registrar in accordance with the form titled Notice of Appeal
within 14 days of the delivery
of this decision and must be served on all
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
practice of this Tribunal to publish its reasons for decision in full on the
Internet. If any party or person contends that
these reasons for decision should
not be published in full the party or person must make an application within
seven days of the
delivery of these reasons. The application shall be by an
Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should be addressed
to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within the time
specified these reasons will be published in accordance
Tribunal’s usual practice.
Trial Book/357
Affidavit of Mr Clift para
Previously rule 21(5)(j), now
rule 22(5)(g).
[2004] SAWCT 113.
at [18], [21]
[2006] SAWCT 23.
[2006] SAWCT 99.
[2007] SAWCT 69.
[2008] SAWCT 6.
[2015] SAWCT 15.
[1995] HCA 39.
[1999] HCA 66
[1999] SASC 272
[2008] SAWCT 25
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (111 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter