URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASC/2025/165.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:05:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
EX NF PTY LTD (IN LIQ) & ANOR v MUNNEKE & ORS [2025] SASC 165 (2 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
EX NF PTY LTD (IN LIQ) & ANOR v MUNNEKE &
[2025] SASC 165
Judgment of the Honourable
Justice Bampton
2 October 2025
CORPORATIONS - MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION - DUTIES AND LIABILITIES OF
OFFICERS OF CORPORATION - FIDUCIARY AND RELATED STATUTORY
DUTIES - REMEDIES AND
PENALTIES FOR BREACH OF DUTY - CONSTRUCTIVE TRUST
CORPORATIONS - WINDING UP - CONDUCT AND INCIDENTS OF WINDING UP -
PROCEEDINGS BY OR AGAINST THE COMPANY - GENERALLY
The company in liquidation and the liquidator, the applicants, seek to
recover asserted property of the company for the benefit of
the company’s
creditors. The applicants seek a declaration that cryptocurrency purchased
using company funds is the property
of the company. The applicants also seek
declarations that the first respondent purchased the properties on
O’Connell Street,
North Adelaide (“O’Connell Street
transaction”) and Ward Street, North Adelaide (“Ward Street
transaction”)
in breach of his statutory and fiduciary duties as director.
In the alternative, the applicants seek orders setting aside the transactions
unreasonable director-related transactions pursuant to
Corporations Act 2001
Whether the cryptocurrency bought with company funds was and remains the
property of the company – whether the duty to consider
the interests of
creditors was enlivened when the O’Connell Street and Ward Street
transactions were contemplated – whether
the payment out of company funds
and incurring of a liability to ANZ in the O’Connell Street transaction
was a breach of the
first respondent’s fiduciary and statutory duties as
director – whether the payment out of company funds in the Ward
transaction was a breach of the first respondent’s fiduciary and statutory
duties as director – whether breaches
were ratified by the sole
shareholder – whether the O’Connell Street and Ward Street
transactions were unreasonable director-related
transactions.
cryptocurrency was and remains the property of the company;
first respondent breached his statutory and fiduciary duties by causing or
allowing the payment out of the company’s funds
and incurring of a
liability to ANZ in the O’Connell Street transaction, and was an
unreasonable director related transaction;
first respondent breached his statutory and fiduciary duties by causing or
allowing the company’s funds to be used in the
Ward Street transaction,
and was an unreasonable director‑related
transaction.
Corporations Act 2001
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
(SA), referred
Adelaide Brighton Cement Limited, in the matter of Concrete Supply Pty Ltd
v Concrete Supply Pty Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement)
[2019] FCA 1846
Ancient Order of Foresters in Victoria Friendly Society Ltd
v Lifeplan Australia Friendly Society Ltd
[2018] HCA 43
(2018) 265 CLR 1
Services Pty Ltd (in liq) & Anor v Carabelas & Anor
[2005] HCA 23
(2005) 226 CLR
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Edwards
[2005] NSWSC 831
220 ALR 148
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Mitchell
& Anor (No 2)
[2020] FCA 1098
(2020) 382 ALR 425
Atco Controls Pty Ltd (in liq) v
Newtronics Pty Ltd (Receivers and Managers Appointed) (In Liq)
[2009] VSCA 238
(2009) 25 VR
Burnett & Anor v Randwick City Council
[2006] NSWCA 196
Direct Securities Pty Ltd v Cooper as Liquidator of Runtong Investment and
Development Pty Ltd (In Liq)
(2025) 309 FCR 66
Connective Services Pty
Ltd v Slea Pty Ltd
(2019) 267 CLR 461
Crowe-Maxwell v Frost
[2016] NSWCA 46
91 NSWLR 414
Daniels v Anderson
(1995) 37 NSWLR 438
De Bourbel Pty
Ltd (in liq) v Distilleria Pty Ltd & Anor
[2023] SASC 88
Divine Homes Pty Ltd; Allen v Harb
[2011] NSWSC 8
(2011) 85 ACSR 512
Gordon v Leon
Plant Hire Pty Ltd (in liq)
(2015) 16 ASTLR 185;
Great Southern Finance
Pty Ltd (in liq) v Rhodes
[2014] WASC 431
(2014) 103 ACSR 137
Hanwood Pastoral Co Pty
Limited v Kelly (No 2)
[2022] FCA 850
Herrman v Simon
(1990) 4 ACSR
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
Jarrett v Perpetual Trustee Co
[2007] NSWSC 1231
(2007) 64 ACSR 552
Kalls Enterprises Pty Ltd (in liq) v Baloglow
[2007] NSWCA 191
(2007) 63 ACSR 557
Kinsela v Russell Kinsela Pty Ltd (In Liq)
Linton v Telnet Pty Ltd
[1999] NSWCA 33
(1999) 30 ACSR 465
Macleod v The
[2003] HCA 24
(2003) 214 CLR 230
Miller v Miller & Miller
(1995) 16 ACSR
Nicholson v Permakraft (NZ) Ltd (in liq)
[1985] NZCA 15
[1985] 1 NZLR 242
Ltd (in liq) v Lucas
(1999) 75 SASR 246
Pilmer v The Duke Group Ltd
[2001] HCA 31
(2001) 207 CLR 165
[2010] FCAFC 34
(2010) 183 FCR 358
Re Duomatic Ltd
[1969] 2 Ch 365
Re Freehouse Pty Ltd; Jordan v Avram
(1997) 26 ACSR 662
Re Pine Forests of Australia (Canberra) Pty Ltd
(2010) 80 ACSR 377;
Newark Pty Ltd
[1993] 1 Qd R 409
Re New World Alliance Pty Ltd; Sycotex
Pty Ltd v Baseler
[1994] FCA 1117
(1994) 51 FCR 425
Shum Yip Properties Development Ltd
v Chatswood Investment and Development Co Pty Ltd
[2002] NSWSC 13
(2002) 166 FLR 451
Taylor v Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd
(1998) 13 ACLR 780
Termite Resources NL (in liq) v Meadows, in the matter of Termite Resources
NL (in liq) (No 2)
[2019] FCA 354
(2019) 370 ALR 191
The Bell Group Ltd (in liq) v
Westpac Banking Corp (No 9)
[2008] WASC 239
(2008) 39 WAR 1
Walker v Wimborne
[1976] HCA 7
Warner (in his capacity as joint and several liquidator of Bellpac
Pty Ltd (recs and mgrs apptd) (ACN 101 713 017) (in liq) &
Ors v Hung &
[2011] FCA 1123
(2011) 297 ALR 56
Weaver v Harburn
(2014) 103 ACSR 416;
Westpac Banking Corporation v Bell Group Ltd (in liq) (No 3)
[2012] WASCA 157
Vasudevan (as Joint and Several Liquidator of Wulguru Retail
Investments Pty Ltd) (in liq) v Becon Constructions (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2014] VSCA 14
(2014) 41 VR 445
Yang v Wong, Axis North Pty Ltd (Recs and Mgrs Appt) (In
Liq) (No 2)
[2025] FCA 693
, considered.
EX NF PTY LTD (IN LIQ) & ANOR v MUNNEKE &
[2025] SASC 165
Bitcoin (BTC)
The most well-known and oldest popular type of
cryptocurrency
makes up the lion’s share of cryptocurrency trading.
Bitcoin white paper
white paper
published in 2008 by
Satoshi Nakamoto
“Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System”.
A company that maintains a list of vendors that accept payment in
for goods and services.
A distributed ledger of
cryptocurrency
transactions and balances
that enables storage of data across many computers controlled by different
parties to create a censorship-resistant
or immutable record of transactions.
The data, which is all publicly accessible, is organised in “blocks”
added together
to form a “chain”.
According to an internet search, the study of computers as persuasive
technologies.
An Australian
cryptocurrency exchange
Cryptocurrency
A type of digital currency, transactions and balances of which are
maintained by a decentralised system using
cryptography
on either a
or another distributed ledger.
Cryptocurrency exchange
A platform on which users can purchase
cryptocurrency
or trade it
for other assets, including fiat currencies. They may be centralised or
decentralised.
Cryptography
The study and practice of verifying and securing data and transactions
using code.
Ether (ETH)
cryptocurrency
ethereum blockchain
bitcoin, ether cannot be transacted without a trusted central party recording
the transactions on a ledger.
A decentralised
primarily founded by
in an attempt to resolve some of the shortcomings associated with
bitcoin, including counterparty risk.
Ethereum white paper
white paper
published in 2014 by
Vitalik Buterin
“A Next-Generation Smart Contract and Decentralized Application
The fee charged for making a transaction or deploying a
ethereum blockchain
, which is recorded and visible on
the blockchain. Gas is a priced in one billionths of an ether and is paid to
those who contribute
computer power to the verification of transactions.
Initial coin offering (ICO)
A process whereby a company raises funds for new
by offering their own
cryptocurrency
as an investment.
An alphanumeric identifier (public key) or code (private key) that relates
. A public key functions as an address for a wallet, whereas
a private key functions as a password, enabling the holder to access
transactions using
cryptocurrency
recorded in a particular wallet.
Living Room of Satoshi
A cryptocurrency broker.
The primary public
ethereum blockchain
Smart contracts
mainnet are open source, meaning that any person can view the underlying code.
Deployment of a smart contract to mainnet is effectively
The process of compiling, verifying and confirming (through computer
software) transactions and adding them to the
in exchange for
cryptocurrency
, which process uses a lot of electricity.
Satoshi Nakamoto
The alias of the unknown person or persons who developed
published the
bitcoin white paper
. Nakamoto presently holds nearly
US$135 billion worth of bitcoin.
An online black market, with all transactions being conducted anonymously
Smart contract
Automated or self-executing code that can be interacted with once deployed
. For example, a smart contract might allow for a party
cryptocurrency
into it and hold it until a predetermined set of
variables are met by a counterparty, or distribute it over time. Apparently,
are neither smart nor contracts.
used to test new developments in a cost and
risk-free environment before deploying them to
Vitalik Buterin
The primary founder of
An address or entry on the ledger (public
) that has some
balance. Who controls a wallet will be unknown unless it can be discerned from
identifying features.
White paper
A report addressing a specific topic or issue and providing a perspective
or proposing a solution.
Introduction
some Bitcoin with this, won’t you love?” Linda Zaccara
(“Ms Zaccara”) alleges she repeatedly said
when she handed
money “over the years” to her then husband, Derek Munneke (“Mr
Munneke”). Mr Munneke is
a software developer, who was at all
material times the sole director of NextFaze Pty Ltd (“NextFaze”), a
web application development business. Ms Zaccara was at all
material times its sole shareholder.
2014, Mr Munneke used NextFaze’s funds to purchase a modest amount of
cryptocurrency, including bitcoin and ethereum, the
value of which has since
appreciated exponentially. In 2015, he applied further NextFaze funds, along
with funds drawn from a loan
to NextFaze, to purchase property that is now held
by 28 O’Connell Pty Ltd. Finally, in 2018, Mr Munneke sold some of
ethereum to finance the purchase of property owned by 106 Ward Street Pty
Ms Zaccara was at all
material times and remains the sole director and shareholder of both
28 O’Connell Pty Ltd and 106 Ward
Street Pty Ltd (“the
respondent companies”). The remaining cryptocurrency and its traceable
proceeds, the majority of
which has been liquidated, are now worth several
million dollars.
was wound up on 15 May 2019 by order of the Federal Court, and Anthony Phillips
was appointed liquidator. By these proceedings,
NextFaze, now Ex NF Pty
Ltd (In Liquidation) (“Ex NF”), and Mr Phillips (“the
applicants”), seek to recover
asserted property of Ex NF for the
benefit of its creditors in respect of the above
transactions.
Background and overview
of the claims
was incorporated on 15 February 2012. It continued the business of 2Moro Mobile
Pty Ltd (“2Moro”), a company
co-founded by Mr Munneke and which went
into liquidation on 20 January 2012.
February 2014, Mr Munneke opened an account with CoinJar (“the CoinJar
account”), a cryptocurrency exchange, linked
to NextFaze’s National
Australia Bank (“NAB”)
account”). In February and August 2014, by several transactions, Mr
Munneke transferred a total of $3,050
from the NAB account to the CoinJar
account, which was then used to purchase bitcoin. Part of the bitcoin was used
by Mr Munneke
to purchase another cryptocurrency, ethereum, including on behalf
of Meeco Group Pty Ltd (“Meeco”), a client of NextFaze.
has since applied some of the ethereum and/or bitcoin to acquire other
cryptocurrency.
6 November 2015, the 28 O’Connell Trust, a discretionary family trust, was
settled with Mr Munneke as trustee. On 19 November
2015, Mr Munneke, acting as
trustee of the 28 O’Connell Trust, entered a contract to purchase
commercial property at 28 O’Connell
Street, North Adelaide
(“O’Connell Street”) for $1.7 million. He paid a deposit of
$40,000 from the NAB account.
settlement on 10 December 2015, $1,025,911.59 was paid from NextFaze’s
Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd (“ANZ”)
Business Premium
Saver account (“the ANZ account”). NextFaze was also loaned
$740,000 by ANZ (“the ANZ loan”)
to fund the purchase, in respect of
which NextFaze made the required repayments. NextFaze made further payments
from the ANZ account
totalling $60,000 to former tenants of O’Connell
Street in consideration of the early termination of their leases (“the
O’Connell Street transaction”).
was alleged that the purchase of O’Connell Street and associated expenses
substantially used NextFaze’s available
cash resources, leaving it with a
cash balance of $218,185. It is further alleged that at the time of the
purchase, NextFaze had
not prepared up-to-date financial records or maintained
its filings with the Australian Taxation Office (“ATO”), meaning
had failed to keep records that “correctly record and explain its
transactions and financial position and performance”
enable true and fair financial statements to be prepared and audited” as
required by
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) (“the
Corporations Act
was asserted that had proper records been maintained, NextFaze would have
identified that as at December 2015, it owed the following:
superannuation
guarantee charge (“SGC”) of at least $119,240;
least $244,377 in respect of goods and services tax (“GST”) and pay
as you go (“PAYG”) withholding;
in income tax; and
interest with the risk of ATO penalties for late filing in respect of 1, 2 and
was alleged that by the end of 2017, NextFaze’s financial situation had
worsened. Having caught up with many of its outstanding
tax filings, very
substantial liabilities to the ATO had crystalised, including for SGC of
$374,035, GST and PAYG withholding of
$1,266,599, and income tax of $174,106,
all of which were subject to accruing penalties and general interest charge. By
early January
2018, NextFaze’s cryptocurrency holdings were worth around
$2.6 million.
4 January 2018, Ms Zaccara entered a contract to purchase commercial property at
106 Ward Street, North Adelaide (“Ward
Street”) for
$1.2 million, with $100,000 payable as a deposit and settlement scheduled
for 31 January 2018. The contract provided
that the purchaser was Ms
Zaccara and/or her nominee. On 17 January 2018, 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd
was incorporated with Ms Zaccara
as its sole director and shareholder.
January 2018, 1,100 units of ethereum were sold by Mr Munneke to realise around
$1.4 million as follows:
units on 11 January 2018, realising $146,850.74, which was paid into Mr
Munneke’s personal Commonwealth Bank of Australia
account (“CBA account”), $100,000 of which was used to pay the Ward
Street deposit on 15 January
units on 24 January 2018, realising $346,464, which was paid into the NAB
account; and
units on 25 January 2018, realising $911,445, which was also paid into the NAB
29 January 2018, $1,135,920.08 was drawn from the NAB account to be paid as
settlement monies for the purchase of Ward Street.
The surplus of $121,988.92
from the cryptocurrency sales paid into the NAB account was transferred from the
NAB account to the NAB
Maximiser account on 29 January 2018.
There is no evidence the surplus from the sale on 11 January 2018
after payment of the deposit
was transferred from Mr Munneke’s CBA account
into any of Ex NF’s bank accounts.
31 January 2018, 106 Ward Trust, a discretionary trust, was settled with
106 Ward Street Pty Ltd as trustee. Mr Munneke is a
beneficiary of
the 106 Ward Trust. On the same date, settlement on Ward Street occurred
with 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd acting as purchaser
as trustee of 106 Ward
Trust and payment of the settlement monies drawn from the NAB account
(“the Ward Street transaction”).
30 January 2019, the ATO issued a statutory demand against NextFaze for
$2,742,510.84 seeking payment of outstanding GST, PAYG
withholding, income tax
and superannuation. On 26 March 2019, the Deputy Commissioner of Taxation
(“Deputy Commissioner”)
filed an application seeking an order from
the Federal Court for the winding up of NextFaze.
Munneke and Ms Zaccara separated in or around April 2019.
O’Connell Pty Ltd was registered on 9 May 2019.
set out above, on 15 May 2019, the Federal Court granted the
Deputy Commissioner’s application for the winding up of NextFaze
appointed the Mr Phillips as liquidator. I will refer to Mr Phillips as
either Mr Phillips or the liquidator.
20 May 2019, Mr Phillips sold most of Ex NF’s business assets to
AllFaze Development Services Pty Ltd (“AllFaze”)
for $110,000,
including GST. AllFaze also assumed leave entitlements owing to 12 employees.
AllFaze is an entity controlled by
Ms Zaccara. Mr Munneke continues to work as
an employee of AllFaze. In his statutory report to creditors dated 31 May 2019,
Mr Phillips
stated that in addition to achieving a better result than would
have been possible at auction, the sale had allowed for the continuation
Ex NF’s business and employment of the majority of Ex NF’s
former staff.
1 July 2019, 28 O’Connell Pty Ltd replaced Mr Munneke as trustee of the 28
O’Connell Trust. Mr Munneke remained the
registered proprietor of
O’Connell Street.
11 July 2019, the Deputy Commissioner commenced proceedings against Mr Munneke
in the District Court of South Australia for $1,515,371.03.
On 9 October
2019, Mr Munneke consented to judgment for the Deputy Commissioner in the
sum $1,515,371.03 plus costs.
changed its name to Ex NF on 13 July 2019. In reciting the history of this
matter, I will refer to NextFaze as Ex NF despite
its name not changing
until on 13 July 2019.
his statutory report to creditors dated 14 August 2019 (“report to
creditors”), Mr Phillips recorded that Mr Munneke
“[had] ascribed
the failure of [Ex NF] to losses incurred following the failure of several
key customers in 2015 and an inability
to recover from this set-back”.
However, Mr Phillips referred to the following “other factors which more
significantly
contributed to the failure of [Ex NF]”:
10 December 2015, $1,025,912 in [Ex NF’s] funds were withdrawn to
purchase a new trading premises for [Ex NF]. At the time
withdrawal, this represented over 80% of [Ex NF’s] cash
This purchase coincided with a material reduction in [Ex NF’s]
profitability that significantly impacted on [Ex NF’s]
ability to pay
its outstanding tax obligations. Between 10 December 2015 and my appointment,
[Ex NF’s] debt to the ATO rose
from $357,929 to $2,194,825 with
respect to GST, PAYG and Income tax. During 2016, [Ex NF] also ceased to
meet its superannuation
and payroll tax obligations.
It is clear that, since 2015, [Ex NF] has only been able to continue its
operations through the non-payment of its tax and superannuation
obligations.
the heading “Cryptocurrency”, Mr Phillips noted in his report to
creditors that in January 2018, funds totalling
were deposited into the
NAB account. He reported that Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara had advised that
these deposits represented the
proceeds of the sale of cryptocurrency, but that
the cryptocurrency was not the property of Ex NF, and Ex NF’s
NAB account
was simply used to assist in the realisation process.
Phillips examined Mr Munneke on 4 February 2021 and Ms Zaccara on 5 February
2021 pursuant to
Corporations Act
examination”).
applicants subsequently commenced:
Court action CIV-21-001837 on 3 March 2021 against Mr Munneke, Ms Zaccara
and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd seeking to recover asserted
property of Ex NF
for the benefit of Ex NF’s creditors in relation to cryptocurrency
alleged to have been acquired with the
property of Ex NF and its traceable
proceeds, as well as the payment out of Ex NF’s funds to acquire Ward
Street; (“the
cryptocurrency and Ward Street claim”) and
Court action CIV-21-012859 on 18 November 2021 against Mr Munneke and 28
O’Connell Pty Ltd seeking to recover asserted
property of Ex NF for
the benefit of Ex NF’s creditors in relation to the payment out of
Ex NF’s funds, and the entry
into a commercial loan with ANZ, to
acquire O’Connell Street (“the O’Connell Street claim”).
priority creditors are for unpaid employee superannuation (approximately
$730,000) and unpaid employee entitlements
(approximately $170,000), which
entitlements were met by the Federal Government under the Fair Entitlements
Guarantee scheme and
are to be repaid. Ex NF’s major unsecured
creditors are the ATO for approximately $2.23 million in unpaid GST, PAYG and
tax dating from 2014, and associated interest and penalties; Revenue SA
for approximately $250,000 in unpaid payroll tax; and ANZ
for $400,000, which
represents the shortfall on the ANZ loan account owing by Ex NF in respect
of the purchase of O’Connell
agreement of the parties, Mr Munneke who uses the monikers “Captain of
Captology” and “Captain Derek”,
sold much of the
remaining cryptocurrency in March 2024, yielding $3,852,555.57 which was paid
into Court pending the determination
of these proceedings. Mr Munneke also
controls and holds the cryptographic keys to the remaining cryptocurrency that
was not sold,
which was valued at the time of trial at just over $500,000 as
depicted in the table below.
Price per unit
(as at 9 April 2024)
ETH (Ether)
13.93116430
SNX (Synthetix)
$238,951.41
BTC (Bitcoin)
$104,285.21
$104,285.21
CEL (Celsius)
93897.93320000
ETC (Ethereum Classic)
1201.67916000
19114.85208400
LTC (Litecoin)
24.51744153
$527,731.11
Relief sought
applicants alleged that the cryptocurrency was purchased in 2014 with
Ex NF’s funds and as part of Ex NF’s business
such that it
was, and to the extent it still exists, remains the property of Ex NF.
applicants seek declarations that the cryptocurrency is the property of
Ex NF, along with consequential orders that the funds
in Court be paid out
and that Mr Munneke deliver up the keys necessary for the applicants to take
control of the residual cryptocurrency
applicants alleged that the purchase of O’Connell Street in the name of Mr
Munneke (as trustee for the 28 O’Connell
Trust) was a self-dealing
transaction undertaken on Mr Munneke’s direction and entirely funded
by Ex NF to its detriment.
It was further alleged that the transaction was
undertaken at a time when Ex NF had woefully inadequate financial records
it was of questionable solvency. Further, Mr Munneke did not know the
true state of Ex NF’s financial position and took no
steps to gain
such an understanding.
these reasons, the applicants seek declarations that Mr Munneke used
Ex NF’s funds to purchase O’Connell Street in
breach of his
fiduciary and statutory duties as a director and consequently, that
O’Connell Street is held on constructive
trust for Ex NF.
Alternatively, the applicants seek an order setting aside the transaction as an
unreasonable director-related transaction
Corporations Act
applicants contended an award of damages would not provide adequate compensation
to Ex NF, as O’Connell Street is held
in a trust and is not available
for Mr Munneke to sell. The applicants also pointed out that as the ATO entered
judgment against
Mr Munneke for the sum of $1,515,371.03 in October 2019, an
award of equitable or statutory compensation would be unlikely to benefit
applicants.
the basis that the ethereum used to fund the purchase of Ward Street was
Ex NF’s property, it was alleged that the purchase
was a self-dealing
transaction undertaken on Mr Munneke’s direction and entirely funded
by Ex NF. It was further alleged that
the transaction was undertaken at a
time when Ex NF was of questionable solvency and when its financial records
remained woefully
inadequate, particularly due to the failure to make filings
with the ATO or meet tax obligations. It was argued that Mr Munneke
ought to have been aware of Ex NF’s parlous financial position and
appreciated that Ex NF could not lawfully fund the
applicants seek declarations that Mr Munneke used Ex NF’s funds to
purchase Ward Street for the benefit of 106 Ward Street
Pty Ltd in breach of his
fiduciary and statutory duties as a director and consequently, that Ward Street
is held on constructive
trust for Ex NF. Alternatively, the applicants
seek an order for equitable compensation or damages, or an order setting aside
transaction as an unreasonable director-related transaction under the
Corporations Act
of the defences
Munneke contended that he and Ms Zaccara determined to purchase the
cryptocurrency as a family investment and that he is presumed
by law to be the
owner of the cryptocurrency. He maintained that funds were used from the NAB
account because it was convenient,
as the NAB account had already been linked to
the CoinJar account to enable Ex NF to accept payment from its clients in
It was submitted that Ex NF, as a web and application development
company, was not in the business of making speculative investments.
Mr Munneke contended that the
in withdrawals offset
incidental expenses that he and Ms Zaccara had personally incurred on an ad hoc
basis on Ex NF’s behalf
or represented deductions from Ms
Zaccara’s loan account. Otherwise, he said the use of the funds
constituted a small loan,
which was later repaid. Ms Zaccara and 106 Ward
Street Pty Ltd defend the cryptocurrency and Ward Street claim on the same
although they assert that the cryptocurrency was purchased for the
benefit of only Ms Zaccara personally.
respect of the O’Connell Street claim, Mr Munneke and 28 O’Connell
Pty Ltd argued that in late 2015, Ex NF had been
trading profitably and had
surplus cash available to it. They contended that Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara
were looking for larger premises
to accommodate Ex NF’s growing
business when the opportunity to acquire O’Connell Street arose. It was
asserted that
during the period immediately prior to 19 November 2015 and up to
10 December 2015:
Ex NF’s two significant clients, Meeco had raised significant capital
in 2014, and the officers of Guvera Australia Pty Ltd
(“Guvera”) had
informed Mr Munneke that Guvera would be publicly listed. Guvera’s
Initial Public Offering was
subsequently released in or about May 2016. As
such, it was argued that a director in the position of Mr Munneke was
entitled to
believe that Ex NF’s debts were recoverable and that
Ex NF was in a healthy financial position;
owned plant and equipment, which had value;
Zaccara, as the sole shareholder of Ex NF, had repeatedly provided
substantial financial assistance to Ex NF since Ex NF’s
inception and was willing and able to provide further financial assistance,
including by borrowing against or realising assets held
by her or related
entities, principally her real estate portfolio;
Ex NF had fallen behind with some ATO lodgements, it had engaged BDO to
regularise them. The ATO was also directly involved
in this process; and
accountant, Kishen Vijayadass of BDO (“Mr Vijayadass”), advised
that Ex NF had sufficient surplus cash to
justify a payment to Ms Zaccara
as shareholder for the purpose of purchasing commercial premises, and assisted
Mr Munneke and Ms
Zaccara in establishing the 28 O’Connell Trust.
Munneke and 28 O’Connell Pty Ltd argued that Mr Munneke relied on
Mr Vijayadass’ advice when he made a payment of
surplus cash to Ms Zaccara in the form of a dividend or reduction and
distribution of capital. They submitted that
Ex NF benefited from
relocating its operations to O’Connell Street, notwithstanding that it was
recorded as the borrower of
the ANZ loan, given that O’Connell Street was
a larger premises and Ex NF paid less than market rent over the course of
was asserted that Mr Munneke reasonably relied upon Mr Vijayadass and Ms
Zaccara to advise him about, and provide him with information
Ex NF’s financial, superannuation and taxation obligations, as well
as to prepare documents and perform tasks in
order to comply with the same. It
was argued that the expert opinion (discussed below) of Alan Scott (“Mr
Scott”) vindicates
Ex NF as being in a sufficiently strong financial
position to release the funds to Ms Zaccara at the time of the
Street purchase, contrary to the opinion of the
applicants’ expert Andrew Heard (“Mr Heard”).
Munneke argued he complied with his duties as a director of Ex NF at all
relevant times, and that Ms Zaccara, as sole shareholder
of Ex NF, agreed,
ratified, and acquiesced to the release of Ex NF’s funds.
Mr Munneke, Ms Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd disputed that the ethereum
used to purchase Ward Street was Ex NF’s
property. They also denied
that Ex NF was of questionable solvency at the time of the purchase of
Ward Street, that Mr Munneke complied
with his duties to Ex NF at
all relevant times, and that if needed Ms Zaccara was able to inject funds into
Ex NF to boost its working
Munneke, Ms Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd contended that if the
cryptocurrency were Ex NF’s property, Ex NF was solvent,
application of the cryptocurrency to purchase Ward Street was agreed, ratified
and acquiesced to by Ms Zaccara as the sole
shareholder of Ex NF,
notwithstanding that the transaction was not to Ex NF’s benefit.
Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd by crossclaim seek a declaration that the
cryptocurrency is held by Mr Munneke as bare trustee
on trust for
Ms Zaccara. They also seek a declaration that 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd is
the sole and entire beneficial owner of Ward
Consolidation and trial of the
to an order of the Chief Justice on 15 November 2023, CIV‑21‑012859
was consolidated with CIV-21-001837. CIV-21-001837
was nominated the lead
action and 28 O’Connell Pty Ltd as trustee of the 28 O’Connell
Trust became the fourth respondent.
His Honour further ordered that the
evidence‑in‑chief of Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara be their statements.
pleadings in the consolidated action were not consolidated.
trial, the applicants called lawyer and former software developer,
Michael Bacina (“Mr Bacina”), who prepared an expert
dated 3 October 2023 regarding cryptocurrency and blockchains
(“the Bacina report”). The applicants also called
Mr Heard, a
chartered accountant and registered liquidator, who prepared a report dated
8 December 2023 regarding the financial position
of Ex NF at the
relevant dates (“the Heard report”).
Munneke called evidence from the chartered accountant and registered liquidator,
Mr Scott, who provided a report dated 14 March
2024 responding to Mr
Heard’s report (“the Scott report”). Mr Munneke was
cross-examined on the evidence he gave
examination and on his
Zaccara and the respondent companies relied on an expert report from Fred
Taormina (“Mr Taormina”) concerning the
rental value of
O’Connell Street. Ms Zaccara was cross‑examined on the evidence she
gave during the
examination and her three statements.
was agreed between the parties that only those documents referred to in closing
submissions or a statement, as set out in the
index provided by the
applicants’ solicitor, are to be relied
The issues for
determination
submitted by the applicants, the objective facts as to the purchase of the
cryptocurrency, O’Connell Street and Ward Street,
and how those purchases
were funded, are substantially not in dispute. The issues for determination
(a) whether the cryptocurrency was acquired as an asset of Ex NF or as a
personal asset of Mr Munneke, Ms Zaccara and/or the ZALD
Trust (“the ZALD
(b) whether the purchase of O’Connell Street in the name of Mr Munneke (as
trustee for a discretionary family trust) was a
self-dealing transaction
undertaken on Mr Munneke’s direction and entirely funded by Ex NF and
whether the use of Ex NF’s
funds to do so was in breach of Mr
Munneke’s fiduciary and statutory duties as a director, and, if so,
whether that breach
was in some way ratified by Ms Zaccara as shareholder;
(c) if the cryptocurrency was an asset of Ex NF, whether the purchase of
Ward Street was a self-dealing transaction undertaken on
Mr Munneke’s
direction and entirely funded by Ex NF and whether the use of
Ex NF’s funds to do so was in breach of Mr
Munneke’s fiduciary
and statutory duties as a director and, if so, whether that breach was in some
way ratified by Ms Zaccara
as shareholder.
central question is whether ratification by Ms Zaccara was legally possible,
given Ex NF’s circumstances at the times of
the O’Connell
Street, cryptocurrency, and Ward Street transactions. The applicants
disputed the claim of ratification not
only by reference to the facts, but also
relying upon the principle that a shareholder cannot ratify a self-dealing
transaction when,
having regard to Ex NF’s financial position,
creditors’ interests would be jeopardised by the transaction. The
asserted that, in any case, ratification is no answer to the claims
that the purchases were unreasonable director-related transactions
as defined by
Corporations Act
there are three aspects to the applicants’ claims, the multimillion-dollar
question for determination is whether or not
the cryptocurrency is the property
way of explaining the heft of these reasons, I indicate I have replicated much
of the Heard and Scott reports for convenience
to assist in appreciating the
financial analyses conducted by the experts. I have also included a detailed
recitation of Mr Munneke
and Ms Zaccara’s evidence to assist in
understanding the accounts they gave in the
examination in 2021,
their statements received as their evidence, and their cross‑examination.
In discussing Mr Munneke and
Ms Zaccara’s evidence, when I refer
to the cross-examination of them, I am referring to the cross-examination in the
Applicants’
crypto lawyer
assist the Court in understanding the subject of cryptocurrency, the applicants
called Mr Bacina a solicitor at Piper Alderman
who has expertise in
cryptocurrency law. He was formerly a software and web developer, although his
experience as a developer predated
the introduction of public blockchains. He
is the lead partner and founder of the Blockchain Group at Piper Alderman,
Financial Services and FinTech Group. Mr Bacina has published,
lectured and presented extensively on cryptocurrency, blockchain
and technology
law and regulation since 2016. He told the Court that he is part of a telegram
group with 187 members globally that
goes by the moniker ‘Hardcore Crypto
Lawyers’ and that there are a limited number of specialists in each
Munneke’s objection to the Bacina report
Munneke objected to [85] to [105] and [109] to [111] of the Bacina report.
These paragraphs provide responses (“responses”)
to the questions
posed by the applicants’ solicitors at [26.2] to [26.4] and [27.1] to
[27.4] (“the questions”)
of their letter dated 29 September
2023 seeking Mr Bacina’s opinion.
Munneke submitted these responses contained irrelevant speculation on Mr
Bacina’s part as to the state of mind of people
in the software and web
development sector. He submitted that by this evidence, the applicants sought
to establish Mr Munneke’s
intention and motivations at the time he
acquired ethereum.
Munneke also submitted that [94] conveyed Mr Bacina’s interpretation of an
email sent by Mr Munneke, which amounted to an
irrelevant opinion on a matter of
applicants submitted that the paragraphs of the Bacina report comprised
background derived from a person with industry experience
and expertise. They
also submitted some relevant concepts required explanation from a person with
industry knowledge such as Mr
have determined to receive impugned responses (which were received
de bene esse
) into evidence with one exception, which I set out
questions, insofar as they sought an opinion regarding, for example, what
software and web developers might have considered or
envisaged, or why they may
have done something, are poorly worded, as they enquire as to the state of mind
of software and web developers.
Mr Bacina cannot speak to this matter.
questions should have been expressed in terms of enquiring as to
Mr Bacina’s expert opinion as informed by his experience.
example, questions at [26.2] and [26.3] would have been better expressed as
26.2 From your experience in information technology and
cryptocurrency law, as at the time of the establishment of the ethereum
blockchain,
what was the power or benefit of a new blockchain which accommodated
“smart contracts”?
26.3 What, in your opinion, was the benefit in acquiring ethereum at the time
of the establishment of the ethereum blockchain?
I am satisfied that Mr Bacina provided his opinion in the responses founded on
his area of expertise and by reference to
his experience and knowledge of
cryptocurrency, blockchain, and technology law.
Bacina provided his opinion as to why it would have been beneficial to acquire
ether at the time of the establishment of the ethereum
blockchain. It is
evidence for me to consider, together with all the evidence in the matter, in
determining the issues in dispute.
However, his comment at [94] that the
rationale he identified was consistent with what Mr Munneke had said in an email
January 2018 is irrelevant opinion evidence. It is for the Court
to determine the meaning of Mr Munneke’s email and whether
consistent with other
Bacina’s evidence and cross-examination
Bacina report is received into evidence with the qualification I have just
discussed. Mr Bacina gave further evidence-in-chief
and was cross-examined.
Bacina began his evidence by defining a series of relevant concepts. These
definitions have been extracted into the glossary
of terms at the commencement
of my reasons. He described that cryptocurrency is an intangible digital asset,
transactions of which
are secured by cryptographic encryption. Mr Bacina
said transactions and balances are stored on either a blockchain or another
distributed
ledger. He explained that use of a blockchain or other ledger
enables storage of data across many computers controlled by different
create a censorship-resistant or immutable record of transactions.
Bacina explained that cryptocurrency itself cannot be held but rather, a person
can hold a private key that enables them to make
transactions using crypto
assets recorded in a “wallet”. He said a wallet, as distinct from a
bank account or actual
wallet, is an address or entry on the ledger (also called
a public key) that has some balance. Mr Bacina explained that the ledger
blockchain records the type and amount of crypto assets, as well as all
transactions, associated with a wallet. He said that
this information is all
publicly accessible, although the identity of who controls a wallet will be
unknown unless it can be discerned
from identifying features.
Bacina gave evidence that cryptocurrency exchanges perform a similar function to
any marketplace, such as those for trading shares.
He explained that parties
can store digital assets on the exchange’s wallet, enabling them to trade
within the central environment
of the exchange’s balances.
Bacina said that bitcoin and ethereum are types of cryptocurrencies. He
explained bitcoin is the most well-known and oldest popular
cryptocurrency and
makes up the lion’s share of cryptocurrency trading. He gave evidence
that bitcoin can be mined by running
software on a computer that verifies
transactions in exchange for bitcoin.
Bacina gave evidence that ethereum was founded later in an attempt to resolve
some of the shortcomings associated with bitcoin,
including counterparty risk.
He said that unlike ethereum, bitcoin can be transacted without a trusted
central party recording the
transactions on a ledger. He explained that
ethereum represented a very significant evolution in blockchain technology by
introducing
smart contracts (which is apparently not an apt name because they
are generally neither smart nor contracts).
Bacina described smart contracts as automated pieces of code that operate
without being overseen by someone responsible for how
they run. He said smart
contracts can be interacted with once they are deployed to the primary public
ethereum blockchain, mainnet.
He explained that a party to a transaction can
place a digital asset into a smart contract which will only be released when a
predetermined
set of variables are met by a counterparty, such as in an escrow
context. He also gave examples of smart contracts allowing a digital
be distributed over time and lending smart contracts, which can automatically
liquidate collateral in the event of a market
Bacina explained that gas is the fee for transactions on the ethereum blockchain
including transfers of ethereum and smart contract
operations; it is the fuel
for ethereum, and any gas associated with a transaction is recorded and visible
on the blockchain. He
said that gas is priced in one-billionths of an ether and
is paid to those who contribute computer power to the verification of
transactions.
Mr Bacina gave evidence that parties offer an amount of gas they
are willing to pay. He explained that if a user wants to have
a transaction
completed quickly, a higher fee should be offered to render the transaction more
valuable, thereby incentivising those
who are running the network of verifiers.
Mr Bacina said in [70] of his report that gas is generally one of a
developer’s
most significant costs.
Bacina said that gas is also necessary for developers to deploy a smart contract
to mainnet and to interact with or process a
smart contract. He said that the
amount of gas required to deploy a smart contract to mainnet is commensurate
with its complexity.
He explained that in addition to testing their own smart
contracts locally on a testnet (which does not require gas), developers
expected to conduct research in relation to other smart contracts on mainnet by
interacting with them.
Bacina reported, in his opinion, a benefit in purchasing ether at the time of
the establishment of the ethereum blockchain would
mitigate any later increase in the price of Ether, which would hedge against
potentially increased gas costs, and possibly
provide both a competitive
advantage over others seeking to operate smart contracts, or provide a capital
gain via the sale of ETH
to clients who might need it to run their own smart
Mr Bacina further reported that during the course of his legal practice a
common question in the blockchain industry “is to
enquire as to when a
person first purchased a cryptocurrency as it serves as a measure of their time
in the industry and carries
some measure of status”.
cross-examination, Mr Bacina said that deployment of a smart contract to mainnet
is effectively permanent. Mr Bacina agreed that
it would be sensible for a
developer to advance development as far as possible in the cost-free environment
of a testnet before deploying
to mainnet. He also accepted that there is no
basis to assume from the Meeco/NextFaze Hackathon Press Release (“the
release”) (discussed later) that the hackathon involved a live
mainnet deployment as opposed to a testnet exercise.
Bacina accepted that it is common for third party developers to be contracted by
proponents of a blockchain project to undertake
development work. However, he
did not accept that gas costs associated with deployment to mainnet would
properly be incurred by
the principal rather than the
contractor‑developer. He said that generally developers offer a whole
service to clients who
do not understand cryptocurrencies and blockchain, then
send a bill that may include gas costs in a manner similar to disbursements.
Heard is a partner in the firm Heard Phillips Lieberenz. Mr Phillips is one of
his partners. The Heard report was received into
evidence and Mr Heard said in
cross-examination that he had not been involved in any aspect of the liquidation
that related to the
applicants’ claims, although he vaguely recalled
giving some advice at the start of the liquidation. Having been directed
annexure to the report to creditors, where six and a half hours’ work are
attributed to him, Mr Heard accepted that he
had been involved in some
investigation in connection with the liquidation. He explained he had not been
involved with anyone who
was related to the trading of Ex NF, including
Mr Phillips, while he was writing his report. Mr Heard said he had gone to
lengths to avoid Mr Phillips, including by preparing most of his
report at home and spending the two days prior to giving evidence
at home rather
than going to the office.
Heard said he knew that Mr Phillips had received funding from the Commonwealth
for the purposes of the applicants’ claims
but that he had not seen the
funding agreement. He agreed that he shared in the profits his firm derived
from liquidations. When
asked whether he indirectly benefited from the funding
agreement in this case, Mr Heard replied that he was paid by the
applicants’
solicitor. He said he presumed that the applicants had
received funding from the Commonwealth Fair Entitlements Guarantee scheme.
applicants submitted it is not uncommon for an insolvency practitioner to give
expert evidence when his or her partner is the
liquidator and it is not uncommon
for the liquidator himself or herself to give evidence on the topic of
insolvency. It was submitted
that the liquidator’s partner was one step
removed from the liquidation. Further, the applicants submitted that it was not
directly suggested to Mr Heard that his evidence was tailored or that he had not
brought a true and impartial mind to the exercise
of writing his report.
Mr Heard’s involvement in the liquidation was the subject of comment in Ms
Zaccara and the respondent companies’
closing address, no complaint was
ultimately made about this topic by the respondents.
Heard report
O’Connell Street
Heard was asked by the applicants’ solicitors to provide his opinion on
whether Ex NF had sufficient financial resources
available to it to make
the payments, and assume the liability to ANZ, in respect of the purchase of
O’Connell Street while
retaining sufficient readily realisable assets
or other financial resources to pay its debts as and when they fell due and to
its ongoing operational requirements. In this context, he was also asked
to comment on the extent to which the debts owing to Ex
Ex NF’s work in progress (“WIP”), and the cryptocurrency
were sensitive to value fluctuation, realisability,
or realisability risk. Mr
Heard was asked to conduct his analysis on two alternative bases:
was the owner of the cryptocurrency; and
was not the owner of the cryptocurrency.
his report, Mr Heard explained that the financial statements were prepared by
Rowe Partners on a monthly basis and on a cash basis,
without incorporating
debtors and creditors. He set out the methodology he adopted to determine
appropriately the resources available
to Ex NF at the time of the
O’Connell Street purchase on 10 December 2015. This included having
regard to the 30 November
2015 balance sheet and the 10 December 2015 bank
balances, while estimating Ex NF’s assets and liabilities, including
the Estimated
Realisable Value (“ERV”) of any assets. Mr Heard also
said that he considered Ex NF’s profitability, which would
to comment on an appropriate level of working capital that Ex NF should
have maintained.
this methodology, Mr Heard said that he estimated the financial position of
Ex NF on 10 December 2015 in the following table:
– Estimated Financial Position
Crypto Owned
Crypto Not Owned
Est 10/12/2015
Est 10/12/2015
Current Assets
Cash at Bank
Non Current Assets
Plant & Equipment
Building Loan – 28 O’Connell Trust
Related Parties
TOTAL ASSETS
Current Liabilities
Tax Creditors & Accruals
Non-Current Liabilities
Related Parties
TOTAL LIABILITIES
Source: Documents in Annexure 4, Annexure 11 analysis and opinions
expressed below
Heard’s comments with respect to the table above are as
December 2015 [Ex NF’s] combined bank balances were
(Annexures 8 and 9)
accounts do not record on its balance sheet on 30 November 2015 any
cryptocurrency. I have been provided with and
adopted a schedule of
cryptocurrency (
) that values the ETH held at this date at
$2,321.95 and the BTC held at this date at $962.32 (
accounts do not record on its balance sheet on 30 November 2015 any Debtors. I
have been provided with and adopted
a list of Debtors prepared on 10 December
), drawn from the Harvest system, which totals
$623,859.35
. The Debtors owing at this date were well beyond what would
be considered normal trading terms. I illustrate the slow payment profile
the Debtor collections below.
accounts do not record on its balance sheet on 30 November 2015 any value for
WIP. It is not possible to put a precise
value on WIP given the way the Harvest
system recorded invoicing and receipts (refer assumption 7.5). Adopting the
Billing and Debtor
Information spreadsheet information I have been given
) I have observed the monthly invoicing in the months before
and after the O’Connell Street Property purchase and observe that
monthly billings were approximately $186,000 per month and the trend of billing
was as below. Given [Ex NF’s] main
client (Meeco Group) was being
billed weekly, there is unlikely to be much unbilled WIP at any stage and for
the purposes of this
analysis only I have given the WIP a notional book value of
book value of plant and equipment reflects the written down value of assets
purchased to be used in the ongoing trading of the
business. These forms of
assets are not available for sale to meet creditor claims unless in a
liquidation scenario.
December 2015 [Ex NF] settled the purchase of the O’Connell Street
Property. The funds used to purchase the property
[Ex NF’s] bank account and for the purposes of this analysis only, I
have recorded the amount as a loan to the 28
O’Connell Trust as
Fig – 5.1.4
– O’Connell Street
Est 10/12/2015
$40,000 Deposit paid (Source
10/12/15 Loan Drawn
10/12/15 Settlement Paid
10/12/15 Lease Incentive
24/12/15 Lease Incentive
$ 1,825,912
Source: Documents in Annexure 8
have grouped together Non-Current Assets and Liabilities (
non-current meaning
the obligation to realise or discharge is not expected within the subsequent
) accounts related to the director of [Ex NF], as set out
Fig – 5.1.5
Related Party Loans
Realisable Value ($)
Book Value ($)
Non-Current Asset
Loans – Associated Trust
Non-Current Liability
Capital Contributed
Conversion balances
With respect to the Non-Current Asset:
Associated Trusts
– I have reviewed the Non-Current Asset from
July 2014 to March 2018. The loan was established earlier than July 2014
only loan repayments have come from manual journal entries to the
Drawings Linda Z
account. I have not seen evidence of, and I have
assumed there was no intent to repay this loan.
With respect to the
Non-Current Liabilities:
Contributed
– I have reviewed the general ledgers across the 2015 to
2017 financial years (
) and have seen that there were some
deposits made into [Ex NF’s] accounts and some credits by way of
manual journal entry.
In my opinion these credits should have been off set
against the
as I have shown above.
– The ledger balance has not changed across the 2015 to 2017
financial years (
) and given the description of the account, I
assume that the balance does not reflect an obligation that is payable, rather
the balance left after an accountant’s unreconciled journal
entry some time earlier than July 2014.
have calculated the amount of taxation and superannuation that was owing by
[Ex NF] (if it had reported the tax and superannuation
amounts unpaid)
). With respect to Superannuation, the amount is without
regard to interest and penalties as this is calculated the date of the SGC
return lodgement.
– Tax, Creditors &
Accruals on 10 December 2015
Amounts Due
Wage Deductions
Activity Statement
Superannuation Guarantee
10 December 2015
Source: Annexure 7
In addition
to the Tax and SGC amounts that were
due on 10 December
, there were,
accruals of $122,614
, being $93,969 of December
Quarter PAYG/GST (not due until February 2016) and $28,645 of Superannuation for
the December quarter
(also not due until February 2016).
ANZ loan, drawn to settle the purchase of the O’Connell Street Property
Annexure 10
(Footnote added)
Heard stated that relying on the analysis in Fig 5.1.1 above, he considered the
value of Ex NF’s assets that were able to
be turned into cash quickly
(i.e., excluding illiquid assets such as plant, equipment and loans not
repayable) to meet the payment
of debts that were overdue as detailed
– Analysis of liquid assets (assets
able to be turned into cash quickly) and current liabilities.
Liquid Assets to meet Creditors
Crypto Owned
Crypto Not Owned
Est 10/12/2015
Est 10/12/2015
Liquid Assets
Cash at Bank
Building Loan –
28 O’Connell Trust
Related Parties
Total Liquid Assets
Overdue Liabilities
Tax Creditors & Accruals
Net Liquid Assets
I make the following comments with respect to the table above.
cryptocurrency is either
by [Ex NF] and has a realisable value
equivalent to its book value or its
owned by [Ex NF] and
isn’t an asset for the purposes of the calculation. Relying on the data I
have been given (
), I can see that shortly
December 2015, the value of ETH rose quickly as illustrated in the table below,
however the value of the cryptocurrency before then
negligible.
This table highlights that some of the cryptocurrency has high value
fluctuations and therefore in my opinion has a high Realisability
Risk (i.e.,
you cannot be certain the value the asset will have on any given day). It is
however my assumption it is easily Realisable
and able to be converted into cash
relatively quickly.
have highlighted above in
the slow rate of collection of
[Ex NF’s] Debtors. Using data from
from December
2015 to the end of March 2016 I can see that only $364,000 of December 2015
Debtors were collected. Whilst the November
2015 debtors do not appear to have
had a high incidence of bad debt, they were very slow
Accordingly, I have reduced the book value of debtors to
reflect my opinion of their quick ERV to 80% of the book value in both the
high/Low ERV scenario. This discount seeks to estimate a value of debtors that
could be quickly recovered to meet the payment of
creditors that were due for
In my view the Debtors have poor Realisability (
they are slow paying
but low Realisability Risk (
in time, most of them pay
ERV has been marked down to NIL because WIP must be converted into a debtor
before it is able to be realised in cash and be available
to meet the payment of
creditor arrears.
amount that I had recorded in
above as a loan to the 28
O’Connell Trust loan has been written off with Nil ERV consistent with the
assumption asked of me
in paragraph 2.2 of my letter of instructions dated 1
November 2023 (
have reviewed the tax lodgement history of [Ex NF] to the ATO running
accounts and the schedule of lodgements provided in my instructions
(instructions 10.10) and note the following returns had not been lodged, up
to and including the September 2015 quarter.
– Late Lodged Returns by November 2015
Description
Date Lodged*
Days Late Lodging
for the period ending
BAS for the period ending Mar 2015
BAS for the period ending June 2015
* as returns had not been lodged, the extent of debt would not have been
Source: Annexure 7 Tax Lodgement History
The due date for the lodgement and payment Activity Statements,
Superannuation Guarantee Charge Statements and Income Tax Returns
– Tax due dates
Lodgement and Payment Due Dates
Activity Statement
Superannuation Guarantee
1 July to 30 September Qtr
28 November
1 October to 31 December Qt
28 February
28 February
1 January to 31 March Qtr
1 April to 30 June Qtr
30 June Financial Year
(Footnotes added)
Heard reported that his analysis appears to indicate that on 10 December 2015,
Ex NF only had $0.7 million of liquid assets available
to it to meet the
$0.6 million in overdue tax and superannuation debts.
Heard commented that having regard to Ex NF’s financial statements,
whilst there were minor cash flow surpluses earned by
Ex NF between July
2015 and November 2015, there were no surpluses generated thereafter that could
have been used to meet the payment
of overdue tax and superannuation debt on
10 December 2015. This is reflected in Fig 5.1.11 below. Mr Heard stated
that in his opinion,
Ex NF’s trading performance in November 2015
would not have given Ex NF confidence that it could meet its tax and
superannuation
arrears on 10 December 2015 from trading surpluses.
In his note to Fig 5.1.11, Mr Heard noted:
“Total Payments” In the June 2016
profit and loss
statements is extraordinary because the accountant passed a journal entry to
bring to account $352,280.02 of PAYGW
tax deductions that had not been accrued
as an expense of salary and wages across the year, due to the accounts only
recording the
cost of salary and wage expense when net wages were paid.
Heard reported that in his opinion, from December 2015 to the end of the
financial year, Ex NF’s cash flow was in deficit,
would not have had the resources to meet any creditor arrears from ongoing
on Fig 5.1.11, Mr Heard determined that in the 2016 financial year,
Ex NF’s average overhead payments were approximately
$155,000 per
month. He stated that in his opinion, a prudent director would seek to keep at
least two months’ overhead costs
as a working capital reserve (for
the illustration he modelled a conservative provision of $250,000), although
this depends on the
director’s risk appetite, the predictability of future
cash collections, looming obligations, debtor collections, and trade
In [Ex NF’s] circumstances, given the slow debtor
collections, keeping a working capital reserve of
at least 2 months
would have been prudent as [Ex NF] was not aware of the tax
debts that were accruing due to the non-lodgement of Activity Statements.
demonstrated in Fig 5.1.12 how Ex NF had insufficient resources to meet tax
and superannuation arrears at the time it used
its funds to purchase
O’Connell Street.
– Available
Available Resources
Est 10/12/2015
Liquid Assets
Cash at Bank
Building Loan – 28 O’Connell Trust
Loans – Associated Trusts
Total Liquid Assets (X Ref Fig 5.17)
Less: Working Capital Provision
Liquid Assets to meet Creditors
Overdue Liabilities
Tax Creditors & Accruals
Net Available Resources
Heard said the shortfalls of $132,838 and $136,122 set out above would have been
even greater if the accruals totalling $122,614
that were due in
February 2016 (comprising $93,969 of PAYG/GST and $28,645 of superannuation
for the December 2015 quarter) were
Heard turned to the ability of Ex NF to assume and meet the liability owed
to ANZ. Mr Heard reported that to purchase O’Connell
Ex NF took out a $740,000 loan on 10 December 2015 that was on
interest-only terms until 10 December 2020. The rate of interest
percent, reconciling to an annual interest of $44,400 per annum. Mr Heard
corrected this to 5.5 percent in cross‑examination.
Heard stated that from his experience as an accountant and board director, to
estimate the level of sustainable debt Ex NF could
have serviced, it is
appropriate to apply a benchmark covenant that Ex NF’s earnings
before interest, taxes, depreciation,
and amortisation (“EBITDA”)
must be greater than 2.5 times the interest expense. He said that in his view,
EBITDA would indicate a higher risk that Ex NF could not afford
principal and interest obligations on loans. Using this benchmark,
calculated that a business with an annual interest expense of $44,400 should be
earning at least $110,000 EBITDA to be able
to service that debt
obligation.
stated that relying on Ex NF’s financial statements, in the 2016
financial year, Ex NF’s reported 12-month EBITDA
was negative
$61,683. He said the fact that Ex NF was not earning an EBITDA
demonstrates it was not earning a sufficient profit
to meet any interest cost
accruing on the ANZ loan. He noted that Ex NF’
-month EBITDA in
the 2017 financial year (after deducting the rent expense that was journalled
in) was $53,763. Mr Heard said that
this figure was $56,233 less than the
benchmark and only marginally more than was sufficient to meet the cost on the
interest payments
that were accruing on the ANZ loan.
Accordingly,
Mr Heard concluded that Ex NF did not have sufficient financial resources
available to it (regardless of whether it
did or did not own the cryptocurrency)
to make the payments, and assume the liability to ANZ, to purchase
O’Connell Street
in December 2015 while retaining sufficient readily
realisable assets or other financial resources to pay its debts as and when they
fell due and to meet its ongoing operational requirements. He gave the
following reasons:
the payment of commitments to settle the O’Connell Street Property
purchase there was just $218,185 cash at bank, less
than what I consider a
prudent level of cash reserves should be for an organisation of
[Ex NF’s] size.
the value of debtors owing to [Ex NF] was significant, they were taking
nearly ½ year to collect and were therefore not
liquid assets available to
meet the payment of overdue debts.
I have estimated a notional value for WIP, the time for WIP to convert into
debtors and then be collected would exceed ½
year and therefore had no
realisable value for the purposes of assessing [Ex NF’s] ability to
meet the payment of overdue debts.
profit and loss statement (prepared on a cash basis), shows that from December
2015 to the end of the financial year
[Ex NF’s] cashflow was in
deficit and [Ex NF] would not have had the resources to meet any creditor
arrears from trading.
on [Ex NF’s] profit and loss statements, I consider [Ex NF] was
not able to generate a sufficient level of EBITDA in
2016 or 2017 to meet the
cost of the interest payments that were accruing on the ANZ loan drawn to
purchase the O’Connell Street
Heard concluded that at the time of the O’Connell Street purchase,
Ex NF was financially unstable, and its director should
have been concerned
Heard was asked to determine whether Ex NF had sufficient financial
resources available to it to make the payments in respect
of the purchase of
Ward Street while still retaining sufficient readily realisable assets or
other financial resources to pay its
debts as and when they fell due and to meet
its ongoing operational requirements. Mr Heard was again asked to comment on
to which the debts owing to Ex NF, Ex NF’s WIP, and
the cryptocurrency were sensitive to valuation fluctuation, realisability,
realisability risk in the context of giving his opinion.
Heard detailed that in answering this question, he adopted the same methodology
as described in relation to the O’Connell
Street analysis above, but
updated to reflect Ex NF’s financial position in January 2018. He
explained that using that methodology,
he estimated the financial position of
Ex NF on 31 January 2018 in the table Fig 5.2.1 on two alternative
was the owner of the cryptocurrency and lent money to 106 Ward Street Pty
Ltd to purchase Ward Street, while retaining the balance
of the unsold
cryptocurrency; and
was not the owner of the cryptocurrency.
– Estimated Financial Position
Crypto Owned
Crypto Not Owned
Current Assets
Cash at Bank
Non Current Assets
Total Fixed Assets
Building Loan – 28 O’Connell Trust
Loan 106 Ward Pty Ltd
Related Party Loans
Total Assets
Liabilities
Current Liabilities
Tax Creditors & Accruals
Non-Current Liabilities
Related Party Loans
Loan D Munneke/Ex Crypto Sales
SUSPENSE ACCOUNT (Balance Sheet)
Total Liabilities
(1,397,213)
Source: Documents in Annexure 4, Annexure 12 analysis and opinions
expressed below
Heard’s notes and comments regarding Fig 5.2.1 are as
accounts do not include a value for cryptocurrency owned. I have been provided
with a schedule of cryptocurrency
) for the purpose of this
analysis. The cryptocurrency had a low-cost price, however, by January 2018
cryptocurrency had experienced
a price spike. The cryptocurrency remaining on
31 January 2018 after sales used to finance the Ward Street property
purchase had
a significant (
$1,302,099.96
) and variable value as
highlighted in the table and graph below.
The graph above illustrates that the cryptocurrency has high value
fluctuations and therefore in my opinion has a high Realisability
Risk (i.e.,
you cannot be certain the value the asset will have on any given day). It is my
assumption that it is easily Realisable.
If the cryptocurrency was owned by [Ex NF], the remaining cryptocurrency
after the sale of the portion used to fund the purchase of
Ward Street Property
had a significant value. If the cryptocurrency was not owned by [Ex NF],
its value is irrelevant for the purposes
of [Ex NF’s] balance sheet.
accounts do not include a value for Debtors, and I have introduced this amount
into the above analysis. Relying on
the documents provided in
I can see the Debtors owing to [Ex NF] on 31 January 2018 totalled
. Many of these accounts were very slow paying as illustrated by
the collection profile of debtors collected after 31 January 2018
accounts do not include a value for WIP owing. It is not possible to put a
precise value on WIP given the way the
Harvest system recorded invoicing and
receipts (refer assumption 7.5). Relying on the documents provided in
I can observe invoices raised by [Ex NF] in the period
before and after 31 January 2018. I illustrate below a trend in declining
billings over the period reviewed, with average monthly billings over the period
of approx. $150,000. Given [Ex NF’s] major
client at the time (Meeco
Group) was being billed on a weekly basis, there is unlikely to be much unbilled
WIP at any stage, and
for the purposes of this analysis only, I have given WIP a
notional book value of
book value of plant and equipment reflects the written down value of assets
purchased to be used in the ongoing trading of the
business. These forms of
assets are not available for sale to meet creditor claims unless in a
liquidation scenario.
amount recorded as a loan to the 28 O’Connell Trust loan has been written
off with Nil ERV consistent with the assumption
asked of me in paragraph 2.2 of
my letter of instructions dated 1 November 2023 (
the cryptocurrency was owned
by [Ex NF], the Ward Street Property was
purchased with [Ex NF] money and the entire amount paid (
$1,235,920)
reflects a loan to 106 Ward Pty Ltd owed to [Ex NF] and
taken as drawings when the deposit was paid (see below).
– Source of Purchase Price
Ward Street Purchase
Applied to Ward
Balance Taken
Balance Retained
Part Crypto
Sales – 11/1/2018
Crypto Sales – 24/1/2018
Crypto Sales – 25/1/2018
Crypto Sales – 25/1/2018
Total Receipts
To Purchase
Deposit to Trust Account – 11/1/2018
Payment 29/1/2018
Total Payments
Source: NAB Bank Statements (
If the cryptocurrency was
by [Ex NF], and
[Ex NF’s] bank account was simply used to transact receipts and
payments, then monies received into the bank
account from cryptocurrency sales
equals disbursements out. It is worth noting that the cryptocurrency sales on
24 January 2018,
should not have been recorded in the financial statements as
fee revenue in January 2018.
have grouped together Non-Current Assets and Liabilities (
non-current meaning
the obligation to realise or discharge is not expected within the subsequent
) that are accounts related to the director of [Ex NF],
as set out below.
– Related Party &
Related Party Loans
Realisable Value ($)
Book Value ($)
Non-Current Assets
Div 7A Loan – 28 O’Connell 2017
Div 7A Loan – Linda Z 2017
Loan Repayments – 28 O’Connell – Interest Only
Loans – Associated Trusts
Non-Current Liabilities
Capital Contributed
Conversion balances
SUSPENSE ACCOUNT
With respect to the Non-Current Assets:
loan account balances relate to journal entries for unpaid interest on
overdrawn loans charged by [Ex NF] in 2017 and I have assumed
there was no
intent to pay this loan.
Repayments – 28 O’Connell
were the interest charges on the ANZ
loan and in 2017 these charges were set off by a manual journal for Rent Expense
assumed that there was no intent to repay this loan.
I have reviewed
the account
Loans – Associated Trusts
from July 2014 to
March 2018. The loan was established earlier than July 2014 and the only
loan repayments have come from manual
journal entries to the
Drawings Linda
account. I have not seen evidence of, and I have assumed there was no
intent to repay that loan.
With respect to the Non-Current
liabilities:
Contributed
and Drawings
amounts should be set off against each other
and I have assumed there was no intent to repay the net Drawings loan balance.
Conversion Balances
– The ledger balance has not changed across the
2015 to 2017 financial years and given the description of the account, I assume
that the balance does not reflect an obligation that is payable, rather
it’s the balance left after an accountant’s unreconciled
entry some time earlier than July 2014.
is created by journal entries processed by the accountant reflecting
postings that had not been reconciled and does not reflect an
identifiable
obligation that is payable.
debts owed to the Australian Taxation Office on account of BAS, Income Tax, and
SGC debts and sundry creditors are summarised
– BAS, Income Tax and SGC debts
Wages Tax & Superannuation
Activity Statement
Superannuation Guarantee
Due on 31 January 2018
Source: Annexure 7
– Sundry Creditors
Sundry Creditors & Accruals
Sundry Creditors
Credit Card
Source: Annexure 7 and Annexure 9
The Sundry Creditors predominantly relate to Payroll Tax accruals for the
2016 and 2017 Financial Years and minor sums for Workcover
and accounting fee
In addition to the Tax and SGC amounts that were
due on 31 January
, there were
accruals of $135,602
, being $101,048 of December
Quarter PAYG/GST (not due until February 2018) and $35,554 of January PAYG
Withholding (not due until
February 2018) and Superannuation that I have not
quantified that would have been due by April 2018.
on his analysis in Fig 5.2.1, Mr Heard said he then considered the value of
Ex NF’s assets that were able to be turned
into cash quickly (i.e.,
excluding illiquid assets such as plant, equipment and loans not repayable) to
meet debts that were overdue
for payment on 31 January 2018 as detailed in
– Analysis of liquid assets
(assets able to be turned into cash quickly) and current liabilities
Liquid Assets
Crypto Owned
Crypto Not Owned
Crypto Owned
Liquid Assets
Building Loan –
28 O’Connell Trust
Loan 106 Ward Pty Ltd
Loans Related Parties
Total Liquid Assets
Overdue Liabilities
Tax Creditors & Accruals
Total Overdue Liabilities
Net Liquid Assets
(1,110,109)
Heard made the following comments, having regard to what he considered to be
reasonably high ERV values for Ex NF’s assets.
the cryptocurrency was owned by [Ex NF], it was an asset able to be
realised to meet the payment of creditors owing, but its value
changed almost
every day (
). If the cryptocurrency was not owned by
[Ex NF], it is not an asset available to meet creditor claims.
can be seen from the table below, over 1/3 of the Debtors were aged over
Having regard to debtors that may be
collectable in time to meet the payment of creditors due for payment, in
particular the 90 and
90+ day amounts and the collectible profile detailed in
Fig 5.2.3 above
, I have reduced the book value of debtors to reflect what
could in my opinion be realised quickly to meet the payment of creditors
were due for payment. I have reduced Debtors to 60% of their book value.
In my view the Debtors have poor Realisability (
they are slow paying
but low Realisability Risk (
in time, most of them pay
– Debtors on 31 January 2018
Debtor Profile
assets are non-repayable loans or assets of no immediate cash value that have
all been marked down to $Nil for the purposes
of estimating the value that could
reasonably have been realised from them for payment of overdue creditors. I
have also had regard
to the assumption asked of me in paragraph 2.3 of my letter
of instructions dated 1 November 2023 (
were the overdue debts described in
Fig 5.2.7 and Fig 5.2.8
(Footnote added)
on his analysis, Mr Heard stated if Ex NF did not own the cryptocurrency,
at the time of the Ward Street purchase, there was
only $0.8 million in
liquid assets at high ERV to meet the claims of overdue creditors totalling $1.9
million. He said that if Ex
NF did own the cryptocurrency, there were
liquid assets (at high ERV) of $2 million, which was only just sufficient
to meet the claims
of overdue creditors totalling $1.9 million.
Heard reported that, as can be seen from Fig 5.2.11, there were no cash
surpluses generated between 1 July 2017 and 31 March 2018.
that in his opinion, the trading performance to January 2018 would not have
given Ex NF confidence that it could meet sundry
creditor, tax and
superannuation arrears from trading surpluses.
stated that it was his opinion that from December 2015 to 31 March 2018,
Ex NF’s cashflow was in deficit, and it would not
have had the
resources to meet any creditor arrears from ongoing trading.
on Fig 5.2.11, Mr Heard determined that in the 2017 financial year, average
company overhead payments were approximately
$137,000 per month. Mr Heard
repeated his opinion that a prudent director would seek to keep at least two
months’ overhead
costs as a working capital reserve (the modelled
“conservative” provision of $250,000), meaning that the cash noted
Fig 5.2.9 above would have been reduced to meet overdue creditors if
Ex NF was able to continue to trade and meet operating costs.
Heard demonstrated in Fig 5.2.12 how Ex NF had insufficient resources to
meet tax and superannuation arrears at the time it used
its funds to purchase
Ward Street. Mr Heard detailed that the shortfalls of $58,009 and $1,360,109
identified in Fig 5.2.12 would
have been even greater if the accruals totalling
$135,602 that were due in February 2018 (comprising $101,048 of PAYG/GST for the
December quarter and $25,554 of PAYG withholding for January 2018), plus an
unquantified amount of superannuation that would have
been due in
April 2018, were included.
– Available
Available Resources
Crypto Owned
Crypto Not Owned
Liquid Assets
Building Loan – 28 O’Connell Trust
Loan 106 Ward Pty Ltd
Suspense and Related Party Loans
Total Liquid Assets (X Ref Fig 5.29)
Less: Working Capital Provision
Liquid Assets to meet Creditors
Overdue Liabilities
Tax Creditors & Accruals
Total Overdue Liabilities
(1,360,109)
Heard said that, in his opinion, Ex NF did not have sufficient financial
resources available to it (regardless of whether it did
or did not own the
cryptocurrency) on 31 January 2018 when the payments were made to purchase Ward
Street. He considered that Ex
NF did not have sufficient liquid assets to
pay all its liabilities that were due to be paid and to continue trading for the
had overwhelming debts owed to the ATO on account of taxation and Superannuation
obligations.
cryptocurrency asset it owned had an unreliable realisable value as the value of
the cryptocurrency was highly volatile.
respect to some of the debtors owed to [Ex NF], it is clear they paid on
long payment terms as illustrated in
Figure 5.2.3
Mr Heard stated in his
opinion Ex NF was facing insolvency at the time of the Ward Street
Accuracy of spreadsheets
Heard was asked to comment on whether the spreadsheet enclosed in the
applicants’ letter seeking his opinion, namely the
Billing and Debtor
Information spreadsheet, a spreadsheet detailing Ex NF’s lodgement
history in respect of business activity
statements (“BAS”) and
income tax (“the lodgement history spreadsheet”), and a spreadsheet
detailing Ex NF’s
total tax liability for BAS, income tax and SGC
(“the tax liability spreadsheet”) accurately reflected the records
Ex NF and the ATO.
Heard said that he was satisfied that the Billing and Debtor Information
spreadsheet reflected Ex NF’s records.
Mr Heard said he was satisfied that lodgement history spreadsheet reflected very
closely the ATO’s records, with
only minor errors noted. He stated that
in his opinion, the late preparation and lodgement of activity statements denied
the opportunity to have an accurate impression of the financial
position of Ex NF.
Mr Heard said that he was satisfied that the tax liability spreadsheet, which
included a relevant tax quarter (and part
month to 10 December 2015 and 31
January 2018) calculated as if relevant returns had been lodged with the ATO by
their due dates,
reflected the ATO’s records.
Heard’s cross-examination by Mr Munneke’s counsel
Heard was cross-examined about Guvera going into administration in about May
2016 at which time it owed Ex NF $462,615. He was
asked whether he would
accept that was an irrecoverable debt for work done and invoices rendered in the
2016 financial year that
would have a substantial effect on EBITDA. Mr Heard
said, “If they’d written it off as a bad debt, yes” and he
agreed it would affect liquidity. He said he would agree that he could not
point to any document or record that he had reviewed
that would suggest it was
reasonably foreseeable by a director in Mr Munneke’s position as at
10 December 2015 that Guvera
would be put into administration.
Heards’s cross-examination by Ms Zaccara and the respondent
companies’ counsel
Heard agreed that while he was not directly asked to comment on solvency, the
questions he was asked to address in respect of
the O’Connell Street
and Ward Street transactions echoed
Corporations Act
which provides:
Meaning of solvent and insolvent
(1) A person is solvent if, and only if, the person is able to pay all the
person’s debts, as and when they become due and payable.
(2) A person who is not solvent is insolvent.
Heard agreed that an earlier definition qualified that the person or company be
able to pay its debts as and when they fell due
from their own resources, but
that this prescription is no longer required by
Mr Heard agreed
that when considering whether Ex NF had sufficient financial resources
available to it whilst retaining sufficient
readily realisable assets or other
financial resources, he focused on resources within the immediate control of
Heard was questioned about his analysis in relation to the
O’Connell Street purchase on the assumption that Ex NF did not
own the cryptocurrency. He was referred to his determination that there were
net liquid assets of $113,878, and that there was negative
$136,122 in available
resources once the working capital provision of $250,000 was included. He
agreed that if there were an additional
injection of liquid funds of $136,122,
Ex NF would have what he considered to be the desirable working capital
reserve of $250,000.
Heard agreed that most of Ex NF’s debtors were slow to pay, but would
eventually do so, and that reasonable minds might
differ about how to bring to
account the value of the debts at any particular time. He said he
“[presumed]” that as
at 10 December 2015, a director could take an
opportunistic view about recovery of debts in due course. Mr Heard said that
his analysis,
by marking down debts by 20 percent as an incentive to debtors,
takes into account that debtors can be made to respond to pressure
more quickly.
Heard was then asked about the value of $80,000 he gave to WIP. He said that as
Meeco was being billed weekly, there would not
have been a build-up of unbilled
work, such that WIP in relation to Meeco would have been relatively low.
Heard was taken to the associated trust loan, which had a book value of $325,000
but was ascribed no value by him, as he assumed
there was no intention, as
opposed to no capacity, to repay it. He agreed that he did not explore the
capacity of the person owing
that loan to repay it if called upon, and said that
he was not given instructions on the subject.
Heard agreed that he recorded the payment of $1.825 million for O’Connell
Street as a loan to the 28 O’Connell Trust,
and that he treated it as not
relevant for the purposes of his liquidity analysis in Fig 5.1.7 because he was
instructed to do so.
Heard agreed that the interest rate he included in his report in relation to the
ANZ loan of six percent was an error and it should,
in fact, have been
5.5 percent at 11 December 2015, 5.71 percent on 12 February 2016, and
5.46 percent on 13 May 2016.
Heard was cross-examined about his opinion that a prudent director would seek to
keep at least two months’ overhead costs
as a working capital reserve. He
said that he formulated that opinion based on his experience as a director. Mr
Heard accepted
that his past directorships were essentially on substantial
charitable boards, and that his current directorships are of his accounting
and Norwood Investments Pty Ltd, which is a company personally associated with
him that provides director advisory services.
Heard was asked about his reference in [43(e)] of the Heard report to
Ex NF’s EBITDA in 2016 and 2017. He explained that
these figures had
been extracted from Ex NF’s profit and loss statements and agreed
that these statements related to financial
periods following the purchase of
O’Connell Street.
Heard said that he did not disagree with the past EBITDA figures referred to by
Mr Scott in the Scott report, but noted that they
were not in existence as at 10
December 2015. He agreed that the figures reflected an improvement in
Ex NF’s position in terms
of EBITDA between the 2013 and 2015
financial years, with a small negative figure recorded in the 2016 financial
year, which Mr Heard
said represented a significant change.
Heard was then questioned about his analysis of the Ward Street purchase. He
agreed that if the cryptocurrency were owned by
Ex NF, as at
31 January 2018, it had net assets of $1.89 million. He accepted that this
represented quite a healthy financial position.
Heard was then questioned about his opinion that a prudent director would have
maintained a cash reserve of $250,000, which opinion
he said was underpinned by
the same considerations that applied with respect to the O’Connell Street
analysis. He was referred
to Fig 5.2.9 of his report, where he noted that if
the cryptocurrency was owned by Ex NF it had positive net liquid assets
at $191,991 as at 31 January 2018, meaning that an additional $58,009
would be required were a reserve of $250,000 to be kept. Mr
Heard was referred
to the record of a loan to Ms Zaccara of $98,909, which was noted in
Mr Scott’s report. He agreed that
while he did not factor this loan
into his analysis of Ex NF’s liquid assets, its repayment would
result in Ex NF’s cash
reserve exceeding
Munneke’s case
Scott report detailed below was received into evidence.
O’Connell Street
Munneke’s solicitors sought Mr Scott’s opinion regarding the
[Ex NF] have sufficient resources available to it, in order to meet its
financial trading obligations, and to:
1.1. Distribute
funds to its shareholder Ms Zaccara; and
1.2. Borrow funds from ANZ
Which funds were then applied in the acquisition of [O’Connell
Scott reported that he adopted the same methodology as adopted in the Heard
report, unless stated otherwise. He was asked by
Mr Munneke’s
solicitors to adopt a number of assumptions in relation to O’Connell
Street, including that the amount of
$1,025,911.59 was paid out of the ANZ
account as a distribution of surplus cash to Ms Zaccara as shareholder, and that
at the time
of the purchase, Ms Zaccara and Mr Munneke were in a position
to, and would have, financially assisted Ex NF if necessary.
accordance with those instructions, Mr Scott treated the sum of $1,025,912
transferred from the ANZ account as a distribution
to Ms Zaccara in her capacity
as shareholder of Ex NF. He also treated the funds borrowed from ANZ as
having been loaned to Ex NF
in its own right, while noting that ANZ
obtained mortgage security over the O’Connell Street property.
Scott said that the financial accounts he and Mr Heard has access to were
deficient in respect of several matters. He noted
that Mr Heard had inserted
certain assets and WIP with amounts he could reasonably estimate. He also noted
Mr Heard had included
tax creditors and accruals by referring to
information subsequently available to the liquidator. Mr Scott said he agreed
Heard report in respect of these matters.
Scott set out his balance sheet analysis at [2.3.3] of his
O’Connell Street – Balance Sheet
Estimated ($)
Current Assets
Cash at Bank
Total Current Assets
Non-Current Assets
Plant and Equipment
28 O’Connell Trust
Related Parties
Total Non-Current Assets
Total Assets
Current Liabilities
Tax Creditors and Accruals
Total Current Liabilities
Non-Current Liabilities
Related Parties
Total Non-Current Liabilities
Total Liabilities
Net Assets/(Liabilities)
Scott notes the following to explain the schedule at [2.3.3]:
at Bank – I have obtained the cash at bank amounts from Annexures 8 and 9
of the Heard Report.
Cryptocurrency
– I agree with the calculation of cryptocurrency as set out in
figure 5.1.1 and Note B of the Heard Report.
For the purposes of this
analysis though, I consider the amounts to be immaterial and as there is no
conjecture as to ownership,
I have excluded this amount from my analysis. I
note however that although I have excluded that amount from my analysis, I do
make any comment as to ownership.
– I agree with the analysis in figure 5.1.1 and Note C of the Heard
– I agree with the analysis in figure 5.1.1 and Note D [of] the Heard
and Equipment – I agree with the analysis in figure 5.1.1 and Note E of
the Heard Report.
O’Connell Trust – The Heard Report includes the purchase price of
the O’Connell Street Property as an asset in
the amount of
$1,825,912. The assumptions I am to make in accordance with the Letter of
Instruction and Subsequent Letter of Instruction
include that surplus funds were
distributed from [Ex NF] to Ms Zaccara by way of dividend. As the
funds were paid to Ms Zaccara
by way of dividend there is no loan. In addition
to the funds distributed to Ms Zaccara, [Ex NF] borrowed $740,000 to fund
the balance
of the purchase of the O’Connell Street Property. I have
not been asked to assume that the borrowings from ANZ in the amount
of $740,000
is also a dividend to Ms Zaccara. In my opinion that amount should be
represented in the accounts of [Ex NF] as both
an asset and a liability. I
have included the amount borrowed by ANZ as being funds lent to the 28
O’Connell Trust.
line item in the general ledger is called ‘Loans – Associated
Trust’. The line item does not identify the ultimate
I agree with the comment in relation to Loans
– Associated Trusts in figure 5.1.1, Note G of the Heard Report, that
was established earlier than July 2014 and the manual journal entries
appear to be against ‘Drawings Linda Z’ account.
During the financial years ending 30 July 2014-16, adjustments are made to
take into account certain requirements of Division 7A of
the ITAA36. That
division applies to transactions between a company and their shareholders and/or
associates.
On the basis that there appears to be corresponding journal entries against
‘Drawings Linda Z’ and there are adjustments
pursuant to Division 7A
of the ITAA36, I assume that that the amount is owing by Ms Zaccara or a trust
associated with her.
As I am unsure of the identity of the associated entity/entities, I have
considered this asset to be of no realisable value.
creditors & accruals – I agree with the analysis in figure 5.1.1, Note
H of the Heard Report.
Loan – I agree with the analysis in figure 5.1.1, Note I of the Heard
Scott concluded that his balance sheet analysis shows that following the
distribution of funds in the amount of $1,025,912 to
Ms Zaccara, Ex NF
still had sufficient total assets to meet the total liabilities due, plus a
surplus of $305,433.
Scott said that he then considered whether Ex NF had sufficient available
resources to meet debts that were either due for payment
at the time of the
O’Connell Street purchase or were likely to be due shortly thereafter,
while being able to continue trading.
The following schedule at [2.4.3] of his
report sets out that
O’Connell Street – Available
Estimated ($)
Current Assets
Cash at Bank
Total Current Assets
Liabilities
Tax Creditors and Accruals
Total Current Liabilities
Net Available Resources
Scott stated that he agreed with the cash and debtors figures noted in the Heard
report. However, he said that he did not include
the $250,000 working capital
provision because in his view, there were sufficient surplus funds to meet the
outstanding tax creditors
and accruals, and because he was instructed to assume
that Ms Zaccara had sufficient personal resources to provide funds to
when needed. He concluded that the analysis shows Ex NF had
sufficient available resources to meet debts due and payable in the
while maintaining sufficient working capital to meet ongoing cashflow
requirements.
Scott then turned to consider whether Ex NF had sufficient resources
available to it to meet its trading obligations and to borrow
$740,000 from ANZ.
He said that the ANZ account statements indicated that Ex NF honoured its
monthly interest commitments between
10 December 2015 and 8 June 2018.
Mr Scott noted that while the Heard report refers to Ex NF’s
EBITDA for the 2015‑16
financial year, being negative $61,683, he reviewed
the profit and loss statements provided for the 2012-13 to 2015-16 financial
years, which disclosed the following EBITDA
Cumulative ($)
Scott said that at the time of the ANZ loan, Ex NF had a reasonable history
of profitability, which would give the director confidence
that Ex NF would
be able to meet its ongoing interest obligations. He stated that, in his
opinion, Ex NF had sufficient available
resources regardless of whether it
did or did not own the cryptocurrency, noting that his calculations (taking into
account the matters
he was asked to assume) provided for a surplus of resources
to meet Ex NF’s debts due and payable.
Ward Street
Scott was asked the following question by Mr Munneke’s solicitors
regarding the Ward Street purchase:
Assuming the cryptocurrency was
not [an Ex NF] asset, as contended by the Respondents in their respective
Defences, what impact, if
any did the sale of the portion of cryptocurrency
applied in the acquisition of Ward St have on the financial position of
Mr Scott stated that, in his opinion, “if the cryptocurrency was not
owned by [Ex NF], the sale of the cryptocurrency had no
[Ex NF’s] financial position”.
Scott was also asked to consider the alternative
hypothesis:
Assuming the cryptocurrency was [an Ex NF] asset,
as contended by the Applicants in the Statement of Claim, did [Ex NF] then
sufficient resources available to it to sell the portion of cryptocurrency
applied in the acquisition of Ward St, and to meet its
financial and trading
obligations?
Scott said he utilised the same methodology in analysing Ex NF’s
position at 31 January 2018 as detailed in his analysis
O’Connell Street purchase. Again, Mr Scott was asked to assume that
at the time of the Ward Street purchase, Ms Zaccara
and Mr Munneke were in
a position to, and would have, financially assisted Ex NF if
Scott’s analysis from [4.3.1] of his report is set out in the following
schedule and notes:
Ward Street – Balance Sheet Analysis
Estimated ($)
Current Assets
Cash at Bank
Total Current Assets
Non-Current Assets
Fixed Assets
Building Loan – 28 O’Connell Trust
28 O’Connell Trust
Loan 106 Ward Pty Ltd
Related Parties
Total Non-Current Assets
Total Assets
Liabilities
Tax Creditors and Accruals
Total Current Liabilities
Non-Current Liabilities
Related Parties
Loan D Munneke/Ex Crypto Sales
Total Non-Current Liabilities
Total Liabilities
Net Assets/(Liabilities)
Cryptocurrency
– I agree with the calculation in figure 5.2.1 and Note A of the Heard
– I agree with the calculation in figure 5.2.1 and Note B of the Heard
– I agree with the calculation in figure 5.2.1 and Note C of the Heard
Assets – I agree with the calculation in figure 5.2.1 and Note D of the
Heard Report.
Loan, 28 O’Connell Trust – On the basis of the assumptions, I
consider that the surplus funds in the amount of
$1,025,912 advanced for the
O’Connell Street Property was a distribution to Ms Zaccara and therefore
there is no realisable
O’Connell Trust – In accordance with Note F in
section 2.3.3
I have included the amount provided to [Ex NF] by ANZ as being funds
on-loaned to the 28 O’Connell Trust.
106 Ward Pty Ltd – I agree with the calculation in figure 5.2.1 and Note F
of the Heard Report.
Party Loans – the related party loans as set out in figure 5.2.6 of the
Heard Report include the
Related Party Loans
Book Value ($)
Non-Current Assets
Div 7A Loan – 28 O’Connell 2017
Div 7A Loan – Linda Z 2017
Loan Repayments – 28 O’Connell – Interest Only
Loans Associated Trust
Non Current Liabilities
Capital Contributed
Conversion Balances
Suspense Account
In accordance with the assumptions I have been instructed to make in both the
Letter of Instruction and the Subsequent Letter of Instruction
together with the
documentation listed in the Subsequent Letter of Instruction, I am to assume
that Ms Zaccara had the financial
capacity to meet the repayment of the
$98,909 loan and the documentation of her ownership of properties supports that
assumption.
For the reasons set out in Note G of
section 2.3.3
above, I consider that
‘Loans – Associated Trust’ may be an amount owing by Ms
Zaccara or a trust associated with
her but I am unable to identify the actual
I have therefore considered that the realisable value of the related party
loans is $98,909 being the ‘Div 7A Loan – Linda
I have not included the balance of the related party amounts as being
realisable.
Creditors and Accruals – I agree with the calculation in figure 5.2.1 and
Note H of the Heard Report.
Scott stated that this analysis showed that following the purchase of
Ward Street, Ex NF still had sufficient total assets to
meet the total
liabilities due.
then considered what assets were realisable immediately or in the
short‑term to meet debts due and payable as set
out in the following
schedule and
Ward Street – Available Resources
Estimate ($)
Current Assets
Cash at Bank
Related Parties
Total Realisable Assets
Liabilities
Tax Creditors and Accruals
Total Current Liabilities
Net Assets/(Liabilities)
agree with the calculation of debtors as set out in figure 5.2.9 of the Heard
have included the amounts which appear to be owing to Ms Zaccara in accordance
with Note H of section 4.3 above.
Scott said that he included the figure of $98,909, which appeared to be a loan
owing by Ms Zaccara. He explained that he did
not include a working capital
provision in his calculations, contrary to the Heard report, as he considered
there were sufficient
surplus funds available.
Scott concluded that his analysis showed that Ex NF had sufficient assets
on 31 January 2018 following the purchase of Ward Street
to meet its
liabilities, leaving a surplus of $1,979,717. He said that further, Ex NF
was able to meet debts due in the short term,
leaving a surplus of $290,901. He
stated that a “significant proportion of that surplus is largely dependent
on Ms Zaccara
making funds available by way of repayment of her loan
account, which [he had] been instructed to
Accuracy of
spreadsheets
Scott said he had no reason to doubt Mr Heard’s opinion that the Billing
and Debtor Information spreadsheet reflected Ex
NF’s records. He
said he was unable to form an opinion in relation to the lodgement history
spreadsheet and the tax liability
spreadsheet as he did not have the source
documents, nor access to the ATO business portal.
relation to Mr Heard’s opinion that the late preparation and lodgement of
activity statements denied the director the opportunity
to obtain an accurate
understanding of the financial position of Ex NF, Mr Scott said he was of
the opinion that it may have denied
the director the opportunity to obtain an
accurate understanding of the financial position of
Compliance with
Corporations Act
Mr Scott was asked by Mr Munneke’s solicitor to comment on whether
Ex NF kept financial records that “correctly
[recorded] and
[explained] its transactions and financial position and performance” and
“would [have enabled] true and
fair financial statements to be prepared
and audited” in compliance with
Corporations Act
the relevant times.
Scott referred to Ex NF utilising various accounting software to maintain
financial records but said that he was otherwise unable
to form an opinion as to
whether Ex NF complied with
Corporations
Scott’s cross-examination
cross-examination, Mr Scott agreed that while he brought to account taxation
liabilities in respect of which lodgements were overdue,
he had not made any
allowance for any penalty being levied by the ATO in respect of those late
lodgements. He said that he was not
aware that when the lodgements were
ultimately made, significant penalties were applied by the ATO, along with
general interest.
Mr Scott accepted that the default position is that making
late lodgements renders the taxpayer liable to penalties and general
charges, although the amounts might be difficult to quantify prior to them being
levied. He also noted that the ATO has
a discretion to waive penalties and
general interest charges, and that “it really depends on what their
– shouldn’t
say this – but what side of the bed the person got
out of ... on the day they assess it”.
Scott was asked to place himself in the position of a person advising a director
in the position of Mr Munneke in 2015. He was
asked whether he would have
advised the director that while outstanding liabilities to the ATO could be
quantified, there would also
likely be penalties and general interest charge
unless the ATO was persuaded to waive them. Mr Scott said that he would not
into account penalties when calculating liabilities because they would not
be known and because “we all know the ATO may well
waive them in certain
circumstances”. He agreed he would advise directors of the potential for
penalties or a general interest
was put to Mr Scott that when considering whether material funds of a company
ought to be paid out to a shareholder, a director
should first be advised to
lodge outstanding returns in order to understand the company’s liabilities
to the ATO. Mr Scott
accepted that as a reasonable proposition. He agreed that
any advice that was divergent from the proposition that it is inappropriate
pay out material funds of a company until its liability to the ATO is understood
would be dangerous. When asked whether it would
also be wrong, Mr Scott
said “That’s probably delving into part of the law that I’m
not sure of”.
Scott was questioned about the schedule at [2.3.3] of the Scott report, where he
had recorded a loan of $740,000 to the 28 O’Connell
non‑current asset. He explained that he had treated the $740,000 borrowed
by Ex NF from ANZ as having been on-lent
to the 28 O’Connell Trust,
which was the only way to record the transaction in circumstances where he had
not been asked to
assume that the funds were gifted to the 28 O’Connell
Trust. When it was pointed out to him that the $740,000 could not be
account as a loan if the recipient and payer did not intend for the funds to be
repaid, Mr Scott maintained that he was
not instructed to assume that the
$740,000 was a gift. He posed the question of why “Ex NF [would]
take up a liability and
not create an asset somewhere”. He was asked
whether by that statement, he meant that a rational director, acting in
with his duties, would have ensured that there was a relevant asset
when the company was incurring a liability of $740,000. Mr Scott
“I think it’s probably, that’s probably right, yes, I mean
otherwise you’ve just gifted it.”
Scott agreed that on the balance sheet analysis, whether there was a surplus of
assets following the O’Connell Street purchase
turns on whether it was
intended that the $740,000 be restored to Ex NF. He accepted that there
would be a deficiency of $435,000
in net assets if there were no intention to
restore. Mr Scott was again asked about not having brought penalties and
the general
interest charge into account. He said that assuming there was an
intention to restore the $740,000, Ex NF’s net assets would
sufficient to meet any penalties and general interest charge, which he said
would not have been great at that stage.
Scott was then referred to his analysis at [2.4] of the Scott report concerning
Ex NF’s available resources to meet debts
due at the time of the
O’Connell Street purchase or shortly thereafter, which he said
demonstrated that Ex NF had $113,000
in available resources. He agreed
that he did not in this analysis bring into account any penalties or the general
interest charge,
or the December 2015 quarter BAS. Mr Scott said that those
liabilities would be contingent and unquantified. He accepted that they
only unquantified because Ex NF had failed to lodge its returns, including
a BAS relating to the September 2014 quarter, the
March 2015 quarter, and the
June 2015 quarter. He accepted that outstanding lodgements of this length are
sufficiently serious as
to render Ex NF liable to penalties and general
interest charge.
also agreed that he had proceeded on the basis that a working capital allowance
was not necessary because in his opinion,
there were sufficient surplus funds
available to meet the outstanding tax creditors and accruals, and because he had
been asked to
assume that Ms Zaccara had sufficient personal resources to
provide funds to Ex NF if necessary. He was asked whether he agreed
the proposition that the purpose of a working capital provision was to ensure
that Ex NF could continue to meet operational
expenses such as wages. Mr
Scott said:
It’s a very nice theoretical concept, but if you
applied that to three-quarters of the companies in South Australia, you’d
have a very much a ghost town where we’re sitting at the moment, but I
mean so that’s the theory of it. The practice
is it would be most of the
businesses in this State could not operate on that basis because they just
don’t have the money...
was asked whether, putting to one side the assumption that Ms Zaccara was able
to contribute funds to Ex NF if necessary, $250,000
was a reasonable
working capital allowance. Mr Scott said “I don’t know whether
it would be $100,000, $50,000, or $400,000.
I just don’t know”.
When it was put to him that “two months’ worth of expenses is pretty
skinny in terms
of a rule of thumb for [a] working capital allowance”, Mr
Scott repeated that three-quarters of the companies in Adelaide would
liquidation if it were necessary to maintain such a provision.
was put to Mr Scott that before a distribution can be made to a shareholder, it
is necessary to consider how much working capital
Ex NF has. Mr Scott
replied that in his view, at 10 December 2015, Ex NF had $113,000 in net
available resources, which was sufficient
for Ex NF to continue to trade,
taking into account the assumption that Ms Zaccara had sufficient personal
resources to provide funds
when needed. When it was pointed out that Ex NF
would not have sufficient existing cash resources to meet ongoing operational
if its debtors did not pay as forecast, Mr Scott said that a
company’s financial position is always changing. He maintained
$250,000 working capital allowance was not necessary because he adopted the
assumption that Ms Zaccara was able to provide
funds when needed.
Mr Scott accepted that he would regard with caution a company paying out more
than one million dollars in cash when less than
one months’ expenses would
remain, he said he was not sure whether it would be “highly
imprudent” having regard
to the assumption that Ms Zaccara could inject
funds if necessary. Mr Scott was asked to ignore that assumption and indicate
he would advise that it was appropriate for Ex NF to make the
payment in the circumstances. He replied, “I’m not a tax
and I’m not a business services adviser”, then said “I
wouldn’t give someone that advice, but I’m
not in a position to give
that advice necessarily”.
Scott was taken to his Ward Street balance sheet analysis at [4.3.1] of his
report. He explained that as he was told to assume
that the funds used to
purchase Ward Street were from the sale of Ex NF’s cryptocurrency, he
recorded the amount as a loan
to 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd. He agreed that if the
cryptocurrency were a company asset but neither 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd nor Mr
Munneke intended that the funds used to purchase Ward Street would be repaid
(such that the $740,000 ANZ loan and the funds from
the cryptocurrency sale were
given away as a gift), solvency would be very borderline, with Ex NF being
marginally solvent by about
was put to Mr Scott that if the cryptocurrency were Ex NF’s asset,
the sale of $1.4 million worth of cryptocurrency would
have left Ex NF
liable to remit capital gains tax (“CGT”) in the order of
30 cents in the dollar. Mr Scott said that
he had not even considered CGT
in that context. He agreed that the CGT liability in respect of the
cryptocurrency sale would be
a current liability payable within the following 12
months, which he had not factored into his balance sheet analysis. Mr Scott was
referred to Fig 5.2.2 of the Heard report concerning cryptocurrency prices. He
agreed that cryptocurrencies have fluctuated very
materially over time, even on
a daily or weekly basis. It was put to Mr Scott that it would be highly
imprudent for Ex NF to gift
the funds used to purchase Ward Street to 106
Ward Street Pty Ltd, as it would leave Ex NF exposed to the
present‑day value
of cryptocurrency to meet its forthcoming liabilities.
He agreed, “it wouldn’t be prudent”. He was asked whether
at January 2018, knowing that Ex NF owed $1.9 million to the ATO, being
reliant on the cryptocurrency market to satisfy that liability
significant concern. Mr Scott said, “That would depend on whether I am a
glass half full or a glass half empty
person and not a pessimist”.
Scott was asked:
before you would advise somebody to pay out $1.235 million in respect of an
asset that will not be available to the company for
relevant purposes you would
regard that as reckless insofar as you were then dependent only on the
cryptocurrency to pay the tax
there was no intention to pay that back there would be $700,000 net, roughly
$700,000 in net assets until such time as you dealt
with the 28 O’Connell
Street trust matter as well. If both of those things were never intended to be
paid back I believe that
would not be right. I couldn’t give that
is you couldn’t give the advice to pay the money out.
couldn’t give the advice to pay the money out to buy something as a
Scott was referred to his schedule at [4.4.1], which records his opinion that
Ex NF had $290,000 in net assets as at 31 January
2018. He agreed that
this figure was highly dependent on the cryptocurrency holding its value. He
further agreed if the director
of Ex NF was not going to sell the
cryptocurrency to pay Ex NF's liabilities it would follow that Ex NF
was insolvent at 31 January
Mr Scott agreed that he was not aware of Ms Zaccara having injected any sums of
money into Ex NF. He repeated that he had
been told to assume that she was
able and willing to do so.
Munneke’s s 597 examination
examination, Mr Munneke said that the liquidation of 2Moro led to the
formation of Ex NF. The developers from 2Moro carried on the
business of
software development at Ex NF. He said Ms Zaccara funded the establishment
of Ex NF and he ran it.
Munneke said he was not sure how much money Ms Zaccara put in to buy 2Moro from
2Moro’s liquidator and pay the initial salaries
of the Ex NF
employees. He said it would have been in the order of $100,000.
agreed that Ms Zaccara had a much more detailed involvement with the ATO and
Ex NF’s accountants than he did.
Munneke said that Ms Zaccara’s role as the 100 percent shareholder of
Ex NF did not imply any level of control over the
affairs of Ex NF.
He said he gave Ms Zaccara the title of chief operations officer, a title
requested by her. Mr Munneke said he
was not aware of any dividends
declared by Ex NF.
Munneke said Ms Zaccara was involved with “the tax stuff” right from
the beginning but as Ex NF grew, she became more
and more involved. He
agreed that she did a large amount of work in 2017 with Rowe Partners,
Ex NF’s accountants, to bring
the accounts up to date and to rectify
the lodgements. Mr Munneke said he signed BAS but was not involved in the
preparation of
those statements nor was he involved in the preparation of
year-end financial accounts, or the annual taxation returns for Ex NF.
agreed that all of those matters were attended to by Ms Zaccara. He said that
he kept an eye on the bank account and kept an
eye on invoices going out and
being paid. He was “not aware of the magnitude of the acquiring
said he was aware Ex NF was not filing BAS for a considerable period of
time. He agreed that Ex NF was delinquent in its taxation
and BAS returns
from September 2013. He said poor accounting practices accounted for Ex NF
not filing its BAS for that period and
all subsequent BAS and returns.
said that he had conversations with Ms Zaccara about the failure to lodge
statements and returns and that she said she
would get around to it. He said it
was a continual source of angst.
agreed that Ms Zaccara was the person responsible for retaining
Rowe Partners and a new accounting package was then used following
engagement. He agreed that when the ATO began complaining about
Ex NF’s failure to file returns, he left that matter
Ms Zaccara.
agreed that the financial records of Ex NF were at a point in time
insufficient to file BAS. He said Ex NF was not keeping records
true and fair financial statements to be prepared. He agreed that during the
time of poor record-keeping that he was not
able to properly analyse the
financial position of the company at any point in time.
agreed that some hefty payment needed to be made by Ex NF to the ATO. He
was asked whether those payments needed to be managed
by ensuring Ex NF had
available cash. Mr Munneke agreed that seemed reasonable. Mr Munneke was
taken to an email chain between
Ms Zaccara and Guvera in January 2016 where
Ms Zaccara wrote:
We’ve also had some hefty ATO catchup
payments which we still haven’t completed. In short we’ve consumed
our reserves. We’ve begun calling in debt from clients including
Guvera. ... I am in a bit of a panic as we have two weeks
of operational funds
left and after that, I kid you not, we have no funds available.
Mr Munneke was asked whether there was a panic when it came to the financial
resources of Ex NF in January 2016 in the context of
ATO catchups. He said
he did not recall but he would imagine that Ms Zaccara would use language like
that used in the email to encourage
clients to pay.
Munneke was asked whether he, in having very little to do with ATO matters, was
unaware of the amounts required to be paid to
the ATO. He agreed that he was
not across how much needed to be paid to the ATO at any point in time. He
agreed that at no point
in time was he able to have an accurate assessment of
the solvency of Ex NF as he did not know how much Ex NF needed to pay
It was put to him that he left that topic, that is, the ATO dealings
and the solvency of Ex NF, to Ms Zaccara. He said he left
the financial
reporting to Ms Zaccara, and he should have been more diligent in his
attention to solvency.
was asked whether Ms Zaccara had a detailed knowledge of the amount of money
that Ex NF had and would have in the future due to
ATO payments, such that
he effectively ceded control of that aspect and more widely of
Ex NF’s decision to spend money to Ms
Zaccara. Mr Munneke said he
did not believe that Ms Zaccara had that knowledge and that was part of the
problem because they did
not have true, accurate accounting books and “so
it wasn’t visible what the ... costs and solvency of [the] company
anybody”. Mr Munneke agreed that he did not know whether Ex NF was
solvent or insolvent in January 2016.
Munneke said he put O’Connell Street into a trust rather than
Ex NF’s name to protect it as an asset which was not
Ex NF’s success or failure. When he was asked what he was trying to
protect the asset from, he said he did not know
and suggested it was to protect
it in the event that someone bought the business.
Munneke said the financing of O’Connell Street got a bit complicated
because they wanted to purchase it in a trust. He
was asked why Ms Zaccara
was chosen as the primary beneficiary under the trust. He said it was because
of the concern about keeping
O’Connell Street separate from Ex NF.
He was asked who paid the money to acquire O’Connell Street. He said
bank loan and there was an amount from Ex NF. He said he did not
know the details. He said he believed that money was transferred
somehow within
the corporate structure to Ms Zaccara as a shareholder and then applied to
the purchase. He said he knew that he
withdrew some money from the NAB account
because NAB would not give them the loan, that he put money into an ANZ account
they went through a loan process with ANZ. Mr Munneke was asked
whether it was fair to say that Ms Zaccara was the person principally
driving the transaction. He said she was driving it in terms of coordinating it
and that she was across the detail, whereas he was
not necessarily across the
agreed that he understood that Ex NF would be the borrower of the ANZ loan.
He was asked whether Ex NF made itself liable for
the large loan from ANZ
in order to secure rent-free tenancy of the building. Mr Munneke said he
saw it more as being rent-free
in advance for 15 years.
Munneke was asked about the substantial amount of money transferred directly
from the ANZ account to pay the balance of the purchase
price. He said that was
more of an extraction by the shareholder. He agreed that he regarded the
contribution that Ex NF made to
the purchase as effectively pre-payment of
rent, being the loan amount. He said he did not get any advice about the
concept of pre‑payment
of rent. He said he could not specifically recall
who made the decision to use more than $1 million in company money to apply
the purchase. He was asked what Ms Zaccara told him about the character
of the transaction where $1 million of company money would
be used to buy
the O’Connell Street property. He said he did not specifically recall,
but it was “shareholder withdrawings
or some sort”. He was asked
whether it was a dividend. He said he did not know, he left that to the
accounting people to
figure out.
agreed it was fair to say that he did not know the specific character of the
transaction, and he did not know how the transaction
was accounted for in the
books. He said it was his general understanding that the monies came from
Ex NF to Ms Zaccara, who then
applied them to the property.
Munneke was taken to the loan documentation for the $740,000 ANZ loan. He
agreed that there was no documentation formalising
his perception that it was
essentially a pre-payment of rent for Ex NF. He was asked why it was in
the interests of Ex NF to subject
itself to a 5.5 percent interest rate on
the loan if it was not actually acquiring the property that was being bought
with the loan.
He said because it was obtaining the lease, a home. He was
asked whether he made any investigations about alternative premises
which might
have been available for rent. He said it just made sense at the time to
purchase O’Connell Street because the
property location was good, and it
was close to where they lived. He agreed that its proximity to his personal
residence was a factor
in the decision to acquire the property.
Munneke agreed that the withdrawal of $1,025,911.59 left an amount of $139,000
in the ANZ account.
Munneke was then asked to consider a financial statement for Ex NF for the
period ending 30 June 2015 prepared by Rowe Partners.
He said he did not know
what entries under “Non-Current Assets” which includes “Loans
– Associated Trust”
in the sum of $325,000 related to. He was asked
to compare that to the 2016 balance sheet and in particular the inclusion of a
loan regarding O’Connell Street for $1.025 million under
“Non-Current Assets”. It was put to him that was the
same amount
that came out of Ex NF’s bank account. He was asked whether it was
accounted for as a loan from Ex NF to 28 O’Connell
Trust. Mr Munneke
said he did not know. Mr Munneke said he was not involved in the retrospective
preparation of the financial statements
for Ex NF for 2015, 2016, and 2017.
He said he was asked no questions by the accountant in relation to the character
of the O’Connell
Street transaction, nor did Ms Zaccara ask him any
questions about it. He said he could not shed any light on the non-current
recorded in the balance sheet. He was asked whether it appeared that it
had been accounted for as a loan rather than a shareholder
distribution. He
said he did not really understand the accounting of it and that it is a matter
he left entirely to Ms Zaccara.
He did not recall discussing with anyone
Ex NF making a loan of $1.025 million to 28 O’Connell Trust. He said
that he did
not turn his mind as a director of Ex NF to the merits or
otherwise of giving a substantial loan of this amount of money. He said
had learned for the first time during the
examination that it was recorded
as a loan to the 28 O’Connell Trust.
Munneke was asked again about his concept of the ANZ loan being a
pre‑payment of rent. It was put to him that Ex NF went
liquidation in 2019, so it had the benefit of occupation for four years. He
said, to his knowledge, the pre‑payment of
rent had not been brought to
account in any way, and it had not been recorded in any document.
Munneke was taken to the email from Ms Zaccara to Guvera where she said,
“We’ve only got a couple of weeks of operational
money left”.
It was pointed out that the email was sent in January 2016, about a month after
the acquisition of O’Connell
Street. He was asked whether, in the context
of the cash requirements of the business, he paused to consider whether or not
appropriate for a million dollars of Ex NF’s money to be used
in a transaction in whatever form. He said “Yes”.
When asked what
consideration he gave to it, he said:
Obviously our liquidity
position was much lower. The amount that I had anticipated would be ... was
much less that it had been.
I think we did kind of get caught in the moment and
so, yes, more was pulled out of the account than anticipated and hence part of
it was to recoup those outstanding invoices.
was put to him that the million-dollar withdrawal from Ex NF’s
accounts put Ex NF in a very bad position. He said:
put it in a tight position. ... I believed that, you know, had we got into a
very bad position – I mean, I believed
we were still solvent and we could
have – well, we were calling on outstanding moneys and we could have, you
know, seeked other
moneys as well.
was put to Mr Munneke that his evidence about Ex NF being solvent was
inconsistent with his previous evidence that he had no ability
to assess the
solvency of Ex NF because he had no visibility of the tax position. He was
asked whether he had turned his mind to
solvency in December 2015.
Mr Munneke said he looked at what was coming in, how much they had at
invoice, and he believed they would
be able to continue to pay operational
costs. He acknowledged that he had that view in the absence of understanding or
the tax liabilities and he did not appreciate the depth of the
Munneke agreed that if Ex NF had a total equity of $722,000, he would have
been concerned about adding another liability of $740,000
if it would have
brought the equity to a negative point. He was asked whether he had any vision
of what the amount of tax might
have been. He said he knew there was
outstanding BAS, but he did not know the magnitude of the tax owing. He was
asked to assume
that as at 30 June 2016 there was $915,000 of tax owing of
various types, much of which had been owed for some time. He was asked
assume there was cash in hand of $472,000. It was put to him Ex NF would
have had no way to pay that tax bill. Mr Munneke said
he knew they had a lot of
outstanding invoices that were also unpaid for a very long time, but he agreed
that the figures indicated
it had no way to pay the tax bill. He was asked to
assume that $915,000 of tax was immediately due and owing, six months or
thereabouts
after, the $1 million in cash was paid from the company bank
account. He was asked to agree that Ex NF was “hopelessly insolvent
at [that] point”. Mr Munneke disagreed, saying “it doesn’t
show receivables”. He did not believe at that
time there was no way of
raising the money if they had to. He was asked whether Ex NF could have
raised nearly $1 million in cash
to pay the ATO with cash at hand and
receivables. Mr Munneke said that he believed they could have sought
further investment from
Ms Zaccara. He was asked whether he had discussions
with Ms Zaccara about her investing further monies in Ex NF. He said he
not aware of the financial position at that time, so there was no
discussion.
Munneke was asked whether he subsequently discussed with Ms Zaccara the
characterisation of the O’Connell Street transaction
books. Mr Munneke said there had been some discussion about a 7A loan or
other loan, but not in detail. Mr Munneke
said that Ms Zaccara had not
subsequently told him about the character of the $1 million withdrawal from
Munneke said that it was Ms Zaccara’s idea to buy Ward Street, and that he
had nothing to do with its acquisition. He said
that he understood Ms Zaccara
had paid the money to acquire Ward Street from various sources including
cryptocurrency. He said he
knew the cryptocurrency belonged to Ms Zaccara
because he had purchased it for her after she asked him to do so. He said that
bitcoin was held in a wallet that he controlled, and that the bitcoin was
used to purchase ethereum, which in turn was exchanged
for cash to purchase Ward
Street. Mr Munneke said that he could not recall how much he paid for the
bitcoin and that it was purchased
over a period of time.
Munneke was taken to the purchase of ethereum in 2014. He said that he sent an
email to Ms Zaccara informing of the purchase
“[b]ecause she had said we
should buy some Ethereum, “we” being personally”. Mr Munneke
stated that Ms Zaccara
told him to make the purchase using the bitcoin in
his wallet.
Munneke said he thought that he purchased the bitcoin in February 2014 with his
personal credit card. He was surprised upon being
shown evidence that the funds
had come from the NAB account:
paid for the $1000 – this all stems from $1000 Bitcoin acquired, I think
you agree, in February 2014? Who paid that $1000?
I don’t recall.
suggested the company would you deny that?
I thought I did. I know there was also some Ethereum bought for a customer
which is the reason why we actually bought
it in the first place, and so there
was a transaction – there would have been a transaction to recoup that,
like, money that
we invoiced to the customer.
I want to suggest to you is that the company funded the original acquisition of
the Bitcoin. The Bitcoin funded the acquisition
of Ethereum, and Ethereum
funded the acquisition of Ward Street. You see the lines I’m drawing,
you accept that the company, through a variety of assets interchanged, funded
Ward Street?
That’s the lines that appear. It wasn’t my understanding.
was your understanding?
That I had bought that crypto from Bitcoin that I had kind of purchased separate
to the company.
Munneke said that he believed that he had records in relation to his
understanding. Having been shown MYOB records, he indicated
that it appeared
that the purchases had been made with the company credit card.
Munneke said that he did not know how the $1,000 bitcoin transaction was
accounted for in Ex NF books. It was put to him that
Ex NF was not
loaning $1,000 to him to buy bitcoin. He said that he did not recall. It was
also put to him that Ex NF was not gifting
him $1,000 to buy bitcoin. He
said that he did not know.
Munneke was asked again why he thought that the ethereum was owned by Ms
Zaccara, given that the bitcoin was purchased by Ex NF.
He replied that at
the time of the ethereum purchase for Meeco, he recalled Ms Zaccara saying,
“maybe we should buy some as
well, in a personal capacity”. The
following exchange then took place:
she say in her personal capacity at the time? Did she use those words?
No, she did not use those words.
did she say, “We should buy some Ethereum”?
I don’t recall but probably the latter.
the communication between you and Ms Zaccara about the Ethereum recorded in
writing at all?
Only that email that was referred to earlier.
Is it possible that because Ms Zaccara was a shareholder of the business you
simply equated her and the business [Ex NF] as the
one and the same?
Definitely not. She would have used buy [Ex NF] Ethereum if that was what
she had intended.
Munneke said that he sold the ethereum in 2018 in three tranches on behalf of
Ms Zaccara only, as opposed to on behalf of himself
and Ms Zaccara
together. He stated that he did not take any steps to advise the ATO of the
capital gains event following the sale,
and that to his knowledge, neither did
Ms Zaccara. He agreed that the proceeds of the first ethereum sale were paid
into his personal
account with the CBA. He said he paid the $100,000 deposit
for Ward Street from that CBA account using the funds from the first
ethereum. He said that he was not aware of how the proceeds of the subsequent
ethereum sales, which were deposited into
the NAB account, were characterised in
Ex NF’s accounts.
Munneke was asked why the proceeds from the sales were paid into the NAB
account. He explained that settlement on Ward Street
was to happen the
following day and “time became of an essence”. He said that the NAB
account was used because the broker
who sold the ethereum banked with NAB, and
it was faster to make transfers between different accounts with the same bank.
Munneke agreed that the surplus from the second and third ethereum sales of
$121,988.92 was paid into another of Ex NF’s
bank accounts, the NAB
Maximiser account, on the same day. It was then suggested that the ethereum had
always been owned by Ex NF.
Mr Munneke replied, “I don’t
believe so.” He was asked to explain why the surplus proceeds from the
sales were left in Ex NF’s account. He said:
Privilege. Again, available money. We have already established
that, you know, there was – liquidity was low, and so having
that amount
available in case we needed it was prudent.
asked whether he had turned his mind to the necessary liquidity of Ex NF at
the time, Mr Munneke said that he did not recall.
He did not accept the
suggestion that his answer about the surplus funds being retained for
Ex NF’s liquidity being something
that he had just thought of during
examination.
Munneke agreed he had not disclosed the substantial cryptocurrency holdings
until the day of the
examination, and that he had told the liquidator that
he had no assets over $10,000. He accepted that ethereum was valued at over
$2,000 per unit and that he held about a million dollars’ worth of
ethereum. When asked whether his statement to the liquidator
had been wrong, he
referred to the huge surge in the value of cryptocurrency and said that at the
time he made the statement, he
did not believe he had a substantial
cryptocurrency holding. When it was put to him that there was a huge surge in
2018 before the
acquisition of Ward Street, Mr Munneke accepted that this was
part of the reason for the transaction. He was asked again whether
statement to the liquidator was incorrect. Mr Munneke replied,
“Probably”, but he denied intentionally hiding the
asset from the
liquidator. He was again asked to explain why he did not disclose the ethereum.
He said that two months prior to
examination, ethereum had been valued
at only $500 per unit, that he did not do the sums, and that he “kind
of” considered
that the ethereum belonged to Ms Zaccara.
Munneke was then questioned about property at 20 South Terrace, Salisbury
(“20 South Terrace”). He said it is property
that Ms Zaccara
operates her boarding house business from. He agreed that he understood it was
owned by Linda Zaccara Holdings Pty
Ltd. He said he did not know who paid for
the property and it surprised him that Ex NF paid for it.
was taken to the NAB account for 19 November 2013 and a withdrawal for $200,000.
He was asked to accept that it was a withdrawal
which funded part of the
$260,000 purchase of 20 South Terrace. He agreed that seeing that Ex NF
had paid that amount of money gave
him concern. He said he did not know that
Ex NF was funding $200,000 to buy that property. He then said he recalled
some discussions about the capacity for Ex NF to provide a loan
and he agreed it was a substantial amount of money to be paid out
at the start
of a startup company.
Munneke was then asked about the property at 22 South Terrace, Salisbury
(“22 South Terrace”). He said that he was
aware that it was also
being used by the boarding house business. It was put to him that it was
acquired in May 2014 for $190,000
and placed in a trust of which Linda
Zaccara Holdings Pty Ltd was a trustee. Mr Munneke said he did not know who
paid for it. He
was asked whether it would surprise him to learn that
Ex NF paid $170,000 of that purchase price. Mr Munneke said, “Less
now”. He said he did not recall $170,000 being taken out of
Ex NF’s bank account. It was pointed out to him that there
$170,000 coming into the account at the same time. He suggested that might be a
redraw on the mortgage that they had for their
Munneke was asked what benefit to Ex NF the loans in relation to the
purchase of 20 South Terrace and 22 South Terrace (“the
South Terrace
properties”) would have been. He said, “Being a loan, I would say
the company interest in it was the repayment
with interest”. He was asked
what the interest rate was. He said he did not know as it did not look as
though it was formalised
correctly, and he did not know or was not aware of any
documentation regarding the transactions. He said he did not consider taking
security over the properties, but in retrospect it would have been a good idea.
He said he was not aware whether Linda Zaccara Holdings
Pty Ltd had ever paid
back any money to Ex NF in repayment of the loans. He agreed the situation
in 2013 and 2014 was that $370,000
worth of loans were made to
Ms Zaccara’s related entity, and he did not insist on any interest or
security and in the years
since has not raised this with Ms Zaccara at all.
Munneke was then questioned about Meeco’s request in October 2018 that
Ex NF defer an amount due by way of fees of $729,346.75
for six months
which Mr Munneke agreed to. He said Meeco wanted the deferral so that they
could show an investor that they were
not insolvent. He was asked why
Ex NF agreed to it and he said because if he did not, it was likely that
Ex NF would not receive
a significant part of their fees
Munneke’s statement
Munneke explained in his statement dated 27 March 2024 that Ms Zaccara is
“quite entrepreneurial or at least my perception
was that she wanted to
see herself as a successful businesswoman”. Mr Munneke explained that
Ms Zaccara was appointed a shareholder
because she contributed the startup
capital to Ex NF. He stated that she was not appointed as a director
because he was the person
with the experience and connections in the industry
and, therefore, he was running the operational side of the business of
Ms Zaccara and Mr Munneke maintained separate bank accounts
and were financially independent of each other. Rather than call himself
director or chief executive officer, Mr Munneke used the title
“Captain of Captology”. Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara agreed
Zaccara would be the chief operating officer. Mr Munneke explained that
her role was also that of chief financial officer
and she was responsible for
all bookkeeping, reporting to the company accountant, and back‑office
operations. Mr Munneke did
most of the client invoicing.
Munneke detailed that Ms Zaccara caused the establishment of the ZALD Trust
in 2008. He said it is a discretionary family trust
established as his
family’s investment vehicle.
described how Ms Zaccara’s family operated a boarding house business in
Salisbury, whereby the family owned multiple properties
in the Salisbury area in
Ms Zaccara’s and her sister’s name. He said Ms Zaccara would work
at the boarding houses three
to four days per week. He described how
Ms Zaccara had said to him at various times that he put too much work and
passion into the
businesses of other people, and she wanted him to be working
for the benefit of their family. He said as Ms Zaccara also had an
education in computer science, she saw a family business as an opportunity to
work alongside each other.
said when 2Moro went into liquidation in January 2012, he, Ms Zaccara, and
the founding members decided to start a business in
mobile and web application
development.
Munneke said Ex NF initially operated the premises upstairs from a dress
shop on the corner of O’Connell Street and Ward
Street, North Adelaide.
The location was around the corner from Mr Munneke and
Ms Zaccara’s home in North Adelaide.
Munneke stated that to start Ex NF Ms Zaccara used her cash resources
to purchase the plant and equipment from 2Moro. She negotiated
liquidator of 2Moro and Ex NF purchased the plant and equipment for $8,500
plus GST. He said during the initial three month
start up period,
Ms Zaccara paid the founding employees and his salary from her own
independent cash resources. He stated a loan
from Ms Zaccara was recorded
in Ex NF’s books of $50,000. He said Ms Zaccara would pay the staff
directly from her own bank
account or cash resources.
Munneke said when Ex NF started trading, it was engaged on behalf of Guvera
to provide technical support and feature development
for Guvera apps.
Mr Munneke said the work from Guvera kick started the focus of Ex NF
to “new ventures”. He said that
encompassed businesses that were
looking to move into new digital ventures, specifically in the mobile space. He
saw an opportunity
to work with founders of startup businesses or existing
businesses that had not worked in the mobile space before to develop their
application ideas.
Munneke described the engagement of BDO following Ex NF’s
incorporation, who were the accountants for 2Moro. He said the
primary contact
was Mr Vijayadass.
Partners became Ex NF’s accountant and its registered office from
20 October 2017. Mr Munneke said he relied on Ms Zaccara
and BDO, and
subsequently Rowe Partners, in respect of Ex NF’s monitoring and
taxation reporting. He generally oversaw cashflow
as he approved invoices and
expenses. If there was a cashflow or liability issue, Ms Zaccara would
discuss it with him as she did
when the ATO was conducting an employer
obligations audit in early 2015.
Munneke stated he regularly monitored Ex NF’s bank account to see how
cashflow was tracking, as well as reviewing the Freshbooks
(later Harvest) which
was Ex NF’s invoicing and debtor management software. Mr Munneke
said if Ms Zaccara was meeting with
the accountants, he would be aware she
was having a meeting but would not personally attend. After such a meeting, he
if something important was discussed and she would give him a
high‑level explanation. He said Ms Zaccara was relatively
self-sufficient
at attending to bookkeeping. He said, whilst he trusted
Ms Zaccara, BDO and Rowe Partners, he remained responsible for reviewing
and signing off on Ex NF’s financial statements and liaising with the
stated that when the ATO conducted its first employer obligations audit the ATO
was supportive and gave the impression it was
compliance with ATO obligations. He said that gave him confidence that, by
working with the ATO
and BDO, Ex NF’s compliance would be rectified
at that time. He stated that he and Ms Zaccara later discovered that BDO
been hands-off in its role as Ex NF’s accountant and he recalled
receiving little paperwork from them to sign, apart from a
yearly statement
regarding Ex NF’s solvency. He said prior to realising this, he had
relied upon BDO in respect of financial
reporting and taxation matters.
Munneke said having reviewed BDO files subpoenaed in this matter, he noted that
there were emails from time to time where BDO
representatives were chasing
Ms Zaccara for documents to complete lodgements or emails from
Ms Zaccara responding that she had been
very busy, which had led to the
delay in providing information.
said he was aware Ms Zaccara was busy but trusted that she had all the
information and data entry under control. He said BDO
was aware he was the
director but would not contact him by telephone to discuss the lodgements and,
at all times, Ms Zaccara was
the primary contact. Mr Munneke said that in
late 2016 when they were put on notice of the second ATO employer obligations
he became concerned about the hands-off approach of BDO and that BDO was
not ensuring sustainable compliance with ATO obligations.
Thereafter, Rowe
Partners were engaged.
Munneke said he was aware that Ms Zaccara met with Robert McDonald of
Rowe Partners (“Mr McDonald”) in early 2017.
Shortly thereafter,
Ms Zaccara had a meeting with representatives of the ATO as part of an
employer obligations audit and Rowe Partners
were heavily involved in ongoing
discussions with the ATO during the first half of 2017. He described that after
Rowe Partners were
engaged, Ex NF ceased using MYOB and transferred to
Munneke described the catalyst to purchase O’Connell Street was that
Ex NF’s lease at 112 Ward Street, North Adelaide
Street”) was due to expire and would not be renewed. He said, at the
time, Ex NF had a good track record
with existing clients such as Meeco and
Guvera. It was making good money and had large amounts of invoiced work
outstanding and
a large amount of cash at hand. He explained that in or about
September/October 2015, he asked Ms Zaccara to speak with
Mr Vijayadass
could be used to purchase a property from where Ex NF could trade and how
purchase could be structured. He said that Ms Zaccara had reported to
him that Mr Vijayadass had advised that there was sufficient
cash in the
business to take it out as a dividend and that the cash could be used to fund
the purchase of a property.
[93] of his statement, Mr Munneke said he has been shown a document titled
“Harvest Invoice Summary” which records
that, as of 31 December
2015, Ex NF had invoiced the sum of $1,135,312.37, received payment for
those invoices in the sum of $1,075,296.34,
had written off $60,016.03 and had
WIP of $89,912.50. He said this was consistent with his recollection at the end
of 2015 that
Ex NF was trading well, had healthy cashflow and WIP when
O’Connell Street was purchased in December 2015. He asserted he
regard to these matters when he transferred the money out of the ANZ account
that went to the acquisition of O’Connell
Munneke contended the email dated 30 September 2015, from Mr Vijayadass to
Ms Zaccara stating, “Given the property is only
likely to have 50%
gearing, I imagine there are many lenders who will be interested to make the
loan to [Mr Munneke] and you”
is consistent with the discussions he
and Ms Zaccara had at the time arising from Ms Zaccara’s
discussions with Mr Vijayadass.
That is, that there was cash that would be
available to Ms Zaccara as shareholder and therefore the proposed loan to
value ratio
on the purchase would be low. He contended the email is also
consistent with their discussions at the time that the property would
Ms Zaccara and him, or him or as advised by the accountant.
Munneke’s evidence was that he made the decision to use the cash at bank
towards the purchase of O’Connell Street
on the basis of the advice that
Ms Zaccara had relayed to him from Mr Vijayadass that the funds could
be paid as a dividend. He
also gave evidence that in September or October 2015,
at his request, Ms Zaccara sought advice about the appropriate structure of
the O’Connell Street purchase from Mr Vijayadass. Mr Munneke said
that he considered there was a sufficient pipeline of work
to meet ongoing
cashflow and a move to O’Connell Street was in the best interests of
Ex NF because it would allow Ex NF to
described, under the heading “Assessment of Cashflow and Solvency of
Company”, his involvement in reviewing cashflow
and financial matters. He
said these matters were in his mind and he had regard to them in deciding to
apply the cash at bank towards
the purchase of O’Connell Street.
Munneke said, consistent with Ms Zaccara’s usual practice, she would
have obtained advice from the accountant that the company
trust structure was
the appropriate structure to purchase the property. He said that their usual
bank, NAB, was not prepared to
advance the loan for the purchase so they
transferred their banking to ANZ. He stated that it was initially proposed that
provide a loan and obtain a first registered mortgage up to 80 percent
of the purchase price for O’Connell Street. He said
on 13 November
2015, ANZ issued a letter of offer in which Ex NF was approved for a loan
to facilitate the purchase in the sum of
$1 million. He said a $40,000
deposit was paid from the NAB account. He maintained that on the advice of the
accountant there were
sufficient funds to pay a dividend.
an unexpected lower bank valuation, ANZ loaned $740,000 and the balance was paid
out of the ANZ account. Mr Munneke said
he did not formalise the extraction of
the funds from Ex NF’s accounts at that time, for example, by way of
a minute of a meeting
or resolution. He maintained Ex NF had been provided
with advice from Mr Vijayadass that its healthy cash position would enable
a dividend to be paid. He said he trusted that the recording of the transaction
of the payment of the dividend would occur when
the accountants prepared the end
of year financial statements and tax returns.
Munneke maintained that despite that cash being withdrawn, there was a good
runway of work, particularly from Guvera and Meeco,
from which ongoing
liabilities would be paid. He said, from the time Ex NF operated from
O’Connell Street, he caused Ex NF
to pay the ANZ mortgage
repayments as payment of Ex NF’s rent for occupation of
O’Connell Street. He said Ex NF did
not make any additional payment
to him, as landlord, over and above the mortgage payment by way of rent. He
said Ex NF was responsible
for all outgoings on O’Connell Street.
There was no written lease agreement. He said the benefits to Ex NF in
moving were
a larger space, more visible street presence, a long-term place of
business and its proximity to his and Ms Zaccara’s home.
Munneke said that in late 2013, he was contacted by Bitmap, a company that
maintained a register of vendors accepting bitcoin
as payment. He explained
that he decided to list Ex NF on the register in the event that a customer
wanted to pay using bitcoin.
The CoinJar account was therefore linked to the
NAB account. However, he stated that no customer of Ex NF ever paid in
Munneke said that he opened a CoinJar account in January 2014 using his
Ex NF email address, which he said he used for both work
and personal
purposes during his directorship. Mr Munneke stated that he always intended for
the CoinJar account to be his personal
account and noted that at the end of
2014, when usernames were introduced to CoinJar, he chose the username
“@nextalias”,
being his personal handle. He said that he opened the
account in his own name because it was not possible for companies to open
accounts. He stated that if it were possible, he would have opened a second
account in Ex NF’s name.
Munneke explained that CoinJar holds the key to the relevant wallet, whereas the
user has a username and password, and is required
to undergo two‑factor
authentication, to access or trade in the cryptocurrency held in the wallet. He
said that no other person
has ever had access to these login details.
Munneke said that the commercial operations of Ex NF were limited to
software development and that it never was in the business
of trading or dealing
in cryptocurrency or investing in any assets.
Munneke stated that on a date between February 2011 and February 2012, he and Ms
Zaccara spoke about mining bitcoin personally,
although they never did so. He
said that in late 2013 or early 2014, Ms Zaccara asked him to purchase
cryptocurrency for them and
their children. He noted that the ZALD Trust had
been established in 2008 “for family investments of this kind”.
Munneke stated that he and Ms Zaccara first purchased bitcoin on
14 February 2014 as a wedding gift for Ex NF employee, Ricardo
(“Ric Santos”), who had provided an address for bitcoin gifts
in lieu of a wedding gift registry. He said that
the gift was from him and Ms
Zaccara personally, with Ex NF giving Ric Santos a separate gift. Mr
Munneke explained that to avoid
verification delays, noting that Ric
Santos’ wedding was to take place the next day on
15 February 2014, Ex NF’s debit
card was used to deposit
$300 into the CoinJar account, as the NAB account had already been linked to the
CoinJar account. He said
that for the same reason, on the evening of
14 February 2014, he transferred a further $700 from the NAB account into
the CoinJar
account, intending to use this money to buy bitcoin as a family
investment.
Munneke said that in around mid-2014, he was asked to purchase ethereum on
Meeco’s behalf in the ethereum pre-sale. He
asked Ms Zaccara whether
they should also purchase some and she agreed. He said, “I believe she
also intended it to be a family
investment”. Mr Munneke detailed the
transactions he made in August 2014 whereby he deposited an additional $650 from
NAB account into the CoinJar account, then purchased bitcoin which was
used to acquire ethereum. He described depositing another
$1,400 from the NAB
account, which was later used to purchase further bitcoin. These transactions
are set out in the following
Transaction
Bitcoin Balance
Ether Purchased
CoinJar Cash Account Deposit of $300
Mr Munneke made this deposit using a debit card linked to the NAB account
subsequent to the $700 deposit referred to below. While
the $700 took several
days to clear, the $300 was available in the CoinJar account immediately.
CoinJar Bitcoin Buy of 0.377986 BTC for $300
CoinJar Bitcoin Send of -0.0200 BTC to
“1K2SdxYrmhypV9nCT6R6gG3nyjpfiawMEn"
Mr Munneke sent this bitcoin from the CoinJar account to a bitcoin wallet
that he controlled.
CoinJar Bitcoin Send of -0.33333333 BTC to
“1MrMrsWPAaK7HzGYG57ekFXbgCsFP7i1Rb”
Mr Munneke sent this bitcoin from the CoinJar account to a bitcoin wallet
nominated by Ex NF employee, Ric Santos as a wedding gift.
CoinJar Bitcoin Receive of 0.0010 BTC from
“1HgQmyBaXzTAXQY2JqPLAu1hfDGQ53g6hC”
Mr Munneke sent this bitcoin from the bitcoin wallet he controlled back to
the CoinJar account as a test. He used the bitcoin remaining
in the wallet
(0.0189 bitcoin) in small transactions over the following weeks, including to
purchase sushi and an AB.
CoinJar Cash Account Deposit of $700
Mr Munneke made this deposit by bank transfer from the NAB account on 14
February 2014 prior to making the $300 deposit referred to
above. However, the
$700 was not credited to the CoinJar account until 18 February 2014.
CoinJar Bitcoin Buy of 1.105636 BTC for $700
CoinJar Bitcoin Send of -0.0282 BTC to
“15EWcrAhKLw4hcaT3VLKEnbjatWAkSTaTT”
CoinJar Bitcoin Send of -0.02585775 BTC to
“1LeKhZyeSSa24mukJsJGovdVf3PJrwhFbn”
CoinJar Bitcoin Send of -1.0152 BTC to
“19ttvUHdNFif6KKyTURk5u1Jr6bpJ7UyNm”
Mr Munneke purchased this ethereum on behalf of Meeco and subsequently
issued an Ex NF invoice to Meeco in respect of the transaction.
CoinJar Cash Account Deposit of $650
Mr Munneke made this deposit by bank transfer from the NAB account on
5 August 2014.
CoinJar Bitcoin Buy of 0.986BTC for $650
CoinJar Bitcoin Send of -1.048 BTC to
“15SL5vXryZWwku8GUWraWstMmJX3gQdjoL”
The ethereum acquired by Mr Munneke in this transaction was issued to a
wallet that he controlled.
CoinJar Cash Account Deposit of $1,400
Mr Munneke made this deposit from the NAB account on 6 August 2014.
CoinJar Bitcoin Buy of 1.0000 BTC for $575.11
CoinJar Bitcoin Buy of 0.3333 BTC for $181.50
CoinJar Bitcoin Buy of 0.3333 BTC for $182.49
CoinJar Bitcoin Buy of 0.3333 BTC for $171.63
with the CoinJar account, Mr Munneke said that he was the only person to ever
have access to the wallets that held the ethereum.
He said that physical copies
of the keys are kept in a safe.
Munneke explained that he used the NAB account to make deposits because it could
have taken three days for him to set up a new
CoinJar account linked to a
personal bank account. He also said that Ms Zaccara used her personal funds to
meet company expenses
from time to time, including sundries, office supplies,
computer hardware, and Christmas presents for staff. He stated that Ex NF
owed Ms Zaccara for these expenses. He said that he and other employees would
also use personal funds for company expenses from
time to time, then would
“generally record expenses in “Freshbooks” ... and request
reimbursement”.
Munneke stated that he did not treat Ex NF’s money as his own. He
said that at the time of the cryptocurrency purchases
and thereafter, he was
conscious that Ex NF would be recompensed for its use of funds by either
setting off amounts owed to Ms Zaccara
or simply repaying them. Mr Munneke
stated that he “did not attribute huge significance” to the use of
the NAB account
because the amounts debited were relatively small, being only
in respect of the
cryptocurrency purchases for him and Ms Zaccara. He noted that in any case,
Ex NF was repaid by virtue of it retaining
surplus funds following the sale
of the ethereum in 2018 for the Ward Street purchase.
Munneke said that because the ZALD Trust is “the family investment
vehicle, [he believed] that the cryptocurrency is an
asset of the ZALD
Trust”. He noted that this should have been recorded in the ZALD
Trust’s financial statements, but
none were ever prepared.
Munneke explained that the cryptocurrency portfolio was managed exclusively by
him by buying, selling and trading. He said that
while he only ever exchanged
cryptocurrency for cash in respect of the Ward Street purchase, he occasionally
paid for personal expenses
with cryptocurrency where it was accepted by
retailers (including Sushi Planet) and transferred amounts to friends.
Mr Munneke stated
that following Ric Santos’ wedding, it became
“customary” for him and Ms Zaccara to gift bitcoin to employees for
their weddings.
Munneke detailed that Ms Zaccara was friends with the previous owner of
Ward Street, who also ran a business out of the building
“The Doll House Anti Ageing Clinic” (“the Doll House”).
That business was sold to Ms Zaccara in
March 2018. Mr Munneke said
Ms Zaccara signed an offer to purchase Ward Street on 3 January
Munneke stated that between 11 and 25 January 2018, Ms Zaccara decided to sell
some of the ethereum, because it was trading at
a record high, and used those
proceeds to purchase Ward Street by 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd.
Mr Munneke’s evidence is that the
purchase of Ward Street shows that
neither he, nor Ms Zaccara, intended Ex NF to own or benefit from the
cryptocurrency or Ward Street.
He said had they intended for Ex NF to
benefit from cryptocurrency, they could have simply purchased Ward Street in the
Ex NF and that would have been far less work. He said Ward Street
housed the Doll House business, which was entirely an enterprise
Ms Zaccara’s, having trained as a beauty therapist.
Munneke said that on 8 January 2018, he was put in contact with someone through
whom he could sell ethereum. He referred to his
email to this contact in which
... wondering what my tax implications are (especially
given the reason to cash out is to pay a company tax bill
said that he did not now recall any bill that was required to be paid at that
time and noted that Meeco was asking him around
that time about how to cash out
and whether there were any implications for doing so.
Munneke said that the first parcel of ethereum (100 units) was sold in January
2018 to a cryptocurrency agency, Caleb & Brown,
and the proceeds were paid
into his personal CBA account. He stated that from this amount, $100,000 was
paid as a deposit for Ward
Street. He said that he then sold further
cryptocurrency to Joe Richards at BitRocket (“Mr Richards”) in two
transactions
for $911,445, which was paid into the NAB account. He described
selling 300 additional units of ethereum to Caleb & Brown for
which was also paid into the NAB account. Mr Munneke said that $1,135,920.08
was paid from the NAB account to the Polson
Legal Trust Account on 29 January
2018 to complete the Ward Street purchase.
Munneke referred to the following email correspondence between him and Mr
Richards on 26 January 2018, following the sale of the
Email content
Thanks for the OTC conversion; will recommend - we have a customer that
bought Ethereum for at pre-sale with us who are also likely
[to] convert some
Mr Richards
Awesome, thanks!
What do you do?
I have a software development studio that has focused on building new
ventures, often with startups. Meeco is a client since 2012,
and we actually
spoke directly with Vitalik in the early days when the Ethereum project was
starting, and believed in the project
and the power of this new blockchain with
smart contracts.
Bought in at the pre-sale to use it, never expected it to
be an investment, just thought it was a cheaper way to get gas for
development.
(emphasis added)
Munneke explained that in this email, when he said, “[b]ought in at the
pre-sale to use it, never expected it to be an investment,
just thought it was a
cheaper way to get gas for development”,
he was referring only to
the ethereum purchased by Meeco for its proposed development of smart contracts,
which would require gas.
He stated Katryna Dow of Meeco (“Ms Dow”)
expected ethereum to be important to the technology Meeco wished to develop.
said that he was not referring to any asset that was to be used in
Ex NF’s business or for its own developments. Mr Munneke
that the purchase of ethereum in 2014 by him and Ms Zaccara was intended as an
investment.
said that from mid to late 2017, Ex NF started doing a fair amount of work
with Real Time Data. Real Time Data had government
contracts to produce mobile
applications for fisheries departments. Mr Munneke said in late November
Ex NF continued to focus a
large percentage of its team on working with
Real Time Data, despite that portion of the business not yet generating income.
said by late 2019, he was busy and distracted and his relationship with
Ms Zaccara was deteriorating. He started to see someone
else on the side.
He, Ms Zaccara and their children went to the United States at Christmas
2019 for a holiday. Following their
return, he and Ms Zaccara then
January 2019, the ATO served a statutory demand for payment on Ex NF,
seeking a sum in excess of $2.7 million. Mr Munneke said
he was surprised to
receive the demand and did not believe the liability to the ATO should be that
high. On the advice of Rowe Partners,
he and Ms Zaccara contacted an
insolvency professional and in March 2019 Ms Zaccara and Mr McDonald
attended a meeting with Mark
Lieberenz of Heard Phillips Lieberenz. Following
that meeting, Ms Zaccara told Mr Munneke words to the effect “the
already on Anthony’s desk”, Anthony being Anthony Phillips,
the liquidator. Thereafter, Ex NF went into liquidation.
Munneke said Meeco and Guvera drove the turnover of Ex NF and that they
were both ultimately invoiced weekly. He stated that
during 2014, when the
cryptocurrency was purchased, he believed there was sufficient funds in
Ex NF’s bank accounts to pay
ongoing liabilities. He stated that
Ex NF had a strong period of growth during 2015 and 2016. The annual
turnover in 2014 had increased
significantly from 2013, from approximately
$600,000 to $1.1 million, and it increased again in 2015 to approximately
$1.6 million
and 2016 to $1.7 million. He stated that Guvera was
always a good “payer”.
was aware of the emails from Ms Zaccara to Guvera from late 2015 to early
2016, where she used words like Ex NF is in “dire
straits” or
that it really needs the money. He said Ms Zaccara used those words as a
debt collection tactic and he had asked
her not to use such tactics in the
future. He maintained that at that time there were ongoing invoices being
generated to each of
Guvera and Meeco, as well as a healthy bank balance. He
contended that in October 2015, the bank balance in the NAB Maximiser account
was $950,678.52, which had been steadily increasing over 2015 and $427,929.98
was in the NAB account. He said in late 2015 or early
2016, he did not know
Ex NF’s exact ATO liability, but he recalled it was not a significant
sum. He believed it was less than
$100,000. He said he did not review the ATO
portal and relied on Ms Zaccara to attend to the necessary payments to the
deposed that in late 2015, Guvera officers said they were going to publicly list
Guvera. He said that provided him with comfort
that Guvera was tracking well
and would be able to pay any outstanding invoices. He was also confident that
Meeco could pay its
outstanding invoices.
Munneke referred to his perusal of the 2016 financial statements prepared by
Rowe Partners in 2017 to the effect that the rent
substantially increased from
$7,060 to $140,149. He said he believes the financial statements do not capture
rent for Ex NF’s
previous premises because rent was usually paid
upfront. He believed that the sum of $140,149 would include the amounts paid
to former tenants of O’Connell Street to surrender the leases. Mr
Munneke referred to the email from Ms Zaccara dated 12 September
Harriette Sale of BDO (“Ms Sale”), in response to Ms
Sale’s email advising Ms Zaccara that BDO had received
a call from
the ATO regarding outstanding lodgements for Ex NF and
Ms Zaccara’s response referring to circumstances that have
Ex NF, including a significant crisis in August 2016, being Guvera going
into administration with a $464,986.17 debt owing
Ms Zaccara said in that email not only was this an obscene amount of money
[C]ould make or break us into shock, we also had the problem
of having long time employees with nothing to do. It took much effort
on my part to help get this company out of this predicament and not fall over.
I am still working on this major event
trying to recover as much money as
Munneke said he recalls that, at the time, the ATO was putting pressure on
Ex NF for compliance to be dealt with quickly, but
he did not believe there
were issues with Ex NF’s insolvency overall. He referred to being
shown a letter from the ATO dated
17 May 2018 detailing the results of an
employer obligations audit and stated that Ex NF was then indebted to the
ATO in respect
of PAYG withholding, SGC and penalties in the sum of $563,417.75.
He said he did not recall seeing that letter prior to this litigation.
Munneke maintained he was generally aware that Ms Zaccara was managing the
compliance issue with Rowe Partners, and he believed
it was under control.
Mr Munneke referred to a letter from Rowe Partners to Ms Zaccara dated
1 December 2017 where Rowe Partners
said, “I would like to discuss
the 2018 year to date accounts as from what I have reconciled so far you are
currently operating
at a very large loss”. Mr Munneke did not believe
Ms Zaccara brought this to his attention. He said at this time, the
at Ex NF were allocated to the Real Time Data work which was not
yet generating income and he did not believe Ex NF was operating
due to the large amounts outstanding from Meeco. He said the cash balances of
Ex NF as at 1 December 2017 were:
account – $28,090.87;
Maximiser account – $1,057.46;
account – $39,962.61.
said he signed the solvency resolution for Ex NF on 8 March 2018 and he
would not have signed that document if he believed Ex
NF was not solvent.
He maintained he did not see the letter dated 1 December 2017 from
Rowe Partners to Ms Zaccara or the email
of 25 June 2018, wherein Rowe
Partners advise that the financial statements for Ex NF expect to report a
very significant loss for
the 2018 financial year. He maintained that, at most,
he recalled a discussion with Ms Zaccara in which she informed him that
should downsize their payroll as they had too many developers.
Munneke explained that in October 2018 he agreed to Meeco’s request that
Ex NF defer its debt of $729,346.75 for 12 months.
He said, up until 2019,
he considered business was good and there was cashflow. He said it was only in
the second half of 2018
that he caused Ex NF to over-invest time in Real
Time Data which was too slow to come to fruition. As a result, cash flow became
more of an issue. He said, even when Guvera when into administration in
June 2016, there was a short‑term hole in cashflow.
The work was
there, as was the ongoing work from Meeco. He said Guvera’s
administration did not cause him any concerns as
to Ex NF’s solvency.
Munneke said he did not consider the insolvency of Ex NF as a relevant
factor to the purchase of Ward Street as it was Ms Zaccara’s
purchased with the family cryptocurrency.
Munneke said he does not recall having seen the ATO integrated client account
for Ex NF dated 26 May 2018, and had he been shown
a document in
May 2018 that recorded that the debt then owing to the ATO was in excess of
$1 million, he would have been surprised.
He was aware that efforts were
being made with the ATO, via Rowe Partners, to bring the lodgements up to date.
He asserted Ms Zaccara
did not ever bring to his attention that the ATO
liability could be that high.
said that on 2 July 2018, Ex NF received an enforcement notice from
Revenue SA alleging unpaid payroll tax for 2015 to 2017 financial
the sum of $140,114.10.
Munneke asserted that neither Ms Zaccara or Rowe Partners informed him that
the ATO debt, as at November 2018, was almost $2 million,
as detailed in the
email from Rowe Partners to Ms Zaccara on 2 November 2018.
Munneke contended that if he or Ms Zaccara were aware of any lingering debt
or solvency issues throughout 2015 to 2018, they would
have applied their
personal funds to support Ex NF. He referred to the fact that
Ms Zaccara financially supported Ex NF from the
beginning when she
purchased plant and equipment from 2Moro and personally paid employees’
salaries. He said he and Ms Zaccara
also supported Ex NF when they
paid $30,000 from their home mortgage for upfront rent at 112 Ward Street. He
referred to Ms Zaccara
having a large number of personal real estate
properties associated with the boarding house business and that, to the best of
knowledge, none of those properties are subject to mortgage. He referred to
also having access to cryptocurrency, if required, to
support Ex NF, which
was valued in 2017-2018 at $1.2 million.
said, as of December 2015 and January 2018, the need to support Ex NF did
not arise as, at those times, Ex NF generally had a
high turnover and they
were working through audit and compliance requirements directly with the ATO.
He contended there was also
sufficient WIP to meet ongoing liabilities, that the
ATO was not taking any other direct action at that time and that at all times
considered Ex NF had sufficient cash at bank to meet its expenses.
Mr Munneke said he was not given any prior notice of the topics that he would be
examined on during the
examination and, at the time of that
examination, he had not refreshed his memory by reference to any books or
records of Ex NF and
some of the events the subject of the examination
occurred six years
Munneke’s cross-examination
cross-examination, Mr Munneke acknowledged he was familiar with the
responsibilities of a director of a company; the obligations
to keep written
financial records that would enable a true and fair financial statement to be
prepared, that he was obliged to act
in the best interests of the company, to
act only for the proper company purposes, and to take into account the interests
of creditors
and to ensure that the company complied with its legal obligations.
Munneke agreed that oversight of Ex NF’s financial performance was
ultimately his responsibility. He said he understood
that he was the only
person who could approve the lodgement of BAS and he knew that Ex NF was
under an obligation to pay SGC. He
then said he knew that there was an
obligation to pay GST on a quarterly basis and that Ex NF was liable to pay
income tax on a quarterly
basis by virtue of BAS lodgements. He was aware that
Ex NF was liable to withhold the tax payable by Ex NF employees and
the ATO on a quarterly basis.
accepted that by the end of March 2015, there had been no BAS lodged by
Ex NF between July 2013 and March 2015, and that
in a flurry in
April 2015 there were lodgements for September 2013, December 2013,
March 2014, and June 2014. Mr Munneke said he
recalled becoming aware that
Ex NF had not been lodging its BAS for close to two years. He said he said
they needed to do something
different, and they sought counsel from an
alternative accountant.
it was put to him that he knew that for a two-year period Ex NF was not
paying GST, PAYG, SGC, or income tax, he said it was
not in the forethought of
his mind, he actually believed it was being taken care of. He was asked how he
thought it was being taken
care of when money was not coming out of
Ex NF’s bank account to make those payments to the ATO. He said
there were lots of
transactions in and out, and he was not explicitly looking
for those transactions. He said he was primarily involved in billing,
developing the projects and invoicing.
said when they first set up Ex NF, he set up separate accounts that were
supposed to be for deposits of cash to pay tax obligations
and he expected that
practice had continued after he became less involved.
Munneke said that he thought the tax payments were being made between July 2013
and March 2015. He thought that Ex NF was covering
its obligations. When
it was put to him that a payment of $46,000 in July 2013 would be something that
he would notice, that being
the liability for the June 2013 quarter, he said it
was not something that he recalled. When asked whether he turned his mind to
the lodgement of BAS, he said he knew they had to be done but he delegated that
to Ms Zaccara, and he thought they were being attended
to. He reiterated his
focus was on getting the money in. It was put to Mr Munneke that he knew
Ex NF was in manifest default of
its tax obligations by the end of 2015.
He said that he thought that the flurry of activity of trying to do the BAS was
them up and by the end of 2015 he thought they had covered all of their
BAS returns.
was asked to explain why the flurry of activity in lodging the 2014 lodgements
did not cause him to make the 2015 lodgements.
He said he expected they would
have been done, and he thought that in the flurry the rest of the outstanding
lodgements were being
attended to. He said that he left it all up to
Ms Zaccara to attend to and expected the accountants would be guiding them
and seeking
information as required. He was asked whether he considered what
the processes were for lodging quarterly BAS. He said he did not
turn his mind
to it, he had other things to worry about. He said he could not do everything,
that is why he delegated that part
of the business to Ms Zaccara and to the
accountants and he focussed on the things that he had the most value in.
was put to Mr Munneke that Ms Zaccara’s performance in April 2015 in terms
of Ex NF’s tax compliance had been an abject
failure. Mr Munneke
said he knew that they had fallen behind, but it was something they were working
through. He knew Ms Zaccara
was working with the accountants to catch up and he
said, “we all learn as we’re building a business”.
Munneke said that the last personal tax return he filed was when he was at
university. He explained that when he was in university
a life insurance policy
was converted to a term investment which complicated his tax return. He said he
did not do a tax return
that year, which he estimates was around 1995 or 1993,
and he has not done one since. He said it has become very difficult to work
how to resolve it. He said he is very cognisant of the fact that he has not
brought his ATO record up-to-date, and he has not
had any child subsidies for
his children. When asked whether he was conscious that between April 2015 and
the end of 2016 that the
ATO compliance issues were yet to be addressed, he
said, “I was conscious that it was in the process of being remedied”
and that he did not exactly know the position of default. Mr Munneke said that
he did not try and ascertain the extent to which
Ex NF was in default. Mr
Munneke denied he had a moral objection to paying tax and denied that he had no
compunction about not complying
with his tax obligations. He said he
understands that tax is an important part of our society, and he understands it
has to be paid.
Munneke said that he worked for certain periods without receiving payment,
paying off a loan that one of Ms Zaccara’s entities
owed to Ex NF.
Mr Munneke said that he and Ms Zaccara borrowed the money from Ex NF
when they had an opportunity to buy property.
They forewent salary until such
time as they felt they had paid the amount back and then resumed receiving
salaries. It was put
to Mr Munneke that he did not ensure compliance with
SGC payments after April 2015. He said he did not know about the dates, but
did create a spreadsheet and that it became a top priority to get that up to
date. Mr Munneke said that after the ATO audit he
was hoping and expecting that
superannuation contribution payments were being maintained. He explained that
he delegated and believed
that it was happening. He was asked:
had a significant sum come out of your bank account to make this due,
weren’t you cognisant thereafter that amounts were
still not coming out of
your bank account referable to tax or GST or superannuation of your
primary reference was, as I have said before, my primary focus was on income, on
bringing business in and invoicing. So the only
– typically the only time
I turned my attention to the bank account was to look at the balance. I
wasn’t looking at
the daily transactions in the bank account. I was
looking at the invoices issued and the invoices paid.
was taken to a letter from the ATO referring to Ex NF not having lodged
activity statements and PAYG amounts withheld
for periods for six quarters.
Mr Munneke agreed it was a serious matter, but he believed that was what led to
the flurry of activity.
Mr Munneke said he did not recall seeing that
correspondence, but it was his understanding in June 2015 that they were
up with tax obligations. He was then asked to look at the
communication from Ms Zaccara to Darren McDougall of ANZ
(“Mr McDougall”)
in relation to potential borrowings for
O’Connell Street. It was put to him that ANZ were indicating they were
not prepared
to lend money if Ex NF was not up to date with their
compliance. Ms Zaccara explained to the banker in that communication that
had lodged the current BAS at that point in time for September 2015.
Mr Munneke said that when Ms Zaccara said this, he was not
conscious that
that left unremedied failures to lodge BAS for September 2014, March 2015, and
June 2015. It was put to him that:
tell the bank that effectively ‘I have included the payment for the BAS in
respect of the period that is the current period’
without disclosing that
there were three quarters left unremedied was quite a misleading impression for
your company to be giving
to your banker, you agree.
Munneke said he did not know if that was the impression that was being given.
He was asked whether at any point he wanted to see
that Ex NF had complied
with their lodgement obligations. He said he did not at any point check what
their current state was, nor
did he made enquiries of Ms Zaccara. He was
asked whether as at the end of the 2015 calendar year he had any understanding
whether Ex NF was up to date with GST obligations. He said he had
expected the flurry of activity with the ATO’s audit that
they had been
brought up to date.
was cross-examined about the
examination where he was asked questions
He was reminded
of the question, “So you weren’t across how much
needed to be paid to the ATO at any point in time?”, and his answer
“No”. Mr Munneke agreed that evidence was true. He was asked
whether his answer of “Yes” in the
examination to the
following question:
If that is the case and I suggest at no point in
time were you able to have an accurate assessment of the solvency of the company
on how much you needed to pay the ATO, is that fair?
was an honest answer. Mr Munneke said, “I mean on that proviso if you
didn’t know, that is correct”. Mr Munneke
agreed that at the end of
the 2015 calendar year he did not know how much needed to be paid to the ATO.
Mr Munneke agreed that he
left the financial reporting to Ms Zaccara but
accepted that solvency was ultimately his responsibility. Mr Munneke repeated
his evidence that he considered that in terms of solvency, his prime
focus was to make sure that Ex NF was making money so that it
could pay its
obligations. He agreed that one of those obligations were the amounts payable
to the ATO.
Munneke agreed that at the end of the 2015 financial year, because he did not
have accurate accounting records, he did not know
what amounts were owed to the
ATO. It was put to him therefore he did not know what Ex NF’s
solvency was. Mr Munneke said
Ex NF was bringing in a lot of money and the
bank balance was good, he believed they had credit in the ATO account. He
agreed that
as he said in the
examination, he did not know in January 2016
whether Ex NF was solvent or insolvent. It was put to him that he did not
know whether
Ex NF had sufficient resources to pay its tax and other
liabilities. Mr Munneke said he could not give a number, but he was of the
belief that Ex NF was doing well. It was put to him that at that time he
was unsure what tax was owed and therefore whether there
were enough resources
to pay tax. Mr Munneke said his understanding at the time was that there was a
$30,000 credit with the ATO
and that they must have been good with the ATO, that
they were making a lot of money, and had a large balance in the bank account,
it was his belief at the time that Ex NF was in a good position. It was
put to him if that was truly his state of mind, he would
not have given the
evidence he did during the
examination about not knowing whether
Ex NF was solvent or insolvent. Mr Munneke said that during the
examination, he felt he had been beaten down, he felt a bit disheartened, and he
had just been given the wind-up notice. He said
there was a degree of guilt and
embarrassment at being wound up. He was in a general state of “What have
I done wrong?”.
It was put to him that the evidence he gave in the
examination was the truth. He replied that he believed it was the truth.
However, he did not say that he thought Ex NF was insolvent
and he did not
say he thought it was solvent. He said he was down and he should have done
Munneke was taken to an email from BDO to Ms Zaccara dated 8 February 2016
seeking information for the lodgement of BAS for 2014
and 2015. He was asked
whether Ms Zaccara told him in February 2016 that BDO were chasing information
for the lodgement of BAS for
the September 2014, March 2015, and June 2015
quarters. Mr Munneke said he could not recall. He also could not recall the
from BDO to Ms Zaccara dated 19 September 2016 stating that the income tax
returns had not been filed for 2014 and 2015. It was
put to him that by this
stage in September 2016, there was a very material default in tax obligations.
He was asked about his evidence
where he referred to not realising that BDO were
hands off and that BDO were not ensuring sustainable compliance. It was put to
him that BDO were seeking to have Ex NF comply, and he and Ms Zaccara were
not attending to the compliance. Mr Munneke said he was
trying to comply, and
they needed someone to come and say, “We will come to your office. We
will run through the receipts,
we’ll run through the invoices, and
we’ll help you put it in”.
Munneke was asked about the letter dated 8 November 2016 from solicitors acting
for REST Pty Ltd, and it was put to him that Ex
NF were sued for a failure
to pay SGC for those employees who were members of REST Superannuation Fund. He
agreed that it was very
important to make sure that superannuation was being
Munneke was taken to a letter from Rowe Partners dated 1 August 2017, forwarding
the 2014 financial statements and income tax
return. Mr Munneke was asked
whether the entry under the heading “Non-Current Assets” on the
balance sheet recording
“Loans – Associated Trusts” for
$370,000 related to Ms Zaccara’s boarding house business. He said it
to a property or a couple of properties that were associated with that
business. He was asked whether at June 2014 he regarded that
as being money
that Ms Zaccara owed to Ex NF. He agreed but was not sure if that number
was correct, he did not recall it being
that high, and he considered it might be
a mistake. He was asked about the entry in the balance sheet under
“Non-Current Liabilities”
recording “Shareholder
Accounts” and the sum of $84,789. He was asked whether that was an
accurate depiction of what
he regarded as Ex NF’s liability to Ms
Zaccara as at June 2014. He said he flicked through the financial
statements, but they
are not his strength so he had trust in the accountants to
prepare it appropriately. Mr Munneke was asked about his evidence during
examination about the acquisition of 20 South Terrace. It was put to
him that acquisition gave rise to an associated loan referred
to in the 2014
accounts prepared by Rowe Partners. Mr Munneke said the loan was repaid by
Ms Zaccara and him taking reduce wages.
was put to Mr Munneke that during the
examination he was asked whether it
would surprise him that Ex NF paid for
20 South Terrace
property and he said “Privilege. Yes” and when asked why it would
surprise him, he said “Privilege.
Because I didn’t think it had
anything to do with the company, Ex NF”. Mr Munneke was asked
whether that was his state
of mind in 2021 at the time of the
examination,
that he knew nothing about the acquisition of 20 South Terrace having been
funded out of Ex NF. Mr Munneke said that
he believed the evidence he gave
in the examination was his recollection of the events. Since that time, he said
he has had time
to consider, recall and has been shown evidence, and that during
the very long
examination he may have forgotten matters.
was taken to the
examination where he was asked whether “Linda
Zaccara Holdings Pty Ltd paid any money back to the company, Ex NF, in
of the loans” and his answer was “Privilege. Not that
I’m aware of”. It was suggested to him that when
he was telling the
Court during the
examination that he was not aware of any repayment of the
loan, that was in reference to the associated trust loan of $370,000 relating
the acquisition of the South Terrace properties referred to in the 2014
accounts. It was put to him that in the
examination he did not give any
evidence about there being an arrangement whereby he and Ms Zaccara were
taking reduced wages which
was paying that loan off. He said that was correct,
because at the time of the examination he did not recall the situation. Mr
Munneke said that having had the time and documents being brought to his
attention, he recalled the agreement that they would pay
that back and that they
forewent salaries for a period of time. It was put to him that during the
examination, he was asked:
In 2013 and 2014 you were aware of
370,000 worth of loans being made, Ms Zaccara’s related entity, you
didn’t insist on
any interest or any security and in the numerous years
since not raised repayment with Ms Zaccara of the loans at all.
to which Mr Munneke said during the examination “Privilege. That is
accurate”. It was put to him that the situation
was that there was never
any arrangement for repayment of the loan by way of salary sacrifice or
otherwise, to which Mr Munneke replied,
“How do you suggest, why do
you suggest we didn’t take salaries for 18 months?”. He said
there was an agreement,
and it was an informal agreement. It was suggested to
him that the evidence he gave during the course of the
examination in 2021
was the truth. Mr Munneke responded, “I don’t think it is
given the evidence”.
was suggested to Mr Munneke that Ms Zaccara met with ANZ representatives about
the O’Connell Street acquisition on 22 September
Mr Munneke said he could recall a meeting with Mr McDougall, but he
believed the first meeting was attended by Ms Zaccara
on her own. Mr
Munneke agreed that in dealing with the banker on behalf of Ex NF that he
– as the sole director – was
the only person authorised to deal with
borrowings on behalf of Ex NF. He agreed that in September 2015 he was
conscious of the
importance of maintaining a separation between what were his
personal financial affairs and the financial affairs of Ex NF. He agreed
it made sense that for Ex NF to enter into borrowings of $1 million or
so, there would need to be a proper company purpose for any
such borrowing. It
was put to him that on the face of it there would be no proper purpose or basis
for Ex NF to be borrowing $1
million so that some other entity could
acquire O’Connell Street. Mr Munneke said at that point in time they
were aware that
they were not able to continue to operate from their premises at
the time and that they were looking at several properties.
Street came onto the market and they were exploring options
to acquire the property and for Ex NF to move into that property. At
point he asked Ms Zaccara to talk to Mr Vijayadass to work out how they
structure it with the funds at hand. Mr Munneke maintained
that he did
think that BDO had full information about Ex NF’s financial position
at the end of 2015 and he believed that after
the flurry of activity, BDO did
know where Ex NF was at. He was reminded of his earlier evidence where he
was cross‑examined
examination to the
effect that he did not think he had accurate books and records as at the end of
2015. It was put to him if he
did not have accurate books and records, it would
follow that BDO could not know the financial position. Mr Munneke said
... the accurate records versus knowing the vibe ... to quote
... basically what was happening [was] ... there was money coming in
and as such
[he] felt that BDO would have an appreciation for [their] current position
without necessarily having the accurate books
and records.
again said that he was caught up in a project and he left how to structure this
purchase to Ms Zaccara, who had the interest in
the property and the business
entities etc. Mr Munneke agreed that by 26 October 2015 he and Ms Zaccara
had agreed that the purchaser
of O’Connell Street was to be him as the
trustee for 28 O’Connell Trust. He agreed that he knew he did not
funds himself to be able to purchase a $1.7 million property. It was
put to him that he knew that the 28 O’Connell Trust had
yet to be formed.
He said he did not know when the trust was formed. He knew there was an
intention to establish it. He was asked
how he thought as at 26 October 2015
that he, in the capacity as trustee for the 28 O’Connell Trust, was
going to buy O’Connell
Street. He said he believed that there was a
combination of a dividend to Ms Zaccara plus a loan from the bank. He was asked
he discussed with Ms Zaccara that a dividend to her in the order of
$1 million would see her liable to pay personal tax of some $500,000.
said he did not discuss that with her and it would have been a concern for her.
He was asked whether he thought she could make
her own investigations about
Ex NF making a distribution to her of $1 million so that she could
lend it back to him so he could buy
a property. Mr Munneke said that it
was his understanding that there was no implication to Ex NF on the payout
of that dividend
and he did not know about Ms Zaccara’s personal tax
implications.
denied he was trying to avoid tax and said that he felt that was something that
accountants would consider and bring to
their attention. He maintained that he
asked Ms Zaccara to seek advice from Mr Vijayadass regarding taking money from
Ex NF to purchase
O’Connell Street.
was put to him that when Ms Zaccara said in an email dated
26 October 2015 that there was consideration given to purchasing
Street as an ongoing commercial interest, that was a false
statement. It was suggested to him that what he knew at that time was
were not going to be acquiring it as an ongoing commercial interest. He said he
was not exactly sure about the terms,
but he guessed he knew that the intention
was for Ex NF to move into O’Connell Street. It was further put to
him that they
were intending to have the two tenants in the property quit their
tenancies on or before settlement. He said at some point they
intended for them
to surrender their leases. It was then put to him that he and Ms Zaccara cooked
up a plan to evade the payment
of GST on the transaction. Mr Munneke said
he did not know. It was put to him that he did not pay any GST on the
transaction.
Again, he said he did not know. It was put to him they instead
treated it as though it was an acquisition of a property with an
commercial interest, namely two ongoing tenants. Mr Munneke said that if the
leases were surrendered for another commercial
tenant, he did not know how it
got treated. Mr Munneke was asked whether the intention was that
Ex NF would borrow $1 million from
ANZ and then loan it to the
purchaser. Mr Munneke said he did not know. Mr Munneke said he was not
qualified to make a decision
regarding how to account for the loans and
dividends, and that is why he wanted to get someone to say, “this is how
to structure
it”. It was put to him that he never got that and he agreed
he did not.
was put to Mr Munneke that at the time of the purchase of O’Connell Street
he did not have the financial statements for
Ex NF for either 2014 or 2015.
Mr Munneke conceded that the letter from Rowe Partners dated 1 August 2017
refreshed his memory that
as of October 2015 he did not have the 2014 or 2015
financial statements. He agreed he did not know what was a reportable profit
for the year ending 2014 or 2015 as at 27 October 2015. Mr Munneke agreed
that the integrated account for Ex NF provided to ANZ
17 November 2015 did not include the various quarterly payments then
outstanding.
Munneke was taken to an email dated 24 November 2015 from Ms Zaccara on
behalf of Ex NF to Guvera when it was owing Ex NF $350,000.
Zaccara said in the email that Ex NF was in “dire straits” with
the ATO on its back for several outstanding BAS returns.
Mr Munneke agreed
that this email was written about four weeks before the settlement of the
O’Connell Street property. He
agreed that as at that date Ex NF had
not entered into any binding obligation to purchase the O’Connell Street
property. Mr
Munneke was asked whether he had turned his mind to the fact that
Ex NF’s position as at 24 November 2015 was one of being
straits. Mr Munneke said he did not, he believed the phrase used by
Ms Zaccara was used as a debt collection tactic, something
that she had
used in the past.
Munneke was asked about the email correspondence dated 7 December 2015
where Ms Zaccara referred to the ANZ valuation for
Street being $1.15 million relative to the purchase
price of $1.7 million. Mr Munneke agreed that they needed to come up with
extra $260,000 for the purchase as the bank would only loan $740,000, not
$1 million as they wanted, and that there was going to
be an additional
drain on the Ex NF resources. Mr Munneke agreed that they were
needing to call in outstanding debtors in order
to be able to fund the
shortfall. Mr Munneke said it was his recollection that they had enough
funds, but the calling in of debtors
was to ensure that they had an operational
buffer. It was put to him that things were pretty tight when the $260,000
cash needed to be found. Mr Munneke said he did not know whether he
would call it “tight”, but it would be beneficial
for the large
amount that they had in invoices to be paid. Mr Munneke was asked whether
he knew the ATO was on Ex NF’s back
and he said “For reporting
yes”, but not for payment. He said that he did not realise that they
still had a ATO debt.
Munneke was taken to the
examination where he was asked why it was that he
put the O’Connell Street property into a trust rather than
name and he had said, “Privilege. Effectively, to
protect it. To kind of go ‘Ok here’s an asset which isn’t
linked to the company’s success or failure’”. Mr Munneke
said that that answer was true. It was put to him that
he wanted to put the
property beyond the reach of the ATO, to which he said that was not his
intention. He said this was an asset
of the family; Ms Zaccara and the family,
and so it made sense to separate Ex NF from the property which Ms Zaccara
was using a dividend
to purchase. He was asked why he would not buy the
property in the name of Ex NF so it remained available for payment of
outstanding
creditors. He answered, “Because it wasn’t a company
concern, it wasn’t a company business”. Mr Munneke
referred to
the payment out of in excess of $1 million to acquire O’Connell
Street as surplus cash. He agreed that it was
surplus cash that was available
to pay debts, including the ATO. When it was put to him that once it was paid
out it was no longer
available, he said, “if there was necessity for
funds, then that was available either from [Ms Zaccara] herself, or from
... customers or interested parties”. He agreed it was his state of
mind at the time he paid the money out that it was okay
because Ms Zaccara might
decide to put money back in if it was needed. He said there was a property
Ms Zaccara had an interest in
on the market, Parawae Road, as well as
outstanding invoices. There was also a good runway of work.
Munneke said that throughout the lifetime of Ex NF, Ms Zaccara was the
driving force for success of Ex NF so that if they required
funding, she had assets that could assist. Mr Munneke was asked whether at
the time $1 million was paid out, he said to
Ms Zaccara “I will pay
out more than $1 million in order to [buy] O’Connell Street on
condition that you commit to paying
money as is necessary see our creditors
paid”. Mr Munneke said he did not have that specific conversation.
Munneke maintained that the payment towards O’Connell Street was paid out
as a dividend to Ms Zaccara. It was put to him
that in 2017, when they were
regularising the financial statements and returns for 2014 and 2015, it was not
reported as a dividend.
Mr Munneke said he was not involved in that process,
and he did not know it was not being characterised as a dividend. He was asked
how, having believed it was a dividend in 2015, did he come along in 2017,
having heard reference being made to an L7 loan, and not
think they were
inconsistent with what he thought the actual state of affairs was.
Mr Munneke said he did not understand what an
L7 loan meant, and that he
trusted Ms Zaccara and the accountant would account for it as per the 2015
intention. He said it was
his understanding that Ex NF’s repayment
of the loan instalments would be its contribution for the rent. It was put to
that in addition to the payments towards the mortgage repayments, Ex NF
made payments of rent to him as the trustee of 28 O’Connell
Trust. He was
taken to Ex NF’s financial statements for the year ending
30 June 2016 where there is a disclosure of rent in
the amount of
$140,149. It was put to him that Ex NF claimed a tax deduction for the
rent and that his evidence that Ex NF received
the benefit of cheaper rent
was untrue because in the 2016 year it paid $11,000 per month for six
months, being $66,000, which well
exceeded the interest only payments on the ANZ
loan of $740,000. It was put to him that Ex NF paid him by virtue of a
transactions through the accounts of Ex NF which were more than
the amount owing to ANZ. Mr Munneke said he did not see any additional
his account. It was put to him that he signed a tax return that claimed a tax
deduction for a rental figure of $140,000.
He said the decision about the
rental charge would have been made by Ms Zaccara and the accountant. It was put
to him that accountants
do not decide what is put in a tax return; they need
instructions. He maintained he did not make the decision to record a rental
charge that was founded upon him receiving rent from Ex NF of $66,000 over
six months.
Munneke said he was aware that NAB had refused to lend money for the
O’Connell Street purchase because Ex NF did not attend
to their ATO
filings and did not have up to date books. He was asked whether he checked to
see whether the filings were up to date
before he went to ANZ and he said that
it appears that he never checked.
Munneke was asked about the withdrawal of $100,000 from the ANZ account for a
family trip to Antarctica in the middle of 2016.
He said he did not believe it
was company money, it might have come out of Ex NF’s account, but it
was not intended to be
Ex NF money. He was asked how it is that he could
not be aware of $100,000 coming out of the bank account. He said it was because
he was focused on invoicing and revenues. He said he did not recall giving Ms
Zaccara authority to withdraw $100,000 for personal
expenses from
Ex NF’s bank account. He said it surprised him that $100,000 had
come out of a company account without being
recompensed. He denied that he
treated Ex NF monies as his own. It was put to him to take $100,000 out of
the accounts of Ex NF,
he would need to know where Ex NF was at with
the creditors. Mr Munneke said he expected the money to have been paid back by
Munneke was then asked whether he was aware by mid-2016 of the emails from BDO
following up the outstanding tax returns and BAS.
Mr Munneke said he recalled
those emails. He was asked whether he was aware that the lack of filings was
far from being remedied
but was becoming increasingly one of default throughout
2016. Mr Munneke said he understood there was still further that needed
done. He said they “did a bunch and then I guess we fell behind
again”. He was asked whether as sole director,
he regarded it as a
serious matter that $100,000 was drawn out of Ex NF’s account to pay
for a holiday in the context of the
issues they were having with the ATO. He
maintained that he did not have any knowledge that the $100,000 had been drawn
was then questioned about cryptocurrency.
Munneke agreed that he and a Meeco representative met with Vitalik Buterin
(“Vitalik”), the inventor of ethereum,
before ethereum was released.
Mr Munneke agreed that in the first half of 2014, precisely what ethereum
might be able to do in relation
to smart contracts was uncertain, and that the
purpose of the meeting with Vitalik was to understand how it might work. He
that at the time, he was acting as the chief technology officer of Meeco,
and that he attended the meeting in that capacity.
Munneke said that he believed in the ethereum project and thought that it was
exciting. He agreed that he viewed ethereum as
very powerful for products being
developed in the Meeco space. He accepted that Ex NF was providing
software development services
to Meeco, one of Ex NF’s biggest
customers. However, he denied that in mid-2014, he was developing proposals for
develop smart contract capability for Meeco.
was suggested to Mr Munneke that he met with Nick Lothian
(“Mr Lothian”)
to develop a proposal for smart contracts
for Meeco. He did not accept this and said that at the meeting, he was acting
in his capacity
as chief technology officer of Meeco to brief Mr Lothian on
creating a proposal for development for Meeco. He explained that Ex
not have the capabilities or capacity to undertake a blockchain project, whereas
Mr Lothian had the time and capability to
do so. Mr Munneke agreed that he
was speaking to Mr Lothian about how Meeco’s platforms could be advanced
by way of smart
contracts, which would ultimately require that Meeco have access
to ethereum. He said that he was tasked by Meeco to acquire ethereum
purpose, which he did by using bitcoin in the CoinJar account. He agreed that
Ex NF invoiced Meeco for the price of the
bitcoin used to acquire the
Munneke agreed that the CoinJar account was linked to Ex NF’s NAB
account to allow customers’ payments by bitcoin
to be made to Ex NF.
Mr Munneke accepted that he linked Ex NF’s email account to the
CoinJar account. When it was pointed
out that he also had a Gmail account, he
said that he did not use that account at the time. He explained that NextFaze
was his handle
and online identity before he started Ex NF. He said that
thereafter, he established a new handle, namely NextAlias.
Munneke said that at the time he set up the CoinJar account, it was for
Ex NF’s purposes; for the receipt of bitcoin and
to convert it to
Australian dollars. He said that intention changed on 14 February 2014, the
night before Ric Santos’ wedding
when he and Ms Zaccara decided to
purchase bitcoin as a wedding gift. Mr Munneke agreed that at the time of
purchasing the bitcoin
for Ric Santos, he was aware that he could add a personal
account to the CoinJar account. He said at that time, there was not enough
to establish or link a separate account. He agreed that at no point after 14
February 2014 did he seek to add a personal bank
account to the CoinJar account.
Mr Munneke agreed the wedding present was his first purchase of cryptocurrency.
It was suggested
to him that the $300 spent on the wedding gift was never
reimbursed by him. Mr Munneke agreed that $300 was not paid back into the
account, but he believed it would be reconciled with debts owing to Ms Zaccara.
He did not recall telling Ms Zacarra that she
needed to take $300 off any debt
owed by Ex NF to her. Mr Munneke was taken to his earlier evidence where
he said that he needed
to use a company debit card because of the need to
purchase the cryptocurrency urgently. He then agreed that the $300 deposited
into the CoinJar account would have been via bank transfer.
Munneke was questioned about communications from CoinJar commencing from 10
February 2014. Mr Munneke was shown an SMS from CoinJar
on 10 February at
10:05 pm which instructed him to go to a NAB branch and deposit $500 in
cash to CoinJar and provided account details
and a reference code. It was put
to Mr Munneke that there was no need to be worried about immediacy of transfer
in light of this
text message from CoinJar. Mr Munneke said the SMS was highly
suspicious. He said if someone told him to deposit cash directly
into a bank
account, he would treat it is a scam and said he did not recall receiving that
Munneke was then taken to an SMS from the same number as the previous message
sent five minutes later at 10:10 pm on 10 February
2014 asking him to
transfer $500 to CoinJar. Mr Munneke said that this text message seemed more
legitimate. Mr Munneke agreed this
text message was instructing him to transfer
the same amount of money into the same bank account as referenced in the message
at 10:05 pm. He said if he could verify the specific account was the same
CoinJar account he was dealing with, he still would not
transfer cash.
Munneke was then shown an SMS he received on 14 February 2014 asking him to
transfer $300 to CoinJar. Mr Munneke accepted this
was the wedding gift to Ric
Santos of $300. He accepted that it was sent from the same SMS and it had the
bank account details as
the SMS’s he received on 10 February. Mr Munneke
accepted that the transaction referred to in this SMS was the transaction
he fulfilled as evidenced by an email from CoinJar confirming it had received
his deposit of $300. Mr Munneke accepted that
both SMS’s had the same
reference number. He agreed the $300 deposited into CoinJar would have been
done by electronic transfer.
Munneke agreed that the communication on 10 February at 10:05 pm was received
almost to the minute of him being in a conversation
with Anthony Mansour of
Alias Life (“Mr Mansour”) at 9:50 pm. Mr Munneke said in that email
to Mr Mansour he was going
to give bitcoin to Ric Santos for his wedding. He
said the email discussions seem to be around about the same time he was
to or looking at making a deposit to CoinJar. Mr Munneke said it
made sense that at 9:59 pm on 10 February 2014 when he said now
the time to buy, he might have triggered something to CoinJar that occasioned
the response by SMS. He accepted he received
by way of SMS two messages: one
involving a bank transfer and one involving a cash deposit, both identifying the
same bank account
for deposit with CoinJar. Mr Munneke agreed that if he did
not have confidence that the messages were not a scam, he would not have
any form of electronic transfer from the NAB account to the bank account
identified in the CoinJar SMS.
Munneke was asked again about the first communication from CoinJar on 10
February 2014 at 10:05 pm giving him an option to go
into a NAB branch and
deposit money into the CoinJar account. Mr Munneke agreed he could have gone
into the NAB branch on Tuesday
to Friday of that week to effect the deposit and
his concerns regarding the clearance the funds would have been avoided if he had
done it at that point in time. He accepted that he would not have had any need
to use a company bank account to effect the transfer.
It was put to Mr Munneke
that his evidence that it was always his intention for the CoinJar account to be
his own personal account
as evident by the username he chose, being NextAlias,
was not true. Mr Munneke maintained it was. It was put to him that he
established
the account in order to be able to receive Ex NF money. Mr
Munneke said it was established in order to be able to receive payment
clients which he would then transfer to Ex NF. He said he did set it up as
a personal CoinJar account because he used his email
account. When asked why he
did not attach his own bank account to the CoinJar account, he said because the
purpose was that if someone
paid Ex NF in bitcoin, they could receive the
bitcoin and then deposit it as Australian dollars into the NAB account. He
that he was lying.
Munneke was then questioned as to why there was urgency in relation to the $300
transaction. Mr Munneke agreed the transaction
on 14 February was urgent
because he had not transferred the $300 when he indicated it was time to buy on
10 February 2014. He agreed
that there was no urgency in relation to the $700
transfer. Mr Munneke agreed that the deposit of $700 reached the CoinJar
on 18 February and it sat in the CoinJar account until it was then
the subject of a purchase of bitcoin on 25 February. He agreed
that both the
$300 and the $700 had come out of the NAB account. He agreed he could have used
personal funds in order to be able
to deposit anything other than the urgent
$300 transaction into the CoinJar account. He was then asked what discussions
with Ms Zaccara regarding the purchase of the bitcoin as the
wedding gift. He said they had discussed that they should get bitcoin
wedding and that the groom had given his bitcoin address. He recalled that at
the time he said “[m]aybe we should
get some bitcoin” or maybe Ms
Zaccara said to him “[m]aybe we should get some bitcoin for ourselves as
Munneke said that the earliest discussions that he and Ms Zaccara had about
bitcoin were probably in 2010 to 2011. He said it
was when Silk Road was a
thing. They talked about mining bitcoin but that was complicated. He said he
was working at 2Moro and
he did not have a lot of time so they looked at buying
it. He explained at that time to purchase bitcoin you would arrange to meet
someone in person and would pay in cash.
explained that acquiring bitcoin meant bringing it into your possession, whereas
buying bitcoin meant transacting with somebody
else in order to achieve it.
When asked how many times Ms Zaccara asked him to buy it on her behalf, he said
he could not say, that
it was discussed at various times and she maintained that
she wanted it but it just was not on his priority list.
Munneke maintained that in 2010 or 2011, Ms Zaccara first asked him to acquire
bitcoin for her. He said back then it was probably
around mining because there
were not really any public exchanges. He said they would have been talking
the process of mining, whereby a computer
program is run and bitcoin is received “if you’re lucky”. He
that Ms Zaccara had asked him to buy it but he did not get around
to it. He was asked again when Ms Zaccara first asked him to buy
bitcoin for
her and he did not get around to it. He maintained that she asked him to
acquire it in 2010 or 2011. He said there
were no discussions about whether or
not it had to be bought or whether it could be mined. He said she might have
raised it when
the topic came up in the news or in tech papers. He said she was
not hounding him for it. He maintained he had an outstanding request
mind from her to acquire bitcoin that took him three or four years to fulfil.
Munneke was asked about the price of bitcoin in 2010. He agreed it could be
bought it for 40 cents per bitcoin but not easily.
Munneke was asked whether he had read Ms Zaccara’s statement. He said he
had read it just prior to being cross-examined.
He was asked whether when he
came into the witness box, he had in mind what Ms Zaccara was proposing to say.
He said he was aware
of some things that she had put in her statement. It was
put to him that he wanted to align his story with her story as much as
He agreed that he read the statement for the purpose of being in court. He said
he had not spoken to Ms Zaccara about
the differences and similarities in their
respective evidence. He said he had only read Ms Zaccara’s first
Munneke agreed that he had said that the $300 and $700 transactions made on 14
February 2014 were made late at night. Mr Munneke
was taken to an SMS he had
received at 2:58 pm on 14 February 2014 telling him the $300 had been received.
It was suggested to him
that there was not such a mad rush making the $300
transfer late at night on a public holiday, as he had previously given evidence
of. He said that would appear so. It was put to him that exchanges that would
engage in public exchange of bitcoin had been around
since 2010. He said he did
not know. It was put to him that the absence of a relevant public exchange was
not an impediment to
him carrying out Ms Zaccara’s request for him to buy
bitcoin in 2013. He said not at that point in time. It was put to him
was not an impediment to him carrying out a request in 2012. He said he could
not comment, he did not know what the landscape
was. It was put to him that
cryptocurrency exchanges would have enabled him to readily and safely embark
upon a purchase transaction.
He agreed that was so for a period of time.
said he did not recall whether Ms Zaccara gave him any money to buy bitcoin on
her behalf. He said she did not ever discuss
how much she wanted him to buy on
her behalf. Mr Munneke said by 2013 he started to become conscious of
Australian-based cryptocurrency
exchanges and he was also conscious of the fact
Ms Zaccara had asked him to purchase bitcoin on her behalf.
was asked whether he agreed the price of bitcoin rose very markedly during the
course of the 2013 year. He said he recalled
a couple of peaks, but he did not
recall the exact times. It was put to him that between the beginning and end of
March 2013, bitcoin
rose from $20 to $100. Mr Munneke said he recalled there
was a peak. He was asked whether there was any discussion with Ms Zaccara
the cryptocurrency going from $20 to $100 and him not having done what she had
asked of him. He said there was a general feeling
of “have we missed the
boat”. He then said he did not recall any discussion where
Ms Zaccara asked him why he did not
buy it when it had risen so rapidly.
It was then pointed out to him that between the end of March 2013 and eight days
later, bitcoin
rose 230 percent. He said he did not recall any conversation in
that context with Ms Zaccara. It was put to him that it had reached
by the end of November 2013. He said, “That’s a big
increase”. Again, he said he did not recall any conversations
Ms Zaccara about not having fulfilled her purchase requests.
was put to Mr Munneke that he did not refer in his statement to having any
outstanding request to buy bitcoin before late-2013
or early-2014. He said he
recalled during the Silk Road wanting to get bitcoin. It was put to him that he
did not speak in his
statement of having been asked to purchase any bitcoin on
Ms Zaccara’s behalf prior to the request he described in [134], where
he said the actual request was late-2013 or early-2014 when it was reaching
mainstream.
Munneke denied that he had read Ms Zaccara’s statement where she said she
asked him to purchase cryptocurrency on many occasions
prior to Ex NF being
incorporated in February 2012. It was put to him that in his statement he first
speaks of having discussed
purchasing cryptocurrency on Ms Zaccara’s
behalf in late 2013 or early 2014 and he had given evidence in cross-examination
to the effect that there were outstanding requests for some years between 2011
and 2014 for him to purchase cryptocurrency on Ms
Zaccara’s behalf.
He said it went back to the acquire versus buy issue.
said he referred to 2010 and 2011 because he would have looked at the
possibility of acquiring bitcoin. He said a serious discussion
to actually
purchase was had in 2013 or 2014. He was asked whether he accepted that he had
changed his evidence because he had read
Ms Zaccara’s statement. He said
it was reasonable to say that perhaps it had influenced him:
I’m suggesting is that you’ve changed your evidence having read
para.86 of Ms Zaccara’s statement where she
says that she commenced asking
you to purchase cryptocurrency on her behalf sometime in 2011.
mean, it might – it might have – it might have – I can’t
remember the – I can’t remember the
exact statement but I mean, you
know, my recollection was wanting to get it and I know that that she continually
talked about Bitcoin.
Whether or not she yeah, as I said, I can’t recall
the discussions buy versus acquire.
the effect of that that you might have had your evidence affected by having read
what she said.
discussion, yes.
accept you’ve changed your evidence because you read Ms Zaccara’s
don’t know if I could accept that. I mean, obviously your probing has
tried to pull out certain pieces of information and
I feel like I’ve been
recollecting against that. But it is also reasonable to say that perhaps that
influenced me.
you say ‘that’ you don’t mean my probing, you mean Ms
Zaccara’s statement, yes.
Zaccara’s statement, yes.
Munneke agreed that when he gave evidence in the
examination, he did not
recall having used Ex NF’s money to buy $700 worth of bitcoin. He
said that at the time of giving
that evidence he honestly thought it had come
out of his credit card. He said that his evidence in this Court was of a
conversation he had on the night of 14 February 2014, where he
said he was going to spend $300 on the wedding gift and Ms Zaccara
“Why don’t you buy another $700 for us”. He agreed he did not
refer to any such conversation in his statement.
He said that he can recall
sitting at his computer late at night on Friday 14 February 2014, having
done the transaction for $300,
thinking he could continue and do the $700
transaction. He was reminded that the $300 transaction was made during the
the day on the debit card and it was suggested that the $700
transaction was processed first. He was taken to an SMS he received
14 February 2014 at 12:16 pm. It was put to him on this date he
processed a $700 transaction with CoinJar at 12:16 pm, effecting
instruction to give effect to that and it was only an hour and a half or so
later at 1:52 pm that he embarked upon the
$300 transaction as the wedding
present. Mr Munneke agreed that was what it appeared to have occurred.
was put to Mr Munneke it was not the case that he effected the wedding present
transaction during the day and then late at night
had a conversation with
Ms Zaccara about doing the $700 transaction. He said he does not know
whether the conversation happened
during the day, and he could not recall the
events clearly. It was put to him he had no such conversation with
Ms Zaccara on the
afternoon or the evening of 14 February 2014 regarding
bitcoin. He said he definitely would have discussed it because they had to
agree to the amount to give Ric Santos as a present.
Munneke was cross-examined about whether or not he had a personal bitcoin
wallet. Mr Munneke agreed he had a personal bitcoin
wallet “Bitcoin
Account 1K2Sd-awMEn” (“1K2Sd”). He said he created the 1K2Sd
wallet on the same day as the
first acquisition of bitcoin in the CoinJar
account which he used to test the transfer of 0.02 bitcoin before he transferred
of bitcoin to Ric Santos’ bitcoin address. He referred to it as
a specific wallet that would have been on his phone. It was
put to Mr Munneke
that the existence of the separate bitcoin wallet, 1K2Sd, had not been mentioned
in any of his evidence. He said
it had been to the effect that he had said he
used bitcoin for various things, such as “paying for sushi, paying for an
like, chips and meat from North Terrace”. It was put to him that when
he had given evidence in an affidavit about purchasing
sushi, he had not
referred to that being purchased with his personal bitcoin wallet. Mr Munneke
said he was not sure if he was asked
to make discovery of anything to do with
the 1K2Sd account. He said the documents relating to the 1SKSd account would
discovered by him because no‑one else would have been able to
access his CoinJar account. He said he provided the document
which shows the
transactions. It was put to Mr Munneke that when he described engaging in
various personal transactions using cryptocurrency
in his statement, he
deliberately concealed that the bitcoin used came out of his personal bitcoin
wallet as distinct from the CoinJar
account. Mr Munneke said that the discovery
showed multiple wallets and he was not trying to conceal the fact he had
multiple wallets.
Munneke accepted that the $700 of Ex NF money that went into the CoinJar
account on 18 February 2014 was transferred towards the
purchase of 1.105636 of
bitcoin on 25 February 2014, and that bitcoin sat in the CoinJar account largely
untraded until the purchase
of ethereum for Meeco on 6 August 2014. Mr Munneke
was asked if he truly thought that $700 was buying bitcoin for him and
Ms Zaccara,
why did he leave the bitcoin that was purchased with the $700
in the CoinJar account, rather than transferring it to his personal
gave evidence the personal wallet was an app that sat on his phone and he did
not want to be carrying around that much
bitcoin. He said he kept small amounts
of bitcoin in his personal wallet for day-to-day spending. If he lost his phone
his keys then he would lose access to the bitcoin, so he felt it safer
to have it in the exchange account. Mr Munneke agreed it
was possible that he
had a key that was stored outside of his phone. It was suggested to him that
losing his phone did not mean
he was losing the bitcoin. He said it could and
he did not recall exactly how he was managing the private keys. It was
all he needed to do was store a key separately and he would be able to
go back in and access his personal bitcoin wallet. He agreed
that in February
2014 he knew that he could back up his key, re-create and re-import the wallet.
then gave evidence about stories in the media about people losing their phone
and losing bitcoin that they had mined.
He agreed that if all he was looking to
do was avoid the loss of his phone, which would then amount to a loss of $700
worth of bitcoin,
there were easy ways with his skills to ensure that he could
access the bitcoin wallet despite the loss of the phone. Mr Munneke
maintained he did have genuine concerns, as at 25 February 2014, about
losing his phone and therefore losing $700 of bitcoin. He
said that he was not
treating the $700 of bitcoin as a static asset, it was an investment asset that
was going to increase in value.
He said he trusted the CoinJar account to be a
secure holding in the same way he might trust a bank to hold his cash.
Munneke denied that the reason he did not transfer the $700 of bitcoin out to
his personal bitcoin wallet was because he knew
and intended that $700 of
company money was to acquire company bitcoin. It was put to him it was because
he was trading in a software
business where bitcoin was relevantly appropriate
currency for dealings in his business. He said:
We never bought
any bitcoin. Ex NF the company never bought anything with bitcoin. So it
had no need to hold bitcoin.
Munneke was asked about publishing the account numbers for the CoinJar account
on his Keybase account, “Nextalias”.
Mr Munneke described Keybase
as an app where “you put a whole lot of verifying attributes”.
Mr Munneke said he provided
his bitcoin address as personally identifying
information. It was suggested to Mr Munneke that it was open to him to put his
bitcoin address for his 1K2Sd wallet on his Keybase account if he was
intending to receive bitcoin for some sort of personal purpose.
Mr Munneke said
that he intended CoinJar to be his personal account, so it made full sense to
use the CoinJar receipt address as
his personal payment address.
was suggested to Mr Munneke that when the reason for the creation of the CoinJar
account was to receive bitcoin from members of
the public for the provision of
services, it would be the inevitable thing to do for Ex NF, to publish the
CoinJar account to which
people could pay Ex NF. Mr Munneke said he did
not anticipate people would actually pay them in bitcoin. He said if he had, he
would have used a shared email account. He said the way it was set up was
clearly linked to him, not to a business facility.
was put to Mr Munneke again that the whole reason for creating the CoinJar
account, and linking it to Ex NF’s bank account,
was because
Ex NF wanted to promote itself as trading in bitcoin. He said he wanted to
make sure that if someone did approach Ex
NF to pay in bitcoin, they had a
way of transferring it. He gave an analogy.
If someone said,
“We want to put you in the Amish registry and they’re going to pay
you in apples”, I would have
talked to Sidewood Cider and said,
“Hey, if someone paid us in apples, how much would you give us for an
Munneke said when he held larger amounts of cryptocurrency or cryptocurrency
that wasn’t held within an exchange, he would
write down the security key
or pass phrase and keep that privately. He said he did not write down the pass
phrase for the 1K2Sd
account because the value of cryptocurrency in that account
was not worthwhile. It was put to Mr Munneke that writing down the pass
for the $700 of bitcoin in the 1K2Sd account would have been a ready way of
ensuring that he could store that bitcoin if he
truly believed that it was
personal bitcoin rather than Ex NF’s property. Mr Munneke said as he
truly believed the CoinJar
account was a personal account, he had no reason to
move the $700 out of that account.
Munneke said he never used the CoinJar account to deal in company
cryptocurrency. He explained how he came to purchase ethereum
for Meeco. He
said Meeco required bitcoin to acquire ethereum. He told Ms Dow he had some
bitcoin and Ms Dow said, “Could
you go ahead and do it?”. Mr
Munneke said this was time sensitive because it was in the pre-sale and every
day the amount
that could be bought decreased, so he acted quickly with the
asset that he had available. He said the purchase of ethereum for Meeco
company transaction that he actioned with his personal bitcoin. He said he
regarded the bitcoin as within his control and
it was a joint asset of his and
Ms Zaccara.
Munneke was then questioned about his evidence that he believed the
cryptocurrency was an asset of the ZALD Trust. He said that
he had purchased
the bitcoin as a family investment and it was his intention for it to be an
asset of the ZALD Trust. He agreed
that someone had suggested to him, in the
course of the proceedings, that that might be an appropriate way of
characterising it.
He agreed that neither he or Ms Zaccara, nor the ZALD
Trust, paid CGT when the ethereum was sold in 2018.
was asked whether if he thought the cryptocurrency was his, did he think he had
to pay CGT on the ethereum when it was
sold in 2018. He said it crossed his
mind that it would have to be worked out. He said that he and Ms Zaccara
had a discussion
in 2018 that there would be CGT on the sale of the ethereum.
He said he expected there would be capital gains implications. He
said he did
not think he would be personally up for the tax. It was put to him he knew that
because it was a company asset. He
denied that and said it was because it was a
trust asset and also because it was a conversion of an investment. He denied
evidence on this topic was a deliberate falsehood and said at the time
of the transaction he had started to consider and work out
how capital gains
might be calculated for the purposes of lodging a personal return.
Munneke was asked why he would do so when he had not lodged a return for 30
years or so. He said up until that point, his tax
position would have been very
simple. He said the sale of ethereum seemed like a transaction that might
change his tax position.
He was asked why he did not carry through with lodging
his personal return after 2018. He said because of the hurdle of “How
I catch up with my personal tax?” and the purchase of the property was
Ms Zaccara’s decision and if there was any
CGT, she would have to
deal with it. He denied that that evidence was also deliberately false.
Munneke was taken to his statement where he said he was conscious at February
2014 and all times thereafter that Ex NF would be
recompensed for the use
of the cash in its accounts to acquire the bitcoin. He was asked how that
evidence sat with the evidence
that he gave in the
examination that he did
not recall whether Ex NF was loaning him money, and that he did not know
whether it was gifting him money.
He said he was not sure what was happening,
his memory of those events was somewhat fuzzy. He had thought that he had
those transactions with his own credit card, so at the time of the
examination he was unsure about what was happening.
Munneke was asked how he could reconcile his evidence in 2021 that he had no
recollection of Ex NF ever loaning him money with
the evidence of his
statement. He said in preparing his statement he guessed that he had the
opportunity to go back and recompose
himself whereas in the
examination he
was thrown and shown a lot of things, and he started to doubt his knowledge and
understanding of the situation. It
was put to him that his evidence in his
statement about recompensing Ex NF was simply made up. Mr Munneke said he
did consider Ex
NF money very separate to his own and he denied that his
evidence on this topic was deliberately false.
Munneke said he did not recall telling Ms Zacarra after the original acquisition
of bitcoin that she needed to record $1,000 against
a loan account. It was put
to him that if he had the state of mind he described in his statement, it would
follow that he would
have to say to Ms Zacarra that it had to be charged to
somebody’s loan account. He agreed and also agreed that he could not
the state of mind that it would be offset against expenses without it being
brought to account in Ex NF’s books.
Munneke said he considered that he personally purchased ethereum for Meeco, not
Ex NF. He said he continued to hold the private
key and then invoiced it
from Ex NF to Meeco.
Munneke was questioned about the August 2014 CoinJar statement. Mr Munneke
accepted that there two transactions within the CoinJar
account that represented
the receipt of cash: one of $650 on 7 August and one of $1,400 on 8 August.
He accepted these transactions
were for the purchase of bitcoin.
Mr Munneke accepted these transactions were after the existing balance of
the CoinJar account
on 5 August had been deployed in the purchase of ethereum
for Meeco. It was put to Mr Munneke that the statements show that on
August almost all of the bitcoin, 1.0152 of bitcoin, in the CoinJar
account was used to purchase ethereum for Meeco. Mr Munneke
accepted over the
next couple of days he purchased additional bitcoin comprising $650 worth of
bitcoin on 8 August and $1,400 worth
of bitcoin between 15 to 19 August
Munneke was questioned about the claim for GST in relation to the cryptocurrency
purchase. He was asked whether he agreed that
the purchase of the bitcoin on 6
and 7 August 2014 in the CoinJar account was treated by Ex NF as a company
expense that entitled
it to a GST
Mr Munneke said he
agreed that appears to be the way it was reported. It was put to Mr Munneke
that this was because the purchase
of bitcoin was, in fact, a company
transaction. Mr Munneke said he thinks it was because the books were
produced in a hurry and
they did not go through every line item. It was put to
him that he knew that when there was a claim for money back from the ATO,
needs to be a proper basis for it. Mr Munneke said the accountant
attempted to do that, but they were under pressure to get
the statements in and
they were done in a hurry with the understanding they could be revisited. He
said the accountant should have
worked more closely with them to characterise
the entry. He agreed that he never went back and recalculated it.
Munneke was then questioned about the hackathon in July 2018 promoted by Meeco
and Ex NF (“Hackathon”). He said the
Hackathon was not
particularly regarding the use of ethereum, it was to do with programming and to
bring together programmers from
Ex NF and Meeco to investigate and evaluate
four different blockchains. It was put to him that he was trying to promote
being a leading authority in this style of smart contract
development. He said Meeco initiated and drove that Hackathon and Ex NF,
being the primary development team, was participating in it. It was put to him
that it was more than that, it was a way of promoting
business. He said it became a way to show that Ex NF had done some
blockchain work. Mr Munneke was taken to the press
release written by Ms
Zaccara on behalf of Ex NF promoting Ex NF’s role in the
Hackathon. It was suggested to him that the
essence of it was that Ex NF
was promoting itself as an expert in emerging technologies such as the ethereum
blockchain. It was
put to him that Ex NF was putting out to the market
that “we are trying to learn about this” “we are a company
that plays an important role in this sphere of the market”. He said what
they were doing was putting themselves forward as
embracing emerging
technologies. Mr Munneke disagreed that the need for holding ethereum was an
important part of being able to
participate in the ethereum blockchain. He said
not a single piece of ethereum was used in the Hackathon.
Munneke was questioned about the email from him to Mr Richards dated 26 January
2018 where he told Mr Richards that he had bought
ethereum at the presale in
mid-2014 to use it and “never expected it to be an investment, just
thought it was a cheaper way
to get gas for development”. It was put to
him that that was a true statement. Mr Munneke said it was true for Meeco.
was put to him that he was not dealing with Meeco’s component, he was
dealing with Mr Richards in relation to the ethereum
that had been retained
by Ex NF. He said he had just referred in the email how on behalf of
Meeco, or with Meeco, he had spoken
to Vitalik and that he was trying to get
some kudos for having spoken directly with Vitalik. He denied that he was
referring to
the ethereum that he had acquired for Ex NF in 2014 when he
made the statement that he never expected the purchase of ethereum to
investment.
Munneke said he recalled the conversation regarding whether he should buy
ethereum with Ms Zaccara and it was on that speculative
investment given that
they had just gone through the hype of bitcoin in 2014. Mr Munneke denied
that evidence was deliberately false.
It was put to him that when he wrote the
email to Mr Richards, he was writing to him describing the good fortune
that Ex NF had
by acquiring ethereum to use in its business and it had
escalated in value. Mr Munneke said the email was about trying to get
from Meeco’s perspective. He denied that Ex NF ever acquired
ethereum. He agreed Ex NF’s money was used to acquire
bitcoin and he
agreed that that bitcoin was used to convert into ethereum. Mr Munneke agreed
that when he gave evidence that Ex
NF’s money was not used to
purchase ethereum, what he was saying was that it was not directly used to
purchase ethereum because
bitcoin was bought as an intermediate part of the
exchange. It was put to Mr Munneke that this email to Mr Richards related
transaction leading up to the purchase of Ward Street and it did not
involve the sale of Meeco’s ethereum. Mr Munneke accepted
that there was
no involvement of Meeco’s ethereum in the transaction resulting in the
money that was used to purchase Ward
was suggested to Mr Munneke that the transaction involving the sale of the
ethereum in order to acquire Ward Street was again
claimed by Ex NF as part
of its GST reporting to the ATO. Mr Munneke said the books were prepared in
was put to Mr Munneke that by the time they came to acquire Ward Street, he
had no intention of using the cryptocurrency then
held towards payment of
Ex NF’s tax liabilities. Mr Munneke said he knew it was an option,
it was a source of investment if
they required. He said he did not know that
Ex NF owed, by the time of the Ward Street acquisition, well in excess of
in tax liabilities. It was put to Mr Munneke that at the time
Ward Street was purchased, Ex NF was suffering very material financial
difficulties, and he did not turn his mind to Ex NF’s ability to be
able to pay its tax liabilities that had crystalised by
January 2018.
Mr Munneke said he could not recall.
was taken to the email he sent on 9 January 2018 to Shannon Curtis of Caleb
& Brown (“Mr Curtis”) where he asked,
“Wondering what my
tax implications are (especially given the reason to cash out is to pay a
company tax bill)”. Mr
Munneke was asked whether it was true that he was
cashing out the ethereum to pay a company tax bill. He said, “No”,
he wanted to know what the tax implications were. He was asked why he said
something to Mr Curtis that he regarded as untrue. He
said he wanted to know
what the implications were if it was applied for that purpose, both for himself
and he recalled Meeco were
talking about the OTC process at the time. He said
he wanted to know if the cash out was required for investment “Like, if
had to invest in to pay off the tax bill, what were the implications”. He
was again asked why he asked about the tax implications
in a context of a reason
for sale of ethereum being to pay a company tax bill if that was untrue. He
said it was not untrue, he
wanted to know what the implications were if it was
used towards that means. He asserted the ethereum had been bought “prior
to the definition of crypto in the tax system”. He said he wanted to know
if the additional units of ethereum were cashed,
what the tax implications would
was put to Mr Munneke that when Ward Street was bought, he knew full well
that he was placing Ex NF’s assets beyond the
reach of the current
liability to the ATO. He said it did not even enter his mind because he did not
consider the assets to be company
assets at all. Mr Munneke denied that the
evidence that he gave about him buying ethereum as some sort of investment based
communication with Ms Zaccara was deliberately
Mr Munneke’s
re-examination
re-examination, Mr Munneke was shown documents relating to bitcoin
addresses that Mr Munneke had not raised in his evidence.
bitcoin addresses was described as “1Nfaze”. Mr Munneke
explained that this was a “vanity address”
that was generated for
Ex NF to publish. He explained that he instructed the computer to generate
an address with NextFaze within
it, “so it was recognisable and branding
for the company”. He said the company purpose was to create a receipt
that could be published on the Ex NF website. However, he said the
“1Nfaze” address was never used for a company
Zaccara and the respondent companies’ case
Zaccara’s evidence
Zaccara’s s 597 examination
Zaccara said that she became the chief operating officer of Ex NF. She
said in that role she reconciled invoices but did not
issue invoices and was
responsible for paying the bills of Ex NF. Originally, Ex NF used the
MYOB accounting system. She agreed
that it was fair to say that the financial
records of Ex NF were not in a great state for many years. When it was
suggested to her
that that was connected with the failure to file BAS, she said
that Ex NF was busy, it was growing so quickly, it was not a mess,
put it down to a failure of proper attendance to that aspect of the business.
was put to Ms Zaccara that Ex NF got significantly behind in its tax
filings. She said the tax filings started to fall behind
was asked why the BAS for September 2013 was not filed for a number of years.
She said she obviously could not cope; she had
another business going that she
incorporated in 2012 with another person. She said she considered it was the
director’s responsibility
to do something about that. She said that
whilst she was given the task of attending to a lot of activities related to the
tax affairs
of Ex NF, Mr Munneke had his finger in everything. She said Mr
Munneke signed off on the BAS and he also met with the accountant.
Zaccara said when Ex NF changed accountants from BDO to Rowe Partners
in 2017 they moved to the Xero accounting system. She agreed
that in 2017 the
ATO was making contact with Ex NF about missed filings and remittances and
it conducted an audit. She agreed that
Rowe Partners were brought in to try and
assist in dealing with the ATO. Ms Zaccara agreed she spent a lot of time
in 2017 on the
tax issue, but said she should have spent more time. She was
asked, prior to the tax filings that Rowe Partners assisted Ex NF to
did Ex NF know the amount of tax outstanding at any point in time.
Ms Zaccara said she did not know the actual figure and
that the accountants
had to really do a lot in a rush. It was suggested to her that not knowing the
amount of tax outstanding at
any point in time led to the position that she did
not know the financial position of Ex NF prior to the filing of tax
Ms Zaccara said she felt that Ex NF was doing well, there
was a significant amount of money in the bank, and there was lots of billable
Zaccara was asked whether the 2015 BAS were filed significantly late. She said
she did not really know, she could not give a
definitive answer. It was then
put to her that if Ex NF was not filing its BAS in 2015 until Rowe Partners
in late 2017, whether she accepted that she would
not have known the tax position in 2015. She disagreed, saying BAS returns were
submitted to the ATO because Ex NF had present up-to-date BAS when it was
trying to get a commercial loan in late 2015. She then
agreed that she did not
have an accurate recollection of when specific BAS were filed. Ms Zaccara said
other than the time she spent
on the tax affairs in 2017, more time should have
been allocated to tax affairs prior to that time but she could not cope with the
amount of work and that is why it was not attended to.
was put to Ms Zaccara that if Ex NF had not complied with its tax filings
in 2015, she could not be confident about the financial
position of Ex NF
at any point in that year. She repeated that she did feel confident as there
was money in the bank, billable work
and everyone was employed. She said she
knew they were late with their filings, but they were late because they were
busy and did
not have the right resources.
Zaccara agreed that prior to the six weeks of work in 2017 with
Rowe Partners to get the tax filings up to date, Ex NF was unable
generate and explain its true and accurate financial position. It was put to
her that Ex NF could not have produced true and
fair financial statements
prior to this extensive six weeks of accounting work. She said she thinks it
could have produced something
very close, just in terms of money coming in and
Zaccara was taken to an email from Nathan Thiele of Rowe Partners
(“Mr Thiele”) dated 21 August 2017 saying “FYI,
have had to lodge the June 2015 BAS for Next Phase [sic] today as the ATO
have advised they will soon be forced to issue notices”.
She was asked
whether she accepted that by, at least 21 August 2017, she had not provided
the information that Mr Thiele needed
to achieve compliance. She said that was
possibly correct. She was taken to another email from Mr Thiele dated
7 November 2017
referring to an ATO audit. Ms Zaccara accepted that
Ex NF was so late with its filings that the ATO was conducting an
was suggested to her that Mr Munneke was almost unaware of the tax issues. She
said she would not agree with that as she was
keeping him informed on a daily
was asked if Ex NF paid dividends to her at any point in time. She said
not officially. She said when the money came
out of the ANZ account to purchase
O’Connell Street, the money was passed over or given to her by Ex NF,
via the director,
to facilitate the 28 O’Connell Trust purchasing the
building. She said:
Now, whether that – we didn’t get
advice about how that should be done. So whether that is – I mean, when
the accountants
came after the fact – and that was explained what was
done, they said, “Well, let’s do it as an L7 loan”.
was asked whether she was unclear about the character of the $1 million
transfer from Ex NF to her in December 2015. She said
transferred to her; it was to a trust she controlled. She said it was envisaged
as some sort of dividend or gift to her
as shareholder. She was asked whether
she was unsure if it was dividend or a gift and she said they were hoping the
experts could
sort it out. She said it was discussed as a dividend, but it was
not decided what it was. It was put to her that she wanted to
achieve the
result of purchasing the property in the name of the trust and she was
unconcerned at that point with the actual character
of the transaction. She
That’s right. I wasn’t too concerned and nor was
[Mr Munneke] about the, you know, how that transaction was going to
be viewed or
accounted for. It was just an advantageous situation for everyone.
Zaccara said O’Connell Street was acquired because there was an excessive
amount of money viewed as profit in the Ex NF
account. She said
Ex NF’s former accountants, BDO, said to both her and Mr Munneke,
“Look, it’s not a good idea
to have a lot of money just sitting
around in a bank. Do something with it”. She said this was also around
the time they
were looking for accommodation. She explained that she considered
the money in the bank as profit as the money had just started
to collate. She
was asked “Did BDO give advice about what ought to happen with the moneys
in the bank account”. She
No. We had perceived
that opinion from our accountant many months before because the money had been
collated and they had been doing
all of the financials.
Zaccara was asked why having the money in the bank was not a good idea. She
... it was because it’s not a good idea for any company
to hold large amounts of money because if things go wrong then a liquidator
comes in and appropriates it.
It was put to her that things only go wrong if debts are not paid. She
agreed and said they did not think things would ever go wrong.
asked whether she or Mr Munneke were seeking asset protection advice from BDO at
that time, she said:
No. We had received that opinion. It
wasn’t in writing. It wasn’t anything formal. There was no sort of
or other advice around it. Then, there was a problem with BDO. We
weren’t really engaging BDO anymore and we didn’t
engage the new
accountants in 2017. So we were in a position where we were having no formal
advice of any kind.
Zaccara denied the money in the bank was transferred away so that any creditors
of Ex NF could not have access to it, and said
it was appropriated for the
benefit of Ex NF. She said asset protection was a minor reason, but the
main reason was Ex NF needed
accommodation. She said the location of
O’Connell Street was “fabulous” and she said putting it
in a trust was
a way to protect the asset. She was asked, “protect it
from whom?”. She said it was what she had:
... been advised
from accountants and then lawyers practically throughout the whole period that I
have been consulting accountants
and lawyers. They’ve always told me the
same thing. Buy property, Linda. Put it under a trust. Protect it.
was asked whether she was aware, at the time, they were using Ex NF’s
money to purchase a property and put it in trust
that Ex NF owed nearly
$1 million in tax. She said:
That’s not right. That is
incorrect. I’m sorry, and we are having forensics on that as well, but I
totally disagree
with that statement and it’s very unfair.
was put to Ms Zaccara that one month after the acquisition of
O’Connell Street she was in a bit of a panic about the operational
funds left in Ex NF. She said the only thing that was of concern was the
$450,000 that was to come from Guvera which was going to
pay off the ATO debt
that was remaining. She was asked whether she told Guvera a month before the
acquisition of O’Connell
Street that they had two weeks of operational
funds left. She said, rightly or wrongly, she says things like that to clients
motivate them to pay.
said she did not see herself as the beneficiary of the 28 O’Connell
Trust. The beneficiaries were her children.
She was asked who organised the
trust to be established and she said she did all of the leg work as she usually
did. Mr Munneke
was informed and consented. She said she dealt with ANZ
to obtain the loan because Mr Munneke was more than busy. She said it saved
lot of time and she was good at it, so she negotiated with the bank and
Mr Munneke signed off on it.
was asked what benefit Ex NF got out of making itself liable for a $740,000
loan and paying $1 million to be put in someone else’s
name. She said
O’Connell Street would be a permanent home where Ex NF could
“hunker down”. She said there was
not a lease between the 28
O’Connell Trust and Ex NF. She said no-one asked for a lease, they
thought they would produce one
at some point but no-one asked, so they just
carried on their busy lives and tried to get on with things that were at that
important. When it was put to Ms Zaccara that a lot of things she
spoke about being the benefit of the purchase of O’Connell
Street were
personal benefits, not benefits to Ex NF, she said:
divorce the personal from the business. This was a family business. We were
married. ... The personal and ... the business
were very much combined in this
family business. So personal considerations were extremely important.
Extremely important.
Zaccara was asked how the withdrawal of $1 million from the ANZ account and the
$740,000 ANZ loan and the acquisition of the property
were recorded in the
financial books of Ex NF. She said she knew it had been recorded as an L7
loan by Rowe Partners. She acknowledged
it was not recorded prior to the
engagement of Rowe Partners as Ex NF was not keeping books. She said they
were “just doing
payroll out of the accounting system, paying bills,
receiving income. That is why we got the accountants”.
was then put to Ms Zaccara that she had given an answer earlier in the
examination where she asserted that Ex NF was keeping books
which were reasonably accurate, and it could produce financial statements
came close to being true and fair. Ms Zaccara said they had a system that was
recording money coming in, “that sort
of thing”, but they could not
produce a balance sheet. She then said that the financial records of Ex NF
were formally done
by Rowe Partners in 2017. She said that the O’Connell
Street transaction was not recorded in any records of Ex NF prior to
Partners involvement other than the bank accounts.
was put to Ms Zaccara that in the 30 June 2016 accounts prepared by
Rowe Partners there was an entry in the non-current assets
“Building Loan – 28 O’Connell Trust” of $1.025
million. She was asked whether she provided instructions
to the accountants to
classify that withdrawal as a loan. She said it was something they did of their
own volition. She agreed
the accountants had treated money withdrawn from
Ex NF as a loan owed to it by the 28 O’Connell Trust and she agreed
was no loan actually entered into at the time of the transaction or
subsequently. She said that she did not consider it a loan and
it was pointed
out to her there was no reference to the ANZ loan that Ex NF was liable for
in the balance sheet. When it was put
to her that one would expect to see that
in the balance sheet, she said, “I don’t know”.
Zaccara was asked whether the accountants knew about Ex NF taking out the
$740,000 loan from ANZ. She said the accountants knew
everything. She was
asked how the accountants knew what amounts for tax to put in the financial
statements. She said she did not
know and that would be a question for them.
It was put to her that the financial documents prepared by the accountants
showed that
Ex NF owed $775,000 in tax liabilities as at 30 June 2016. She
understood that the position of Ex NF was different a year before
there were a lot of things that happened in 2016. Guvera went into
administration and there were some bad decisions made
by Mr Munneke because he
did not decrease the workforce. She said, “who could have foreseen the
figures there in 2016?”.
was put to Ms Zaccara that six months prior it had been thought appropriate to
take $1 million out of Ex NF and buy a property
and put it into a trust
with $775,000 tax liabilities owing six months later. She said that was not
apparent at the time O’Connell
Street was purchased. She said things
changed dramatically in six months. She was then asked whether she realised
Ex NF was subject
to a half a million dollar tax liability as at June 2015.
She said “No, not at the time”. She was asked what steps she
to ascertain how much Ex NF owed in tax prior to deciding to purchase
O’Connell Street with Mr Munneke. She said the
BAS were produced to the
bank and there was an audit that was completed a little bit before the end of
2015. She then queried whether
it was her responsibility to find out how much
tax was owed. She said she saw four notices from the ATO about tax that was
which were paid. She was reminded that only one quarter in 2015 was the
subject of a BAS filing in 2015. The other three quarters
were filed in 2017.
She said they just paid what the ATO said they owed.
was then asked about the Ward Street purchase. She said that she paid for the
property by converting her ethereum. When
asked to explain why it was her
cryptocurrency, she replied, “[b]ecause I invested in Bitcoin when nobody
even knew what it
was, and the Bitcoin bought the Ethereum”. She said
that both she and Mr Munneke were interested in bitcoin and that Mr Munneke
the transactions for her, including the initial purchase in 2012. Ms Zaccara
stated that she knew the purchase occurred in 2012
because “that’s
when [she] gave the money to [Mr Munneke] to buy it”. She described
depositing cash and making
a bank transfer into his personal account. She said
she gave him several tens of thousands of
Zaccara estimated that Mr Munneke purchased approximately three bitcoins
for her. She said that she understood that all of this
bitcoin was converted to
ethereum in around 2014. She maintained that she instructed Mr Munneke to
make these transactions because
she became aware of the trends, and she believed
that ethereum would boom in the future. She said that she believed all of the
was converted to cash to fund the Ward Street purchase. Ms Zaccara was
asked whether she and Mr Munneke discussed how much ethereum
he should sell.
She said that she just told him to sell the ethereum so that they could purchase
Ward Street.
Zaccara was asked whether she owned any ethereum at the time of the
examination. She said, “No. Not me, no”. She said that to her
knowledge, no one in her family owned ethereum, including
Mr Munneke.
Zaccara said that she never saw any evidence that the bitcoin and ethereum had
been acquired and agreed that the sole source of
her information about the
cryptocurrency was what Mr Munneke had said to her and the credits to the bank
account in January 2018.
When it was put to her that her assertion of ownership
of the ethereum consequently was based only on this information, she replied,
“Well, it’s my money. Yes”. Ms Zaccara agreed that she could
not point to anything else to show that she owned
the ethereum that was sold in
Zaccara rejected the suggestion that the bitcoin was purchased with monies
withdrawn from Ex NF’s bank account, saying that
there “was no
cryptocurrency that was purchased by [Ex NF]”. She said that Mr
Munneke would not have done that, and
that she had looked through the bank
statements over the years and nothing stood out. It was put to her again that
the bitcoin used
to acquire the ethereum was purchased with Ex NF’s
money. She said:
I wouldn’t agree that would be the case. I
would – I would probably have a heart attack if that is true. [Mr
would have to account for that but the bitcoin that was converted to
Ethereum was money that I paid to [Mr Munneke].
was suggested to Ms Zaccara Ex NF’s money had been used to purchase
1.477 bitcoins in February 2014, of which 1.048 bitcoins
were converted into
ethereum in August 2014. Ms Zaccara maintained that she could not accept
that the ethereum had been acquired
with bitcoin that had been purchased with
Ex NF’s money in 2014 because she and Mr Munneke had bitcoin before
denied being aware that Mr Munneke still held 500 units of ethereum. She said
that she was unaware that Mr Munneke said
that he held it on her behalf. When
asked whether she paid CGT on the realisation of the ethereum in 2018, she said
that the taxation
had not been sorted out and she had received advice from Mr
Vijayadass that the capital gain could be deferred because she was converting
investment “into another property”.
Zaccara was then asked about the South Terrace properties transactions and the
monies drawn from Ex NF’s account. She said
the money was repaid to
Ex NF. She said she effectively worked for Ex NF for two years
without remuneration. She was taken to the
balance sheets for 2014 and the
figure of a “Loan – Associated Trusts” in the balance sheet of
$370,000. She said
there was no benefit to Ex NF in using $370,000 of its
money to buy the two properties that were put into her company’s name
it did not cause any harm
Zaccara’s statements
her first statement dated 28 March 2024, Ms Zaccara said she is the sole
director, secretary, and shareholder of 106 Ward Street
Pty Ltd which acts
trustee of the 106 Ward Trust. 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd is the registered
proprietor of Ward Street. Ms Zaccara
is also the sole director,
secretary, and shareholder of 28 O’Connell Pty Ltd. She said that 28
O’Connell Pty Ltd acts
as trustee of the 28 O’Connell Trust.
She is the appointor named in the deed establishing the 28 O’Connell
a specified beneficiary. She explained that on 1 July 2019
by deed 28 O’Connell Pty Ltd replaced Mr Munneke as a trustee of
O’Connell Trust and 28 O’Connell Pty Ltd owns the legal title
to the real property of O’Connell Street.
Zaccara gave evidence that her mother has been a strong influence in how she
views finances and wealth. She stated that she finds
the most difficult stress
to bear is when her financial stability is threatened. She believes it is vital
for a woman to be financially
self-sufficient and stable. She said this could
explain while during her marriage to Mr Munneke, they remained financially
independent
from each other. She explained how she assisted her mother in the
boarding house business that her mother started and took over
the business in
2001. She said she attends that business two days a week. She detailed that
she owns property from which the boarding
house business is conducted and
explained that she deals with issues arising from that business on a daily basis
including attending
to calls in the middle of the night. She said the boarding
house business houses socially disenfranchised men.
Zaccara explained that in 1986 she completed a year-long diploma course in
beauty therapy, completed a Bachelor of Arts degree
majoring in economic history
and politics in 1993, and completed an Honours degree by thesis in 1996.
detailed her developing interest while studying in the new technologies that
were emerging in cyberspace. She explained that
she came to believe that
cyberspace was a new medium that was opening up in culture and society and had
the potential to profoundly
transform it. She said that she has maintained her
interest in cyberspace, which led her to study a graduate diploma in computer
and information science at the University of South Australia where she met
Mr Munneke who was studying a post-graduate degree in
computer science.
Zaccara said that in November 2008 she established the ZALD Trust. She
described that in 2012, with a partner, she established
a company, City Sous
Chef Pty Ltd, with the intention of selling pre-packaged ingredients, recipes,
and instructions for meals.
She was a director of that company for two years
but in the end the business did not fully develop.
explained that following the liquidation of 2Moro in 2012, she was determined to
invest in a business that Mr Munneke would run.
She said Mr Munneke is a
highly skilled software developer and has experience in leadership and
management roles. Ms Zaccara said
that the mobile app development industry was
taking off and she expected that a business in that industry would be successful
profitable.
and Mr Munneke established Ex NF which was incorporated on 15 February
Zaccara explained that she bought the WIP and equipment of 2Moro from the
liquidator and paid other expenses from her own funds,
including securing office
space. She also paid out 10 weeks of pay to the six employees of 2Moro,
who moved to Ex NF to start up
the new business. She said those payments
totalled $53,000.
said in 2014/2015, the business of Ex NF exploded because under
Mr Munneke’s direction it came to offer “back-end”
development capacity. She explained that Ex NF moved into accommodation at
112 Ward Street, and she conducted her business interests
from that premises as
well. She established the company Linda Zaccara Pty Ltd to be the management
company to manage the business
affairs of her boarding house business and other
properties she owned. She explained that $30,000 was used to pay the upfront
for 112 Ward Street, taken from her home mortgage. She said she
agreed with Mr Munneke that she would invoice Ex NF for one-half
the rent charged to Linda Zaccara Pty Ltd. Ex NF did not have any formal
subtenancy with her and, for the first year, it did
not pay any rent to her and
only paid outgoings. She stated that as far as she is aware, the first
year’s rent was never charged
to any loan account maintained by her or
Linda Zaccara Pty Ltd.
Zaccara described her role in Ex NF as focussing on general housekeeping,
morale boosting, new technology emerging in culture
and society. She was
responsible for paying bills and she was the liaison between Mr Munneke and
lawyers, accountants, ATO, Work
SA, Revenue SA, and other professionals. She
undertook the tasks of pay runs, calculating superannuation and end of
employment obligations
and entering details of the employees into the accounting
system. She did not do any client invoicing, paying superannuation or
obligations, or making significant purchases without Mr Munneke’s approval
as director, and she did not sign tax returns.
Zaccara gave evidence that Mr Munneke was involved in and oversaw all the
affairs of Ex NF including, but not limited to, managing
the provision of
services and billing clients, accounting and taxation matters, reviewing the
bank accounts to assess its cashflow
position, and reviewing the Harvest
invoicing and debtor control system of Ex NF. She said she also had some
involvement in managing
debtors and reviewing the bank position. She said under
the direction of Mr Munneke, Ex NF engaged external accountants to attend
to financial, superannuation, and taxation affairs, including the lodgement of
BAS, superannuation returns, and tax returns with
the ATO. She said BDO were
the accountants from 2012 until 2017, thereafter Rowe Partners took over.
Zaccara said she had an active interest in cryptocurrency and had been
researching and collecting articles to inform herself about
digital currency
since it launched in about 2009. She said in or around 2010 she became aware of
and read the bitcoin white paper.
gave evidence that she began to talk with Mr Munneke about bitcoin around
2010/2011 as she was interested in purchasing supplements
on Silk Road. Mr
Zaccara said she and Mr Munneke had many conversations about cryptocurrency and
her interest in it. She said she
came to view bitcoin as a commodity with value
itself rather than just an alternative method of payment and their conversations
the nature of bitcoin continued until they finally purchased it.
Zaccara said she had asked Mr Munneke to purchase cryptocurrency for her on many
occasions prior to the establishment of Ex NF.
She recalled first asking
Mr Munneke to purchase cryptocurrency sometime in 2011 and she recalled being
aware that Mr Munneke had
purchased some bitcoin prior to a family trip to
America in July 2014. She also remembered Mr Munneke giving a fraction of a
to Ric Santos as a wedding present in the early part of 2014. She said she
could specifically recall the circumstances because she
had complained to
Mr Munneke that she did not want to give bitcoin away.
Zaccara said she became aware prior to their family holiday to America that a
new cryptocurrency, ethereum, was to be released.
She said she had many
conversations about ethereum with Mr Munneke before the holiday. She had also
learnt Mr Munneke was talking
that Ms Dow had an interest in ethereum either for herself or Meeco.
the family holiday, Mr Munneke had said to Ms Zaccara that Ms Dow had asked
him to get some ethereum for her. When he told
her that, she said to him she
wanted some too. Ms Zaccara said she also took Mr Munneke to the bitcoin office
in New York during
the holiday and spoke with a bitcoin representative about
bitcoin as an investment.
Zaccara said she learnt about the ethereum presale and told Mr Munneke she
wanted him to purchase it for her. However, she understood
it could only be
purchased with bitcoin and therefore there had to be a bitcoin purchase prior to
purchasing ethereum. Ms Zaccara
said in August 2014 she learnt that Mr Munneke
had finally bought ethereum.
Zaccara explained that since the liquidation of Ex NF
aware that on or about 14 February 2014, the amounts of $300 and $700
respectively were withdrawn from the NAB account
and deposited into Mr
Munneke’s “personal CoinJar account”. She also understood
that the amounts of $650 and $1,400
were withdrawn from the NAB account 5 August
and 6 August 2014 respectively and deposited into the CoinJar account.
Zaccara said Ex NF was not an investor in cryptocurrency or any other
passive investments it was however, indebted to her for
personal contributions
she had made to Ex NF since its establishment on her loan account.
Zaccara explained that as she was not aware of the withdrawals from the NAB
account to buy cryptocurrency until after the liquidation,
she did not turn her
mind to recording the transactions in Ex NF’s records as a debit to
her loan account.
said that it was never her intention that her personal speculative investment
which Mr Munneke facilitated was in any way associated
with Ex NF. She
said that in none of her discussions with Mr Munneke about cryptocurrency did he
suggest that the investment was
being undertaken by Ex NF. Ms Zaccara
explained that over the course of their relationship, she had a better personal
cashflow than
Mr Munneke, and over the years had provided him with a significant
amount of money for his personal use. She had assumed that when
Mr Munneke made
investments in cryptocurrency at her request, he would fund the purchases out of
his own funds.
her second statement dated 8 April 2024, Ms Zaccara said that since making her
first statement, she recalled reviewing Ex NF’s
bank statements for
February and August 2014 and, around that time, noting the debits in the NAB
account, being the withdrawals for
the purchases of cryptocurrency in
February 2014 and August 2014 and realised that they related to
cryptocurrency purchases. She
said as sole shareholder of Ex NF at the
time, she had no difficulty with the transactions given her request to Mr
Munneke to purchase
cryptocurrency on her behalf. She said had she been asked
at the time; she would have agreed to apply the withdrawals from the NAB
as a debit to her shareholder loan account. She was not overly concerned with
recording the transactions because of the
small amount of money involved.
Zaccara said the time of the
examination in 2021 was a period of extreme
stress and turmoil.
recalls during the
examination being surprised when told that the funds
used to purchase cryptocurrency were withdrawn from the NAB account. She said
she had taken additional doses of pregabalin, medication she was prescribed for
chronic pain and anxiety, on the day of the examination.
She said at the time
examination, she did not recall having sighted the bank
statements in 2014. Given the small amount of money withdrawn and her
that it would have been treated as a debit to her shareholder’s
loan account, she said she did not give the source of money
to purchase the
cryptocurrency a second thought. She said it was not until after the
liquidation that she went to the trouble of
having expenses paid by her for
Ex NF attributed as loans made by her. She said she maintained a schedule
of the receipts she kept
for expenses she paid but said she never provided that
schedule to BDO nor Rowe Partners to include in a loan account for
Zaccara recalled being asked during the
examination questions about
whether she owned ethereum. She said she had not at that time turned her mind
to whether there was any
holding of ethereum left, as she assumed it had all
been sold to purchase Ward Street.
Zaccara gave evidence that although Ex NF accepted cryptocurrency as a form
of payment, Ex NF had no other interest in cryptocurrency.
said that the monies comprising the NAB account cryptocurrency withdrawals
between 14 February and 8 August 2014 were withdrawn
by Mr Munneke on her
behalf and deposited into the CoinJar account so that he could purchase
cryptocurrencies and trade in cryptocurrencies
on her behalf. This included the
purchase of ethereum in the pre-sale.
Zaccara said that she was aware in the period between 14 February 2014 and 19
August 2014 that Mr Munneke was purchasing cryptocurrency,
but she was not aware
of the detail of the transactions. She said she was aware that Mr Munneke
gave Ric Santos bitcoin as a wedding
gift, and two further gifts of a fraction
of bitcoin to two other individuals. She says all three wedding gifts were from
Mr Munneke.
Zaccara stated that the cryptocurrency purchased by Mr Munneke and which
continued to be held in his name set out in her first
statement was held as bare
trustee for her.
Zaccara said the cryptocurrency substantially increased in value from her
initial investment of $3,050 by virtue of the technical
expertise of Mr
Zaccara gave evidence that when Ex NF went into liquidation on
15 May 2019, there remained in the NAB account the sum of
$168,839.63
by way of surplus
proceeds from the sale of part of her cryptocurrency holdings in
January 2018 as set out in her first statement.
She asserted those monies
are her personal property.
Zaccara explained that BDO were the accountants for Ex NF until early 2017
and her main point of contact with BDO was Mr Vijayadass.
said the three main clients of Ex NF at this time were Meeco, Guvera, and
iQnet. These clients provided repeat work and revenue
said one of her functions was to receive and monitor the bank statements on the
NAB account. She said that in about September
2015, Ex NF had
$1.4 million in the bank and in December 2015 she was also aware of the
debtors outstanding and the amount of WIP
not yet billed. She said to the best
of her recollection, at the time of the O’Connell Street purchase, Guvera
was the largest
debtor. She said Guvera had the practice of running up
substantial debit for work done and then paying the amount down with large
amounts. She said that was the position into 2016 and that she had no qualms
April 2016.
her first statement, Ms Zaccara said:
I can distinctly recall around
this time that [Mr Vijayadass] said words to the effect that having this amount
of surplus of money
in the bank was not a good idea. I cannot now recall
precisely the occasion when he said that although I believe to the best of
recollection it was in a face to face meeting. I cannot now recall whether [Mr
Munneke] was present although I believe he may
Ms Zaccara said by reference to the email from Mr Vijayadass to her dated
30 September 2015, she thinks this discussion occurred in
September 2015.
said she also noted in the WIP history of BDO an entry from dated
30 September 2015 referring to a telephone call between Mr
Vijayadass and
her in respect of:
... property [p]urchase, loan structure,
acuisioon 23rustee23e [
], lo‑doc due to Linda but could use
derek as 23rustee [
] of new trust update on compliance etc
She said these documents have assisted her to recall that she was looking to
purchase a property for Ex NF to use at around this time.
She said the
112 Ward Street owner had informed her that 31 March 2016 was a hard
lease termination date as he intended to demolish
the building. She said,
originally, she started looking for a rental property. However, in the middle
of 2015 she was expecting
to receive part of the proceeds of a sale of a family
property at Parawae Road, Salisbury. This spurred her into considering
a property to relocate Ex NF to. As that Parawae Road sale did
not go through in 2015, she went back looking for suitable premises
said that having had the discussion with Mr Vijayadass about Ex NF
holding surplus cash, it occurred to her that she could take
her money out of
Ex NF and use that to buy a property for Ex NF to use. She recalled
that she approached Ex NF’s bank manager
at NAB for a loan and the
response was negative. She said the bank manager said words to the effect that
Ex NF’s books, accounting,
and tax filings were not up to date, NAB
was a conservative bank and without the filings being up to date, Ex NF
could not obtain
Zaccara said she was disappointed with NAB’s attitude regarding
Ex NF’s accounting as it was not her perception at
the time that
there was any fundamental problem. She said she was reliant on BDO, which had
not drawn her attention to any significant
issue with Ex NF’s
finances and, in fact, Mr Vijayadass’ “approach was to the
Zaccara said as Ex NF had built up a large amount of cash in the bank, had
significant monies owing for work it had done which
it expected to collect, had
projects lined up, had no long-term debt, and at that time she had every
confidence in Ex NF’s
future success, she entered into negotiations
to buy O’Connell Street. She consulted Polson Legal to assist her in
establishing
a new trust in which her interest in the property would be held.
stated that she had further conversations with Mr Vijayadass (on dates that she
cannot specifically recall) where he said words
to the effect that it would be a
good idea that Ex NF pay the surplus monies to her as a shareholder as a
dividend or return of capital.
She maintained that at no time during those
discussions did Mr Vijayadass suggest that the monies would be loaned by
Ex NF to her.
She spoke to Mr Munneke after each discussion she had with
Mr Vijayadass. She asserted that Mr Munneke was also aware that Ex NF
was in a sound financial position. She had full confidence in Mr Munneke to run
the business and both she and Mr Munneke accepted
the advice of
Mr Vijayadass.
Zaccara stated that Mr Vijayadass assisted with the incorporation of a new
entity for the purchase of the property. She said
he was aware that the
beneficial owner of the property was to be 28 O’Connell Trust and at the
establishment of that trust
Mr Vijayadass was the settlor.
explained that after the rejection by NAB, she approached ANZ which made clear
it would not lend to the 28 O’Connell Trust.
It then became apparent to
her that she could only secure the loan if it was made to Ex NF, and that
Ex NF would have to then on-lend
the money to 28 O’Connell
Trust. She stated that ANZ was not happy that the purchaser was the trustee of
a discretionary trust
and would only proceed with the loan if Mr Munneke,
as director of Ex NF, was the trustee and guaranteed payments to ANZ. She
that the bank valuation came in at $1.15 million, which reduced
the permitted borrowing component allowed by ANZ to $740,000. She
that both she and Mr Munneke were aware following her discussion with Mr
Vijayadass that there was sufficient cash available
to pay surplus assets to her
as a shareholder to facilitate the purchase of O’Connell Street. She
repeated that the monies
were paid out to her and applied towards the purchase
of O’Connell Street as a dividend or reduction and distribution of capital
to her in her capacity as sole shareholder. She said that Mr Munneke drew
down the funds to settle on the purchase by obtaining
a bank cheque and he did
so with her agreement and authority.
Zaccara said she agreed with Mr Munneke that the only rent payable by Ex NF
for its occupation of O’Connell Street would
be the instalments on the
mortgage, together with outgoings such as rates and taxes. She said she
considered the payment by Ex NF
of mortgage repayments was concessionary
and below market rent that would otherwise have been charged. She said no
tenancy agreement
was prepared or signed, and no rental payments were made for
the period 10 December 2015 to 15 May 2019 over and above the contributions
way of mortgage instalments. Ms Zaccara said she paid approximately $38,000 of
her own money toward the refurbishment of O’Connell
Street prior to
Ex NF moving in in April 2016.
Zaccara said that at a point in time after the O’Connell Street purchase,
it became apparent to her and Mr Munneke that
BDO had failed to attend to
various tasks, including lodgement of BAS, superannuation returns, and tax
returns. Thereafter, Rowe
Partners were engaged. Ms Zaccara said it transpired
that Rowe Partners recorded the dividend distribution to her as a loan.
maintained that she never agreed for the monies distributed to her to be
treated as a loan.
Zaccara gave evidence about her considerable property portfolio. In her second
statement, she set out the valuations of her properties
as close to
10 December 2015, including a number of Valuer-General valuations, together
with details of any money secured against
the properties.
said that in relation to the Parawae Road property, she was expecting to receive
$500,000 for her share on the sale of the property.
The property was sold in
2016, and she recovered a little over $700,000. In her third statement,
Ms Zaccara gave evidence that
from the sale proceeds, on 28 June 2016, she
deposited an amount of $54,996.90 into Ex NF’s NAB account.
Zaccara said if she had been told in December 2015 by an accountant or lawyer
that the distribution to her of the monies from
Ex NF’s account in
December 2015 would impair the ability of Ex NF to continue to trade
properly and lawfully because of a
potential shortfall in available resources,
she would have been prepared to commit funds to make up the shortfall out of her
assets. She said that she could have contributed hundreds of thousands of
dollars by borrowing against her freehold properties or
contributing an amount
on account of proceeds that she expected to receive from Parawae Road. She said
she only took the cash out
of Ex NF because of Mr Vijayadass’ advice
that Ex NF could pay her a dividend.
Zaccara spoke about deciding to purchase Ward Street and entering into the
contract on 4 January 2018. She maintained that the
purchase funds came from
her own personal sources, that is, from the sale of cryptocurrency. She said
she told Mr Munneke that she
wanted to fund the purchase from her cryptocurrency
holdings, and he agreed he would sell down sufficient to allow her to complete
the purchase.
Zaccara said she consulted her solicitor, Loretta Polson (“Ms
Polson”), and requested she act on the conveyance and
establish a company
and trust to undertake the purchase. She said the proceeds of the sale of the
cryptocurrency were banked into
the NAB account and the settlement monies were
withdrawn shortly thereafter.
Ms Zaccara stated that if she had been told on 31 January 2018 by an accountant
or lawyer that she should assume the remaining
cryptocurrency held by Mr Munneke
in fact belonged to Ex NF and the payment out of Ex NF of the proceeds
of the sale of cryptocurrency
in January 2018 would impair the ability of
Ex NF to trade continually and lawfully because of a potential shortfall in
resources, she would have been prepared to commit funds to make up the
shortfall out of her own assets. She further said that if
it turns out that the
cryptocurrency was a company asset and not hers, then Mr Munneke had her consent
and authority as a shareholder
of Ex NF to distribute to her the funds
which were realised from the sale of cryptocurrency and deployed in the
acquisition of Ward
Zaccara said prior to the January 2018 cryptocurrency sales, she recalled Mr
Munneke telling her that the exchange required the
proceeds from the sale of
cryptocurrency, that was received in Australian dollars, to be banked into a NAB
bank account. She recalled
at the time of the Ward Street acquisition, becoming
anxious about the tight settlement date and the need to quickly realise the
proceeds from the sale of cryptocurrency. She recalled advising Mr Munneke that
because Ms Polson’s trust account was a NAB
bank account, paying the
proceeds from the NAB account would be the fastest way to provide her with the
settlement proceeds.
Zaccara gave evidence that whether the cryptocurrency was her property or the
property of Ex NF, in 2018, Mr Munneke had her agreement
and approval to
sell the cryptocurrency and provide the proceeds to 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd to
facilitate the purchase of Ward Street
as trustee for the 106 Ward Trust.
Zaccara also referred to Mr Munneke deciding to not send invoices to Meeco in
2018 which she said led to a lack of funding for
Ex NF. As at liquidation,
Meeco owed Ex NF approximately $665,000.
said Real Time Data was also another major client of Ex NF from around
2017. Ex NF did nearly $1 million of work for Real Time
Data and was
paid nothing for that work. Ms Zaccara said she believes it is the failure of
these two principal clients to meet their
obligations to Ex NF that brought
Zaccara said she is a creditor in the Ex NF liquidation as she advanced
significant monies to Ex NF from its incorporation until
liquidation. She
said that she has retained receipts for the purchases she made where applicable
and kept a running spreadsheet.
She said those payments to her total
$272,286.83 not including the amount of approximately $53,000 that she paid to
the liquidator
of 2Moro and the benefit Ex NF has had of $168,839.63 being
the surplus proceeds from the sale of her cryptocurrency.
her third statement dated 13 April 2024, Ms Zaccara explained that it was her
typical practice to pay for work expenses in cash.
If employees paid for work
expenses from their own funds, she would reimburse them with cash from her
personal funds and retain
the receipt. She said that she retained receipts for
the purchases she made on behalf of Ex NF and kept contemporaneous
handwritten
notes that were prepared on a monthly basis. These informal records
were carried forward into a spreadsheet.
her third statement, Ms Zaccara spoke about the South Terrace properties. She
said on 27 November 2013, a sum of $200,000 was
loaned to her by Ex NF to
acquire 20 South Terrace. Loan repayments were made to Ex NF by Mr Munneke
and her not receiving remuneration
for a period of two years. Additionally, she
said she made a part repayment of $58,000 into the NAB account on that same
She said that in May 2014, she deposited an amount of $170,000 into the
NAB account and on the same day $170,000 was withdrawn from
the NAB account at
her direction which was used to acquire 22 South Terrace.
Zaccara explained that Rowe Partners prepared a Division 7A Schedule in respect
of the monies withdrawn from the NAB account in
2013 and 2014 to acquire the
South Terrace properties, assuming a loan amount of $370,000. She said that the
principal loan amount
should have been $142,000 because of her repayments of
$58,000 and $170,000. She said all loan monies have been repaid in full.
Ms Zaccara’s
cross-examination
agreed in cross-examination that she assumed responsibility for the maintenance
of the accounting functions of Ex NF and
that she had principal
responsibility for liaison with the accountant and with the ATO. She said that
she had principal responsibility
for the lodgement of the BAS, but she was
delegated that job by Mr Munneke. She agreed that Mr Munneke relied on her to
do the work
necessary to prepare the BAS. She was asked whether he also relied
on her to see that the timing of lodgements accorded with statutory
obligations.
Her response was that they handed that over to the accountants. She agreed that
BDO would ask for certain information
that they did not have access to. She was
asked whether she agreed that in the period July 2013 to April 2015 no BAS were
She said that could be right and agreed it was possible that before the
lodgement of BAS in April 2015 there had not been a lodgement
consecutive quarters. She agreed that not lodging the BAS was not an oversight
and said, “It was just not having
the skills and ability at the time to
get those things together I suppose, and I was hoping that the accountants could
agreed that she knew in that period, July 2013 to April 2015, Ex NF was not
paying GST, withholding tax, or income tax. She
agreed that because there had
not been payments of SGC up to April 2015, Ex NF then had to pay in
excess of $140,000 to catch up.
was put to Ms Zaccara that, during the period up to the ATO audit and the
catch-up payment in early 2015, she was aware that for
an extended period
Ex NF had not been paying the SGC entitlement of employees. She agreed but
said they were not excessively behind
and that she made several payments before
the audit commenced. She agreed that she was responsible for the day-to-day
of entries into Ex NF’s primary accounting records. She
then said that she was not making the entries herself into the system,
just using it for pay runs. She said that she would send material information
to BDO and BDO would process the entry.
was put to Ms Zaccara that leading up to 2016, BDO did not have all the
information necessary to have the accounts brought up
to date. She said she
thought that they did. It was then put to her that if she did think they had
all the information, it would
have been a matter for her to request the BAS from
BDO. She said it was usually BDO chasing her but there seemed to be a really
large gap of not a lot of communication from around 2015.
was put to Ms Zaccara that the accounting records were not sufficiently up to
date in 2013 through to April 2015 to enable PAYG
lodgements to be made.
Ms Zaccara agreed that they were not up to date for that period and
likewise for the period 2015 through
to when BDO was no longer engaged by
Ex NF in 2016. It was put to her that, up until the time BDO were replaced
by Rowe Partners,
at no stage had she been up to date in giving BDO all the
information they needed to prepare accurate financial records. She maintained
BDO was provided with all the information they needed to complete the returns.
Zaccara was asked whether she agreed that up until the end of the
2015 year, at no stage, were there up-to-date financial records.
she did the BAS in 2015. She maintained that she did look at the records; she
looked at income, she looked at expenditure,
she looked at GST due and she did
all things to prepare the BAS in 2015. She said she did not have accounting
figures to look at,
but she could appreciate it from the perspective of looking
at those records.
Zaccara was asked whether she agreed that at the end of the 2016 year the
September 2014 quarter BAS was outstanding. She said
that she did do a BAS
because ANZ required two previous BAS when they were applying for the ANZ loan.
She said she was aware that
the BAS previous to those two had not been completed
and she agreed there were a number that were still not completed as at the end
of 2015. She agreed she was aware that left Ex NF liable to the general
interest charge and penalties. She agreed that the 2014
income tax return was
lodged 15 months late.
Zaccara was taken to the 2014 financial statements and income tax return for
Ex NF. She was asked whether she carefully reviewed
the financial
statements provided to her by Rowe Partners. She said she could not recall.
She was then taken to the page of Ex
NF’s 2014 taxation return, which
bears her signature. She was asked whether, as a public officer, she approved
the taxation
officer; she was a chief operating officer. She was pointed to
the document
where it says “Signature of public officer” above where she signed
her name. She maintained she just signed
the document and did not know what it
referred to. She said she was happy to sign it because she trusted Mr McDonald,
who was doing
his best under the circumstances. She said she did not think she
actually went through the figures herself.
Zaccara was asked whether she signed the tax return without checking it was
accurate. She said she had no reason to believe that
it was not accurate. She
was working with the accountants, who were trying to do things to placate the
ATO, which was on their backs,
so she would have just signed it.
Zaccara was questioned about the loans made to her by Ex NF to acquire the
South Terrace properties. She was asked to look at
the balance sheet prepared
by Rowe Partners for the year ended 30 June 2014 which recorded under current
assets a “Loans –
Associated Trust” in the sum of $370,000.
She agreed it was a loan owing in the consequence of a boarding house that she
in Salisbury, being funded out of Ex NF. She was asked whether, as at
20 June 2017, when she signed the tax return, she agreed that
she thought
that there was such a loan owing from her associated trust to Ex NF. She
So you’ve pointed out the figure and I have acknowledged
the figure as I sit here, but at the time I wouldn’t have acknowledged
that figure. I would have just assumed the accountants had it under
She said she did not think she read the balance sheet before signing the tax
return, nor did she think she told Mr McDonald that her
trust owed $370,000 to
Ex NF. She was asked how Mr McDonald came up with the number and she said
he asked her about some sums of
money, and she explained they were loans to her
by Ex NF and that Mr Munneke and she paid the loans off by foregoing salary
over two years.
Zaccara was asked whether she thought Mr McDonald made a mistake by including
the loan in the accounts. She said he did not deal
with it sufficiently enough
and made a mistake.
Zaccara was asked in relation to 22 South Terrace whether she specifically
recalled depositing $170,000 into the NAB account on
the same day as the
$170,000 withdrawal was made. She said, “I don’t specifically
remember that, but I recall having
the feeling that I had done it”. She
was asked again about the associated trust loan for $370,000 and the payments
she referred
to at [15] and [16] of her third statement. At [15], she stated
that she paid into the NAB account a part repayment of the 20 South
Terrace loan
of $58,000 on 27 November 2013. It was put to her that was not true. She
said she believed it was, and she said she
also believed she made a deposit of
$170,000 from her personal funds in May 2014. She maintained she recalled
offsetting the amount
that was taken out of Ex NF’s bank account, but
she was not sure whether it related to 20 South Terrace or 22 South
was asked to consider annexure N to her third statement, being NAB account bank
statements. It was suggested to her that
the $58,000 referred to in [15] of her
third statement as being a payment she made as a part payment of the loan was,
transfer out of the NAB Maximiser account into the NAB account
on 27 November 2013. It was put to her that what she said in [15]
of her third statement is false. She said she sees that now, but
she did not
see it before.
was put to Ms Zaccara that the notion of having made a repayment in the nature
of a part payment of the loan, as large as $58,000,
is something that she would
remember. She said the reality is that all she could really remember is that
she offset what was taken
out and she believed that she had put it in. It was
put to her that she signed her third statement on 13 April 2024 when she knew
full well that she had not made a payment of $58,000 that she claimed at [15] in
the statement. She disagreed and said she believed
Zaccara was then asked about the $170,000 deposit that she referred to at [16]
of her third statement. She said she believed
that amount was paid out of her
personal funds into Ex NF’s bank account. It was put to her that
that was false. She said,
“All right. I didn’t have access to
these Maximiser Account statements”. It was put to her that she did not
“There’s a possibility that I made the payment of $170,000, but
I simply can’t recall”, and instead she said
she paid, by way of
deposit, an amount of $170,000 into the NAB account. She said, “Correct,
and I believe that”.
was taken to annexure O to her third statement and the highlighted entry of
$170,000 withdrawal on 21 May 2014 from the NAB account.
She said the
highlighted entry was a withdrawal from the NAB account to pay to her associated
trust. She maintained that the $170,000
credit recorded in the NAB account
statement above the $170,000 withdrawal was deposited by her into the NAB
account. It was pointed
out that $170,000 was drawn out of the NAB Maximiser
account on 21 May 2014 and transferred to the NAB account on the same day.
was asked whether she agreed that the $170,000 did not come from her personal
funds but out of the NAB Maximiser account. She
said “yes” and
maintained that she put money in to offset the loan. She maintained she
deposited the amount of $170,000
on 21 May 2014 and said she can see that it
came from the NAB Maximiser account but, strictly speaking, she said she did do
the deposit.
It was put to her that what she said in [15] and [16] of her third
statement was false. She said she did not mean for that to happen.
that her statement was false and apologised.
Zaccara denied that she was deliberately trying to overstate any money that she
says that she put into Ex NF in repayment of her
Zaccara was asked whether other deposits, including the deposits of $300,000 and
$150,000 made into the NAB Maximiser account
on 9 April 2014 and 13 June 2024,
respectively, were also transfers made between the two Ex NF NAB accounts,
as opposed to deposits
made by her into Ex NF’s banks accounts. Ms
Zaccara responded, “it appears so”.
Zaccara was then taken to Ex NF’s financial statements for the year
ended 30 June 2016 prepared by Rowe Partners, where
the loan to associated
trusts was recorded as $278,486. It was put to her that she had involvement in
the preparation of the 2016
financial statements. She said she just handed
everything over to the accountants. She agreed the accountants had questions
to the 2016 account and she agreed that the accountants would ask her
those questions as a matter of course, rather than ask Mr Munneke.
was also asked whether she checked the 2016 financial statements to see if they
were correct. She said she did not look at them.
She was asked whether that
was a serious answer, and she said it was the truth. She was asked whether the
loan to the associated
trust of $278,486 was wrong. She said, “Well, it
can’t be right because that’s different from the previous
she was shown. It was pointed out to her that two years’
worth of debits and credits had been made to the loan account. She
just does not have enough information to commit to a yes or no. She maintained
that she believed it was wrong because she
knew that she offset the loan
was asked about the building loan for O’Connell Street for $1.025 million.
She denied that at the time of the O’Connell
Street purchase, no decision
was made about how the money taken out of Ex NF in order to effect the
purchase would be characterised.
She was then taken to the
examination
where she was asked “So you’re unsure whether it was a dividend or a
gift” in reference to the O’Connell
Street transaction and she
Well, we were that hoping experts could sort that out, you
know, good advice would sort that out. But you know, it was discussed
dividend. But it wasn’t decided what it was.
Ms Zaccara was asked during cross-examination whether that evidence was
true. Ms Zaccara said:
It was recommended to take as a dividend. However, Rowe Partners thought it
was better to do it is an L7 loan and then subsequently
advice that looked
through some of the accounts said, ‘Well, this looks like a gift’.
So I don’t know what it
was but the initial recommendation and the
intention was a dividend and when I told Robert McDonald ... it’s a
dividend, he
goes ‘Well, I don’t know your financial position so
I’m going to put it as an L7 loan’.
was then taken to the question during the
examination regarding the
character of the transaction where she said:
No. Not the character
of the transaction but, you know, what was going to be achieved with the
transaction? The structure of all
that was going to be decided, you know, with
experts that were, you know, considering our perspective, [Ex NF’s].
then stated that she was having trouble coping with her anxiety, fear and stress
examination and that she overtook her prescription medication
during the day of the examination, so she really was not sure about
some of her
answers. It was put to her that she did not say, “I’m incapable of
answering this”, but rather gave
an answer to the effect that a decision
had not been made as to how to record the transaction.
Zaccara said it had not been decided by the accountant, Mr McDonald. It was put
to her that she was asked during the
examination:
to say you wanted to achieve the result of purchasing the property in the name
of the Trust and were unconcerned at that
point in time with the actual
character of the transaction?
and her answer in the
examination was:
That’s right. I wasn’t too concerned and nor was [Mr Munneke]
be viewed or accounted
for. It was just an advantageous situation for everyone.
Ms Zaccara said that was the truth and she was not concerned because she
thought the accountants knew the best way to deal with it.
was put to Ms Zaccara that when she discussed it with the accountants in 2016,
she decided to record it as a loan. She said that
Mr McDonald decided to record
it as a loan, and she just agreed because she thought he knew best. It was
suggested to her that what
Mr McDonald said was that if she declared it was a
dividend she would have to be paying very large amounts of tax on the dividend.
She said she did not think he put it in those terms, but it was mutually
understood. She maintained it was not about the tax issue,
he just needed to
know the complete financial situation to make an informed decision.
Zaccara was asked whether she told Mr Munneke that she had been told by the
accountants it was better to record it as an L7 loan
because otherwise tax would
be payable. She said she thought she told Mr Munneke the accountant was
not sure what the tax liability
was. It was put to her that at no point did she
correct the accounts to say that the $1.025 million was actually intended to be
a dividend, rather than a loan. She said she did not correct what Mr McDonald
was suggesting because he implied that he was putting
it together the best he
could under the circumstances, and he would review it within the two-year period
that the ATO allows for
returns to be reviewed or corrected. She was asked
whether she considered it was an accurate recording of the transaction to record
it as a loan. She said, “No, there wasn’t much accurate about
it” and the figures were put together very quickly.
was put to Ms Zaccara that she knew full well how this transaction was going to
be accounted for, and what she was advising the
accountant was the true nature
of it. She said it was not that way at all, she was not advising him at all.
It was put to her that
the accountant was not going to record something against
her wishes and that she was content for it to be regarded as a loan repayable
the 28 O’Connell Trust to Ex NF. She said she was content to
trust his expertise and, to be frank, she did not really know
the significance
of the L7 loan and what it would mean.
Zaccara denied that, as at 2016, her associated trust owed more to Ex NF
than Ex NF owed her. It was suggested to her that she
was fully aware
that, as at 16 June 2016, her associated trust connected to the South Terrace
properties were indebted to Ex NF for
more than Ex NF was indebted to
her. She said she believed that the debt was paid by the end of 2015.
Zaccara was asked whether she was saying that the financial statements recording
loans to the associated trust, as at 30 June
2016 for $278,486, were wrong. She
Okay. So I do have something to say about this. So the
first thing to say is that [Mr Munneke] and I forewent just over two years
of salary which equated to around the 220 to $230,000 mark and then there was a
sum of nearly $60,000 that was put into the NAB account
around maybe end of May,
beginning of June in 2016. So, yes, the debt was paid off.
She said the documents were wrong to that extent.
was then taken to her first statement at [168] in relation to her evidence that
she had contemporaneously, with each advance
she made to Ex NF, kept a
running sheet. She said she did not keep a running sheet, but she kept receipts
with amounts on a piece
of paper and it was put on a spreadsheet later. It was
put to her that she first started preparing the spreadsheet in December 2020
she said that might be right.
was asked whether she agreed that none of the payments that she says she made,
as detailed in the spreadsheet, are evidenced
by any transaction out of a bank
account of hers. She said they were cash purchases. She was asked where she
got all the cash from.
She said that she is in the accommodation business and
was then asked about the notice to produce, directed to Linda Zaccara Pty Ltd,
and the Court being told that Linda Zaccara Pty
Ltd was not able to produce a
tax return from 2012 to the date of trial. She said that is because it did not
receive any income
effectively and the ZALD Trust had not lodged a return
because it had not received income either.
Zaccara agreed that the cash she was receiving from the boarding house business
was income that she was receiving in the course
of her personal business that
she had not paid tax on. She was asked whether there was any record of the cash
being received. She
maintained there were plenty of records but a tax return
has not been prepared. She also said the last time she personally filed
return was, she believed, 2005. She was asked:
haven’t you lodged a tax return since then.
the straight answer is that I don’t exactly know but I have a rational
fear, I guess you could call it, but I know that
I – my psychologist and I
had discussed two main things and that is the liquidation process and why I have
such difficulty
doing tax, paying bills, that sort of thing. He’s related
it to some obsessive compulsive disorder but we’re breaking
it down and
we’re trying to deal with it and all I can say is that there is an
irrational relationship I do have with the tax
issue. I know that when I was
younger, accountants were [revered]. When the accountant came over to our
house, we just sort of
had to sort of prepare for royalty. However, we
weren’t allowed to mention the Australian taxation department. I
know why but we weren’t allowed to say that. And just
probably how money was used in the family. Sort of, you know, wraps
up in that.
So I’m embarrassed about that. I’m ashamed about that. I carry
that shame baggage with me all the time
because I fundamentally understand that
I’m not paying taxes is profoundly unfair to everybody else that does and
fully prepared to deal with it, pay my penalties, pay my interest and
move forward and try to prevent falling into that type of behaviour
was put to Ms Zaccara that when she was having discussions about acquiring
O’Connell Street she was quite anxious to move
assets out of Ex NF in
order to not pay the tax liability. She maintained that was absolutely not true
and she had nothing but care
and love for Ex NF, it was her baby, she set
it up and she nurtured it. She maintained she would not do anything to hurt
she is definitely not a tax denier.
Zaccara was asked whether in 2016 she was being chased by BDO for a significant
number of outstanding PAYG, BAS statements, as
well as outstanding tax returns
for 2014, 2015, and 2016. She agreed and also agreed that she knew there were a
significant number
of BAS outstanding. It was put to her that she did not know
what tax, GST, PAYG withholding and SGC was payable. She said that
rough estimate. She conceded she did not calculate the penalties or the general
interest rate in her rough estimate.
Zaccara was asked about money withdrawn from Ex NF’s ANZ account in
September 2016 to pay for a
She explained that the
money was withdrawn to pay for a 24-hour, half-price deal to travel to
Antarctica that she and her sister
decided to take advantage of. She was asked
whether she paid back the $100,000 into Ex NF’s bank account. She
said her sister
paid her share into the bank account. She said as far as her
repayment went, she said she knew that Parawae Road was going to be
there would be money coming in and that there was $60,000 that came in in the
middle of 2016.
She said she
did not actually get to the point of doing the figures, but she felt sure that
the holiday loan would have been repaid.
Zaccara agreed that by September 2016, Ex NF had a very significant
liability to the ATO that was liable to fall due as soon as
the outstanding BAS
and income tax returns were lodged. However, she said at that point the ATO had
communicated to her that the
liability was around a couple of hundred thousand
dollars. It was put to her that the ATO said no such thing, as the ATO could
tell her what the liability was until the returns were lodged. She
maintained she recalled talking to the ATO about it and that
she and Mr Munneke
were shocked when they became aware of the $2 million tax liability.
was put to Ms Zaccara that she knew full well that Ex NF was going to owe a
very significant amount of money because it was a
long way behind in respect of
its returns. She said she did not expect the amount owed to be over a couple of
was then taken to the following questions she was asked during the
examination about Mr Munneke purchasing bitcoin on her behalf:
do you know that.
that’s when I gave the money to [Mr Munneke] to buy it.
how did you give the money to him to buy it.
there was cash deposited and I think there was bank transfers too.
into which account.
you say this was around 2012?
there. I’m not sure of the actual date.
much did you deposit into Mr Munneke’s account in order for him to buy
Bitcoin on your behalf?
So I’m not sure of the exact amount. There are a couple of transactions
but we are looking at several.
of thousands of dollars.
Ms Zaccara said in cross-examination the
transcript of the
examination should record that she said “Several
trails of thousands of dollars”.
said, over the years, she has deposited money into Mr Munneke’s
personal account and has given him cash as well.
She said she and Mr
Munneke’s were talking about buying bitcoin from around 2010 or 2011. She
was asked when she gave Mr
Munneke cash to buy bitcoin on her behalf. She said
there were a couple of times where she would give him cash. Cash was something
she gave him regularly and she would say “Buy some Bitcoin with
this”. She said they discussed buying bitcoin for quite
some time, from
around 2010 or 2011 and she would say “I’m giving you this. You buy
some Bitcoin”. She was asked
how many times she gave him cash to buy
bitcoin and she said maybe between four and six times, from around 2010 to 2011,
until the bitcoin was actually purchased in 2014.
Zaccara was asked how many thousands of dollars she gave Mr Munneke to buy
bitcoin on her behalf. She said she would give Mr
Munneke anywhere from a
couple of hundred at a time. She said basically there is a trail that would
lead to several thousands of
was asked about the evidence she gave in the
examination that she did not
own any ethereum. She said she does not really understand why she said that,
she does recall it was
late in the day, she was pretty confused and tired. She
said she is not sure why she said it, but she knows that:
Ethereum was converted to buy 106 Ward and that was put under my entity and the
trust I was an appointer of, I remember in
my mind that I said ‘Well if
[Mr Munneke] and I ever break up at least there is half the Ethereum left so,
you know, I get
the building and he will get that Ethereum’.
She then went on to say that she was pretty confused during the
examination and she put it down to the side effects of the pregabalin, which
include drowsiness and confused thinking.
was put to Ms Zaccara that she said she did not own any ethereum because it was
the truth. She said, “I believed that I
owned more cryptocurrency”.
She said the ethereum would not exist if she had not insisted on Mr Munneke
buying some ethereum
was put to Ms Zaccara that she did not, in the
examination or when
she prepared her first statement, remember the money used to buy the bitcoin
that was used to buy the ethereum
coming out of Ex NF’s bank
accounts. She said in cross‑examination that she remembers seeing a
CoinJar entry in the
bank statements around 2014 but she did not think much of
it at the time or make the connection that the purchase had been made out
Ex NF’s account. She maintained that she knew nothing about the
cryptocurrency being paid for by Ex NF’s funds.
Ms Zaccara was
reminded that it was put to her in the
examination, “I suggest
that this is not the same transaction acquisition of Bitcoin that you’ve
had in your mind that
you have described earlier”, that is, $1,000 coming
out of the NAB account to buy bitcoin. She said in the
examination,
“No, it’s not. I don’t know anything about this
acquisition”. It was put to Ms Zaccara in
cross-examination before
me that that answer was not true. Ms Zaccara said that she did not
understand her answers given during
examination and that she could
only put it down to being confused because she specifically remembered the
acquisition of the bitcoin
in February 2014.
Zaccara was then asked about her answer to the following question put to her
examination:
think your evidence was you didn’t know of any transaction where the
company had bought Bitcoin?
A. That’s correct.
When asked in cross-examination whether that was true, Ms Zaccara said
she would have answered to the best of her ability and she
would not have
purposefully deceived but she does not know why she said that because she does
know that Mecco was rendered an invoice
for the ethereum acquired on
Meeco’s behalf. She was asked whether she knew of the transaction
involving Ex NF buying bitcoin
in order to acquire ethereum from Mecco.
She said it was not Ex NF; it was Mr Munneke and he did that for Ms
Dow because he had
expertise. She agreed she knew Ex NF rendered an
invoice for it. She was asked why Ex NF was rendering an invoice if it was
Mr Munneke doing it. She said she guessed that was the way Mr Munneke
got payment for the ethereum he bought.
was then asked about her evidence in the
examination when she was asked
that was later used to fund
the ethereum purchase. She maintained she knew
nothing about the money coming from Ex NF other than she knew something
NF acquiring ethereum on behalf of Meeco. Ms Zaccara maintained
that Mr Munneke had given her an assurance that the payment for
the bitcoin came
from his account. She said there was nothing between 2014 and 2020 that
suggested to her that Ex NF was buying
bitcoin on her behalf and nothing
that suggested that Ex NF was acquiring ethereum on her behalf as it was Mr
Munneke who was acquiring
it on her behalf.
Zaccara was asked whether Mr Munneke bought bitcoin on her behalf when she asked
him to and gave him money. She said he did not,
and she was a bit upset about
it. She said she nagged him a bit and she asked him several times whether he
had done it. She maintained
that he said, “I’ll get to it”.
She said that she was a little bit annoyed, and he could sense that. She said
that she had gifted him some thousands of dollars from around the end of 2010
right up to 2014.
was suggested to Ms Zaccara that bitcoin’s price at its high point in 2010
was $0.40 per bitcoin and whether that accorded
with her recollection. She said
she did not really care about what the price was, she just wanted to get into
the market. She maintained
that she was interested in the emerging new
technology of digital monies. She said initially she was interested in it as an
alternative
to money, but then later she came to see it as having a lot of
potential. She was asked whether she formed a view about bitcoin
investment in the time period 2010 to 2011. She said she was interested in it
to purchase supplements on Silk Road and then
became interested in it as a
commodity. She said around 2013 or 2014, she remembers speaking to a broker in
the bitcoin office on
Wall Street and they were discussing how bitcoin was going
to rise as a commodity, rather than just a replacement of money. It was
her that in her first statement she referred to having formed the view that
bitcoin was appropriate as an investment by around
2010/2011. Ms Zaccara said
she began to talk to Mr Munneke about bitcoin in 2010/2011 as she was
interested in purchasing supplements
on Silk Road. She maintained that she did
not care about the price, she just wanted to acquire it because she knew it
great value in the future. It was put to her that that meant that
she would be interested in the price. She maintained she did
not really care
it would be in the future.
Zaccara said she presumed that at the time she was asking Mr Munneke to buy
bitcoin in 2010/2011, it was very cheap. It was put
to her that she knew that
in 2011/2012, it rose markedly. She said she did not think she knew that. She
said she did not know that
in early 2013 it went from about $13 to $150 by
April. It was put to her that it was all over the news that bitcoin was
in value. She said she assumed from the beginning that the value
would increase as time went on. It was put to her that by November
increased to $1,200. It was put to her that she asked Mr Munneke to buy it in
2010/2011 at which time it was worth about
$0.40 a coin and then by the end of
2013 it was worth $1,200 a coin. She was asked whether she was pretty upset at
that point and
might have said to Mr Munneke, “Derek, you’ve missed
the boat”. She said she was not upset about that; she was
just upset that
he did not buy it when she asked him to. She denied that her evidence about
asking him to buy it on her behalf in
2010/2011 onwards was simply untrue and
that he did not do it for a few years was all made up. She said she was not
aware of the
price, and it was not really how she rolls. She was asked when she
first learned that Mr Munneke had purchased any bitcoin. She
said it was on the
day of Ric Santos’ wedding when Mr Munneke said he had bought some bitcoin
for Ric Santos as a gift from
them. She said she was very upset about that
because she thought, “Wow, I’ve been asking you for a couple of
buy Bitcoin and you go ahead and buy some finally and it’s not
even for me, it’s for Ric”. She said she asked
Mr Munneke to
promise her that as soon as he got a chance he would buy them more. She told
him to buy up to $1,000 worth.
Zaccara was taken to her third statement and her evidence about the spreadsheet
of expenses that she said she maintained. She
agreed that none of the expenses
she claimed on pages 1 to 37 of annexure G of her third statement were ever
entered into Ex NF records
and she was never reimbursed for them. She
maintained that Rowe Partners made an allowance of roughly $1,000 per month for
her expenses,
but she was never actually reimbursed. She was asked why she did
not arrange for reimbursement, and she said, “They weren’t
priority”. It was put to her that she had seven years from
Ex NF’s incorporation to its liquidation to attend to it.
“there were lots of things that should have been attended in those seven
years that weren’t”.
was asked about the payments of $2,000 to founding employees every Christmas
since Christmas 2012. It was put to her that, in
effect, what she was saying
was that these amounts should have been added to her loan account and her loan
account was in error in
not reflecting the amounts that were made on behalf of
Ex NF. It was put to her that if she was making cash payments to
she would have understood that she needed to hold back tax for the
employees as being taxable income that Ex NF was obliged to withhold.
said she understood it was up to the employee to declare the income because it
was not part of their salary, they were just
gift bonuses.
was put to Ms Zaccara that if all these expenses were proper business expenses,
it would have been in Ex NF’s best interest
to be claiming a tax
deduction for proper business expenses. She agreed and was asked:
why didn’t you attend to entering them into the accounts and claiming a
tax deduction for them.
just think that the way I saw the company was a family company. I sort of dealt
with it from what I knew being a sole proprietor.
I cared about the company. I
wasn’t too concerned at the time necessarily about, you know, getting
repaid at that time.
I knew that the accountants would sort it out eventually
as I wasn’t the best bookkeeper. ...
Zaccara vehemently denied that her evidence regarding the cash payments that she
made that should have been added to her loan
account was deliberately a lie.
was put to Ms Zaccara that her evidence was that she formed the view that she
wanted to acquire bitcoin as an investment when
she started to read the white
paper. She then said:
... back then because of my research at uni,
I thought that Bitcoin did have potential for that but initially it was to just
Bitcoin to purchase supplements on Silk Road.
was put to her again that she was aware that bitcoin was going through a
significant price rise, and it had gone up about 50 times
in value over the
two‑year period, 2010 to 2012. She said it could have, but she was not
specifically aware of that. It was
then put to her again that it went up to
$1,200 per bitcoin by the end of 2013, that it had gone up by a multiple of
said, “Wow”. It was put to her that if she wanted to
invest $1,000 at the end of 2010, by the end of 2013 that would
have been worth
some $5 million. She said she was generally aware and when it first came
onto the market, she was interested in
it because she wanted to use it like
currency. She knew it was rising but she did not know specifically by how much,
and somewhere
along that period she started to look at it more as an investment
rather than an acquisition to purchase something.
Zaccara agreed that she knew that in order to purchase ethereum, bitcoin was
needed. She was asked what bitcoin she thought he
was going to be using to buy
the ethereum. She said she did not turn her mind to it and left it to
Mr Munneke. She was asked whether
she thought he was going to be using his
own money. She said she did not put her mind to it, but she would have assumed
have been the case. She said she did not care how much the ethereum
was going to cost. She said that she had passed enough money
Mr Munneke over the years, saying “Buy some Bitcoin with this,
won’t you love”.
was then taken to her evidence in her first statement where she
... It also appears from the pleadings I have been shown in
this case that the holding of Bitcoin had been reduced by 7 August 2014
0.062 of a Bitcoin because [Mr Munneke] had prior to that time used 1.0152
of a Bitcoin in his wallet to acquire Ethereum
on behalf of Meeco. I do not
believe I was aware of that transaction as it happened, and I did not agree to
Ms Zaccara said that statement was true. She said she did not know that the
holding of bitcoin from February 2014 was used to acquire
the Meeco ethereum.
She said she did not specifically turn her mind to the manner in which ethereum
would be acquired for Meeco.
She was asked whether she knew that Ex NF was
buying bitcoin in August 2014. She said she had no idea. She was asked when
first learned Ex NF had bought bitcoin in 2014. She said she did not
fully appreciate Ex NF had purchased that until after the liquidation,
although she had seen that CoinJar expense in the bank account, but she just was
not concerned about it.
Zaccara was asked about her evidence in her first statement where she
As I was not aware at the time of the NAB cryptocurrency
withdrawals or that the monies used to acquire the cryptocurrency had been
deducted from the NAB Account, I did not turn my mind to recording the
transactions in the NextFaze books and records as a debit
She was then taken to [11] of her second statement where she said she
recalled reviewing bank statements in February 2014 and August
2014, and noting
the entries in the bank statements, and realising that they related to
cryptocurrency purchases. It was put to
her that the evidence cannot stand
consistently with what she said in her first statement. She repeated that she
did not recognise
the CoinJar transaction. She then went on to say:
... with all due respect, Mr Roberts, that these subsequent statements were
done – and even the first statement was late. There
was great difficulty
getting these statements out. The second and third statement were done quickly.
... when I reread these statements
I read them very quickly, and I didn’t
adhere to exact phrasing that you’ve been pointing out to try to say that
contradicting myself. ...
was asked whether she agreed her evidence was inconsistent and she said,
“Well, if you read it per se”. She was
again taken to her second
statement where she said she recalled noting the particular debits and realising
they related to cryptocurrency
purchases. She said that was true, but she did
not think that she realised all were cryptocurrency purchases. She did come to
all were cryptocurrency purchases at some point, but she did not think
she realised all were at August 2014.
Zaccara was taken to the preparation of the 2014 September quarter BAS and to
the GST audit report prepared by Rowe Partners for
the September 2014
quarter and asked to look at an entry of $1,400 and an entry for $650. It was
put to her that Ex NF was claiming
an input tax credit for the purchase of
bitcoin in August 2014. She said that she might have to agree but that was the
she has seen those entries, and, in that case, Rowe Partners had made
a mistake. It was put to her that she stated in her second
statement that,
having reviewed the NAB account statements and realising they related to
cryptocurrency purchases, she noted the
$650 and $400 debits. She said she
visually saw those entries but did not make that connection to cryptocurrency
purchases at the
time. She was asked whether she wanted to retract [11] of her
second statement. She said the only thing that she would adjust in
statement is that they related to some of the cryptocurrency purchases. She was
asked whether she noted the entry for $650
referred to at [10.3] of her second
statement in August 2014 and realised that that related to a cryptocurrency
purchase. She said:
Not at the time, because Bill Buddy
didn’t strike accord [sic] with me to do with the cryptocurrency, so I
would have sighted
that at some point, but not at the time.
was asked whether she realised that the effect of the GST lodgement was to claim
an input tax credit on behalf of Ex NF for its
purchase of bitcoin in
August 2014. She said:
So I can see what Rowe Partners have
done here, but that’s obviously a mistake, and you know, Rowe Partners
didn’t make
any secret of that. They said ‘Look, we did the best we
could with the information we had’. I’ve rung the –
McDonald told me had rung the ATO, and said ‘Look, how long do we have to
make corrections to our lodgements?’
So that’s what he told me. So
obviously they’ve made a mistake. Obviously, they didn’t recognise
what it was
just took those figures and interpreted them at their own volition.
Zaccara was taken to the GST audit report prepared by Rowe Partners for the
March 2018 quarter and questioned about the BAS lodgement
for the quarter. She
was referred to an entry on 24 January 2018 recording Ex NF paying GST of
$31,496.73 in relation to the sale
of ethereum in 2018 to fund Ward Street. She
was asked whether she was the person who gave the relevant instructions to the
accountants
regarding the GST in relation to ethereum. She said “No, no,
not at all”. She said she remembers specifically telling
Mr McDonald
that the ethereum had to go through the NAB account because of the settlement
issues they were having and that it was
her private cryptocurrency, not
Ex NF cryptocurrency. She said she was stunned later when it was pointed
out to her that income
from the cryptocurrency sale that came into the NAB
account was put down as company income by an accountant. She said it was a
mistake and that she did specifically tell the accountants that it was
private cryptocurrency. She said it was another mistake made
by accountants.
She said she could not exactly recall when she told the accountant it was
private cryptocurrency. She was asked:
told him that, did you then check on whether he’d carried your instruction
into effect.
didn’t check, because, as I said, I trusted Robert McDonald to, you know,
do the best he could under the circumstances.
She said she
was stunned when she learned it had been recorded differently in March or April
2019. She was asked why she did not
do anything about correcting the records.
She was asked why she did not lodge an amended GST return in order to get back
had been remitted to the ATO. She said that she did not even think
Zaccara was asked about her claim to the surplus proceeds following the sale of
the cryptocurrency to acquire Ward Street remaining
in the NAB account. She
agreed that there was nothing to record any loan being made by her to Ex NF
for that purpose.
was put to her that at the time the Ward Street transaction occurred, she
realised that Ex NF could not pay its tax bill. She
maintained that she
always thought Ex NF could manage the tax bill even if the lodgements were
behind. She agreed that by late 2017
the lodgements that had been made saw very
significant notices of assessment. She said she did not recall a million-dollar
but it could have been. She was taken to a statement from the ATO dated
6 January 2018 recording $1.264 million owing in respect
of income tax.
She was taken to another statement dated 5 January 2018 which recorded another
$174,000 owing. She said that she
did not see the statements at the time. She
was asked whether it was front and centre in her mind in late 2017 that there
significant amounts being levied by the ATO for various heads of tax
liabilities. She said it was not in the forefront of her mind.
She said that
she always had great belief that they would manage and that it Ex NF would
manage its debts.
was put to Ms Zaccara that by 2017 Ex NF was trading at a very large loss.
She said she recalled a call from Mr Thiele who said
that the salaries were too
high. She was referred to an email from Mr Thiele dated 1 December 2017,
before the Ward Street purchase,
where he said:
I would also like
to discuss the 2018 year to date accounts as from what I have reconciled so far
you are currently operating at a
very large loss.
Ms Zaccara said that she did not recall reading this email and people who
work with her know that if they want to get to her, they
need to call her
because she misses a lot of emails. She said the information was conveyed to
her by telephone by Mr Thiele.
was put to her that when the ethereum proceeds were banked into the NAB
in early 2018, it was at a point in time when Ex NF had very
limited resources from which to pay tax debts that had been levied.
Ms Zaccara said:
Look, that may be true but the cryptocurrency
doesn’t belong to the company, Mr Roberts. That cryptocurrency is my
cryptocurrency,
so it’s not something that I would have put in relation to
what was happening with the company and my asset.
was asked whether she agreed that without the cryptocurrency there was no means
of paying the tax debts as at the end of 2017.
She did not agree with that
because she remembered talking to Mr Munneke and he would always reassure
It’s okay, Linda, we will get out of this. We will get
the money from Real Time Data, we will get the money from Meeco, we
will get the
money from iConnect and we will get out of this.
said she knew the tax bill was accumulating and it would have been large. She
... a client came onboard that, in my opinion, hypnotised
Derek – that’s real-time data – and Derek started to employ
people specifically to work on that project; and in effect, they weren’t
paying properly for the huge amount of development
that was being done for that
was suggested to Ms Zaccara that by 2018 if she thought that the ethereum that
was being sold was hers, it would have been very
important to have the surplus
ethereum that was left in the bank account recognised as being money that she
was lending Ex NF. Ms
Zaccara said she did not view leaving the money as a
loan to Ex NF. She was asked what she did regard as. She said, “My
Zaccara maintained that she did not see any tax bill being unmanageable. It was
put to her that she never thought about putting
her own money into the tax bill.
She said she did not, but if someone had told that was what was required, she
would have put her
mind to it. She maintained Ex NF was her
“baby”, she loved it, and it was going to be a family legacy. It
her that by late 2017, she knew full well that there was a really
significant tax debt. She maintained that the tax statements were
never brought
to her attention. It was put to her that that evidence was deliberately
dishonest. She said, “Well, Mr Roberts,
you’re wrong about that.
No-one actually told
Ms Zaccara’s
re-examination
re-examination, Ms Zaccara was asked about her evidence in response to questions
She said it was because she
found out about the entries in the financial records she disagreed with on the
day Ex NF went into liquidation,
and it was her belief that she could do
absolutely nothing with company records once it went into
liquidation.
of the experts
Bacina’s gave evidence based on his knowledge and experience in
cryptocurrency, blockchain, and technology. I have addressed
Mr Munneke’s
objections to certain paragraphs of the Bacina report in discussing Mr
Bacina’s evidence. I make clear
I have not received his evidence to
assist in determining Mr Munneke’s intentions and motivations at the
time he acquired ethereum.
His evidence provided background to and explained
concepts concerning cryptocurrencies. Except as I indicated in discussing his
evidence, I accept Mr Bacina’s evidence.
Mr Heard and the liquidator are both members of the firm Heard Phillips
Lieberenz, there was no suggestion Mr Heard’s
opinion was affected by
unconscious bias. Whilst it would be preferable an expert witness has no
connection with a party to litigation,
I am satisfied Mr Heard understands his
obligations as an independent expert and conformed to the standards required by
code of conduct prescribed by the
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
Heard explained clearly and logically how he arrived at his conclusions in
relation to the O’Connell Street transaction:
Ex NF did not have sufficient financial resources available to it
(regardless of whether it did or did not own the cryptocurrency)
to make the
payments, and assume the liability to ANZ, to purchase O’Connell Street in
December 2015 while retaining sufficient
readily realisable assets or other
financial resources to pay its debts as and when they fell due and to meet its
ongoing operational
requirements; and
at the time of the O’Connell Street transaction, Ex NF was
financially unstable, and Mr Munneke should have been concerned
insolvency.
also explained clearly and logically how he arrived at his conclusions in
relation to the Ward Street transaction:
Ex NF did not have sufficient financial resources available to it
(regardless of whether it did or did not own the cryptocurrency)
31 January 2018 when the payments were made to purchase Ward Street.
He considered that Ex NF did not have sufficient liquid
assets to pay all
its liabilities that were due to be paid and to continue trading; and
in his opinion Ex NF was facing insolvency at the time of the
Ward Street transaction.
cross-examination, Mr Heard acknowledged he applied the incorrect interest rate
in considering the ANZ loan. Mr Heard agreed
in cross-examination that the
EBITDA figures referred to in the Scott report reflected an improvement in
EBITDA between the 2013
and 2015 financial years. Of course, EBITDA does not
include tax liabilities and does not represent the total financial health of
company. Ms Zaccara and the respondent companies submitted that in relation to
working capital reserve, Mr Heard’s experience
as a director was limited
to his own private company and certain charities.
Scott adopted the same methodology as Mr Heard and agreed with the estimations
in the Heard report as to debtors, WIP, tax creditors
and accruals. However, he
disagreed with Mr Heard’s inclusion of a working capital reserve for
operational costs/overhead
costs was required to assess Ex NF’s
financial position. I am unable to glean from Mr Scott’s evidence whether
he seriously
considered the need for working capital, in assessing solvency as
it was demonstrably evident from his cross‑examination, that
assessment of Ex NF’s financial position was wedded to the assumption
that Ms Zaccara was willing if needed to provide
cash to Ex NF to meet
its liabilities (“the assumption”). This was one of the assumptions
Mr Scott was asked by Mr Munneke’s
solicitors to make and he was most
reluctant to divorce himself from or ignore for a moment that assumption. His
cross-examination
was peppered with his reluctance give his opinion absent the
assumption. Rather he reiterated that a working capital allowance was
necessary because he adopted the assumption.
Scott contended in cross-examination that a working capital reserve was not
necessary on the basis that three-quarters of the
companies in South Australia
would be in liquidation. As submitted by the applicants, Mr Scott did not
attempt to explain why such
a reserve was not necessary or prudent. However, he
ultimately accepted that he would view a distribution leaving less than one
month’s worth of expenses in the bank account with “some
caution”. Unlike Mr Heard, Mr Scott did not address head
quantum of Ex NF’s operational costs. I infer, noting that Mr Scott
said he agreed with and adopted the methodology
adopted in the Heard report
unless otherwise stated, that he did not disagree with Mr Heard’s
assessment that Ex NF’s
average overheads for the 2015 financial year
were $155,000 per month and $137,000 for the 2017 financial year. When he was
to put to one side the assumption and consider whether $250,000 was a
reasonable working capital allowance, Mr Scott said “I
know whether it would be 100,000, 50,000, or 400,000. I just don’t
know”. When it was put to him that “two
months’ worth of
expenses is pretty skinny in terms of a rule of thumb [for a] working capital
allowance”, Mr Scott repeated
that three-quarters of the companies in
Adelaide would be in liquidation if it were necessary to maintain such a
submitted by the applicants Mr Scott appeared quite inflexible when asked to
consider alternate hypotheses put to him in cross‑examination
hypotheses might lead to a conclusion unfavourable to Mr Munneke and he was
unwilling to move beyond the facts Mr Munneke’s
solicitors had asked him
to assume. For example, he was reluctant to engage with the hypothesis that the
sum of $740,000 as a loan
to the 28 O’Connell Trust should not be included
as an asset in his analysis. He did eventually accept that if it was excluded
as an asset, there was a substantial net asset deficiency. He was also
remarkably reluctant to make concessions as to how imprudent
it would be for a
director in the position that Ex NF found itself in to have, in effect,
gifted the cash to acquire both O’Connell
Street and Ward Street with
no ability to recover that capital.
manner in which Mr Scott responded to questions during cross‑examination
and, in particular, his unwillingness to consider
the matter in the absence of
the assumption, left me wondering whether he understood his role and obligations
as an independent expert.
His recourse to the assumption in
cross‑examination suggested a lack of independence and a preparedness to
advance Mr Munneke’s
Scott ultimately reluctantly made concessions as to the imprudence of the
dealings undertaken by Ex NF. I have had regard to
the submissions and the
criticisms made by the parties regarding Mr Heard and Mr Scott’s
evidence, which I have set out in
more detail later in these reasons. Where
Mr Scott’s evidence differs from Mr Heard’s evidence, I
prefer Mr Heard’s
evidence. I accept Mr Heard’s evidence
and am also satisfied that Mr Heard is qualified to proffer an opinion
regarding working
capital reserve, which I suggest is a standard accounting
of witnesses
witnesses speak about matters in the past, there is necessarily an element of
reconstruction for the most honest of witnesses.
As submitted by the applicants
where there is self-interest in mind, there is an inevitability that that will
unwittingly infect
the reconstruction exercise, again, even for the most honest
witness. The applicants suggested I approach the counterfactual evidence
by Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara regarding what they would have done if they had
been made aware of certain matters with reticence.
was submitted in Mr Munneke’s closing submissions Mr Munneke was a
truthful witness whose evidence should be accepted and
that incongruities
between his evidence at trial and that given during the s 597 examination in
February 2021 are of no surprise.
It was contended Mr Munneke presented to the
s 597 examination and was asked detailed questions about events that had
occurred more
than seven years prior, and he was obliged to provide evidence
without the benefit of having any reasonable opportunity to consider
the events and documents in question, or to investigate the issues to assist his
recollection.
was submitted Mr Munneke quite reasonably explained that divergences from his
evidence given in the s 597 examination have come
opportunity to investigate and refresh his memory on the issues being examined.
was argued the applicants frequently urged the Court to measure the facts and
the evidence of Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara with a
level of exaction and
perfection that is simply beyond the norm and is unrealistic.
accept that at the time they each gave evidence in the s 597 examination,
Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara were under stress both
personally and professionally. I have no doubt each of them was under stress
cross‑examination in this trial. Stress is a common feature of
litigation. It was submitted by Ms Zaccara and the respondent
that any minor discrepancy in the detail of the accounts of Mr Munneke and
Ms Zaccara, noting that Mr Munneke had a better
technical understanding of
cryptocurrency and transacting in cryptocurrency, is a reason to accord
authenticity and credibility to
their evidence rather than the converse. I
agree with Ms Zaccara and the respondent companies’ submission that it is
not surprising
in the context of a marriage relationship and, in particular,
after a breakdown of that relationship that there might be different
views about
the ultimate ownership of an asset.
it was contended Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara made significant admissions against
interest including as to their taxation affairs,
and neither sought to claim any
privilege against self-incrimination. I agree it is a common feature of human
experience that not
all individuals conduct themselves in an organised and
orderly manner and this is certainly the case with Mr Munneke and
Ms Zaccara.
However, their approach to the financial affairs of Ex NF
was demonstrably tracking toward the extreme end of the disorganised and
disordered spectrum. I point out that admissions were made in the face of
compelling evidence about their unsatisfactory attention
to, in particular, the
tax affairs of Ex NF.
assessing Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara’s reliability and credibility, I have
made allowance for the passage of time between
the occurrence of events and
cross-examination about those events, the fact that they have endured a
relationship breakdown, the
demise of Ex NF and the stress of giving
am left with the impression the evidence of Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara is an
evolution of their accounts from the s 597 examination,
through their
statements, and to their oral evidence in this Court. The evolution causes me
to approach with caution the evidence
they each gave in this matter. Each of
them attempted to qualify or resile from evidence they gave during the
s 597 examination.
Ms Zaccara referred to having taken medication
that affected her evidence in the s 597 examination. Mr Munneke spoke
beaten down and a bit disheartened during the s 597 examination
and that he had since refreshed his memory from contemporaneous documents.
White J did in relation to the witnesses who had given evidence in s 597
examinations and who gave evidence before him in
Termite Resources NL (in
liq) v Meadows, in the matter of Termite Resources NL (in liq) (No 2)
Termite Resources
I accept that the fact Mr
Munneke and Ms Zaccara are
respondents:
serious claims is likely to have sharpened their focus on relevant events. I
also accept that they may have thought about
events more deeply than they had at
the time of the s 597 examinations. Nevertheless, I thought that these
factors could not explain
many of the variances in the respective
cross‑examinations from the s 597 answers. I have maintained that
view on re-reading
of the transcript.
Further, I consider that each of Mr Munneke and Ms
... realised the damaging nature of the answers in the s 597
examinations and sought to modify them. ... When this occurred, I have
generally that the s 597 examination are more likely to be accurate.
this juncture, I indicate Mr Munneke’s evidence in the s 597
examination regarding his cryptocurrency holding and its original
purchase cause
me to approach his evidence with caution. It appears from the transcript of
that examination that Mr Munneke had
not, until the s 597 examination,
disclosed the “substantial cryptocurrency holdings”, having told the
liquidator he
did not hold any assets above $10,000.
asserted the ethereum was owned by Ms Zaccara because she had asked him to
purchase it in 2012. When asked whose money was used
to purchase the
cryptocurrency, he said:
... it was Bitcoin that was stored in a
wallet that I would have purchased previously.
... Yes, so obviously family, you know, family funds but it was one that I
had – yes, it was a wallet – a wallet I had
control over.
Mr Munneke then corrected himself and said the ethereum was acquired in
2014. When asked who paid $1,000 in February 2014 to acquire
bitcoin, he said
he did not recall. When it was suggested Ex NF paid, he said, “I
thought I did”. When Mr Munneke was
shown the purchase made using
the Ex NF credit card account, he was asked if Ex NF was loaning
$1,000 to buy bitcoin. He said he
did not recall and when asked whether
Ex NF was gifting $1,000 to buy bitcoin, he said he did not know. When it
was suggested to
him that Ex NF owned the ethereum all along, he said he
did not believe so. Further, when asked why the surplus $121,988.92 from
sale of ethereum was left in Ex NF’s account, he said liquidity was
low “and so having that amount available in case
we need it was
Assessment of
Mr Munneke’s evidence
Munneke’s evidence suggested he is an experienced software developer, who
focused on developing Ex NF, who kept his eye
on Ex NF’s bank
balances and issued invoices, leaving the financial management of the business
to Ms Zaccara and the accountants.
Munneke admitted that he had read Ms Zaccara’s first statement shortly
before giving his evidence at trial. He accepted
his evidence regarding any
discussions between him and Ms Zaccara concerning the purchase of cryptocurrency
was affected by having
read Ms Zaccara’s statement in advance. In
cross-examination, Mr Munneke said his evidence might have changed having
[86] of Ms Zaccara’s first statement where she said she started
asking him to purchase cryptocurrency on her behalf some time
in 2011. He also
conceded that reading Ms Zaccara’s first statement might have influenced
the applicants pointed out, Mr Munneke’s evidence about the purchase of
bitcoin in February 2014 was unsatisfactory. During
the s 597 examination, he
said the source of the funds used to purchase bitcoin in February 2014 he
thought was from his personal
credit card and he was surprised when shown the
purchase was made with Ex NF funds. His evidence in his statement was that
he recalled
the purchase was made with Ex NF’s funds and it was
something he had discussed with Ms Zaccara, that it was to be made for
benefit of the ZALD Trust, and that he considered the use of Ex NF’s
funds would in some way be offset against money owed
to Ms Zaccara by
Ex NF. In cross-examination, Mr Munneke spoke about having a discussion
with Ms Zaccara about the purchase of bitcoin
as a family investment late in the
evening on 14 February 2014. As submitted by the applicants, Mr Munneke’s
evidence in cross‑examination
on this topic appeared to be a
reconstruction:
was deposited to the CoinJar account in the afternoon of 14 February 2014,
not at some point in the evening or middle of the
conceded that he gave no thought to the ZALD Trust at the time of the purchase
but that “it’s been suggested to me
that if it was viewed as a
family, or a combined asset, then that would have been the appropriate vehicle
that it would be within”;
admitted to having no specific recollection of a conversation with Ms Zaccara on
the night of 14 February 2014;
evidence about the order of the transactions with a first deposit of $700 by
bank transfer followed by a $300 deposit for Ric
Santos’ wedding gift from
his debit card, was directly inconsistent with his earlier evidence
So we decided leading up to that point that we would
get the Bitcoin for Rick [sic] and – but I believe it was on the evening
itself that once I had made the first transaction I said – we discussed
and suggested that we should also get some for ourselves.
agree with the applicants’ submission that the evolution in Mr
Munneke’s account from the s 597 examination, to his
statement, to his
cross‑examination does not reflect well on him.
am unable to accept Mr Munneke’s evidence about his interactions with
Ms Zaccara regarding the cryptocurrency purchase in
the years before 2014
which appeared to be an attempt to align his evidence with what he had read in
Ms Zaccara’s first statement.
In his statement, he referred to some
discussions with Ms Zaccara in 2011 or 2012 about potentially mining bitcoin,
which they ultimately
did not do, whereas Ms Zaccara in her statement gave
evidence of having made repeated requests for Mr Munneke to purchase bitcoin
from 2010. In his cross-examination, Mr Munneke gave evidence about
Ms Zaccara having made numerous requests for him to purchase
bitcoin over
the years that he did not action. He said that he did not get around to it for
many years. It was submitted by the
applicants that this evidence can be
inferred to be a deliberate attempt by Mr Munneke to tailor his evidence to
match Ms Zaccara’s
first statement as it was not mentioned at all in
his statement.
was submitted that Ms Zaccara, however, in cross-examination, by reference to
what she had said in the s 597 examination, embellished
the story given in her
statements by adding that she had paid Mr Munneke thousands of dollars over the
years to buy bitcoin. Mr
Munneke made no mention of receiving any money from Ms
Zaccara to purchase bitcoin in the s 597 examination, his statement, or in
cross-examination.
agree with the applicants that I should reject Mr Munneke’s evidence, save
to the extent that it was consistent with contemporaneous
documentary evidence
or represented a concession against his interests. Cross-examination of him
left me with the impression his
evidence on certain matters was at the least
reconstructed.
Munneke’s evidence during the s 597 examination was to the effect that he
had no idea as to Ex NF’s solvency by reference
to his lack of
understanding of the extent of the defaults in the tax filings and to the tax
liabilities.
Munneke also gave evidence that he had not filed personal income tax returns
since some time in the early 1990s. The applicants
contended that his admitted
failure to attend to his personal tax affairs in his personal capacity displays
a wanton disregard of
Ex NF’s obligations to file timely returns to
the ATO and make remittances.
Munneke said in cross-examination he is ashamed that he has not filed a tax
return since 1993, and Ms Zaccara spoke about the
psychological assistance she
was receiving to work through her tax issues. Ms Zaccara’s counsel warned
invitation to find discreditable conduct on the part
of Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara in respect of their taxation affairs, and to
in “bad person” reasoning. I have not used the evidence
given by Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara on this issue as demonstrating
engage in deliberate conduct to avoid payment of tax and therefore are likely to
hide assets. It establishes that Mr Munneke
and Ms Zaccara, by their own
admission, have not attended to their personal tax obligations, which leads to
an inference, together
with other evidence on the topic, that as director and
chief operating officer they did not attend to and had at least a
laissez-faire
approach to the timely lodgement of tax returns and making
provision for tax liabilities in the operation of Ex NF.
accept that Mr Munneke’s evidence where it amounted to admissions against
his interests was inherently likely to be true.
I accept his evidence regarding
his failure to attend to his personal tax affairs and his evidence regarding a
lack of any substantive
understanding of Ex NF’s financial situation.
Munneke admitted during the s 597 examination, and ultimately in
cross‑examination, that he did not have sufficient information
proper assessment of Ex NF’s financial position in late 2015 when
O’Connell Street was purchased.
accept Mr Munneke’s evidence that he focussed on technical matters and
left dealing with tax and accounting matters to Ms
Zaccara. However, as
submitted by the applicants, his reliance on Ms Zaccara was not based upon any
reasonable foundation or meaningful
oversight of the accounting function. He
had a lack of awareness of non-payment of BAS and failed to take any meaningful
ensure compliance or ascertain the extent to which Ex NF was in
default. Mr Munneke maintained he left it all up to Ms Zaccara.
was asked whether, in mid-2015 when back lodgements needed to be made, he
considered what the process was in lodging quarterly
BAS, he said he did not
bring his mind to it as he had other things to worry about. When asked whether
that was a serious answer,
he said it was and that he could not do everything,
so he delegated that part of the business to Ms Zaccara and the accountants and
focussed on the things that had the most value.
was put to Mr Munneke that Ms Zaccara’s performance in April 2015 in terms
of tax compliance had been an abject failure.
He said he knew that they had
fallen behind, but it was something they were working through. He knew she was
working with the accountants,
and it was something that “we all learn as
we’re building a business”. He said he did not try to ascertain the
extent to which Ex NF was in default in BAS reporting and gave evidence
that he did not realise that Ex NF was behind in lodgements.
Munneke was asked whether he agreed that as at the end of 2015, Ex NF did
not have true and accurate accounting books. He said
he did not believe that
they accurately recorded their transactions. He agreed that as at the end of
2015, because they did not
have accurate accounting books, he did not know what
amounts were owed to the ATO. It was put to him that he did not, therefore,
know what Ex NF’s solvency was. He said maybe not the number but he
said he knew Ex NF was doing well and bringing in a lot
of money and the
bank balance was good, and he believed that there was a credit with the ATO
account but he said it was apparent
to him that they were doing well.
was reminded that in the s 597 examination, when asked, “So at this
point in January 2016 would you agree that you didn’t
know whether
Ex NF was solvent or insolvent” and he answered, “Privilege. I
did not know”. Mr Munneke said he
did not know Ex NF had well
in excess of $1 million in tax liabilities by the time of the Ward Street
transaction or that it was
in very material financial difficulty. He confirmed
in cross‑examination that he did not know. It was submitted by the
that as Mr Munneke’s reliance on Ms Zaccara was not based
on any reasonable foundation or meaningful oversight of the accounting
he could not avail himself to avoid the consequences of what were patent and
obvious breaches of his duties as a director
of Ex NF. As submitted, it is
apparent that to the extent to which Mr Munneke concerned himself with financial
matters, his predominant,
if not entire, focus was on the revenue generated by
Ex NF, and he did not have proper regard to Ex NF’s liabilities
time the O’Connell Street transaction and the Ward Street
transaction were contemplated. I agree with the applicants’
that it is unsurprising that a director who had no real regard to a
company’s liabilities would have an unjustifiably
rosy view of
of Ms Zaccara’s evidence
Zaccara’s evidence revealed that she had a lot of fingers in a lot of pies
from the incorporation of Ex NF until its liquidation.
At times things,
particularly the taxation affairs of Ex NF, overwhelmed her and she
appeared to be constantly chased by her accountants
for information about
Ex NF’s tax affairs. Her evidence was that Ex NF was her
“baby” and she wanted it to succeed.
However, the evidence before
me reveals she delayed addressing tax matters and was avoidant of them. She
spoke of a psychological
blockage when it comes to with dealing with the ATO and
tax obligations. She did not act to ensure the nourishment and long-term
viability of her “baby” Ex NF.
acknowledged in the s 597 examination that she was not the best bookkeeper.
Zaccara blamed the accountants for errors in lodgements and returns and for not
attending to details. She blamed BDO for not
drawing her attention to the
financial state of Ex NF. However, she admitted not checking documents
submitted to her for approval
by Rowe Partners. She gave evidence that
communication with BDO was poor, whilst asserting the payment of
Ex NF’s funds toward
O’Connell Street was consequent upon
advice by BDO. She was at times evasive in her evidence and tended to
submitted by the applicants, Ms Zaccara admitted serious difficulties in
separating her knowledge now from what she knew at the
relevant times.
accept Ms Zaccara’s evidence of having made payments to Ex NF’s
expenses. However, the matters deposed to in her third
statement and the
annexures thereto (including documents prepared by her and numerous receipts,
many of which are faded and unreadable),
together with the evidence of
Mr Heard and Mr Scott regarding the associated trust loan and the
inference that the associated loan
remains unpaid drawn from
Mr Munneke’s criticism of Mr Heard for not investigating the
capacity of the associated loan debtor
to repay, leave me in a position where
the evidence does not disclose how much Ms Zaccara has paid.
agree the evidence Ms Zaccara gave in her third statement that she had made
payments of a total of $228,000 to Ex NF to repay advances
when the funds were in fact a transfer between Ex NF’s NAB accounts
on 27 November 2013 and 21 May 2014 suggests
a willingness to manufacture
or reconstruct evidence. As submitted, even when confronted with the clear
misstatement, Ms Zaccara
did not accept the falsity of her evidence but
maintained, but did not identify, that some form of payment to Ex NF had
I note she did pay the sum of $54,996.90 into the NAB account on 28
June 2016 following the Parawae Road sale and suggested in evidence
this repaid
the Antarctica holiday withdrawal in September 2016.
find that Ms Zaccara’s evidence regarding the cryptocurrency was a
reconstruction. I do not accept her evidence of having
made repeated requests
and substantial payments to Mr Munneke to purchase bitcoin, which evidence
cannot be reconciled with Mr Munneke’s
evidence on the topic.
find her evidence regarding not being aware of the price unconvincing. As
submitted by the applicants, that evidence was also
inherently improbable given
the massive appreciation in the price of bitcoin over many years at a time when
Mr Munneke was apparently
failing to get around to purchasing bitcoin in
response to Ms Zaccara’s repeated requests and having given him money
specifically
for that purpose. I agree it is highly unlikely that an
appreciation in the price of bitcoin over 5,000 times in the period 2010
2013 occasioning losses of many millions of dollars was met with such
Zaccara’s evidence in the s 597 examination was that she did not own any
ethereum, nor did she know that Mr Munneke continued
to control any ethereum
after the purchase of Ward Street. As submitted, it is inherently implausible
that if the ethereum had been
purchased for Ms Zaccara then she would have known
whether any was still held given its immense value. I agree
Ms Zaccara’s
attempts to explain away her straightforward answers to
straightforward questions in the s 597 examination as being due to stress
effects of medication are not credible.
am satisfied that neither Mr Munneke nor Ms Zaccara were cognisant of
the actual financial state of Ex NF at the relevant times.
satisfied that they understood they had a liability for tax debts even if they
did not know the quantum of such debts
as they each acknowledged in the
s 597 examination.
were a number of matters both Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara gave evidence
their evidence in their
respective s 597 examinations which are not supported by any
contemporaneous records.
is my impression that Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara’s evidence
before me was affected by retrospective rationalisation.
The difficulties posed by Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara’s respective accounts
are such that I cannot agree that they were both
credible witnesses who gave
plausible and coherent accounts which may readily be accepted. I have
difficulty accepting the evidence
they each gave which is not supported by
contemporaneous documents or other evidence I
did Mr Vijayadass advise?
in the s 597 examination gave evidence about the lack of communication with BDO
from around 2015. She intimated she was
dissatisfied with BOS’s services,
that the advice “it’s not a good idea for any company to hold large
money because if things go wrong then a liquidator comes in and
appropriates it” was advice given in the nature of asset protection,
was not in writing and was not anything formal. It is notable that the
purported advice about “large amounts of money”
that had “no
sort of structure or other advice around it” has evolved to advice
underpinning the transaction.
Munneke and 28 O’Connell Pty Ltd pleaded in the O’Connell Street
claim, and Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara gave evidence,
that the purchase of
O’Connell Street occurred consequent upon advice given by Mr Vijayadass.
It was asserted that Mr Vijayadass
advised that Ex NF was carrying
excessive surplus cash in the bank and should do something with it. Ms Zaccara
said Mr Vijayadass
also spoke to her about payment out to her of surplus
cash by way of a dividend or distribution of capital. Ms Zaccara said she
relayed this advice to Mr Munneke. Mr Munneke gave evidence that he had asked
Ms Zaccara to speak with Mr Vijayadass about whether
the funds in
Ex NF’s bank account could be used to purchase a property from where
Ex NF could trade and how that purchase could
be structured. Mr Munneke
also said that Ms Zaccara told him around that time that Mr Vijayadass had
informed her that there was
sufficient cash in Ex NF to take the monies out
as a dividend. Mr Munneke pleaded that he relied upon this advice in reaching
determination to pay surplus Ex NF funds to Ms Zaccara as shareholder,
and which reliance is reasonable by reason of
Corporations
was submitted that Mr Vijayadass assisted Ms Zaccara in the establishment of a
discretionary trust of which he was the settlor
and known as the 28
O’Connell Trust by deed dated 6 November 2015. In this regard, the
solicitor, Ms Polson, forwarded to
Mr Vijayadass the trust deed for his
signature by letter dated 28 October 2015.
applicants pleaded in their reply in the O’Connell Street claim that
insofar as there was any discussion between Ms Zaccara
and Mr Vijayadass which
was then relayed to Mr Munneke (which they do not admit), it was not reasonable
for Mr Munneke to rely upon
such conversations.
Munneke submitted the evidence demonstrates that BDO was well aware of the
financial position of Ex NF including as to its late
lodgements. He said
Mr Vijayadass had provided accounting services to Ex NF since January
2013, that BDO and Mr Vijayadass continued
throughout 2014 to assist Ex NF
catch up with outstanding lodgements, that BDO were aware of the ATO review in
early 2015 and sought
instructions as to the status of the review and meetings
between the ATO and Ms Zaccara, that BDO prepared and lodged the 2013 tax
on 23 December 2014.
was submitted by Mr Munneke that the documentary evidence also shows that BDO
advised on the funding and structuring of the O’Connell
acquisition. It was asserted BDO spoke to, and met with, Ms Zaccara regarding
this subject on several occasions in late 2015
as evidenced by:
Vijayadass’ email dated 30 September 2015 where he
Good to chat after a long while. Outlined below is
the contact details of a loan broker I’ve used in the past. Given the
is only likely to have 50% gearing, I’d imagine there are many
lenders who will be interested to make the loan to [Mr Munneke]
Vijayadass’ time sheet entry dated 30 September 2015 recording a 0.3
[Ms Zaccara] re property [purchase], loan structure, lo-doc due to
[Ms Zaccara], but could use [Mr Munneke] as trustee of
update on compliance etc”.
Vijayadass was put forward as the settlor of the 28 O’Connell Trust and he
is recorded as being the settlor in the final
executed deed establishing the 28
O’Connell Street Trust;
28 October 2015, Ms Polson wrote to Mr Vijayadass and noted that:
suggested to Ms Zaccara that she might want to speak with her accountant in
order to obtain accounting advice in respect of the
appropriateness or otherwise
of establishing the trust (whether discretionary or a unit trust) or perhaps a
superannuation fund as
a property investment vehicle. Ms Zaccara
instructed me to prepare a discretionary trust and indicated that you would be
to act as Settlor.
Vijayadass wrote to Ms Polson on 4 November 2015 providing original executed
copies of the deed establishing the 28 O’Connell
the course of November and December 2015, Ms Zaccara and Mr Vijayadass
communicated and met directly in connection with the acquisition
O’Connell Street as well as the preparation of the outstanding BAS
lodgements;
assistance in catching up on late lodgements continued after the settlement of
O’Connell Street;
invoice rendered by BDO to Ex NF in respect of the period 1 November
2014 to 30 June 2016 recorded the following professional services
Meeting attended by [Mr] Vijayadass and [Ms] Zaccara
regarding various business and taxation matters on 9 December 2015 ... Various
telephone correspondence regarding the purchase of a property, loan structures,
acquisition structures and ATO registrations.
meeting attended by Mr Vijayadass and Ms Zaccara on 9 December 2015
occurred on the day immediately before the payment of Ex NF
Munneke submitted the evidence demonstrates that:
had been tasked with catching Ex NF up with its late lodgements;
had access to the underlying financial records of Ex NF – sufficient
to allow it to provide the services it had been engaged
to perform;
was accordingly aware of Ex NF’s financial position including its
late lodgements;
was in a position to advise on the availability of surplus cash as a
distribution to the shareholder;
Vijayadass was aware that Ex NF’s funds were to be used to acquire
O’Connell Street through
Ms Zaccara or Mr Munneke not
30 September 2015 email from Mr Vijayadass indicated that the purchaser was not
to be Ex NF, but either Mr Munneke or Ms Zaccara.
The reference to
“only 50% gearing”
supports the evidence that the healthy
cash balance would be applied towards the purchase.
asked in the
examination whether BDO had given advice about what ought to
happen with the money in the bank account, Ms Zaccara said:
had perceived that opinion from our accountant many months before because the
money had collated and they had been doing all
of the financials.
When asked whether she or Mr Munneke were seeking asset protection advice
from BDO at that time, she said:
No. We had received that opinion. It wasn’t in writing. It
wasn’t anything formal. There was no sort of structure
or other advice
around it. Then, there was a problem with BDO. We weren’t really
engaging BDO anymore and we didn’t
engage the new accountants in 2017. So
we were in a position where we were having no formal advice of any kind.
In her first statement, Ms Zaccara said she could distinctly recall around
the time Ex NF was looking for new premises, Mr Vijayadass
informed her
that having the amount of surplus of money Ex NF had in the bank was not a
Munneke submitted his evidence and Ms Zaccara’s evidence should be
accepted to the effect that O’Connell Street was
not acquired with the
funds of Ex NF. Rather, it had been acquired through funds which had been
distributed to Ms Zaccara as shareholder
and that distribution occurred after
the independent advice of BDO vindicated that
Vijayadass was not called to give evidence
Munneke contended that the failure of the applicants to call Mr Vijayadass,
having stated he would be called/subpoenaed to give
evidence “to rebut a
contention from the defence”, gives rise to an inference that the
applicants abandoned their intention
to call Mr Vijayadass through fear that he
would corroborate the evidence of Mr Munneke and Ms
Vijayadass was not called by Mr Munneke or 28 O’Connell Pty Ltd to give
as contended by Mr Munneke, the applicants’ decision to abandon their
intention to call Mr Vijayadass gives rise to
the inference that they feared he
would corroborate the evidence of Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara can be drawn depends
on several matters,
including the asserted significance of Mr Vijayadass.
is to be noted that the applicants informed the respondents in an email dated 26
March 2024 that Mr Vijayadass was no longer prepared
to provide a statement and
that he had been subpoenaed. On 9 April 2024, four days before trial, the
applicants informed the respondents
that they did not propose to call on the
subpoena at trial. It may be that Mr Vijayadass, having stated he no longer was
to provide a statement, left the applicants in the position where they
were not sufficiently aware of what Mr Vijayadass would say
to warrant the
inference Mr Munneke contended should be drawn.
my view, having considered all the evidence, the applicants abandoning their
intention to call Mr Vijayadass is not sufficiently
material to lead me to draw
an inference that the evidence of Mr Vijayadass would not have assisted their
case. It was Mr Munneke
and 28 O’Connell Pty Ltd who pleaded the alleged
advice which plea was put in issue by the applicants’ reply. In the
circumstances, Mr Munneke bears the onus of proof regarding the advice
alleged to have been given by Mr Vijayadass.
would expect Mr Vijayadass to be called by Mr Munneke and
28 O’Connell Pty Ltd rather than the applicants. His evidence
elucidate the issue of the asserted advice regarding payment of
Ex NF’s funds, and his absence has not been explained.
circumstances, the evidence given by Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara about
the advice they alleged they relied upon regarding
the use of and
characterisation of the payment of Ex NF’s funds may be more readily
is significant that at the time of the purported advice Ex NF was again
behind in its tax filings, did not have up to date financial
statements, and the
documentary record reveals that there been no contact from Ms Zaccara to BDO
since February 2015. Notably, Mr
Vijayadass commences his email on
30 September 2015 with “Good to chat after a long while”. I
agree with applicants
that it is implausible that in the relatively short
telephone conversation on the same date Mr Vijayadass gave actionable advice
tenor of the email suggests it was Ms Zaccara who initiated
the chat with
Mr Vijayadass seeking contact details of a loan broker. I agree with the
applicants’ submission that, at most,
consistent with what would have been
sensible high-level advice, Mr Vijayadass may have indicated to Ms Zaccara
that if Ex NF had
surplus cash, they could consider how that cash might be
used to fund a property purchase. I agree it is inconceivable given the
of Ex NF’s tax filings and records that Mr Vijayadass advised Ms
Zaccara that Ex NF could properly pay her a substantial
dividend. I also
agree it is inconceivable that Mr Vijayadass would have advised payment of
a dividend without advising the requisite
processes for the declaration of a
dividend to fund the purchase in Mr Munneke’s name should be
followed. It is also of note
that had a dividend been declared that would have
led to a material tax liability for Ms Zaccara.
BDO invoice for the period 1 November 2014 to 30 June 2016 recording a meeting
on 9 December 2015 does not support the contention
that Mr Vijayadass provided
the advice Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara said they acted on.
is further to be noted that the last communication with Ms Zaccara and BDO
before Mr Vijayadass’ email dated 30 September
2015 was on
18 February 2015. Mr Vijayadass’ email suggests Ms Zaccara
had informed him about the property to be purchased
that was “only like to
have a 50% gearing”. Ms Zaccara rescheduled an appointment with Mr
Vijayadass in the week of
23 November 2015 stating in an email she had not
“had a chance to update MYOB for” Ex NF’s returns and had
focusing on “completing BAS for our loan requirements”. She
also said, “loan has been approved – subject
valuations”. Mr Vijayadass emailed back suggesting a meeting on
2 December 2015. On 2 December 2015, Ms Zaccara emailed
Vijayadass asking to postpone the meeting scheduled for that day. She also said
“there has still been lots of activity
with financing, conveyancing and
valuation this week” and “I’ve caught up with BAS and Super
thanks to finance
application”.
made reference to “tackling overdue income returns”. It appears
that by reference to an email dated 3 December
2015 from Ms Zaccara to her
solicitor, Ms Polson, the valuation was expected on 7 December 2015.
On 7 December 2015, Ms Zaccara
was “shocked” to learn that
the valuation of O’Connell Street came in at $1.15 million,
significantly lower than
the Registrar‑General’s valuation at $1.54
million. There is no evidence that Mr Vijayadass was informed of the
lower‑than-expected
valuation and ANZ’s preparedness to loan only
$740,000, not the $1 million as applied for. Nor is there evidence he was
that an extra $260,000 of Ex NF’s funds would be paid out or
that on 24 November 2015 Ms Zaccara was pursuing payment from
client, saying Ex NF was in “dire straits”, with the ATO on its
back. If he was informed prior to settlement
on 10 December 2015, there is
no evidence to suggest that it occurred prior to the meeting on 9 December
suspect the evidence Ms Zaccara gave during the
examination reflects
the true situation regarding her communication with Mr Vijayadass when she was
asked whether BDO gave advice
bank and she said:
No. We had perceived that opinion from our
accountant many months before ...
... It wasn’t in writing. It wasn’t anything formal. There was
no sort of structure or other advice around it.
and where she said, “We didn’t get advice about how that should
am unable to accept that Mr Vijayadass gave the advice Mr Munneke and
Ms Zaccara alleged. As a final note on this topic, Mr Munneke
cross‑examination that he “didn’t talk to BDO about” the
large surplus, and left it to
Ms Zaccara.
Corporations Act
provides to the effect that a company which
is not solvent is insolvent, and a company is solvent if, and only if, it is
able to pay
all the company’s debts, as and when they become due and
question whether a company is unable to pay its debts as they full due is a
question of fact to be decided as a matter of commercial
reality in the light of
all the circumstances and not merely be looking at the accounts and making a
mechanical comparison of assets
liabilities.
submitted by Ms Zaccara and the respondent companies, this matter is not an
insolvent trading case and the applicants do not specifically
call in aid the
definition of insolvency in
Corporations Act
submitted that definition may inform the Court’s approach to the pleaded
allegation of insolvency, and it has informed
the approach of Mr Heard, to his
assessment of Ex NF’s financial position at relevant times. While in
a case involving an
allegation of insolvent trading pursuant to
the requirement to establish insolvency at the time of the incurring of the debt
is essentially backward looking or retrospective,
the allegations in this matter
require regard to be had to the appearance of solvency from the perspective of
the director, Mr Munneke,
at the time of the alleged breaches of duty.
assessing solvency, a debtor’s financial resources are not limited to
their cash resources immediately available.
which on a “realistic commercial assessment” are capable of being
raised from outside sources are relevant to the
question whether a company is
Presumption
of insolvency
applicants pleaded in both the O’Connell Street claim and the
cryptocurrency and Ward Street claim that Ex NF was presumed
Corporations Act
by reason of an alleged failure
to keep financial records pursuant to
Corporations
relevantly provides that if it is proved that the company has failed
to keep “financial records” in relation to a period
as required by
the company is presumed to have been insolvent throughout the
period. Pursuant to
, the presumption of insolvency operates
except so far as the contrary is proved.
applicants bear the onus of proving the matters in
Thereafter, it is
open to the party who is subject to the presumption of insolvency to prove an
absence of insolvency, that is,
relevantly provides as follows:
(1) A company ... must keep financial records that:
(a) correctly record and explain its transactions and financial position and
performance; and
(b) would enable true and fair financial statements to be prepared and audited.
definition of “financial records” provides as
financial records
(a) invoices, receipts, orders for the payment of money, bills of exchange,
cheques, promissory notes and vouchers; and
(b) documents of prime entry; and
(c) working papers and other documents needed to explain:
(i) the methods by which financial statements are made up; and
(ii) adjustments to be made in preparing financial statements.
Munneke relied on a decision of Barrett J in
Fisher v Divine Homes Pty Ltd;
Allen v Harb
, where the liquidator sought to rely (as here) on a presumption
of insolvency arising under
, by reason of an alleged failure to
keep records pursuant to
was conceded in that case that the company had not prepared income tax returns,
BAS, balance sheets, or profit and loss accounts
for any period since its
incorporation. Nor had it ever made any lodgements with the Australian
Securities and Investments
Commission.
Despite the absence
of ATO lodgements, Barrett J found that there existed records that met the
definition of “financial
Justice Barrett found as
that no income tax return, business activity statement, balance sheet or profit
and loss account was prepared for a period
does not mean that “financial
records” for that period were not kept.
For a presumption of insolvency to arise under
s 588E(4)(a)
and to be relied
on in relation to a particular period, it must be proved either that no document
whatsoever within the “financial
records” description was kept in
relation to that period or that such documents within the definition as were
kept in relation
to the period were deficient as to content, in the sense that
they either did not correctly record and explain the company’s
transactions and financial position and performance (for example, because they
did not accurately record the matters purportedly
(2008) 67 ACSR 611
[2008] NSWSC 868)
or would not enable true and
fair financial statements to be prepared and audited. Separate and distinct
proof is necessary in relation
to each relevant period:
liquidator of SSET Construction Pty Ltd) v Khattar
[2010] NSWSC 102.
It follows that where, as here, there is evidence that
“invoices”, “receipts”, “loan documents”
“cheque books” (including cheque butts) did exist in relation to the
company’s activities, the presumption
will not be available in relation to
a given period unless the person seeking to rely on the presumption shows that
those documents
were, in respect of the period in question, deficient in the
sense just mentioned.
In the present case, the liquidator has proved nothing about the content of
the “invoices”, “receipts”, “loan
and “cheque books” (including cheque butts). The fact that no
income tax return, business activity
statement, balance sheet or profit and loss
account of Divine Homes was ever prepared says nothing about conformity of the
that did exist with the criteria in
In the case of a
company carrying on a simple cash business it is quite conceivable that a
collection of invoices and cheque butts
in “raw form” (supplemented
by bank statements) will satisfy those criteria.
Justice Barrett
I therefore cannot find, in relation to any period, that the liquidator has
proved the matter in
s 588E(4)(a)
, that is, that Divine Homes failed to
“keep” financial records as required by
It is important
to emphasise that it is for the liquidator to prove that the records kept were
deficient, not for Mr Harb to prove
that they were not.
Justice Barrett ultimately found that the liquidator had failed to prove the
insolvency of the company through the presumption available
and any failure to keep financial records pursuant to
Adelaide Brighton Cement Limited, in the matter of Concrete Supply Pty Ltd v
Concrete Supply Pty Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement)
, Besanko J
absence of records is no doubt one example of a contravention of
not see any justification in the words of the section for limiting the scope of
the section to that example. The failure
to record a major liability of the
company (perhaps any liability other than one which is
be a contravention of the section. That raises the prospect of the presumption
of insolvency arising.
statutory duties owed by a director are:
exercise his or her powers and discharge his or her duties with the degree of
care and diligence that a reasonable person would
exercise if they were a
director or officer of the company in the company’s circumstances and
occupied the office held by,
and had the same responsibilities within the
company as the director;
exercise his or her powers and discharge his or her duties in good faith in the
best interest of the company and for a proper
not improperly use his or her position as a director to gain an advantage for
himself or herself or someone else or to cause detriment
Corporations Act
, a director must exercise his or her
powers and discharge his or her duties with the degree of care and diligence a
reasonable person
would exercise if he or she were a director in the
circumstances.
establishes a statutory defence to a contravention of
the “business judgment rule”. The director of a company who makes a
business judgment is taken not to contravene
Corporations Act
if he or she:
(a) make the judgment in good faith for a proper purpose; and
(b) do not have a material personal interest in the subject matter of the
judgment; and
(c) inform themselves about the subject matter of the judgment to the extent
they reasonably believe to be appropriate; and
(d) rationally believe that the judgment is in the best interests of the
corporation.
Corporations Act
, a director must exercise their
powers and discharge their duties in good faith in the best interests of a
corporation and for a
proper purpose. The legal principles in relation to
were summarised by Stein J in
De Bourbel Pty Ltd (in liq) v Distilleria Pty
step is to ascertain the nature of the power in question, and the second is to
identify the substantial purpose for which
the power was exercised and determine
whether that purpose was proper or improper.
In relation to
, the following matters are relevant in considering
whether directors have acted for an improper purpose:
(i) Fiduciary powers and duties are to be exercised for the purpose for which
they were given and not for collateral purposes.
(ii) It must be shown that the substantial purpose was improper or collateral to
the duties of the director. The issue is not whether
a business decision
was good or bad but whether a director has acted in breach of their fiduciary
(iii) Honest or altruistic behaviour does not prevent a finding of improper
conduct if the conduct was carried out for an improper
purpose. Evidence
as to the subjective intention or belief of the director is relevant.
(iv) The Court must determine whether, but for the improper or collateral
purpose, the director would have performed the act in dispute.
Corporations Act
provides that a director must not
improperly use his or her position to gain an advantage for himself or herself
or someone else
or cause detriment to the corporation. Justice Halley
summarised the authorities on
Hanwood Pastoral Co Pty Limited v
The question
of whether a director has used their position improperly to gain an advantage
for themselves or another or to cause detriment
to the corporation is to be
assessed objectively:
Earth Civil
at [969] (Ward CJ in Eq, as her Honour
then was) citing
Re Colorado Products
at [432]‑[433];
Australia Pty Ltd v Wang
(2018) 130 ACSR 531
[2018] NSWSC 1412
(Black J) and the following statement by Gleeson CJ (with whom Allen and James
JJ agreed) in
(1996) 21 ACSR 46
at 57 that impropriety is
established by:
a breach of the standards of conduct that would be expected of a person in
the position of the alleged offender by reasonable persons
with knowledge of the
duties powers and authority of the position and the circumstances of the
It is not necessary for the relevant advantage or detriment sought be
achieved in order to establish a contravention of
Re Colorado
at [433] (Black J).
regard to a director using company funds for personal expenses (even of a modest
amount), the applicants cited the following passage
of Austin J in
Properties Development Ltd v Chatswood Investment and Development Co Pty
is not entitled to charge private expenses to the company’s account simply
because the director’s loan account
has been simultaneously debited with
the same amount. Using the company’s funds to pay a director’s
private expenses
is a misappropriation of company property even if the director
undertakes an obligation to reimburse the company, unless the transaction
specifically and properly authorised by the company.
of creditors
duty to act in good faith in the best interests of the company may require a
director to consider the interests of
obligation to consider the interests of creditors is enlivened particularly when
a company is insolvent or nearing
insolvency.
Walker v Wimborne
, Mason J (with whom Barwick CJ agreed)
should be emphasized that the directors of a company in discharging their duty
to the company must take account of the interest
of its shareholders and its
creditors. Any failure by the directors to take into account the interests of
creditors will have adverse
consequences for the company as well for them. The
creditor of a company, whether it be a member of a “group” of
in the accepted sense of that term or not, must look to that company
for payment. His interests may be prejudiced by the movement
of funds between
companies in the event that the companies become insolvent.
Re New World Alliance Pty Ltd; Sycotex Pty Ltd v Baseler
clear that the duty to take into account the interests of creditors is merely a
restriction on the right of shareholders to
ratify breaches of the duty owed to
the company. The restriction is similar to that found in cases involving fraud
on the minority.
Where a company is insolvent or nearing insolvency, the
creditors are to be seen as having a direct interest in the company and
interest cannot be overridden by the shareholders. This restriction does not,
in the absence of any conferral of such a right
by statute, confer upon
creditors any general law right against former directors of the company to
recover losses suffered by those
creditors ... the result is that there is a
duty of imperfect obligation owed to creditors, one which the creditors cannot
save to the extent that the company acts on its own motion or through a
liquidator.
(Footnotes omitted)
a case of insolvency or near insolvency, shareholders will not have the power or
the authority to absolve directors from any breach
In particular, the
principle permitting shareholder ratification of a director’s conduct
(discussed later) is not then
Russell Kinsela Pty Ltd (In Liq)
, Street CJ said (with whom Hope and
solvent company the proprietary interests of the shareholders entitle them as a
general body to be regarded as the company when
questions of the duty of
directors arise. If, as a general body, they authorise or ratify a particular
action of the directors,
there can be no challenge to the validity of what the
directors have done. But where a company is insolvent the interests of the
creditors intrude. They become prospectively entitled, through the mechanism of
liquidation, to displace the power of the shareholders
and directors to deal
with the company’s assets. It is in a practical sense their assets and
not the shareholders’ assets
that, through the medium of the company, are
under the management of the directors pending either liquidation, return to
or the imposition of some alternative administration.
Chief Justice Street hesitated
... attempt to formulate a general test of the degree of financial
instability which would impose upon directors an obligation to
consider the
interests of creditors ... the duty arises when a company is insolvent inasmuch
as it is the creditors’ money
which is at risk, in contrast to the
shareholders proprietary interests.
courts have used a range of different language to identify when the interests of
creditors must be considered as an aspect of
the duty to act in the best
interests of the company, for example:
(a) “doubtful
(b) “an insolvency
(c) “should have been [concerned] for its
(d) “is insolvent or nearing
insolvency”;
(e) “financial
instability”;
(f) when a transaction would be “prejudicial to
creditors”;
(g) “facing
insolvency”;
(h) “a real risk that the creditors of a company in an insolvency context
would suffer significant
prejudice”;
(i) “a real and not remote risk that [creditors] will be
prejudiced.
Section 189
Corporations Act
relevantly provides:
(a) a director relies on information, or professional or expert advice, given or
prepared by:
(i) an employee of the corporation whom the director believes on reasonable
grounds to be reliable and competent in relation to the
matters concerned; or
(ii) a professional adviser or expert in relation to matters that the director
believes on reasonable grounds to be within the person’s
professional or
expert competence; or
(b) the reliance was made:
(i) in good faith; and
(ii) after making an independent assessment of the information or advice, having
regard to the director’s knowledge of the
corporation and the complexity
of the structure and operations of the corporations; and
(c) the reasonableness of the director’s reliance on the information or
advice arises in proceedings brought to determine whether
a director has
performed a duty under this Part or an equivalent general law duty;
the director’s reliance on the information or advice is taken to be
reasonable unless the contrary is proved.
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Mitchell & Anor
... In effect,
requires that where the director relies on information, professional or
expert advice, he must do so in good faith and only after
having made an
independent assessment of the information or advice. In this context,
independent assessment requires no more than
that the director, having listened
to and assessed what his colleagues have said, must bring his own mind to bear
on the issue using
such skill and judgment as he may possess. Further, there
must be evidence that he in fact relied on the information provided.
present case each of those criteria are satisfied on the evidence. Therefore
Mr Healy’s reliance on Mr Wood is presumed
to have been reasonable.
And ASIC has failed to discharge the onus that it was not.
Corporations Act
Declaration of contravention
(1) If a Court is satisfied that a person has contravened a civil penalty
provision, the Court must make a declaration of contravention.
(2) The declaration must specify the following:
(a) the Court that made the declaration;
(b) the civil penalty provision that was contravened;
(c) the person who contravened the provision;
(d) the conduct that constituted the contravention;
(e) if the contravention is of a corporation/scheme civil penalty
provision—the corporation, registered scheme or notified
foreign passport
fund to which the conduct related;
(f) if the contravention is of subsection 1211B(1) or (2) (complying with the
Passport Rules for this jurisdiction)–the passport
fund in relation to
which the obligation was imposed on the person;
(g) if the contravention is of subsection 670A(4), 727(6), 728(4) or 1309(12)
(misleading statements etc.)–the corporation,
registered scheme or
notified foreign passport fund to which the conduct related.
1317E provides that ss 180(1), 181(1), and 182(1) are civil penalty
provisions.
Corporations Act
Compensation for damage suffered
(1) A Court may order a person to compensate a corporation, registered scheme
or notified foreign passport fund for damage suffered
by the corporation, scheme
or fund if:
(a) the person has contravened a corporation/scheme civil penalty provision in
relation to the corporation, scheme or fund; and
(b) the damage resulted from the contravention.
The order must specify the amount of the compensation.
Note: An order may be made under this subsection whether or not a declaration
of contravention has been made under
section 1317E.
Damage includes profits
(2) In determining the damage suffered by the corporation, scheme or fund
for the purposes of making a compensation order, include
profits made by any
person resulting from the contravention or the offence.
Sections 1317S
Mr Munneke is found to have breached any duty, he submits he ought to be excused
for any such breach pursuant to
Corporations
Court has power to grant relief, wholly or partly, from a contravention of a
civil penalty provision under
if, in “eligible proceedings”
brought against a person, it appears to the Court that that person has, or may
have, contravened
a civil penalty provision, but that person has acted honestly
and, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, the person
ought fairly
to be excused for the contravention.
in turn allows a Court to relieve, wholly or partly, relevantly, an officer
of a corporation, from liability in any civil proceeding
for negligence,
default, breach of trust or breach of duty, if that person establishes that they
acted honestly and that, having
regard to all the circumstances of the case,
including those connected with the person’s appointment, the person ought
excused for the negligence, default, breach of trust or breach of duty,
the Court may relieve the person wholly or partly from liability
on such terms
as the Court thinks fit.
relief from liability should be granted under
depends not only
on subjective honesty but also on:
(a) the degree to which the relevant conduct fell short of the required
(b) the seriousness of the contravention and its actual or potential
consequences;
(c) any element of impropriety such as deception and personal gain;
(d) any contrition of the applicant; and
(e) the need for general
deterrence.
Great Southern Finance Pty Ltd (in liq) v Rhodes
, Beech J held that for a
court to order relief under
, it must be satisfied of three
(a) that the defendant acted honestly;
(b) of the value judgment that, having regard to all the circumstances of the
case, the person ought fairly to be excused for the
contravention, negligence,
default or breach of duty (as the case may be); and
(c) that as a matter of discretion the court ought exercise its power to relieve
the person from any liability.
purpose of the relief provisions is to excuse company officers from liability in
situations where it would be unjust and oppressive
not to do so, recognising
that such officers are businessmen and women who act in an environment involving
risk in commercial
decision-making.
director is in a fiduciary relationship with the company and by reason of that
relationship, owes the following duties to it:
avoid conflicts between duty and personal interest (the “conflict
to misuse the fiduciary position for personal gain or benefit (the “profit
rule”); and
act bona fide for proper purposes.
Ancient Order of Foresters in Victoria Friendly Society Ltd v Lifeplan Australia
Friendly Society Ltd
, Gageler J summarised the proscriptive fiduciary duties
comprising the profit and conflict
first”, often referred to as the “conflict rule”, “is
that which appropriates for the benefit of
the person to whom the fiduciary duty
is owed any benefit or gain obtained or received by the fiduciary in
circumstances where there
existed a conflict of personal interest and fiduciary
duty or a significant possibility of such conflict: the objective is to preclude
the fiduciary from being swayed by considerations of personal interest”.
The unconscionability which attracts equitable remedies
in circumstances where
the conflict rule alone is invoked lies not so much in receipt by the fiduciary
of the benefit or gain (over
which the fiduciary need not have control) as in
retention by the fiduciary of the benefit or gain which in conscience ought to
disgorged to the principal.
“The second”, often referred to as the “profit rule”,
“is that which requires the fiduciary to account
for any benefit or gain
obtained or received by reason of or by use of [the] fiduciary position or of
opportunity or knowledge resulting
from it: the objective is to preclude the
fiduciary from actually misusing [the fiduciary’s] position for [the
fiduciary’s]
personal advantage.” The unconscionability which
attracts equitable remedies in such circumstances lies in pursuit by the
of self-interest, or, more precisely, in pursuit of an interest other
than the exclusive interest of the principal.
Consistently with the objective of imposing each obligation, in neither case
does the benefit or gain to the fiduciary need to be
at the expense of the
principal, though it may be. And in neither case does the fiduciary need to act
dishonestly or fraudulently,
or otherwise than in good faith, though again the
fiduciary may do so. Where a fiduciary does act dishonestly and fraudulently,
however, the dishonest and fraudulent character of the breach of fiduciary duty
is not without consequence for the intensity of the
equitable remedies available
against the defaulting fiduciary. More important for present purposes is that
the dishonest and fraudulent
character of the conduct of the fiduciary gives
rise to the potential for similar remedies to be available in equity against
person who might knowingly participate in the fiduciary’s
Ratification
the fiduciary, a director is under an obligation, without informed consent, not
to promote his or her personal interests by making
or pursuing a gain in
circumstances where there is “a conflict or a real or substantial
possibility of a conflict” between
their own personal interests and those
owed to the company.
shareholders of a company may authorise or affirm, by unanimous consent, a
decision of the directors which would otherwise be
voidable because it amounts
to a breach by those directors of their fiduciary duties to the company
(“the unanimous shareholder
The rule was
endorsed by the Full Court (Lander J with Millhouse and Duggan JJ agreeing) in
Pascoe Ltd (in liq) v Lucas
There cannot be assent or ratification unless the shareholders have full
knowledge of the nature of the transaction and its
consequences.
it can be shown that all shareholders having a right to attend and vote at a
general meeting of a company assent, with full
knowledge and consent, to some
matter which a general meeting of the company could carry into effect, that
assent is as binding as
a resolution in general meeting would
, Lander J observed that where there is only one shareholder,
approval by that shareholder in advance of the
transaction:
could amount to an authority by that shareholder for the company to enter into
the transaction even if the entry into that transaction
gave rise to a breach of
fiduciary duties on the part of the director.
That proposition is subject to the following
qualifications:
company must be solvent.
transaction itself must be
intra vires
directors must make full disclosure to the shareholders.
directors must be acting in good faith.
submitted, the
ultra vires
rule has been abolished.
unanimous shareholder consent rule only applies to actual events and not
hypothetical ones.
is not necessary that a formal decision of the shareholders should be made;
informal consent will be sufficient. Further, where
there is only one
shareholder, there is even less need for a formal
ratification operates to protect a director from a claim of breach of a
fiduciary duty, conduct by directors that does amount
to a contravention of a
statutory duty cannot be ratified by shareholders. Shareholders cannot release
the directors from the obligation
to perform their statutory
Further, as the
applicants submitted, a shareholder cannot ratify a transaction involving
expropriation of company property if the
company is near
Accordingly,
the applicants correctly submitted that ratification is irrelevant to claims for
breach of the
Corporations Act
, i.e. conduct that amounts to an
unreasonable director-related transaction or a breach of a statutory
director’s duty cannot
be ratified.
Angas Law Services Pty Ltd (in liq) & Anor v Carabelas & Anor
Angas Law Services
”), Gleeson CJ and Heydon J (with
whom Gummow, Hayne and Kirby J agreed)
While, in some
circumstances, the informed assent of all the shareholders to a transaction
might be a fact relevant to a question
of impropriety, the provisions of
creating offences operate according to their terms. Where ratification operates
to protect a director from civil liability to a
company it does so upon the
principle that “those to whom [fiduciary] duties are owed may release
those who owe the duties
from their legal obligations and may do so either
prospectively or retrospectively, provided that full disclosure of the relevant
facts is made to them in advance of the decision”. The shareholders of a
company cannot release directors from the statutory
duties imposed by sub-s (2)
or sub-s (4) of
In a particular case, their acquiescence in a course of
conduct might affect the practical content of those duties. It might, for
example, be relevant to a question of impropriety. A company’s right to
recover under
depends upon the existence of a contravention. If such a
contravention has occurred, the question whether a company has lost its
action under
because of some binding decision on the part of its
shareholders to release the potential defendants is another matter, and one that
did not arise in this case.
(Footnotes omitted)
the applicants submitted, shareholders cannot belatedly ratify past misconduct
after winding up. Once a winding up is in process,
the liquidator is the
company’s decisionmaker. There is no scope for decisions affecting the
company to be made for
to pay dividends
the extent that the respondents contend that payments made by Ex NF to
acquire O’Connell Street represented informal distributions,
applicants submitted it is relevant to consider the requirements for a company
to properly make a distribution of assets to shareholders.
Corporations Act
relevantly provides as follows:
(1) A company must not pay a dividend unless:
(a) the company’s assets exceed its liabilities immediately before the
dividend is declared and the excess is sufficient for
the payment of the
dividend; and
(b) the payment of the dividend is fair and reasonable to the company’s
shareholders as a whole; and
(c) the payment of the dividend does not materially prejudice the
company’s ability to pay its creditors.
Note 1: As an example, the payment of a dividend would materially prejudice
the company’s ability to pay its creditors if the
company would become
insolvent as a result of the payment.
the requirements for a lawful return of capital are similarly stated in
Corporations Act
, which relevantly provides:
(1) A company may reduce its share capital in a way that is not otherwise
authorised by law if the reduction:
(a) is fair and reasonable to the company’s shareholders as a whole;
(b) does not materially prejudice the company’s ability to pay its
creditors; and
(c) is approved by shareholders under
section 256C.
either case, for capital to be returned to shareholders, the transaction must
“not materially prejudice the company’s
ability to pay its
creditors”.
phrase was addressed by the High Court in
Connective Services Pty Ltd v Slea
in the related context of the prohibition on a corporation giving
assistance for the acquisition of its own shares in the following
The issue of
material prejudice to the interests of the company or its shareholders or
creditors requires an assessment of and comparison
between the position before
the giving of the financial assistance and the position after it to see whether
the company or its shareholders
or its ability to pay its creditors is in a
worse position. It does not assist to gloss the concept of material prejudice
introduction of further concepts, which themselves require further
explanation, such as whether there has been a diminution of the
assets of the
company, whether there has been a transaction, or whether there was a net
transfer of value to the person acquiring
the shares. For instance, the
introduction of a requirement not present in the text of
transaction with, or a net transfer of value to, the person acquiring the shares
could lead to further issues such as whether
the interposition of intermediaries
is included within those concepts.
Keane CJ and Jacobson J in the Full Court of the
Federal Court stated:
One is, we think, on safe ground, however, in treating "material
prejudice" to a company’s ability to pay its creditors as relating
creation of a material as opposed to theoretical increase, in the likelihood
that the reduction in capital will result in
a reduced ability to pay
Accordingly,
the applicants submitted, a distribution to shareholders will be unlawful if it
increases the risk to creditors of non-payment.
It is not necessary for the
distribution to lead to insolvency or near insolvency, albeit that if the
distribution does, then it
would necessarily have materially prejudiced the
interests of
Unreasonable
director-related transactions
Corporations Act
(1) A transaction of a company is an
unreasonable directed-related
transaction
of the company if, and only if:
(a) the transaction is:
(i) a payment made by the company; or
(ii) a conveyance, transfer or other disposition by the company of property of
the company; or
(iii) the issue of securities by the company; or
(iv) the incurring by the company of an obligation to make such a payment,
disposition or issue: and
(b) the payment, disposition or issue is, or is to be made to:
(i) a director of the company; or
(ii) a relative of a director of the company; or
(iii) a relative of a spouse of a director of the company; or
(iv) a person on behalf, or for the benefit of, a person of a kind referred to
in subparagraph (i), (ii) or (iii); and
(c) it may be expected that a reasonable person in the company’s
circumstances would not have entered into the transaction,
having regard to:
(i) the benefits (if any) to the company of entering into the transaction;
(ii) the detriment to the company of entering into the transaction; and
(iii) the respective benefits to other parties to the transaction of entering
into it; and
(iv) any other relevant matter.
The obligation referred to in subparagraph (a)(iv) may be a contingent
obligation).
Note: Subparagraph (a)(iv) – This would include, for example, granting
options over shares in the company.
(2) To avoid doubt, if:
(a) the transaction is a payment, disposition or issue; and
(b) the transaction is entered into for the purpose of meeting an obligation the
company has incurred;
the test in paragraph (1)(c) applies to the transaction taking into account
the circumstances as they exist at the time when the transaction
is entered into
(rather than as they existed at the time when the obligation was incurred).
(3) A transaction may be an unreasonable director-related transaction because
of subsection (1):
(a) whether or not a creditor of the company is a party to the transaction;
(b) even if the transaction is given effect to, or is required to be given
effect to, because of an order of an Australian court
or a direction by an
satisfy the description of being an unreasonable director-related transaction,
the transaction must answer the criteria in each
s 588FDA(1)(a)
The requirements
s 588FDA(1)(a)
to (c) are clearly
cumulative.
Yang v Wong,
Axis North Pty Ltd (Recs and Mgrs Appt) (in Liq) (No 2)
Derrington J set out the steps an applicant must take to prove that an
impugned payments is an “unreasonable director-related
transaction”
pursuant to
s 588FDA(1):
applicant must:
(1) identify the relevant “transaction” (or
“transactions”); and
(2) establish that any such transaction:
(a) comprises one of the dealings defined in
s 588FDA(1)(a)
(b) is, or is to be, made to one of the entities defined in
s 588FDA(1)(b)
(3) establish that it may be expected that a “reasonable person”,
in the company’s position, would not have entered
the transaction having
regard to the factors in
s 588FDA(1)(c).
is concerned with the reasonableness of the company’s conduct,
objectively assessed, not the director’s conduct, in entering
transaction.
The essential
purpose of the provision is to strike at a gift or benefit at an undervalue
transactions
unreasonable director-related transaction may be voidable pursuant to
Corporations Act
. Relevantly,
s 588FE(6A)
(6A) The transaction is voidable if:
(a) it is an unreasonable director-related transaction
of the company; and
(b) it was entered into, or an act was done for the purposes of giving effect to
(i) during the 4 years ending on the relation-back
(ii) after that day but on or before the day when the winding up began
Court upon finding that a transaction is voidable pursuant to
an order that a person transfer the company property that the Court is satisfied
fairly represents money that the company
has paid under the transaction or
proceeds of property that the company has transferred under the
transaction.
O’Connell Street claim
Applicants’
submissions
applicants pointed out that by April 2015 the last BAS that had been filed by
Ex NF was for the quarter ended 30 June 2013.
This meant that the next
seven quarters of BAS filings and attendant payment obligations in respect of
PAYG withheld, GST collected,
and income tax were outstanding.
Zaccara engaged in a “flurry of activity” in April 2015 causing BAS
for the quarters ended 30 September 2013, 31 December
2013, 31 March 2014, and
30 June 2014 to be filed. The 31 December 2014 BAS return was filed in
June 2015. This activity left outstanding
as at mid-2015 the BAS for the
quarters ended 30 September 2014 and 31 March 2015 with the BAS for the quarter
ended 30 June 2015
due in the third quarter of the year as well as the income
tax return for the year ended 30 June 2014. It was submitted that Ex
also had a contingent liability in respect of the December 2015 quarter.
applicants contended that the evidence of Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara reveals that
throughout 2015, Ex NF did not have any reliable
financial statements to
enable any meaningful monitoring of the state of its assets and liabilities.
negotiated an extension on its tenancy at 112 Ward Street until March 2016
in mid‑July 2015 and from about August or
September 2015,
Ms Zaccara commenced negotiations for the acquisition and financing of
O’Connell Street. Ms Zaccara originally
approached NAB to provide finance
to purchase a property but NAB indicated that Ex NF would not be able to
obtain a loan from NAB
as its books, accounts, and tax filings were not up to
date. The applicants argued that rather than attend to the filings, Ms Zaccara
approached ANZ and engaged in negotiations on behalf of Ex NF for the
company to obtain a loan of $1 million to fund the purchase
of real estate.
or about 30 September 2015, Ms Zaccara had the conversation with
Mr Vijayadass I discussed earlier in these reasons.
applicants submitted that by early October 2015, O’Connell Street had been
identified for purchase and preparation of the
documentation in respect of its
purchase was underway. Notwithstanding that the purchase was entirely funded by
Ex NF, it was envisaged
from the outset that Mr Munneke would be the
purchaser. The 28 O’Connell Trust was settled on 6 November 2015 with
as trustee. Mr Munneke’s evidence was that the purpose in
acquiring O’Connell Street in the trust was to acquire it
in a structure
that was not linked to the success or failure of Ex NF and in that sense
put it beyond the reach of Ex NF’s
creditors. The applicants
submitted this was undertaken with the knowledge (or lack thereof) as to
Ex NF’s financial position.
this time, it was submitted, Ms Zaccara negotiated with the existing tenants of
O’Connell Street payments totalling
$60,000 for the early termination of
their tenancies, so that Ex NF would be able to take vacant possession of
O’Connell Street.
It was argued that notwithstanding that arrangements
were in place for the tenants to vacate, the sale and purchase of
Street was conducted on a “going concern” basis
which meant that GST was not payable on the sale. The applicants said
sale been on the basis of vacant possession, it would have been subject to GST
of $170,000 and while this would have been
recoverable by the 28 O’Connell
Trust over time against GST collected, this would have taken a very long time
and in the circumstances
still effectively have been paid by Ex NF.
applicants submitted that during the purchase process, on
5 November 2015, Ms Zaccara sent an email to ANZ indicating that
NF’s ATO integrated client account was $30,000 in credit but did
not refer to the outstanding BAS returns. Thereafter, on
12 November 2015, Ms
Zaccara lodged Ex NF’s BAS for the quarter ended 30 September 2015
and caused Ex NF to pay $112,865 to
the ATO. On 17 November 2015, Ms
Zaccara represented to ANZ that Ex NF’s integrated client account
with the ATO was in credit
to the sum of $30,000 after this filing and payment.
The applicants submitted Ms Zaccara knew, but omitted to mention to ANZ, that
Ex NF still had outstanding BAS filings at this time in respect of the
quarters ended 30 September 2014, 31 March 2015, and
2015, and an outstanding tax return for the year ended
30 June 2014.
19 November 2015, Mr Munneke acting as trustee of the 28 O’Connell Trust
entered a contract to purchase O’Connell
Street for $1.7 million with a
deposit of $40,000 payable and a settlement date of 10 December 2015. At
Mr Munneke’s direction,
the deposit of $40,000 was paid from the NAB
account on 19 November 2015. At about the same time, it was submitted,
Ms Zaccara was
aggressively chasing Guvera for payment of invoices.
Ms Zaccara stated in an email to Guvera dated 24 November 2015
Unfortunately I’m in ‘dire straits’
currently – I have the ATO on my back for payment for several outstanding
BAS returns and last years company tax that I have factored in the Guvera
payments for.
It was submitted as Ms Zaccara acknowledged she was clearly aware of
Ex NF’s tax issues at this point. It was also submitted
apparent from this email that Ms Zaccara was aware that the purchase of
O’Connell Street would place a serious strain
resources. The applicants argued that Mr Munneke’s evidence that Ms
Zaccara’s emails were a mere debt
collection tactic is not credible as a
company does not lightly tell its major customers that it is facing liquidity
prior to the O’Connell Street settlement on10 December 2015, a
lower‑than-expected bank valuation for O’Connell
Street, resulted in
a reduction of the amount lent by ANZ to $740,000. The applicants pointed out
the extent of Ex NF’s cash
commitment rose commensurately.
settlement sum comprised $1,025,911.59 paid from the ANZ bank account and the
ANZ loan of $740,000 guaranteed by Mr Munneke and
secured over O’Connell
Street. As discussed above, Ex NF also made the payments totalling $60,000
to the former tenants of
O’Connell Street.
applicants submitted that the effect of the purchase of O’Connell Street
was that Ex NF had paid away cash totalling
$1,065,911.59
and incurred a
liability of $740,000 to ANZ in respect of a property that was owned by
Mr Munneke as trustee of the 28 O’Connell
Trust. It was contended
there was objectively no benefit to Ex NF from this transaction.
Ex NF’s funds were paid away and
a significant liability incurred in
respect of the purchase of a property that Ex NF had no interest in. It
was argued the contention
that Ex NF benefited from reduced rental expenses
as it was only required to pay the mortgage repayments could not be sustained,
including considering the evidence that Ex NF was charged market rent for
the year ended 30 June 2016. It was pointed out Ex NF
paid substantial
interest and on winding up, ANZ applied $337,491.93 to reduce the ANZ loan
balance. Further, it was contended that
if O’Connell Street had been
purchased by Ex NF, it would have enjoyed the same benefit and the property
would have been available
as an asset to be used to pay creditors.
applicants submitted that at the date of settlement on 10 December 2015, to the
knowledge of both Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara:
were no up to date or accurate accounts available to Mr Munneke or Ms Zaccara as
to the financial position of Ex NF;
was not up to date in filing its BAS with the ATO, with returns for the quarter
years ended September 2014, March 2015 and June
2015 all outstanding;
was not up to date in filing its income tax returns with the ATO, with returns
for the years ended 30 June 2014 and 30 June
2015 outstanding;
had not lodged any statements in respect of SGC, such that the amount owing in
respect of superannuation was unknown;
would also be required to file a BAS for the quarter ended December 2015 early
the following year; and
was also very likely to face further charges for interest and penalties from the
ATO when it filed its long overdue BAS and
income tax returns.
applicants further submitted that as against this, it was also known by both Mr
Munneke and Ms Zaccara that:
purchase of O’Connell Street was not in the name of Ex NF but was for
the benefit of Mr Munneke as trustee of the 28 O’Connell
use of the trust was intended, or at the least would have the effect, of placing
the property outside of the reach of Ex NF’s
creditors; and
purchase of O’Connell Street and related expenses used substantially all
of Ex NF’s available cash resources, leaving
a balance of $218,185
(which it was contended left Ex NF in an immediately precarious position,
even ignoring the substantial tax
debts, as is apparent from Ms Zaccara’s
debt collection efforts with Guvera in January 2016 where she stated that
be frank we need the money!!!” and “... I’m in a bit
of a panic as we have two weeks of operational funds
was submitted that at the time of settlement of O’Connell Street, neither
Mr Munneke nor Ms Zaccara had given any serious
consideration to whether,
and if so how, Ex NF’s funds might lawfully be paid out of Ex NF
to fund the purchase. At highest,
Ms Zaccara’s evidence was to the effect
that this was a matter that would be sorted out by the accountants later. It
was submitted
it is notable that when it was, it was recorded as a loan
(notwithstanding Ms Zaccara’s protest in evidence that the accountants
made an error). The applicants argued the indeterminate nature of the
distribution meant that it was, for all intents and purposes,
applicants submitted that, contrary to the contention that the transaction was
some form of dividend or other distribution of
profit, neither Ms Zaccara nor
the ZALD Trust have filed any tax returns, declared or paid tax on the
distribution that they contend
that they received. It was contended the tax
payable on such a distribution would be substantial.
applicants submitted that, by her own admission, Ms Zaccara’s evidence
that she would have provided further resources to
fund Ex NF if necessary
should not be accepted. I am not satisfied that the following evidence of Ms
Zaccara during cross-examination,
relied on by the applicants, can be read as
evidencing that she would not having provided further resources in
moneys were banked into the company account for Ethereum proceeds in early 2018
was it a point in time when the company had very
limited resources from which to
pay the tax debts that had then been levied didn’t it.
that may be true but the cryptocurrency doesn’t belong to the company,
Mr Roberts. That cryptocurrency is my cryptocurrency,
so it’s not
something that I would have put in relation to what was happening with the
company and my asset.
you agree that without any reference to cryptocurrency there was no means of
paying the tax debt at the end of 2017.
don’t agree with that because I remember talking to [Mr Munneke]. I
was worried so I talked to [Mr Munneke] and I conveyed
exactly what Nathan
Thiele had conveyed to me and there had been other times when I had pointed out
to [Mr Munneke] look, the bank
account is getting low etc. He would always
assure me ‘It’s okay, Linda, we will get out of this. We will get
from Real Time Data, we will get the money from Meeco, we will get the
money from iConnect and we will get out of this’.
applicants said the rejection of Ms Zaccara’s self-serving ex post facto
contention that she would have provided further
resources to Ex NF if
necessary is also consistent with:
subsequent use of $100,000 of Ex NF cash to pay for the trip to Antarctica
in September 2016 (at a time when Ex NF’s was
even more seriously
behind in its tax filings and she had no way of knowing the extent of its
liabilities); and
actual course of events, where Ms Zaccara did not provide funds to Ex NF to
pay the ATO to enable it to avoid winding up.
indicate I have not taken those matters which occurred after
10 December 2015 into account in considering on a realistic commercial
assessment whether funds would be provided by Ms Zaccara.
applicants contended that in the circumstances of the
O’Connell Street transaction:
Munneke breached his statutory and fiduciary duties to Ex NF and Ms Zaccara
could not properly excuse that breach; and
any event, the transaction was an unreasonable director‑related
transaction under
Corporations Act
submitted by the applicants, the actual financial position of Ex NF at
December 2015 is relevant to the assessment of Mr Munneke’
duties on an
objective basis (i.e. a reasonable director would have known the true financial
position) and as to whether breaches
of duty by Mr Munneke were capable of
ratification. If Ex NF had made its required tax filings and maintained
proper records, it
would have identified that it owed:
of at least $119,240;
least $244,377 in respect of GST and PAYG withholding; and
for income tax;
and in each case, plus general interest
charge and the risk of the imposition of penalties by the ATO for late filing.
It was pointed
out that Mr Scott accepted the liability to penalties and general
interest charge represents the default position, applicable unless
waived by the
ATO. It was also submitted that the amount of the general interest charge or
penalties could not be calculated until
the default in lodgements was remedied
does not detract from the existence of that likely financial exposure occasioned
by the default
in lodgements and consequent default in the payment of tax. The
applicants argued that considering these liabilities, Ex NF was
insolvent or was rendered insolvent by paying away its cash and assuming a
$740,000 liability through the purchase of O’Connell
Street. At the
least, it was submitted the transaction plainly materially prejudiced
Ex NF’s ability to pay its creditors.
applicants submitted that, as Mr Scott accepted, the position was in fact worse
than this, as both his and Mr Heard’s calculations
did not provide for (a)
interest or penalties on the outstanding BAS taxes (PAYG, GST, and income tax)
and income tax, which would
depend on assessment by the ATO after the required
filings were made; and (b) accrued expenses for PAYG, GST, and income tax for
the quarter to that point. It was argued these accruing liabilities could not
be ignored by a reasonable director.
discussed above, Mr Scott considered that no working capital buffer was
necessary as he relied upon the assumption that he was
instructed to make that
Ms Zaccara would provide funding to Ex NF if necessary.
was pointed out that Mr Scott, when asked whether he would regard it highly
imprudent for a company to pay out more than $1 million
dollars cash from its
bank account leaving less than one months’ worth of expenses in the bank
account, said:
I would regard it with some caution. I’m not
quite sure highly imprudent is the answer because I also have the assumption
I’ve been given which I’m to listen to and read and constantly
read that Ms Zaccara has sufficient personal resources
to provide funds to the
company if needed.
I infer from Mr Scott’s evidence that even relying on the assumption Ms
Zaccara had sufficient personal resources to provide
funds, he would regard the
payment out of over $1 million by a company in Ex NF’s position
with some caution. Further, when
I insisted that Mr Scott ignore “the
assumption”, he conceded he would not give advice to a company in
position to pay out over $1 million leaving it with less
than one months’ worth of expenses.
submitted by the applicants, as a matter of commercial reality, the need for
working capital to pay recurring expenditure, such
as wages, could not be
applicants submitted, irrespective, in circumstances where Ex NF was
receiving no benefit from the payment out of its resources
to permit Mr Munneke
to acquire O’Connell Street in his own name, it suffices for relevant
purposes that Ex NF was placed in
a precarious financial position by the
extent of the funds paid out and the ANZ obligations incurred.
applicants relied on the actual financial position of Ex NF by reference to
its reconstructed balance sheet. It was pointed
out that it is apparent from
Mr Scott’s balance sheet that on his analysis, Ex NF only had
positive net assets due to the inclusion
of the funds borrowed by Ex NF as
an asset of $740,000. It was also pointed out that Mr Scott accepted that if
there was no intention
on the part of the 28 O’Connell Trust to repay any
sum to Ex NF, then the $740,000 loan should not be recorded as an asset.
The applicants said the case advanced by Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara
repeatedly disavowed the existence of any $740,000 debt and the
$740,000 should therefore not be recorded in the adjusted balance sheet. With
the $740,000 loan removed, after the purchase
of O’Connell Street, it
was submitted Ex NF had a deficit of assets to liabilities of $434,557.
Accordingly, the applicants
submitted taking into account the objective
financial position of Ex NF, it was objectively imprudent and prejudicial
creditors for Ex NF to have made a gift of the
majority of its cash assets of over $1 million and assumed a debt of $740,000
a property that it did not
Munneke’s submissions
Munneke submitted that the applicants have not established any breach of duty
and it has not been proven that:
was insolvent or of doubtful solvency at December 2015;
failed to keep accurate financial records at December 2015 in accordance with
Corporations Act
reasonable director in the position of Mr Munneke would not have released the
funds in December 2015; and
otherwise failed to comply with his duties.
Munneke argued his reliance on Ms Zaccara and BDO was reasonable within the
Corporations Act
and in determining to release
Ex NF’s funds to acquire O’Connell Street, Mr Munneke
exercised a business judgment for
the purpose of
Corporations
contended that the applicants have not otherwise established:
, or fiduciary duties, when the interests of the creditors
were not prejudiced and Ms Zaccara, as sole shareholder, consented to,
of, and ratified the release of the funds and the acquisition of O’Connell
damage resulting from the alleged breach, as required by
Corporations Act
, such that, no entitlement to relief has been
established;
the acquisition of O’Connell Street was an unreasonable
director‑related transaction for the purpose of
Corporations Act
Munneke submitted the breach of director’s duty case against him requires
the Court to find that, at December 2015, Ex NF
was “insolvent or of
doubtful solvency”.
submitted the applicants’ case as to “doubtful solvency” must
be considered against the backdrop of uncontroversial
evidence that sits
uncomfortably with that submission:
cross-examination, Mr Heard conceded an improvement in Ex NF’s EBITDA
across 2013, 2014, and 2015. Prior to the acquisition
of O’Connell
Street, Ex NF had large amounts of cash at bank and unpaid invoiced work,
and it was making “good money”
from clients such as Guvera and
Meeco. Ex NF’s annual turnover had increased substantially from
approximately $600,000 in
2013, $1.1 million in 2014, and $1.6 million in
had required an updated ATO integrated client account to be provided ahead of
advancing the loan funds for the acquisition of
O’Connell Street. That
account recorded bulk payment having been made in June 2015. At November 2015,
Ex NF’s integrated
client account stood in credit by $30,283;
subsequently advanced the funds to facilitate the purchase of O’Connell
Street. It was submitted the Court can infer that,
having regard to the active
oversight by ANZ of the ATO integrated client account, if ANZ were concerned
taxation liabilities of Ex NF that would
or may crystallise on the lodgement of unreconciled BAS, ANZ would not have
advanced the
loan funds required to settle on O’Connell Street. I do not
accept this submission because the information presented to the
incomplete as Ex NF still had outstanding BAS filings in respect of the
quarters ended 30 September 2014, 31 March 2015,
and 30 June 2015, and an
outstanding tax return for the year ended 30 June 2014.
was submitted that under cross-examination, Mr Heard agreed that as at
10 December 2015, and despite writing down the value of
the debtors by
20 percent, most or all of the debts could be collected, but it would take
time. Mr Heard further agreed that reasonable
minds may differ as to how
one should bring to account the present value of the debts.
Munneke contended that Mr Heard and the applicants sought to discount the value
of the debt owed by Guvera. It was pointed out
that such a discount is an
exercise in retrospective accounting and is only made good with the benefit of
hindsight and, as things
stood at December 2015, there was no reason to believe
the debt would not be paid in full.
was submitted that under cross-examination Mr Heard agreed that:
was a significant customer of Ex NF. Ex NF had invoiced Guvera in
December 2015 and, at December 2015, Guvera was slow‑paying,
realisability risk;
was no evidence to suggest that, at 10 December 2015, Guvera would become an
irrecoverable debtor. Nor was there evidence that,
at 10 December 2015, it was
reasonably foreseeable by a director in the position of Mr Munneke that Guvera
would become a bad debtor;
went into voluntary administration on 27 June 2016 and Ex NF proved for
$462,615 in the Guvera voluntary administration. Ex
NF’s debt was
admitted by the administrators of Guvera for some purpose.
Accordingly,
it was submitted that on the evidence, at December 2015, the value of the Guvera
debt should be treated as being collectible
Munneke contended that Mr Heard did not undertake any investigations or inform
himself as to the capacity of any associated trust
debtors to repay amounts
owing to Ex NF. It was submitted that Mr Heard agreed under
cross‑examination that he only had regard
to assets apparently within the
immediate control of Ex NF in his assessment of Ex NF’s
financial position and he did not explore
the capacity for a person owing an
associated trust loan of $325,853 to repay it if called upon.
was submitted there was no proper basis for Mr Heard to opine or assume, without
any investigation, that the associated trust
debts would not be recovered by the
Ex NF and the assumption was inconsistent with the evidence of
Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara regarding
their history of financially
supporting Ex NF, and the substantial assets that Ms Zaccara had available
Munneke submitted the opinion of Mr Scott should be preferred regarding the need
for working capital. He said if Mr Heard was
correct about his significant
additional working capital buffer, despite such a concept dooming most small
businesses to insolvency,
such a buffer is accounted for as follows:
associated trust loan of $325,853 was recoverable and would have met the
“deficiency” twice over;
Zaccara otherwise only needed to find $136,122 from the substantial assets to
fulfil any such requirement; and
Guvera debt was fully collectible.
Munneke submitted that Mr Scott’s opinion regarding the recording of ANZ
loan of $740,000 as both a liability and an asset
of Ex NF is
unchallenged and should be accepted. Mr Munneke also submitted Mr Scott’s
evidence about penalties and general
interest charge is unchallenged and should
be accepted. Mr Munneke relied on the evidence that in early 2017, the ATO
indicated a willingness to review any penalties that might otherwise
be payable by Ex NF when ATO officers replied to Ms Zaccara
on 22 February
2017 as follows:
We look forward to working with you to achieve
compliance with your outstanding lodgements. Once the lodgements have been
we will review any unintended consequences (penalties) as
Mr Munneke, therefore, contended the possibility of penalties or interest at
December 2015 was no more than a possibility, and which
was then unquantifiable.
He submitted that the applicants have not proven their case that Ex NF was
“insolvent or of doubtful
solvency” at 10 December 2015.
Munneke submitted that applicants have not adduced any
evidence and
therefore have not established that a reasonable director in the role he had
would not have released funds to the shareholder
in the circumstances as they
stood at December 2015. He further argued that the opinion of Mr Heard as to
the working capital reserve
that a “prudent” director may seek is
not based on any recognisable specialist knowledge by Mr Heard. Accordingly, he
said there is no evidence capable of establishing any breach of
Corporations Act
and nothing to indicate that a reasonable director would
have acted differently to Mr Munneke
the release of
funds to the shareholder.
Munneke denied the allegations in the O’Connell Street claim that
Ex NF is presumed insolvent under
Corporations Act
because it failed to keep financial records that correctly recorded and
explained its transactions and financial position and performance
which would
have enabled an assessment of Ex NF’s liabilities pursuant to
Munneke submitted that the applicants have not led any expert evidence which
purports to opine on the accuracy or otherwise of
the documents clearly
available to them (and which Mr Heard was provided with and considered) and
which fall under the
definition of “financial records”.
Munneke relied on
which provides that no presumption of insolvency
will be available if it is proven to the contrary. Accordingly, even if the
presumption
arose (which is denied), it was contended that the evidence of
Mr Scott establishes that Ex NF was able to meet its obligations at
all relevant times and that the evidence of Mr Scott should be accepted.
was submitted that it is otherwise a strange case that would see a
presumption
of insolvency available where the applicants relied on
primary opinion evidence as to the financial position of Ex NF, but
deliberately
stopped short of asking their expert, Mr Heard, to opine on actual
insolvency (as distinct from the vague concept of “doubtful
solvency”), and avoided asking Mr Heard outright as to the accuracy of
books and records for the purpose of
was submitted Mr Heard was obviously able to proffer an opinion about the
underlying accuracy of the “financial records”
that he had
been provided and the applicants declined to ask Mr Heard that question.
Accordingly, it was submitted the applicants
have not proven their case on the
alleged failure to keep accurate records.
Munneke asserted the evidence proves that he fulfilled his duty of care and
diligence pursuant to
Corporations Act
submitted that in construing the nature of Mr Munneke’s duty, regard is to
be had to the specific role he had within
Ex NF; that Ms Zaccara had been
delegated the role and acted as chief financial officer; that Ms Zaccara was
unquestionably chief
liaison with BDO and the ATO; that BDO was actively
providing advisory and accounting services; and that, whilst reliance was placed
on Ms Zaccara and the external accountants, Mr Munneke informed himself,
maintained oversight, and continued to guide and monitor
Munneke submitted the applicants have not established that:
was “insolvent” or of “doubtful solvency” as
December 2015;
failed to keep accurate financial records as at December 2015 in accordance with
Corporations Act
reasonable director in his position would not have released the funds in
December 2015;
otherwise failed to comply with his duty of care and diligence.
Munneke maintained his reliance on Ms Zaccara and BDO was reasonable within the
Corporations Act
. Further, he said in
determining to release Ex NF’s funds, Mr Munneke exercised a business
judgement for the purpose of
Corporations Act
submitted he had no material personal interest in the transaction, and he was
not a beneficiary of the 28 O’Connell Trust.
Munneke asserted the applicants have not established any breach of
, or fiduciary obligations in circumstances where:
advised Ms Zaccara that Ex NF was in a position to release surplus cash to
Ms Zaccara as shareholder;
of BDO, Ms Zaccara, and he were satisfied that Ex NF was in a position to
release the unutilised funds;
relied on Ms Zaccara and BDO in releasing those monies;
release of surplus cash was expressly for the purpose of Ms Zaccara acquiring
O’Connell Street through a special purpose
applicants have not established that Ex NF was insolvent or of doubtful
solvency, or that the interests of creditors would be
prejudiced, and Ms
Zaccara, as sole shareholder, consented to, approved of and ratified the release
of the funds and the acquisition
of O’Connell Street.
Munneke contended the evidence that Ms Zaccara agreed to and authorised him to
distribute the funds in December 2015 is unequivocal.
He argued there can be no
bad faith or improper purpose or advantage when the sole shareholder, who was
his wife, was not only fully
informed but was herself taking steps to obtain the
advice of BDO and progress the broader property acquisition which was contingent
on the release of the funds to her as shareholder.
Munneke submitted that if he is found to have breached any duty, he ought to be
excused for any such breach pursuant to
Corporations
. Mr Munneke submitted that in the event of any finding of breach, he
ought to be relieved of any liability in circumstances where:
has not been established that any loss or damage has befallen Ex NF or its
creditors by reason of the release of funds in December
determining to release those funds he: (a) held an honest belief that Ex NF
was in a position to release those funds; (b) was not
motivated by any personal
advantage, and was not ultimately advantaged, not being a beneficiary of the 28
O’Connell Trust;
and (c) relied on the information provided by Ms Zaccara,
whom had obtained advice from BDO, regarding the release the funds being
proper course.
was submitted that the release of Ex NF’s funds to Ms Zaccara and the
acquisition of O’Connell Street was not an unreasonable
director-related
transaction for the following reasons:
was not insolvent or of doubtful solvency at the time, and therefore there was
no risk to creditors;
Zaccara as shareholder had full knowledge of the release of funds; and consented
to or validated the distribution;
bona fide distribution of funds to a shareholder cannot properly be regarded as
an unreasonable director-related transaction; and
benefitted by having access to a larger premises allowing its operations to grow
and for which it was not required to disgorge
on a cash basis the market rate
rent obtainable in respect of the premises.
Munneke submitted that no resulting trust arises by presumption in this case
Street was not acquired from Ex NF’s funds; it was purchased through
the funds of Ms Zaccara; Mr Munneke having
determined to pay
Ex NF’s surplus cash to Ms Zaccara in the form of a dividend or
reduction and distribution of capital;
accordingly,
the starting point is that Ex NF has not provided the purchase monies in
“that character”;
purchaser of the property was the 28 O’Connell Trust; and
intention of each of Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara was that the
28 O’Connell Trust would hold the legal and beneficial interest
O’Connell Street.
was further submitted Ex NF did not provide any purchase monies.
Ex NF distributed funds to its shareholder, who then made the
monies available to the 28 O’Connell Trust. There was never any intention
that Ex NF was to have any beneficial interest
in O’Connell Street.
The establishment of the 28 O’Connell Trust and the purchase through that
entity bespeaks of an
intention that the beneficial ownership would sit
exclusively with that
Zaccara and 28 O’Connell Pty Ltd’s submissions
was submitted that the applicants’ case is to treat the entire compound
transaction of distribution of around $1 million
from Ex NF’s
funds to Ms Zaccara and the ANZ loan as the one transaction to be assessed
by referenced to
Corporations Act
. It is contended the
case stands or falls on the pleaded case.
was submitted that, critically, in this case, the evidence adduced by the
applicants does not allow for a finding that the transaction
was of no benefit
to Ex NF. It was contended that the essence of
is that there
should be something in the nature of a gift or transfer at an undervalue and
there was nothing of the sort here. It
was submitted that the provision of
funds to the 28 O’Connell Trust represented a distribution of capital
out of Ex NF or retained
earnings which in substance belonged to
Ms Zaccara as sole shareholder made at her direction. In substance, it was
Ms Zaccara’s
money. It was submitted that there was no gift but a
return of capital or accumulated profits out of retained earnings.
was submitted that in 2015, Ex NF’s prospects were good and its
business was expanding. Alternative accommodation had to
be secured if
Ex NF was to continue in business as its lease at 112 Ward Street was to
expire with no prospect of extension. It
was submitted that Ms Zaccara was
prepared to withdraw a portion of her shareholder’s capital and put it
into premises, providing
long-term security of occupation to Ex NF.
was submitted a balance of funds had to be found and ANZ was prepared to lend
but its valuation came in well under expectations
and it became necessary to
draw more from Ex NF than originally anticipated. It was further submitted
that Ex NF had the benefit
of security for repayment to the bank in the
form of a mortgage over the property and a guarantee from Mr Munneke, and Mr
and Ms Zaccara had an arrangement or understanding that Ex NF
was only to pay a consideration for occupation of the premises well
below market
was contended reasonableness is to be tested from the perspective of Ex NF;
and from the perspective of Ex NF the transaction
was entirely reasonable
and there was no gift or transfer of company property at an undervalue to
Mr Munneke as the director, or
to Ms Zaccara or any other associate of
Mr Munneke.
was submitted that Ms Zaccara and Mr Munneke had always contemplated supplying
the difference with a distribution of dividends
or capital from Ex NF (in
accordance with the advice that had been received from Mr Vijayadass) and
as the available loan reduced,
the amount required to be drawn from Ex NF
was submitted that prior to the settlement on O’Connell Street, Ms Zaccara
and Mr Munneke had an agreement that the rent
charged to Ex NF for the
occupation of O’Connell Street would be the equivalent of the instalment
payments on the mortgage
together with outgoings such as rates and taxes, and
that Ex NF would meet those payments in the first instance in lieu of
direct payments to the owner.
was submitted that Ms Zaccara gave evidence that in her view the rent
charged to Ex NF was below market. Further, it was submitted
had the benefit of cheap rent by reference to the evidence of Mr Taormina that a
market rent for the entire O’Connell
Street premises in 2016 was $95,205,
in 2017 was $99,013.20, in 2018 was $102,973.73, and from December 2018 up to
May 2019 was $50,199.69.
Ms Zaccara and 28 O’Connell Pty Ltd
submitted that the arrangement between Ex NF and the owner was informal and
not documented
and would amount to an equitable lease.
was submitted that the claim of an unreasonable director-related transaction
cannot be made out and should be dismissed.
and 28 O’Connell Pty Ltd submitted that the qualification of informed
consent in answer to an allegation of breach
of fiduciary duty is reflected in
the unanimous shareholder consent
was submitted that full disclosure means material disclosure which might affect
the informed consent given to directors. It was
submitted that there is no
doubt that the payment of funds out of Ex NF for the purchase of
O’Connell Street was effected at
the instigation of Ms Zaccara and there
was nothing more about the transaction actually being undertaken that she was
required to
know. Ms Zaccara and Mr Munneke gave evidence that they
understood the money was to be withdrawn from Ex NF (on the advice of Mr
Vijayadass) and not by way of a loan but by way of some kind of return of
company funds to Ms Zaccara. It was submitted that, accordingly,
acted appropriately as a sole director in facilitating the withdrawal and
application of the funds in accordance with
Ms Zaccara’s explicit and
implicit intentions as conveyed to him.
relation to good faith, it was noted there is a plea that Mr Munneke acted in
bad faith in obtaining (as trustee) an interest
in O’Connell Street.
However, it was submitted on the evidence there is no basis to find that he
acted in bad faith as alleged
or otherwise. Reference was made to the High
Court’s decision in
Angas Law Services
concerned with allegations of breaches of statutory duty rather than fiduciary
duty. In that context, Gleeson CJ and Heydon
The unanimous
informed consent of the shareholders of ALS, the solvency of ALS and
Mr Carabelas [the director who granted the loan],
and the absence of any
adverse effect on the interests of third parties, were facts relevant to the
propriety of the mortgage transaction.
Their Honours went on to hold that while ratification would operate to
protect a director from a claim of breach of fiduciary duty
to those who ratify
or release, the shareholders of the company could not release directors from
their statutory duties.
submitted that the critical question for unanimous shareholder consent therefore
becomes one of the financial state, that
is, the solvency or otherwise of
Ex NF at the date of the transaction.
was submitted it is appropriate to consider the terms of support available to
Ex NF and it is sufficient if the evidence of financial
support is in the
form of some non-binding indication as opposed to a binding financial
was submitted that should the Court be persuaded to accept the evidence of Mr
Heard that a further $136,122 was required to make
up his preferred working
capital reserve, and the Court should find that had it been seen necessary by
Mr Munneke and called for,
it would have been contributed by
Ms Zaccara. It was submitted that there are two obvious points to keep in
mind. The first is
that Mr Heard’s opinion was not strictly a
solvency analysis by reference to
Corporations Act
merely an analysis grounding an opinion of a suitable working capital
requirement at 10 December 2015. The second is that the
Court is in the
unusual position of having to decide a counterfactual because this is not a case
where there had been the occasion
prior to 10 December 2015 to establish an
explicit basis, formal or informal, upon which Ms Zaccara would provide further
support to Ex NF. However, it was contended that it is not
necessary for the shareholder’s undertaking to provide support
legally binding form provided the directors of the company to whom such
undertakings are given are entitled to assume
that the undertakings would be
was submitted that Ms Zaccara gave passionate evidence that Ex NF was her
“baby”, and she would not let it down.
Ex NF was to be a
family legacy, and it was contended that the evidence discloses that Ms Zaccara
clearly had both the means and
the willingness to contribute should it have come
to that in December 2015.
was made to Ms Zaccara’s property portfolio and to her expectation in 2015
of the imminent receipt of funds from
the Parawae Road property sale and to her
evidence in her second statement regarding her property portfolio.
was pointed out Ms Zaccara explained that she was expecting the sale and receipt
of her share of the Parawae Road proceeds, estimated
to be about $500,000, in
the middle of 2015. She explained that when the sale finally proceeded in 2016,
she recovered a little
under $800,000. Reference was made to
Ms Zaccara’s evidence that upon receipt of her share of the sale
proceeds she deposited
an amount of $54,996.90 into the NAB account on 28 June
to Ms Zaccara’s willingness to contribute funds, it was submitted there is
ample evidence that Ms Zaccara would have been
willing to do so. It was
contended that her third statement is a testament to monies which she said she
put into Ex NF for which
she kept records, and which were not applied to a
loan account where she had not received reimbursement. It was pointed out that
she gave evidence in her first statement that she had paid part of the wages of
Ex NF’s employees in the first 10 weeks of
operations but later
acknowledged being reimbursed for that. In her third statement, she described
her practice of keeping paper
records for her payments on account of company
expenses in the form of receipts, together with handwritten notes, and placing
in envelopes on a monthly basis covering the period 2012 through to 2016.
She then reduced those expenses to her aggregate spreadsheet
at the time of the
examination. It was submitted that the total amount in the
spreadsheet was $272,286.83 as at the end of 2016. It was submitted
of 2015, the amount Ms Zaccara had contributed during the period 2013 through
2015 was $100,789.01.
was submitted that there was no real challenge at trial to Ms Zaccara’s
evidence of continuing payment towards company expenses
detailed in her third
was submitted that the consent of Ms Zaccara to the O’Connell Street
transaction and the distribution of Ex NF’s funds
to her at her
direction goes to absolve Mr Munneke of any fiduciary conflict. It further
means, it was submitted, that he had not
improperly used his position to gain an
advantage for Ms Zaccara in breach of
Corporations Act
and that there has been no improper use of position to cause detriment to
was submitted that the interests of Ex NF aligned with that of
Ms Zaccara as the sole shareholder subject only to the possible
intervention of the interests of creditors.
was submitted that the applicants essentially rely on the premise that,
following the transaction, Ex NF was near insolvent so
as to require
Mr Munneke to act in the interests of Ex NF in some wider sense. It
was contended that Ex NF objectively appeared
to be developing well and
able to pay its debts as and when they fell due, and it was the collapse of
Guvera in May 2016 which brought
a significant change.
was submitted that the applicants’ claim turns on the financial position
its creditors at the time of the
transaction and either on a claim of insolvency at the time of the transaction
or on a claim of
high susceptibility to insolvency at that time. It was
contended that it cannot be enough to allege simply that the assets of
NF were depleted. By itself, it was argued, that is a circumstance of
no relevant consequence nor is it enough to allege accrued
taxation liabilities
if it cannot be shown that Ex NF did not have resources to meet them, nor
is it enough to assert a failure to
consider the interests of creditors unless
it can be shown Ex NF was insolvent or near insolvent following the
transaction, which,
was submitted, cannot be demonstrated on the evidence.
was submitted that it is not to be expected that a reasonable person in the
position of Mr Munneke would have held back amounts
reasonably estimated to be
payable to creditors when the applicants have not explicitly shown what amounts
might be when Ex NF from
the perspective of Mr Munneke had experienced
increasing EBITDA across 2013, 2014, and 2015 financial years and up to November
and when the debtors had proved to be good-paying, albeit
slow‑paying.
was contended that Mr Heard’s counsel of prudence which directly bears on
this aspect is not soundly based. It was submitted
that it was more a counsel
of perfection than evidence of how an ordinary person, with the knowledge of the
director, might be expected
to have acted if he were acting on his own behalf.
To the extent that extends to a requisite degree of understanding of
financial affairs and its financial capacity. The fact that
Mr Munneke did not have the benefit of up-to-date accounting does not
could not have an appreciation and feel for Ex NF’s general
condition, as he said he did.
importantly, it was argued, the applicants have not shown that the lack of
complete financial records has caused Mr Munneke
to act in a way he otherwise
would or should have reasonably acted. It was submitted that even with
Mr Heard’s complete financial
reckoning, a director in Mr
Munneke’s position would not have breached his duty of care and diligence
in proceeding with the
O’Connell Street transaction as he did.
was submitted no breach of any fiduciary or statutory duty has been demonstrated
by the applicants on the pleaded
Street findings
is my assessment that Mr Munneke completely abrogated his responsibility as a
director in relying on Ms Zaccara. Further, as
discussed earlier, I do not
accept that he is vindicated in the purported distribution of funds to Ms
Zaccara to acquire O’Connell
Street which he alleges occurred after
the independent advice of BDO.
indicated above, I accept the evidence of Mr Heard and I accept the need for a
working capital reserve.
considered all the evidence and submissions of the parties, I am satisfised that
as at 10 December 2015 Ex NF’s financial
state was such that there
was a “real and not remote risk of insolvency” enlivening the duty
of Mr Munneke to consider
the interests of Ex NF’s
duty to consider the interests of creditors is not confined to an insolvent or
nearly insolvent company. As White J stated in
the obligation of directors to consider the interests of creditors is enlivened
particularly when a company is insolvent or nearing
insolvency. The Courts have
avoided formulating any general test of the degree of financial instability
necessary to give rise to
a duty by directors of a company to consider the
interests of its creditors.
Further, White J stated:
... there are numerous illustrations in the authorities of actual or
prospective insolvency being held to enliven a duty by directors
to consider the
interests of creditors as an aspect of the duty to act in the best interests of
the company.
His Honour referred to
Nicholson v Permakraft NZ
where Cooke J regarded
the fact of actual or approaching insolvency as being but one instance of a
circumstance in which directors
may be required to consider the interests of
Justice Cooke went
on to say that directors may be under a duty to consider the interests of
creditors “if a contemplated
payment or other course of action would
jeopardise its
decision in
Termite Resources
concerned a solvent company paying money
out but placing the interests of creditors in jeopardy notwithstanding that it
was neither
insolvent nor nearly insolvent while the iron ore price remained
high. Nevertheless, the payments out were in breach of a duty because
directors were relevantly placing the creditors in jeopardy because any fall in
the iron ore price would mean that the company
was at risk of no longer
this matter, putting aside the penalties and general interest, the money paid
out in December 2015 to acquire O’Connell
Street effectively meant
there was an insufficient working capital reserve, placing Ex NF in
jeopardy. Mr Munneke’s duty to
consider the interests of creditors
in complying with his duty to act in the best interests of Ex NF was
enlivened when payment of
Ex NF’s funds to acquire
O’Connell Street and the incurring of the $740,000 loan was
contemplated. Had he acted in compliance
with his duty he would have properly
informed himself as to Ex NF’s financial position and would not have
paid out over $1
million dollars and borrowed $740,000 if that was
going to jeopardise Ex NF’s solvency.
payment of Ex NF’s funds was not ever declared as a dividend
regularly or irregularly. The intention was to defer the
decision of the
characterisation of the payment out for later consideration. As submitted by
the applicants, what was contemplated
was a hypothetical dividend that was never
declared to Ms Zaccara, which is beyond the principle of assent or
ratification.
Corporations Act
, Ex NF did not maintain
written financial records that correctly recorded and explained its
transactions, for example, the loans
to Ms Zaccara, the payments
Ms Zaccara made and asserted she made, the payment of Ex NF’s
funds and the ANZ loan underlying
the O’Connell Street purchase, and
the basis upon which Ex NF occupied O’Connell Street, and which
would enable true
and fair financial statements to be prepared and audited.
am satisfied having regard to Mr Heard’s opinion that Ex NF creditors
were placed in jeopardy by reason of the withdrawal
of $1,025,911.59 from the
ANZ accounts and the $740,000 liability incurred to ANZ.
find that in late 2015, Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara were each aware:
were no up-to-date or accurate accounts available to them as to the financial
position of Ex NF;
was not up to date in filing its BAS with the ATO, with returns for the quarter
years ended September 2014, March 2015 and June
2015 outstanding;
was not up to date in filing its income tax returns with the ATO, with returns
for the years ended 30 June 2014 and 30 June
2015 outstanding;
had not lodged any statements in respect of SGC, such that the amount owing in
respect of superannuation was unknown;
would also be required to file a BAS for the quarter ended December 2015 early
the following year; and
was also very likely to face further charges for interest and penalties from the
ATO when it filed its long overdue BAS and
income tax returns.
caused Ex NF to lodge its BAS for the quarter ended 30 September 2015
and pay $112,865 to the ATO, Ex NF would be exposed to
further payments
upon lodging of outstanding BAS and tax returns.
also find Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara were each aware that:
purchase of O’Connell Street was not in the name of Ex NF but was for
the benefit of Mr Munneke as trustee of the 28 O’Connell
use of the trust would have the effect, of placing the property outside of the
reach of Ex NF’s creditors; and
purchase of O’Connell Street and related expenses used substantially all
of Ex NF’s available cash resources, leaving
a balance of
$218,185.26. This left Ex NF in an immediately precarious position. The
position was even worse when the substantial
tax debts are factored in.
find that Ms Zaccara’s plaintive debt collection tactics with Guvera in
November 2015 demonstrates she was aware of existing
and impending ATO
liabilities. Further, she was aware in January 2016 of Ex NF’s lack
of operational funds, when she stated
in an email to Guvera that “To be
frank we need the money” and “... I’m in a bit of a panic as
we have two
weeks of operational funds left”.
is patently obvious that Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara did not engage in a
proper analysis of the amount required to maintain a working
capital buffer
before paying out Ex NF’s funds and submitting Ex NF to the ANZ
Ms Zaccara submitted that the O’Connell Street acquisition was to be
regarded as a payment to her as a dividend, she
made admissions in the
examination to the effect that it was not decided to be a dividend,
rather its characterisation was to be a decision made later.
She asserted Rowe
Partners determined it was better to call it a loan rather than calling it a
dividend. If it were a dividend,
she would have brought herself under a tax
liability of tax on the dividend being paid out at the personal tax rate.
am not satisfied that Ms Zaccara would have provided funds to Ex NF if
required to pay tax liabilities. It appeared she frequently
made payments of
cash, she purchased plant and equipment from 2Moro, and paid Ex NF’s
founding employees’ salaries from
her own resources at incorporation of
Ex NF. However, she borrowed money from Ex NF to purchase the South
Terrace properties. Whilst
she maintained she and Mr Munneke had not taken
a salary for two years to pay back that loan, there is no contemporaneous
recording of this arrangement. She was also prepared to take
Ex NF’s funds and expose it to the liability of the ANZ loan
her loans or ensuring financial records correctly recorded her assertion the
loan was paid back. She gave evidence about
payments she asserted were made to
the loan which were shown to be interbank transfers not loan repayments. There
are no records
recording the basis upon which Ex NF’s funds were paid
out and the basis upon which Ex NF took on the ANZ loan to effect the
purchase of O’Connell Street. Nor are there any records regarding any
agreement underlying Ex NF’s occupation of O’Connell
Zaccara did not provide ANZ with an up-to-date accurate picture of
Ex NF’s financial situation when the ANZ loan was applied
the purposes of the loan application to the ANZ, she caused Ex NF to lodge
its BAS for the quarter ended 30 September 2015
and pay $112,865 to the ATO.
have already stated I do not accept Ms Zaccara’s evidence regarding her
reliance on the alleged advice from Mr Vijayadass.
I am unable to accept
Mr Vijayadass gave the advice she alleged. The documents relied on her to
this effect are not sufficient
to establish that, despite not being fully
apprised of Ex NF’s financial position in late 2015, Mr Vijayadass
advised a dividend
of 80 percent of Ex NF’s funds were surplus
funds and could be paid as a dividend. As I discussed earlier in these reasons,
I infer Mr Vijayadass discussed a property purchase with 50 percent gearing.
There is no evidence he was informed at any time between
the date of his email
and his meeting with Ms Zaccara the day before settlement that ANZ were no
longer prepared to lend $1 million,
requiring Ex NF to contribute an
extra $260,000. This clearly made Ex NF’s financial position
precarious. Of note, the extra
$260,000 Ex NF contributed to the purchase
is $10,000 more than the working capital of $250,000 advised by Mr Heard,
having calculated
monthly overheads as at 10 December 2015 were $155,000. Of
note, Ms Zaccara had at December 2015 never put any personal funds in
pay Ex NF’s creditors and certainly never committed to paying tax
Munneke said in cross-examination that he did not turn his mind to
Ms Zaccara putting money back in when he was paying out $1,025,911
ANZ account and he did not have a discussion with her about putting money back
relation to Mr Munneke’s criticism of Mr Heard not undertaking
investigations regarding the capacity of the debtors to pay
in relation to the
debt of $325,853, I note both Mr Heard and Mr Scott treated this debt as owed by
Ms Zaccara or an entity associated
with her, which was of no realisable
value. Given Ms Zaccara’s evidence about having paid the original
loan of $370,000 off
in full, together with her evidence about paying a total of
$228,000 to the loan (which was demonstrated to be incorrect and was,
two interbank transfers), I am not satisfied the debt of $325,853 was
recoverable.
consider it inherently unlikely that Ms Zaccara was ever going to commit
her personal funds to pay Ex NF’s tax creditors.
I say this having
regard to her own evidence about having a “fear”, “such
difficulty doing tax” that it
relates to “some obsessive compulsive
disorder”, and that she has “an irrational relationship ... with the
issue”. At the very least, I infer Ms Zaccara, whilst denying
she was a tax denier, did not prioritise the payment of tax
unless it is in her
interest, as I infer it was when she caused Ex NF to pay $112,865 tax
following lodgement of the September 2015
BAS when applying for the ANZ
find that at the time of the O’Connell Street transaction and the payment
out of over $1 million dollars of Ex NF’s
funds and the incurring of
the $740,000 liability to ANZ, Mr Munneke was aware there was a tax
liability. A reasonable director
in his position ought to have apprised himself
of the existing financial position of Ex NF (not just the bank balances and
rendered) and not paid Ex NF’s funds out or incurred the ANZ
loan liability until the quantum of the tax liability was known.
Mr Scott stated, on the hypothesis that a director is faced with a decision
whether to pay out a shareholder before a company
was up to date with its
filings, it was a reasonable proposition that the company lodge all returns
before making any payment out.
As submitted, I note that Mr Scott, in a
tempered way, acceded to the proposition that effectively a director does not
make a payment
out before bringing the company tax up to date and the general
interest and penalties are known.
Scott’s evidence was that any advice to pay out before a director has
brought returns up to date and upon filing understands
the liability to the ATO
would be dangerous. I agree with the applicants’ submission that one does
not need to be a chartered
accountant to realise that any reasonable director in
the shoes of Mr Munneke would know that it would be dangerous to be paying
out very material sums until liability to the ATO is known.
Scott’s evidence in relation to the $740,000 loan was that a rational
director acting in conformity with his duties would
have ensured that there was
a relevant asset when incurring a liability on behalf of Ex NF for $740,000
because, as he said, “otherwise
you have just gifted it”. Mr Scott
said he could not give a director the advice to proceed with the $740,000 loan
transaction
if it was never intended to be paid back to Ex NF. Ex NF
was being put in a position where it was of very questionable solvency
December 2015 before general interest charge and penalties are factored in. To
pay out Ex NF’s money for the benefit
of another where Ex NF has
no interest in O’Connell Street nor any ability to recover the $740,000
loan from anyone is patently
unreasonable.
was the recipient of the proceeds as the purchaser of O’Connell Street, so
too was Ms Zaccara as one of the beneficiaries
28 O’Connell Trust. The transaction at the very least, placed
creditors in material jeopardy from the $1.025 million
paid out and the
$740,000 loan. A rational director would not pay out that money before
understanding the tax liability position.
reasonable director acting with due care and diligence in the best interests of
a company would want to know what is owed before
a decision to pay out and incur
a liability is contemplated. Mr Munneke’s failure to do so
demonstrates self‑interest.
Munneke breached his fiduciary duty in the strict sense because there was a
conflict between his duty to Ex NF to act in its interests
on the one hand,
and his self‑interest as the recipient of the funds on the other
gave evidence that he did not understand Ex NF’s liabilities and
focused on revenue. He said money was coming into
the bank and invoices
rendered. However, to borrow his term, “the vibe” is not enough.
Whilst the EBITDA for the 2013
to 2015 financial years showed improvement, it
does not take into account Ex NF’s tax liability. As submitted by
the applicants,
a competent, rational director does not look at simply whether
revenue is coming in without understanding what the liabilities are,
particularly in circumstances where the liabilities are tax, penalties and
general interest charge, because the more money made,
the more tax owed. As
further submitted, leaving tax liabilities unpaid for a long time makes it
unsurprising that there will be
a credit balance in the bank. I agree a
rational director simply does not ignore that liabilities side of the equation.
Ms Zaccara’s self-confessed issue with tax, I suspect the payment out
of Ex NF’s funds was just taking money out
of Ex NF to buy
something never intending for it to have the formalities of a dividend, from
which tax would flow.
it is be noted that
Corporations Act
materially limits the
ability to pay a dividend if it will have any prejudicial effect on
is a legal impediment to lawfully paying a dividend or otherwise making a return
of capital to a shareholder unless such course
does not materially prejudice the
ability to pay the company’s creditors. As submitted by the applicants, a
dividend cannot
be declared lawfully unless it is not going to materially
prejudice Ex NF’s ability to pay its creditors. As pointed out by
the applicants, there was no evidence that BDO was ever given any indication
what the creditors’
position was.
agree with the submission that no rational director would act on the hearsay
account of Ms Zaccara that BDO thought it might be
a good idea to declare
some sort of dividend, particularly when there had been no up-to-date financial
records and in the circumstances
of Mr Munneke having no idea about
Ex NF’s solvency.
find that the effect of the purchase of O’Connell Street was that
Ex NF had paid away cash totalling
$1,125,911.59
and incurred a
liability of $740,000 to ANZ in respect of a property that was owned by Mr
Munneke as trustee of the 28 O’Connell
Trust. There was objectively
no benefit to Ex NF from this transaction. Ex NF’s funds were
paid away and a significant liability
incurred in respect of the purchase of a
property that Ex NF had no interest in. The respondents’ submission
that Ex NF benefited
from reduced rental expenses as it was only required
to pay the mortgage repayments cannot be sustained, including considering the
evidence that Ex NF was charged market rent for the year ended 30 June
2016. Ex NF paid substantial interest and on winding up,
ANZ applied
$337,491.93 to reduce the loan balance. Further, as contended, if
O’Connell Street had been purchased by Ex NF,
it would have enjoyed
the same benefit and the property would have been available as an asset to be
used to pay creditors.
find the O’Connell Street transaction:
a self-dealing transaction by Mr Munneke that was wholly for his benefit and
that of his family through the 28 O’Connell
Trust, with no benefit to
undertaken entirely using Ex NF’s funds comprising most of
Ex NF’s cash resources and Ex NF incurring a liability
undertaken at a time when the books and records of Ex NF were, to
Mr Munneke’s knowledge, incomplete and Ex NF was, to
Munneke’s knowledge, seriously behind in its tax filings, in
circumstances where Mr Munneke accepted that he did not know and
of knowing Ex NF’s true financial position.
the actual state of Ex NF’s finances been known, as it would have
been by a reasonable director, then, allowing for Ex
liabilities, the effect of paying away Ex NF’s cash and incurring
further debt for no benefit was to render
Ex NF of doubtful solvency, or
that insolvency was a real and not remote risk, and to materially prejudice its
ability to pay its
am not satisfied that Ms Zaccara might have contributed resources to
Ex NF to pay its liabilities in December 2015.
Munneke’s breach of duty was plain and obvious. He applied the bulk of
Ex NF’s funds and incurred substantial further
liabilities in a
transaction that was solely for his own benefit in circumstances where he could
have had no idea as to the full
picture of Ex NF’s financial status,
having failed to ensure that Ex NF was up-to-date in its tax filings.
statutory duties breached are as follows:
Munneke failed to exercise due care and diligence and breached
reasonable director in Mr Munneke’s position would have ensured that
Ex NF was up-to-date with its tax filings and payments
and that Ex NF
maintained up to date financial statements. A reasonable director in
Mr Munneke’s position would not have made
a gift of the bulk of
Ex NF’s cash and committed it to further loans without any idea of
Ex NF’s real financial position.
A reasonable director in
Mr Munneke’s position would not have paid away Ex NF’s
assets before the ATO liabilities were
paid, nor in the context of the actual
financial position that Ex NF was in.
is plainly evident from my findings that the statutory defence, the business
judgment rule, prescribed by
is not available to
Mr Munneke.
Munneke did not exercise his powers as director in good faith in the best
interests of Ex NF or for a proper purpose and was in
It was not a proper corporate purpose for Mr Munneke to make a gift to
himself of Ex NF’s cash and cause Ex NF to incur further
substantial debt to purchase a property for Mr Munneke’s benefit.
Mr Munneke admitted in the
examination that the purpose of purchasing
the property outside of Ex NF was to have an asset that was not tied to the
failure of Ex NF. There was no attempt by Mr Munneke to
cause the payments to be made lawfully by either declaration of a dividend
pursuant to
Corporations Act
or as a return of capital
pursuant to
and, in the circumstances, given the material
prejudice to creditors from the transaction, there was no way for the
transactions
to be undertaken lawfully.
Munneke made improper use of his position as director to gain an advantage for
himself and others and cause detriment to Ex NF
in breach of
is also plainly evident from my findings that Mr Munneke’s reliance
on Ms Zaccara and Mr Vijayadass was not reasonable as
Corporations Act
. His own evidence is to the effect he
made no independent assessment of the purported advice of Mr Vijayadass
conveyed to him by
Ms Zaccara and did not discuss the issue directly with
Mr Vijayadass.
application of Ex NF’s funds and borrowings to acquire
O’Connell Street was also a breach of fiduciary duty by Mr
Munneke. The
transaction was a disposal of Ex NF’s funds that was not in any way
authorised by law. It was materially prejudicial
to creditors and left
Ex NF either insolvent or nearing insolvency. Mr Munneke was clearly
conflicted and obtained a profit from
the transaction, in breach of both the
conflict and profit rules.
The acquisition of O’Connell Street using Ex NF funds was an
unreasonable director‑related transaction:
was a “transaction” within the broad meaning in
Corporations Act
“transaction” involved both a payment of money by Ex NF in the
amount of $1,125,911.59 applied to the purchase and
the incurring of a debt by
Ex NF to ANZ of a further $740,000;
payment and obligation to pay were made to Mr Munneke or for his benefit;
reasonable person in the circumstances of Ex NF would not have entered into
the transaction. The transaction was a breach of director’s
breach of fiduciary duties as set out above.
Munneke’s breaches are not absolved because they were encouraged by
Ms Zaccara. In the circumstances of the O’Connell
transaction, Ms Zaccara’s assent to the transactions is legally
irrelevant:
ratification
or unanimous shareholder consent is irrelevant to breaches of the law. Ms
Zaccara’s assent is therefore irrelevant
to Ex NF’s claim of
statutory breach;
Zaccara could not ratify an informal distribution in circumstances where the
material prejudice to creditors caused by the transaction
meant that it could
not have been undertaken as a lawful dividend or capital distribution;
shareholders
cannot, in any event, ratify conduct of directors that is adverse to the
interests of creditors in circumstances of doubtful
solvency, near insolvency,
or the like;
ratification
requires that the shareholder have full knowledge of the underlying facts and
circumstances. Ms Zaccara had no better
knowledge of Ex NF’s
financial situation as at December 2015 than Mr Munneke did;
ratification
is not a principle that exists at large to fill in steps that were not taken by
the parties at the time of the transaction,
such as to determine the fundamental
nature of the transaction itself;
Zaccara did not, in fact, ever ratify a distribution of capital to her, whether
as a dividend or otherwise. When the accountants
finally looked at the
transaction after the event, she said they advised not to record it as a
dividend. Consequentially, the transaction
was recorded as a loan. Each of
Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara now deny any liability under a loan. The effect
of this is that there
was not a ratification by Ms Zaccara of a dividend.
O’Connell Street transaction is voidable within the meaning of
s 588FE(6A)
Corporations Act
relief against liability prescribed by
Corporations Act
is not available to Mr Munneke. It only applies where a
director, as an officer of a corporation, has acted honestly and having
to the circumstances of the case ought fairly be excused. The circumstances of
this matter are not such that Mr Munneke’s
conduct ought fairly be excused
from his breaches of the
Corporations Act
cryptocurrency and Ward Street claim
applicants contended that the bitcoin was purchased in February and
August 2014 as part of Ex NF’s business and using
NF’s funds, such that the cryptocurrency was, and to the extent
that it still exists, remains the property of Ex NF. Mr Munneke
that the purchase was a family investment and the cryptocurrency was an asset of
the ZALD Trust, whereas Ms Zaccara asserted
that it was a purchase for her
benefit, with the use of Ex NF’s funds representing repayment of a
loan or loans she had made
to Ex NF. The applicants submitted that it is
noteworthy that the positions of Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara are
irreconcilable.
Applicants’
submissions on cryptocurrency
the outset, I note the applicants’ submission that cryptocurrency is a
remedies. The
respondents did not advance a contrary position and in any case, most of the
cryptocurrency has now been liquidated
by agreement of the parties.
applicants said that the evidence establishes several matters, which in turn
establish that Ex NF is the owner of the cryptocurrency:
bitcoin was purchased by Mr Munneke, a director of Ex NF, using Ex NF
funds from the NAB account;
CoinJar account was linked only to the NAB account, notwithstanding that Mr
Munneke knew that it was possible for him to link
a personal bank account in
order to deposit personal funds;
the CoinJar account was used in Ex NF’s ordinary business, having
originally been opened to facilitate Ex NF marketing
itself as a
cutting-edge software developer by accepting bitcoin for payment, which bitcoin
could then be converted to Australian
dollars and remitted to Ex NF using
the CoinJar exchange. The CoinJar account was opened in Mr Munneke’s name
only because
an account could not be opened by a company. Of course, as Ms
Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd submitted, a decision to accept
bitcoin for
payment is distinct from a decision to purchase bitcoin for use in
Ex NF’s business.
reason of the first to third matters above, the applicants said that the
purchases of cryptocurrency were company transactions
on their face. However,
the applicants point to evidence establishing further matters:
the purpose of establishing the CoinJar account, it is inherently unlikely that
there was an intention to store bitcoin owned
by Ex NF and bitcoin owned by
Mr Munneke personally together in the account, noting especially that bitcoin is
stored in “complicated
fractions [of a bitcoin]” and also that Mr
Munneke had a personal bitcoin wallet, which had been established by no later
14 February 2014;
was every reason for Ex NF to hold bitcoin as a software developer working
in applications and interested in bitcoin;
advance of Ric Santos’ wedding on 15 February 2014, Mr Munneke had taken
steps on 10 February 2014 to deposit funds into
the CoinJar account. There was
no need for him to have transferred funds from the NAB account on 14 February to
pay for Ric Santos’
gift, as he could have attended a NAB branch to
deposit his own cash on any day between 10 and 14 February if his intention
to purchase bitcoin as personal property;
Munneke did not transfer all the bitcoin from the CoinJar account to his
personal bitcoin wallet, and his explanation that he did
not do so because of
security risks is unconvincing. The applicants also said that I should infer
from Mr Munneke’s failure
to disclose the bitcoin wallet that he was
conscious of its existence being inconsistent with the suggestion that the
CoinJar account
was his personal account;
Munneke used the remaining bitcoin from the amount he had transferred to the
bitcoin wallet, 1K2Sd, to make small transactions
such as to purchase sushi,
which is consistent with Mr Munneke establishing familiarity with bitcoin in his
capacity as a developer
rather than the bitcoin being a personal or family
investment;
residual bitcoin in the CoinJar account was used to obtain ethereum for
Ex NF’s client, Meeco in August 2014. Ex NF issued
invoice in respect of this transaction by reference to the bitcoin purchase
price as at February 2014;
bitcoin was purchased in August 2014 to acquire ethereum. The funds used to
purchase the further bitcoin were treated as
a company expense for GST purposes
and the bitcoin sale was partially recorded in Ex NF’s GST filings.
Ex NF went on to demonstrate
interest in the ethereum blockchain by
undertaking various activities as part of its business, including the Hackathon,
attending the “blockchain summit” and undertaking a
blockchain software development course paid for by
I note Mr Munneke
“tweeted” in early March 2017 (I infer while at the blockchain
summit) that:
Developers, developers, developers not
forgotten at #AdlBlockchainSummit; Ethereum largest ecosystem of developers then
other blockchain
amounts of cryptocurrency acquired in 2014 were modest when compared to the
property investments made by Ms Zaccara, which is
inconsistent with the
suggestion of the cryptocurrency being a long‑term personal or family
investment. However, as Ms Zaccara
and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd submitted, the
small size of the investment is a neutral consideration in circumstances where
cryptocurrency
was in its infancy at the time of the acquisitions;
Munneke had ample opportunity to but did not compensate Ex NF for the use
of its funds to purchase bitcoin in February or August
2014, including by
transferring some of the “thousands of dollars” purportedly given to
him by Ms Zaccara to invest in
bitcoin. I note that this submission does not
advance the applicants’ case in circumstances where it is asserted that
bitcoin was purchased with Ex NF funds to offset amounts owing to Ms
purchases were never recorded in Ex NF’s accounts as a loan or gift
to Mr Munneke, Ms Zaccara or any other person, and Ms
Zaccara was never informed
that Ex NF funds had been used to purchase cryptocurrency, notwithstanding
that Ms Zaccara maintained
Ex NF’s loan accounts. I note Ms Zaccara
and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd’s submission that this evidence is neutral, as
it would equally be expected that Mr Munneke would tell Ms Zaccara about
the cryptocurrency acquisition if it were intended to be
a company asset so that
it could be recorded;
has never been paid by Ms Zaccara or the ZALD Trust on the liquidation of the
ethereum in 2018, the gain on sale was about $1.4
million and CGT payable
is significant and Mr Munneke’s explanation for the failure to do so is
unsatisfactory;
funds realised from the three ethereum sales in January 2018 were paid into the
NAB account.
Following the
purchase of the Ward Street property, the surplus funds of $121,988.89 were
retained by Ex NF in the NAB
Ms Zaccara never took
steps to recover these funds and her explanation for not doing so is a vague
reconstruction. Further, no
record was made dealing with her rights over the
funds even though by this time, there was a risk of Ex NF passing into
insolvency.
applicants relied especially on admissions, which they said illustrate most
clearly that the cryptocurrency was a company asset:
firstly, Mr Munneke’s
email to Mr Richards dated 26 January 2018 and secondly, Ms Zaccara’s
admissions made at the
examination that it was never intended that
Ex NF purchase cryptocurrency on her behalf and that she did not own any
cryptocurrency.
email chain between Mr Munneke and Mr Richards, the broker that he used to
liquidate part of the ethereum on 26 January 2018,
is reproduced again in the
Email content
Thanks for the OTC conversion; will recommend - we have a customer that
bought Ethereum for at pre-sale with us who are also likely
[to] convert some
Mr Richards
Awesome, thanks!
What do you do?
I have a software development studio that has focused on building new
ventures, often with startups. Meeco is a client since 2012,
and we actually
spoke directly with Vitalik in the early days when the Ethereum project was
starting, and believed in the project
and the power of this new blockchain with
smart contracts. Bought in at the pre-sale to use it, never expected it to be an
investment,
just thought it was a cheaper way to get gas for development
applicants said that Mr Munneke had no reason to lie in his email dated 26
January 2018 when he stated in an “unguarded
way” that the ethereum
had been “[b]ought ... at the pre-sale to use it, never expected it to be
an investment, just
thought it was a cheaper way to get gas for
development”. In response to Mr Munneke’s assertion that this
was a reference
only to Meeco’s ethereum, the applicants pointed out that
Mr Munneke was communicating with the broker about the sale of the
ethereum held by Ex NF, not Meeco. The applicants contended that it would
make no sense for Mr Munneke to send this email
in answer to the broker’s
question, “What do you do?”, if he were talking about Meeco’s
activities and intentions.
Further, the applicants submitted that
Mr Munneke is not speaking on behalf of or from the position of Meeco,
noting that he referred
to Meeco as a “customer” or
“client” elsewhere in the email correspondence and distinguishes
between the
ethereum the subject of the sale and the ethereum owned by Meeco.
The applicants also contended that the reference could not have
Meeco’s ethereum, as this ethereum was not available to be used by
Ex NF in development. I note that while this may
be so, the submission
does not address the suggestion that Mr Munneke was speaking to Meeco’s
intention to obtain gas for use
in its own development activities.
applicants said that Ms Zaccara’s admissions during the
examination
cannot be explained away, given the implausibility of a person owning millions
of dollars’ worth of cryptocurrency
but forgetting or being confused about
that ownership, even having taken medication.
applicants also submitted that Mr Munneke’s account of a discussion with
Ms Zaccara in the late evening of 14 February
2014 about purchasing bitcoin as a
family investment is a deliberate fabrication or at least a reconstruction. The
applicants pointed
out that funds were deposited in the CoinJar account during
the afternoon, rather than the evening of 14 February. Further, the
relied on Mr Munneke’s concessions that he did not consider the ZALD Trust
at the time of the purchase, that it
was later suggested to him in the context
of this litigation that the ZALD Trust would have been the appropriate vehicle
asset, and that he had no specific recollection of the conversation he
said that he had with Ms Zaccara on the evening of 14 February
was pointed out that Ms Zaccara did not give any evidence of such a
conversation on or around 14 February 2014. The applicants
suggested that
Mr Munneke has every reason to embrace the suggestion that the bitcoin was
purchased as an investment for the ZALD
Trust, noting that the ATO in October
2019 entered judgment against Mr Munneke for the sum of $1,515,371.03, so
as to prevent the
applicants or a bankruptcy trustee having recourse to the
cryptocurrency. Ms Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd complained that
this proposition was never put to Mr Munneke in cross-examination.
addition, the applicants contended that Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara’s
accounts regarding the cryptocurrency are irreconcilable
with each other and the
evidence they each gave in the
examinations. It was also submitted
that Ms Zaccara’s first and second statements are inconsistent.
applicants contended that Mr Munneke, by stating for the first time in
cross-examination that Ms Zaccara asked him on several
occasions over many years
to purchase bitcoin, although he “didn’t get around to [it]”,
was deliberately tailoring
his evidence to align with Ms Zaccara’s account
in her first statement of repeatedly requesting Mr Munneke to purchase bitcoin
from 2010. The applicants pointed out in this context that Mr Munneke admitted
to having read Ms Zaccara’s first statement
before giving evidence.
Further, the applicants emphasised that while Ms Zaccara gave evidence in
cross-examination and in the
examination that she paid thousands of
dollars to Mr Munneke over years to buy bitcoin, this was not mentioned in her
or by Mr Munneke at all.
was also submitted that Ms Zaccara’s evidence on these subjects is
inherently unlikely, noting the appreciation in the value
of bitcoin by nearly
5,000 times between 2010 and late 2013. The applicants said that against
this background, had Mr Munneke failed
to carry out Ms Zaccara’s
instructions during this time, this would have been the subject of
“serious and upset protestations
from Ms Zaccara”, not the vague
“missed the boat” type of evidence given by Mr Munneke. The
applicants characterised
Ms Zaccara’s evidence that she was indifferent to
the value of bitcoin as extraordinary, noting that she said she intended
acquire it as an investment. Further, the applicants pointed out that there is
no documentary evidence of such a request by Ms
Zaccara that Mr Munneke purchase
bitcoin, nor of her giving him money for that purpose, despite her evidence that
she did so by bank
transfer. It was also submitted that Ms Zaccara’s
evidence of paying thousands to Mr Munneke to purchase bitcoin is implausible
given that he only ever purchased modest amounts of it and that he used
Ex NF funds to do so.
applicants challenged other aspects of Ms Zaccara’s evidence regarding the
$300 worth of bitcoin gifted to Ric Santos for
his wedding. Ms Zaccara’s
account in her first statement is that she recalled being aware prior to the
July 2014 trip to America
that Mr Munneke had purchased some bitcoin and
remembering he gave a fraction of a coin as a wedding present. She also
“complaining to [Mr Munneke] that [she] did not want to give
the Bitcoin away like that”. The applicants characterised
account that “she was complaining about a disposition of her
cryptocurrency”. However, the applicants pointed
out that cryptocurrency
was purchased for the first time by Mr Munneke as a wedding gift for Ric
Santos. The applicants also noted
that in cross‑examination, Ms
Zaccara’s evidence was that she expressed annoyance at Mr Munneke for
purchasing bitcoin
for Ric Santos and not for her. The applicants submitted
that this revision is consistent with her evidence in the
examination that
she had no contemporaneous knowledge of Mr Munneke purchasing bitcoin, whether
using Ex NF funds or otherwise.
The applicants said this was a damning
evolution in her story.
applicants also highlighted that on Mr Munneke’s account, he and
Ms Zaccara agreed upon the amount of bitcoin to be gifted
to Ric Santos
prior to the wedding, whereas Ms Zaccara said that she was unaware of the gift
until after the fact. Ms Zaccara and
106 Ward Street Pty Ltd said that this
divergence is insignificant. I do not agree. This inconsistency undermines Mr
account of the phone call with Ms Zaccara on the evening of 14
February 2014, in which he said they discussed purchasing bitcoin
as a family
investment, notwithstanding that Ms Zaccara’s evidence is that she had
been asking Mr Munneke to purchase bitcoin
for years. However, I note that
Mr Munneke’s evidence on this subject was equivocal. He said he and Ms
Zaccara “would
have discussed it” rather than recounting a memory of
such a discussion.
the applicants’ submission, the fact that bitcoin was given to Ric Santos
does not undermine their contention that the bitcoin
was owned by Ex NF.
The applicants said that the wedding gift was a sufficiently legitimate
corporate expense so as to make the
use of Ex NF funds appropriate.
applicants submitted that I should reject Mr Munneke’s evidence that at
the time the bitcoin was purchased, he was aware
that Ex NF would be
compensated for the use of its funds to acquire the bitcoin. The applicants
pointed to the inconsistency between
this evidence and Mr Munneke’s
statements in the
examination that he could not recall who purchased
the bitcoin, then that he “thought” that he had paid for it. This
is also inconsistent with the suggestion that the use of Ex NF funds was to
repay money owing to Ms Zaccara. Further, the applicants
said that Mr Munneke
failed to explain this inconsistency during cross‑examination, responding
that he had been “frazzled”
examination. The
applicants characterised this as a material evolution of Mr Munneke’s
story, whereas Ms Zaccara and 106 Ward
Street Pty Ltd submitted that this is not
a material inconsistency but rather, is “just a difference in memory when
applicants noted that Ms Zaccara’s evidence on the subject of whether she
had contemporaneous knowledge of the bitcoin
purchases is inconsistent. The
applicants contended that the evidence given in the
examination and her
first statement, being that she had no knowledge of the use of Ex NF funds
to purchase cryptocurrency, is most
likely to be true. Further, it was
submitted that each of Ms Zaccara’s accounts is inconsistent with Mr
Munneke’s evidence
that he and Ms Zaccara discussed and agreed on the
purchases of bitcoin by Ex NF as a family investment.
applicants said that there is no contemporaneous evidence to corroborate the
assertion that the ethereum was acquired for Ms
Zaccara at her request, noting
especially that she had no contemporaneous knowledge that Ex NF’s
funds had been used to purchase
bitcoin in August 2014. The applicants also
pointed to the
examination, during which Ms Zaccara denied knowledge
of Mr Munneke controlling residual cryptocurrency and expressed shock at him
continuing to control ethereum of substantial value. The applicants submitted
that I should reject her attempts to resile from this
evidence in
cross‑examination, contending that it is inconceivable that Ms Zaccara
would not be aware of the ethereum that
remained following the purchase of Ward
Street had it been purchased for
Applicants’
alternative case
the alternative, the applicants said that Mr Munneke’s use of Ex NF
funds to purchase the cryptocurrency as a family investment
was a self-dealing
transaction in breach of his statutory and fiduciary duties, notwithstanding the
relatively modest value of the
funds used.
was submitted that the breach could not have been ratified in circumstances
where Ex NF was insolvent or of doubtful solvency
and where Ms Zaccara was
not even aware of any cryptocurrency having been purchased on her behalf. The
applicants contended that,
as explained above, Ms Zaccara treated the
cryptocurrency as an asset of Ex NF. The applicants said that any
purported assent after
the liquidation is
ineffectual.
Munneke’s submissions on cryptocurrency
to the applicants’ submissions, Mr Munneke contended that in circumstances
where he is and has always been the sole
holder of the private keys associated
with the relevant cryptocurrency wallets, as well as the CoinJar account login
details, a presumption
arises that he is the owner of the cryptocurrency, which
the applicants have failed to rebut. On this point, the applicants correctly
submitted, relying on
that possession of
documents associated with a chose in action or intangible property does not
amount to ownership of the chose or
property itself. The applicants also
correctly said that possession of property by a director does not give the
director rights
to the property as against the company, relying on
& Anor v Randwick City
any case, Mr Munneke submitted that the evidence establishes several matters,
which in turn establish that the cryptocurrency
is owned by him personally:
CoinJar account is in Mr Munneke’s name. Mr Munneke submitted that
relevant cryptocurrency has also been held in wallets
in his name;
private keys to the cryptocurrency wallets were held in the personal residence
of Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara;
the CoinJar account was established in part to facilitate Ex NF accepting
bitcoin as payment, it was also established for Mr
Munneke’s personal use.
Mr Munneke did not anticipate any customers paying in bitcoin and while
Ex NF was added to the third‑party
register of companies accepting
bitcoin for payment, this was not at Mr Munneke’s bidding.
Ex NF never purchased anything
in bitcoin. I note, however, that
Ex NF purchased ethereum for Meeco using bitcoin in the CoinJar
Zaccara asked Mr Munneke to purchase bitcoin, and it was their joint intention
that the cryptocurrency be a personal investment;
amounts from the NAB account used to purchase bitcoin amounted to only $3,050
over six months, which amount was repaid by offsetting
amounts owing to Ms
Zaccara and if that were insufficient, by virtue of Ex NF retaining surplus
proceeds from the sale of ethereum
in January 2018. Ex NF was
indebted to Ms Zaccara in respect of loans for startup costs and wages.
Further, in mid-2013, Mr Munneke
and Ms Zaccara paid $30,000 upfront for 12
months’ rent for Ex NF’s new business premises, with the funds
being extracted
from their personal mortgage;
Zaccara realised in February and August 2014 that debits from the NAB account
related to acquisitions of cryptocurrency and “had
[she] been asked at the
time, [she] would have agreed to apply [those amounts] as a debit to [her]
shareholder’s loan account”;
Munneke established a separate bitcoin address, being a vanity address for
Ex NF, that bore the name “1NFaz”, having
intended to publish
the address on Ex NF’s website for branding purposes and to
facilitate clients making payments using bitcoin;
never undertook activity on the ethereum blockchain or incurred gas, including
during the Hackathon with Meeco, and the submissions
that Ex NF needed
ethereum to use as gas and that Mr Munneke’s intention was to acquire
ethereum for this purpose are conjecture.
While Meeco had a need for gas, that
was entirely distinct to the acquisition of cryptocurrency by Mr Munneke and Ms
the time of the ethereum purchase for Meeco, Ex NF was not involved in
developing smart contracts for Meeco. Rather, Mr Munneke
met with and
briefed Mr Lothian who was to be engaged directly by Meeco to create a proposal
for Meeco to develop a smart contract
application;
Munneke never communicated with employees that Ex NF held cryptocurrency
that was available to be used in development, and Mr Munneke’s
evidence that he never discussed the cryptocurrency being a company asset ready
to deploy for a company purpose with employees was
not challenged in
cross-examination; and
funds realised from the sale of the ethereum in January 2018 were deposited
directly into Mr Munneke’s personal CBA account,
then applied to purchase
Ward Street. As I noted above, only the proceeds of the first of the three
sales of ethereum in 2018 were
paid into Mr Munneke’s CBA account on
12 January 2018. Mr Munneke transferred $100,000 out of his CBA account on
2018 to pay the deposit for Ward Street.
Munneke said that if the applicants’ characterisation of the
examination as providing a platform for unguarded and honest evidence is
correct, I ought to accept the statements he made therein
that he thought he had
purchased the bitcoin with his own funds. I have detailed my concerns regarding
Mr Munneke’s evidence
given in the
examination in
discussing my assessment of his evidence.
Munneke pointed to statements in several emails that he said are consistent with
the cryptocurrency being a personal asset, including
Mr Munneke referring to Ms
Zaccara as “[our] bitcoin expert”, Ms Zaccara referring to the
ethereum being sold to fund
the purchase of Ward Street as “our
cryptocurrency”, and Mr Munneke providing a table of “FTR.. my BTC
(from 3 years ago)”.
Munneke also pointed to Mr Bacina’s evidence that in a lot of contracts,
developers undertake development of a blockchain
project in a testnet before
handing over control to the principal, after which it will be deployed to
mainnet and gas costs will
be incurred by the principal. However, I note that
Mr Bacina confined this opinion to contracts where the principal “has the
skill” and that “it all depends on the nature of the arrangement
between the project principal and the developer”.
that Ex NF tax documents were filed by Rowe Partners under time pressure,
Mr Munneke said that his and Ms Zaccara’s
evidence that the cryptocurrency
was recorded in tax documents as a company asset in error is supported by
contemporaneous emails,
in which Mr Thiele explained that documents needed to be
lodged and could be amended later if necessary. However, I observe that
amendments were ever made.
respect to the email from Mr Munneke to Mr Richards dated
26 January 2018, Mr Munneke submitted that on a plain reading of the
words informed by the context, Mr Munneke was referring to Meeco’s
ethereum when he said, “[b]ought ... at the pre-sale
to use it, never
expected it to be an investment, just thought it was a cheaper way to get gas
for development”. Mr Munneke
noted that in his previous email, he had
referred to having “a customer that bought Ethereum ... at pre-sale with
also likely [to] convert some soonish”. Mr Munneke said that
he was speaking as to Meeco’s intention and lack of expectation
ethereum it had purchased would be an investment. Mr Munneke submitted it
was possible for him to speak on these matters
because he had been the acting
chief technical officer of Meeco and had attended the meeting with Vitalik
referred to in the email
in this capacity. In any case, Mr Munneke
submitted that it would be unsafe for me to accept this email as corroborating
the applicants’
case regarding ownership of the cryptocurrency given its
informal and casual
Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd’s submissions on
cryptocurrency
Zaccara and
106 Ward Street Pty Ltd contended that
the primary issue for determination is whether the applicants have discharged
their onus of
proving that Ex NF owned the cryptocurrency, with the issue
of which respondent or respondents own the cryptocurrency being merely
consequential.
applicants suggested that Ms Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd have adopted
this approach to avoid having to reconcile their
case with that of
Mr Munneke. Further, the applicants noted that Ms Zaccara maintains by her
crossclaim that the cryptocurrency
belongs to her to the exclusion of
Mr Munneke.
Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd submitted that it would be perverse to act
on the basis that Ex NF’s records regarding
the cryptocurrency
transactions are accurate, noting that Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara did not
“conduct themselves in an organised
and orderly way”. It was
submitted that they were “hopeless record keepers” and therefore,
one would not expect
them to attend to detailed recording of how company funds
were used and credited to Ms Zaccara’s loan account.
Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd said that the evidence establishes several
matters, which in turn establish that the cryptocurrency
is owned by
Ms Zaccara personally:
Munneke used an amount of bitcoin that he had transferred to his personal wallet
from the CoinJar account for personal incidentals,
some being used as wedding
gifts to other Ex NF employees, and it cannot be established that it was
used in the conduct of Ex NF’s
business. Ms Zaccara and 106
Ward Street Pty Ltd said that Mr Munneke’s use of small amounts of
bitcoin in day-to-day spending
can be explained by his expertise and interest in
cryptocurrency;
had no need to acquire ethereum for business purposes and never deployed
ethereum in its business as gas or otherwise;
Hackathon was only a testnet exercise and therefore required no ethereum for
Munneke emailed Ms Zaccara on 8 August 2014 to confirm that he had purchased
2,001 units of ethereum for 1.048 bitcoin immediately
following the transaction,
which it was submitted would not have been necessary if the ethereum had been
purchased for Ex NF to use
Zaccara provided financial support to Ex NF, including $3,269.92 in January
and February 2014, and an additional $4,148.01 by the
end of August 2014;
Munneke created a vanity address for Ex NF called “1NFaz” to
facilitate Ex NF receiving payments in bitcoin, although
no client ever
paid Ex NF in bitcoin.
Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd criticised the applicants on the basis that
Mr Munneke was not cross-examined about the replenishment
of the CoinJar account
with bitcoin and the use of that bitcoin to purchase the second tranche of
ethereum on 8 August 2014. Ms
Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd characterise
this as a “deliberate forensic choice... to avoid showing up a fundamental
weakness in the [applicants’] case”. It appeared to be the
submission of Ms Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd that
although the
initial purchase of bitcoin in February 2014 was intended as a family
investment, with the $700 used to fund the purchase
coming from the NAB account
being treated as offsetting a loan to Ms Zaccara, the application of the bitcoin
to purchase the ethereum
for Meeco was a company transaction. Therefore, Ms
Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd submitted that it was rational,
and proper for Mr Munneke to issue an invoice from Ex NF to
Meeco in June 2015 in respect of the purchase of ethereum, noting that
be traced to funds deposited in the CoinJar account from the NAB account. It
was submitted that it was “simply commercial
commonsense” for Mr
Munneke to restore the CoinJar account with additional funds from the NAB
account, then apply them to acquire
ethereum for Ms Zaccara.
Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd said that while it is accepted that
Ex NF promoted itself as accepting bitcoin for payment,
the applicants have
made a “deliberate forensic choice” to avoid exploring why
Ex NF needed to separately acquire bitcoin
and ultimately have been unable
to provide an explanation. When I pointed out that Ex NF used bitcoin to
acquire ethereum on behalf
of Meeco, which could be viewed as part of
Ex NF’s business, counsel replied, “Well, it was a commercial
favour we would
say.” He said that the acquisition for Meeco was “a
kind of commercial happenstance but it does not say anything contrary
ultimate and original motivation to acquire and keep bitcoin.”
Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd submitted that Ms Zaccara appears to have
been “confused about the precise chain of
events” with respect to
the first acquisition of bitcoin, being the gift for Ric Santos’ wedding.
It was submitted that
following Mr Munneke purchasing bitcoin for Ric Santos,
Ms Zaccara complained to Mr Munneke that he had still failed to buy bitcoin
for her despite repeated requests.
Further, noting
that the SMS messages indicate that Mr Munneke made the bitcoin
transactions during the afternoon of 14 February 2014,
Ms Zaccara and
106 Ward Street Pty Ltd said that Mr Munneke must have been incorrect about
deciding to purchase bitcoin on the evening
of 14 February 2014, being the
Friday prior to Ric Santos’ wedding. It was suggested that he was likely
referring to Thursday
evening but was mistaken about the days.
Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd acknowledged that the bitcoin was purchased
in February and August 2014 using funds from the
NAB account. However, it was
submitted that Ms Zaccara was the intended owner of the cryptocurrency and
therefore, it was appropriate
that the funds be applied to her loan account.
Again, Ms Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd emphasised that Ex NF’s
record-keeping
was “irregular and incomplete at best”, and that
there is no reason to believe that Ms Zaccara was not advancing substantial
amounts to Ex NF that were not properly recorded or credited to her loan
account. It was submitted that in these circumstances,
“the precise
accounting... is not relevant.”
Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd pointed out that Ms Zaccara’s evidence
was not that the monies given to Mr Munneke over
time were only and immediately
to be used for the purchase of cryptocurrency. It was submitted that the funds
provided by Ms Zaccara
were fungible and therefore, her account is not
inconsistent with Mr Munneke having used company funds to purchase the
cryptocurrency.
In response to this submission, the applicants pointed to the
following exchange during Ms Zaccara’s cross-examination:
did you give Mr Munneke cash to buy Bitcoin on your behalf.
there were a couple of times when I would give him cash and cash was something
that I gave him regularly and I would say 'Buy some
Bitcoin with this'.
was 2010 or 2011 you think.
was a couple of times. It was a little bit of a, you know, 'I'm giving you this.
You buy some Bitcoin'. We had discussed for quite
some time the buying Bitcoin
from around the 2010, 2011 mark.
how many times do you think you gave him cash to buy Bitcoin on your
I said those words specifically?
– actually I don’t know. I'm not going to guess. I did that at
examination so I’m not going to do it again.
I don't know. But I would
give cash amount to [Mr Munneke] regularly. Every couple of weeks.
Something like that.
how many times did you - doing the best you can, how many times did you attach
to the provision of the cash ‘Please buy
some Bitcoin on my
you want me to guess?
don't want you to guess.
I don't know that specific amount of times but I can give you maybe a
you can do a range do the best you can.
somewhere between four and six times.
I agree the effect
of this evidence is plainly that Ms Zaccara gave Mr Munneke money on separate
occasions and asked him to purchase
bitcoin with it.
Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd submitted that Mr Munneke storing the $700
worth of bitcoin in the CoinJar account rather
than moving it to the personal
wallet on his phone is consistent with the bitcoin being an investment that he
expected would increase
in value and therefore, that he did not want to carry
around with him.
Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd said that Mr Munneke’s account of
acquiring the 2,001 units of ethereum on 8 August
2014 as a family investment is
corroborated by the evidence of the timing of the transactions, along with the
fact that the amount
of ethereum purchased was almost the same as the amount
purchased for Meeco. However, it is difficult to see how this evidence
corroborates
Mr Munneke’s version of events; it is equally consistent with
Mr Munneke having purchased ethereum for Ex NF at the same time
having done so for Meeco.
Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd submitted that Mr Munneke acquiring ethereum
for Meeco on 6 August 2014 and acquiring further
ethereum on 8 August 2014 is
consistent with Ms Zaccara’s account that upon Mr Munneke telling her that
he had been asked to
purchase ethereum on Meeco’s behalf, she asked him to
purchase some for her as well. While this may be so, contrary to the
submissions of Ms Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd, the transaction on
8 August and the email from Mr Munneke to Ms Zaccara informing
purchase are not “strongly probative evidence” that Mr Munneke had
finally gotten around to actioning Ms Zaccara’s
request to purchase
cryptocurrency for her. The evidence is equally consistent with Mr Munneke
having purchased cryptocurrency for
Ex NF then sending Ms Zaccara the email
as an “FYI”.
it was submitted that because Ms Zaccara needed to realise funds quickly to
purchase the Ward Street property, the proceeds
from the sale of the ethereum in
2018 were deposited into the NAB account on the advice of Mr Munneke, who
had told Ms Zaccara that
this would be the fastest way to provide her solicitor,
Ms Polson, with the settlement funds, given that Ms Polson’s trust
account was also with NAB.
Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd said that a large part of the
applicants’ case unravels if I accept Mr Munneke’s
evidence that he
had no intention of acquiring ethereum for Ex NF to use as
Cryptocurrency
discussion and findings
accept the submission that having regard to the source of the funds used to
purchase it and the fact that the CoinJar account was
initially intended to be
used in Ex NF’s business, the cryptocurrency purchases were on their
face company transactions.
respondents have repeatedly pointed out that Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara were
“hopeless record keepers”, that they
did not “conduct
themselves in an organised and orderly way”, that Ex NF’s
records were “irregular and incomplete
at best”, and that
“there was no sophisticated accounting in much of what Mr Munneke and Ms
Zaccara did within [Ex NF]”.
However, it is difficult to discern an
intention to credit amounts to Ms Zaccara’s loan account in the absence of
any contemporaneous
documentary record consistent with this assertion,
especially in circumstances where there are objective factors consistent with
the cryptocurrency being treated as a company asset.
do not accept the evidence of Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara that they intended to
acquire the cryptocurrency as an investment.
reject Ms Zaccara’s evidence that she paid “thousands of
dollars” to Mr Munneke on separate occasions over the
repeatedly asked that he purchase bitcoin with the funds on her behalf. Her
account is undermined by the fact that Mr
Munneke did not “get
around” to fulfilling her requests until February 2014, several years
later, at which point he purchased
less than $1,000 worth of bitcoin (setting
aside the amount purchased for Ric Santos) with Ex NF funds. Her evidence
that she was
indifferent to the increasing value of bitcoin, while continuing to
pay funds to Mr Munneke, who was failing to attend to her instructions,
inherently implausible. Further, Mr Munneke has never given evidence that Ms
Zaccara gave him thousands of dollars for the particular
purpose of purchasing
bitcoin on her behalf and there are no objective records of such transactions,
notwithstanding Ms Zaccara’s
evidence that was a transaction by bank
am also unable to accept that Mr Munneke made a phone call to Ms Zaccara one
night in February 2014 during which they discussed
purchasing bitcoin as an
investment. Mr Munneke’s account that the conversation took place on
14 February, being the night
before Ric Santos’ wedding, is
undermined by the evidence of funds being deposited in the CoinJar account
during the afternoon
of that day. I am not persuaded that Mr Munneke was simply
confused about the night on which the conversation occurred, noting the
proximity to Ric Santos’ wedding and the absence of any evidence that
Mr Munneke spoke with Ms Zaccara on the phone one night
then delayed purchasing
the bitcoin until the following afternoon. Further, not only did Ms Zaccara
fail to mention any such conversation
in her evidence, but her account of
learning that Mr Munneke had purchased bitcoin for Ric Santos after the fact is
inconsistent
with his version of events.
light of Mr Munneke’s concessions during cross-examination, I am unable to
accept the suggestion that the cryptocurrency
was an asset of the
ZALD Trust. This is especially so noting that Ms Zaccara gave no evidence
consistent with this assertion. At
this point, I indicate that I also reject Mr
Munneke’s submission that Ex NF was ultimately repaid by virtue of it
the surplus proceeds from the ethereum liquidations in January 2018.
There is no evidence that at the time of the cryptocurrency
acquisitions,
Ex NF’s funds were treated as a loan, and such an assertion is
fundamentally inconsistent with the submission
that the funds represented
repayment of amounts owing to Ms Zaccara.
Munneke and Ms Zaccara in fact each gave evidence that is inconsistent with the
suggestion that the intention was to credit Ex
NF’s funds to Ms
Zaccara’s loan account. In this respect, I note Mr Munneke’s
evidence that at the time of the
bitcoin purchases, he understood that
Ex NF would be compensated for the use of its funds. I accept that this
statement is inconsistent
with the fact that he failed to remember who paid for
the bitcoin, then said that he “thought” that he had paid for it,
which itself undermines the suggestion of Ex NF’s funds representing
repayment of a loan to Ms Zaccara. So too does Ms Zaccara’s
evidence of
giving Mr Munneke thousands of dollars and instructing him to purchase bitcoin
fact that Mr Munneke did not inform Ms Zaccara that he had used
Ex NF’s funds to purchase the cryptocurrency weighs against
respondents. I accept that Ms Zaccara should equally have been informed were
the cryptocurrency intended to be a company asset.
note the assertion that in August 2014, notwithstanding that he regarded it as a
personal asset, Mr Munneke applied the bitcoin
in the CoinJar account to acquire
ethereum on Meeco’s behalf, then issued an Ex NF invoice to Meeco
before replenishing the
account with further Ex NF funds. This suggestion
is convoluted and implausible. While bitcoin and ethereum are fungible in the
same way as regular currency, it is very convenient for Mr Munneke and Ms
Zaccara to say that they treated the cryptocurrency in
the CoinJar account as
sometimes belonging to Ex NF and sometimes belonging to them personally.
There is no evidence to explain
why it would have been necessary for Mr Munneke
to have recourse to the bitcoin already in the CoinJar account rather than
further company funds to convert to ethereum for Meeco. This would
have allowed him to simply invoice Meeco for the amount of cash
also makes no sense that after using 1.0152 bitcoin that was purportedly a
personal asset to acquire ethereum for Meeco, Mr Munneke
only replenished the
CoinJar account with 0.986 bitcoin. There is no evidence that Ms
Zaccara’s loan account was adjusted
taking into account this discrepancy
of 0.0292 bitcoin. While the difference is not significant, and can arguably be
explained by
Mr Munneke depositing funds of an approximately equivalent value to
the bitcoin already in the CoinJar account, it could easily have
been avoided
altogether as I have explained above. Mr Munneke’s failure to do so
indicates that he did not consider that the
CoinJar account held some
cryptocurrency belonging to Ex NF and some belonging to him and Ms Zaccara
personally.
my view, the fact that Mr Munneke invoiced Meeco by reference to the price of
bitcoin as at February 2014 is also consistent with
the applicants’ case
that the cryptocurrency always belonged to Ex NF.
there is objective evidence of the cryptocurrency being treated as
Ex NF’s asset, including the facts that Mr Munneke
stored it in the
CoinJar account rather than moving it to the bitcoin wallet that he controlled,
that the proceeds from the two
later sales of ethereum in January 2018 were
paid into the NAB account, and that the surplus funds following the purchase of
Street remained in the NAB account. I do not accept Mr Munneke’s
evidence that he did not transfer the bitcoin to the wallet
that he controlled
because of security risks, noting his concessions in cross-examination that he
could have simply stored the private
key in a safe. While Ms Zaccara
explained why the funds realised from the sale of the ethereum were deposited
into the NAB account,
her account of the surplus funds remaining there
apparently for convenience purposes is unconvincing, especially when coupled
the absence of records dealing with her purported ownership of the
Ex NF claiming a
tax credit in respect of the cryptocurrency in 2014 and assuming a GST
collection obligation in 2018 also indicates
that the cryptocurrency was treated
as a company asset.
am ultimately persuaded that Mr Munneke’s email to Mr Richards dated
26 January 2018 constitutes an admission as contended
by the applicants.
The chain of communication plainly concerns the sale of the ethereum originally
acquired with Ex NF’s funds.
While I accept that Mr Munneke
introduced Meeco into the discussion, he clearly distinguishes between his
software development studio
and Meeco, which he refers to as a
“customer” and “client”. Having done so, his statement
“we actually
spoke directly with Vitalik” can only be interpreted as
meaning that Ex NF and Meeco together spoke directly with Vitalik.
interpretation is consistent with both Mr Munneke and Ms Dow attending the
meeting with Vitalik. If Mr Munneke were intending
to refer only to Meeco in
the following sentence, it would have been necessary for him to say, “They
bought [it] at the pre-sale...”.
However, I infer that by the following
sentence, which does not commence with any pronoun, Mr Munneke was continuing to
both Ex NF and Meeco having “never expected [ethereum] to be
an investment, just thought it was a cheaper way to get gas for
development”. In these circumstances, the evidence that Mr Munneke acted
as Meeco’s chief technical officer and was
able to speak on Meeco’s
behalf or from Meeco’s position is neither here nor there.
Zaccara’s admissions also weigh heavily against the respondents. Her
statements that she did not own any cryptocurrency
as at the time of the
examination and that none was ever purchased on her behalf are unequivocal. The
suggestion that Ms Zaccara was confused or had forgotten
significant amount of cryptocurrency is fanciful.
only objective matter that weighs in the respondents’ favour is that there
is no evidence that Ex NF used cryptocurrency
in its business activities
save for in the purchase of ethereum for Meeco. The applicants submitted that
Mr Munneke acquired this
small amount in case it would prove useful for
Ex NF at some point. This submission is consistent with the evidence
regarding the
source of the funds and the cryptocurrency being held in the
CoinJar account which was linked to the company’s NAB account,
Ex NF having been a software development company with an undeniable
interest in cryptocurrency. The same can be said
with respect to the
acquisition of ethereum, except that its possible utility to Ex NF as gas
in development was more discrete.
Hackathon co-hosted by Ex NF, Mr Munneke’s tweet regarding the
blockchain summit, and involvement in the ethereum blockchain
developer course,
the email dated 20 October 2017 regarding that course which asserted
“Developers are in high demand”,
Mr Munneke’s meeting
with Vitalik “in the early days when the project was starting”,
Mr Munneke’s belief
in the project and the power of the new
blockchain with smart contracts, bolster a finding that the ethereum was bought
for Ex NF’s
business purposes.
evidence of Mr Bacina regarding the benefits and competitive advantages of
purchasing ether at the establishment of the ethereum
blockchain, together with
the status/kudos for having been there at the establishment of a new
cryptocurrency, further supports a
finding that a developer would acquire
ethereum at pre-sale for Ex NF business purposes. Mr Munneke
considered ethereum exciting
technology. He emailed his staff on 20 July 2018
regarding the Hackathon to be held on 30 July 2018 to 3 August 2018. The
was to “get practical experience in blockchain development as we
test and evaluate 4 leading technologies [including ethereum]”.
document titled “Blockchain Hackathon NextFaze Syncing Their Blocks”
refers to the Hackathon to be held on 30 July
2018 and records Ms Zaccara
NextFaze is a company that embraces emerging technologies
in the most rapidly changing tech space of app and Web development. We
operate on the leading edge of the industry. NextFaze are dedicating a week for
the entire crew to focus their collective
expertise and proficiency to create a
synergy of knowledge that is more than its parts combined. Our team will launch
into the technology
in a creative and supportive way that demonstrates our
passion for bringing the best solutions and tech to our clients.
The document went on to state:
Having a South Australian presence in the international blockchain community
technology hub. NextFaze
plays an important role in the burgeoning technology ecosystem in SA ...
am satisfied that the ethereum was purchased by Ex NF in the course of its
business for use in its business at some point in the
future. It matters not
that Ex NF did not undertake activity on the ethereum blockchain or
incurred gas prior to its liquidation.
my view, the evidence regarding Mr Munneke using a small amount of bitcoin in
day-to-day spending, including to buy sushi and
an AB, is neutral. While his
conduct is plainly inconsistent with the bitcoin being a family investment, it
is also inconsistent
with it being a company asset. Mr Munneke clearly treated
this portion of the cryptocurrency as a novelty. But the evidence does
permit me to make a finding about whether he was experimenting with the bitcoin
in a personal capacity or in his capacity as
a developer.
circumstances where the purchases of the cryptocurrency were on their face
company transactions, the objective evidence is consistent
cryptocurrency having been treated as a company asset, and the
respondents’ assertions to the contrary are unsupported
by the evidence, I
find that the cryptocurrency purchased in February and August 2014 was acquired
for Ex NF and was and remains
an asset of Ex NF. In view of my
findings, it is not necessary to consider the applicants’ alternative case
cryptocurrency.
Applicants’
submissions on Ward Street
applicants submitted that after the limited tax filings prior to the purchase of
O’Connell Street, Ex NF again stopped
attending to its tax affairs
entirely during the course of 2016. Ms Zaccara received numerous emails from
BDO over the first half
of 2016 regarding Ex NF’s ongoing default
that did not lead to any action. By September 2016, the ATO were calling BDO
action on the outstanding filings. Despite representations to BDO and
further calls from the ATO to BDO, no filings were made.
applicants pointed out that it was during this period that Ms Zaccara
(unbeknownst to Mr Munneke) withdrew a further $100,000
from the ANZ account in
September 2016 to fund a trip to Antarctica.
November 2016, Ex NF was also sued for having failed to make superannuation
contributions for its employees.
early 2017, Ms Zaccara had been interviewed by the ATO about Ex NF’s
compliance and had changed accountants to Rowe Partners.
In the second half of
2017, after substantial further chasing by the ATO, Ex NF prepared belated
financial statements for the years
ended 30 June 2014, 2015, and 2016 and made
numerous BAS and income tax returns filings, the effect of which was as at the
2017, Ex NF had very substantial liabilities owing to the ATO for
SGC ($374,035), GST and PAYG withholding ($1,266,599), and income
($174,106), all of which were subject to accruing penalties and interest.
was submitted these liabilities were all known to Mr Munneke (noting he wrote in
an email 9 January 2018 to Caleb & Brown
that he wanted to know the tax
implication of selling ethereum “especially given the reason to cash out
is to pay a company
tax bill” but denied in his statement recalling that
any bill needed to be paid at that time) and Ms Zaccara. It was contended
Munneke and Ms Zaccara also knew that there was no prospect that Ex NF
could pay its tax debt from its cash and debtors alone.
on 1 December 2017, Ms Zaccara was also warned by Rowe Partners that
Ex NF was operating at a very large loss. As submitted
by the applicants,
notwithstanding this dire financial situation, on 4 January 2018, Ms Zaccara
entered into a contract for her or
her nominee to purchase Ward Street for
$1.2 million with $100,000 payable as a deposit and settlement scheduled
for 31 January 2018.
To fund this acquisition, over the course of January
2018, Mr Munneke liquidated Ex NF’s ethereum which provided the
for the purchase.
ethereum sales resulted in a surplus of $121,988.89 being retained by Ex NF
in the NAB account and later transferred to the NAB
Maximiser account. As
detailed earlier in these reasons, despite Ms Zaccara’s assertion that the
ethereum was her property,
the applicants submitted she made no attempt to
recover these surplus funds and it was submitted this conduct is consistent only
with Ex NF being the true owner of the ethereum, and that being known to
Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara.
as noted above, contrary to her claim to ownership of the ethereum, Ms Zaccara
has not filed returns or paid CGT (either
in her own right or as trustee of the
ZALD Trust) in respect of the sale of the ethereum.
applicants submitted that on the basis that the ethereum was Ex NF’s
property, given the massive financial problems faced
by Ex NF at the time,
for the ethereum to have been applied to the purchase of a property for the
benefit of Ward Street was plainly
was submitted that by reference to the reconstructed accounts, the consequence
of Ex NF making a gift of the ethereum was that
Ex NF was insolvent,
even taking into account the growth in value in its holdings of cryptocurrency,
and the payment away of over
$1.1 million was self-evidently materially
prejudicial to Ex NF’s ability to pay its creditors. The applicants
referred to
Mr Heard’s summary of Ex NF’s financial position as
set out in Fig.5.2.12 above in my discussion of Mr Heard’s
was submitted that, as with the position regarding O’Connell Street, the
position was worse than indicated by the reconstruction,
particularly in
circumstances where if the cryptocurrency was sold to realise cash to pay the
tax debt, Ex NF would then be liable
for substantial CGT on the sum
realised. If the CGT liability that would arise on sale of the cryptocurrency
was factored in, the
applicants submitted the financial position would be
significantly worse. The CGT would be payable at the company tax rate (30
on a gain of over $1.4 million. It was submitted this analysis
assumes that Mr Munneke would have deployed Ex NF’s cryptocurrency
payment of Ex NF’s creditors, particularly its large outstanding tax
liability. Yet it was submitted Mr Munneke’s
actions in 2018
demonstrate that that was highly unlikely. The tax liabilities remained unpaid
throughout.
was contended even were the cryptocurrencies to be made available in payment of
Ex NF’s liabilities, the highly volatile
nature of the cryptocurrency
prices was such that there could be no rational assurance that the
cryptocurrency would remain at a
value that would see the liabilities capable of
being paid. Mr Scott frankly conceded the difficulty in making any
prediction as
to the future value of cryptocurrencies.
was submitted the stark position that Ex NF faced at the time of the
acquisition of Ward Street is apparent from the balance sheet
at [4.3.1] in the
Scott report set out in my discussion of Mr Scott’s evidence.
with the position at the time of the purchase of O’Connell Street,
Mr Scott’s balance sheet assumes the existence
of loans for both the
$740,000 applied to the purchase of O’Connell Street and the $1,235,920
from the sale of ethereum applied
to the purchase of Ward Street. Mr Scott
accepted that if there was no intention for either of these amounts to be repaid
NF (as was submitted was, in fact, the case) then the assets should
be removed. Once removed, the applicants contended Ex NF had
a borderline
asset position, with a corrected net assets of about $4,000 without taking into
account any CGT liability from the sale
of ethereum, meaning that the real
position was worse than represented. As Mr Scott accepted, the uncertainty in
the value of the
cryptocurrency meant that it would not be prudent for a
director to rely solely on cryptocurrency to pay Ex NF’s very
substantial
was submitted Mr Munneke clearly did not intend for the cryptocurrency to be
available to Ex NF to meet its debts or he would
have sold it to pay the
outstanding tax.
applicants contended the financial position of Ex NF deteriorated over the
course of 2018. By June 2018, Ms Zaccara was warned
by Rowe Partners that
Ex NF’s accounting records were showing a loss of $606,395 for the
financial year to date and a very
large loss was anticipated. At November 2018,
Ex NF’s outstanding tax debt was at almost $2 million. No
cryptocurrency was
sold, or funds provided to Ex NF, to enable it to meet
its liabilities and Ex NF was ultimately wound up on 15 May
Munneke’s submissions on Ward Street
Mr Munneke submitted the purchase of Ward Street through 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd
demonstrates there was never any intention that
Ex NF would have a
beneficial interest in Ward Street.
argued the Ward Street breach of duty case does not arise if Ex NF’s
primary claims to legal or beneficial ownership of
the cryptocurrency fail. He
submitted the Ward Street breach of duty case is premised on the factual
allegation that Ex NF’s
property funded the acquisition of Ward
Street. Therefore, if Ex NF’s primary claims to legal or beneficial
ownership of the
cryptocurrency fail, no property of Ex NF will have funded
the acquisition of Ward Street. There would be no factual basis for the
of duty claim to arise. Mr Munneke relied on Mr Scott’s opinion to
the effect that if the cryptocurrency was not Ex
NF’s property, then
the sale of the cryptocurrency and the Ward Street acquisition was entirely
neutral and had no financial
impact on Ex NF whatsoever. No breach could
conceivably flow if the cryptocurrency was not an asset of Ex NF.
Munneke submitted that if it is found that the cryptocurrency was legally or
beneficially that of Ex NF, the applicants have not
established any breach
of duty because it has not been proven that Ex NF was insolvent or of
doubtful solvency as at January 2018
and/or that Ex NF failed to keep
accurate financial records as at January 2018 in accordance with
Corporations Act
Munneke contended that the applicants have not otherwise established:
or fiduciary duties, when Ms Zaccara, as sole shareholder,
consented to, approved of, and ratified the acquisition of the cryptocurrency
well as the release of the funds and the acquisition of Ward Street using the
cryptocurrency proceeds. Just as in relation to
the O’Connell Street
claim, Mr Munneke submitted there can be no bad faith or improper purpose
or advantage when the sole shareholder,
who is the wife of Mr Munneke, was
not only fully informed, but herself was taking steps to progress the Ward
Street acquisition
which was contingent on the release of funds from her sale of
the cryptocurrency;
damage to Ex NF resulting from the payment out of $3,050 from the NAB
account to acquire bitcoin or from the acquisition of Ward
required by
, such that, no entitlement to relief has been
established;
the acquisition of Ward Street was an unreasonable director‑related
transaction for the purpose of
Corporations
Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd’s submissions on Ward
was submitted Ms Zaccara gave evidence that in early 2018, after discussing the
matter with Mr Munneke, Ms Zaccara decided to
purchase Ward Street. It was
further submitted that Ms Zaccara decided to fund the acquisition by selling
part of her cryptocurrency
holdings and she requested that Mr Munneke assist her
to sell sufficient of the cryptocurrency to fund the purchase.
primary position of Ms Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd is that the
cryptocurrency used to acquire Ward Street was Ms Zaccara’s
or at least not the property of Ex NF. Accordingly, it was submitted it is
only necessary to deal with the alternative
that it was Ex NF’s
property on a hypothetical counterfactual basis.
was submitted Ms Zaccara, as sole shareholder of Ex NF, agreed, ratified,
and acquiesced to the application of the proceeds realised
on the sale of the
cryptocurrency towards the purchase of Ward Street.
was submitted Mr Heard, in his report, adopting a similar methodology to that
adopted in relation to the O’Connell Street
transaction, concluded that if
Ex NF owned the cryptocurrency then, as at 31 January 2018, Ex NF had
a surplus of net liquid assets
of $191,991. It was contended Mr Heard made
various assumptions adverse to Ex NF’s position and opined that
Ex NF, at 31 January
2018, needed at least $250,000 in working
capital. It was pointed out Mr Heard’s opinion, again, is only as to the
he considered a prudent director should have taken (and one with which
Mr Scott does not agree). It was submitted that means, at
31 January 2018,
adopting Mr Heard’s methodology, an injection of funds in the amount of
$58,009 was required to make up the
working capital to Mr Heard’s
preferred balance.
Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd submitted, for the same reasons as put in
relation to the O’Connell Street transaction,
the Court can readily find
that Ms Zaccara would have been both able and willing to contribute that
sum to Ex NF if required to do
so at that time in order to satisfy a
solvency standard of the kind set by Mr Heard.
was submitted that at the time of the 2018 cryptocurrency sale and use of the
sale proceeds to purchase Ward Street, Ms Zaccara
believed that she was using
her own property. It was submitted on the basis that the Court should find that
she genuinely believed
that it was her property but that, objectively and in
point of law, she was wrong in her belief, it would be unfair if she could
be heard to say that had she known the cryptocurrency was Ex NF’s
property, she would have directed and authorised, in
her capacity as the sole
shareholder, Ex NF’s director to distribute sufficient of the
proceeds of sale to her in her own right
to facilitate settlement on the
purchase of Ward Street.
was argued on that alternative and counterfactual basis that it is open to the
Court to apply the unanimous shareholder consent
rule, both in answer to the
allegation of fiduciary breach against Mr Munneke and the allegation of
statutory breaches, for the same
reasons as have been put in relation to the
O’Connell Street transaction.
Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd submitted the allegation that as
Ex NF’s funds were used to purchase Ward Street, then
Ward Street
must belong to Ex NF proceeds on a false premise. It was submitted that
begs the question whether, even if the ethereum
did belong to Ex NF, the
payment of the funds to or for the benefit or at the direction of Ms Zaccara
meant that someone other than
Ex NF owned Ward Street free and clear of any
claim of Ex NF.
was submitted if the cryptocurrency did not belong to Ex NF, no issue of
breach of fiduciary duty as pleaded can arise. It was
further submitted that if
the claim of breach of fiduciary duty must be tested on the premise that
Ex NF owned the cryptocurrency,
then it is only fair that it be tested on
the counterfactual hypothesis that Ms Zaccara has directed and authorised the
the funds to herself or at her direction.
was contended the allegations of a failure to undertake analysis go nowhere
unless the failure is consequential, and the only
truly consequential allegation
pressed by the applicants is that the Ward Street transaction rendered
Ex NF highly susceptible to
insolvency. However, it was submitted, on the
assumption that the cryptocurrency belonged to Ex NF, and accepting the
proposition
that if a company is near insolvency the director must have regard
to the interest of creditors as well as shareholders, the applicants’
evidence falls short of establishing such a case.
was contended in relation to the allegation that the Ward Street transaction was
an unreasonable director-related transaction,
it is not clear on the
applicants’ case how they say this is to be tested. It was submitted if
the cryptocurrency at 31 January
2018 did not belong to Ex NF, then
there is no relevant transaction, and the pleaded claim is inutile. Further, it
was submitted
if the cryptocurrency was an asset of Ex NF, then not only
did Ex NF own real property into which that asset had been converted,
also held a significant residual balance of cryptocurrency. It was submitted
the value of that residual holding continued to
escalate up to the point of
liquidation and beyond in circumstances where the escalation in price was on a
consistent, upward trend
albeit with some fallbacks in price from time to time.
It was submitted that cannot be ignored in an objective assessment of what
reasonable on the hypothesis that the director knew that Ex NF owned the
cryptocurrency.
Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd submitted that, in the circumstances, and
given that the proceeds of the sale of the cryptocurrency
were used and applied
for the benefit of the sole shareholder or at her direction, a release of
Ex NF’s funds to or at the
direction of that sole shareholder in
those circumstances was not commercially unreasonable. It was contended that if
Ex NF owned
the cryptocurrency, the release of the funds was a release of
shareholder’s funds for the sole shareholder and there was no
transaction at an undervalue.
Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd submitted that on the hypothesis that the
cryptocurrency belonged to Ex NF, the applicants
have not established a
basis in the evidence for a finding of any actual or presumed intention to
create a debt for the monies paid
to 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd and no claim of
unjust enrichment is pleaded or available.
Street discussion and findings
I have found, the ethereum sold to fund the purchase of Ward Street was the
property of Ex NF and, as with the purchase of O’Connell
was not open to Mr Munneke to make a gift of Ward Street to 106 Ward Street
Pty Ltd as trustee of a trust held for his
personal benefit.
the end of 2017, having prepared belated financial statements for the years
ended 30 June 2014, 2015, and 2016 and made numerous
BAS and income tax returns
filings, Ex NF had very substantial liabilities owing to the ATO for SGC
($374,035), GST and PAYG withholding
($1,266,599), and income tax ($174,106),
all of which were subject to accruing penalties and general interest.
continued in its failure to maintain written financial records that correctly
recorded and explained its transactions and financial
position and would enable
true and fair financial records to be prepared and audited including by not
explaining the loans to Ms
Zaccara and entities controlled by her, payments
made or asserted to have been made by her, the payment of Ex NF funds, the
underlying the O’Connell Street transaction, the basis upon
which Ex NF occupied O’Connell Street, the cryptocurrency
and the Ward Street transaction.
Partners emailed Ms Zaccara on 1 December 2017 warning that Ex NF was
operating at a very large loss. Mr Munneke continued
to leave tax issues
to Ms Zaccara and the accountant, failing to maintain an informed oversight
of Ex NF’s financial affairs.
It is plainly evident from my findings
that Mr Munneke’s reliance on Ms Zaccara and Rowe Partners was
not reasonable as defined
Corporations Act
Heard’s opinion was that if Ex NF did own the cryptocurrency, there
were liquid assets (at high ERV) of $2 million, which
was only just
sufficient to meet the claims of overdue creditors totalling $1.9 million. Mr
Heard further stated there were no cash
surpluses generated between
1 July 2017 and 31 March 2018 and that the trading
performance to January 2018 would not have given Ex
NF confidence that
it could meet sundry creditors, tax, and superannuation arrears from trading
Heard’s opinion demonstrated in Fig 5.2.12 reveals that Ex NF had
insufficient resources to meet tax and superannuation
arrears at the time it
used its funds to purchase Ward Street. He detailed that on the assumption
Ex NF owned the cryptocurrency,
the shortfall of $58,009 would have been
even greater if the accruals totalling $135,602 that were due in February 2018
(comprising
$101,048 of PAYG/GST for the December quarter and $25,554 of PAYG
withholding for January 2018), plus an unquantified amount of superannuation
that would have been due in April 2018, were included. Mr Heard did not
factor in any CGT on the sale of the ethereum.
accept Mr Heard’s opinion that Ex NF did not have sufficient
financial resources available to it on 31 January 2018 when
the payment was made
to purchase Ward Street. I accept his opinion that Ex NF did not have
sufficient liquid assets to pay all its
liabilities that were due to be paid and
to continue trading and was facing insolvency at the time of the Ward Street
submitted by the applicants, notwithstanding this dire financial situation, on 4
January 2018, Ms Zaccara entered into a contract
for her or her nominee to
purchase Ward Street for $1.2 million with $100,000 payable as a
considered all the evidence and submissions of the parties, I am satisfised that
as at 31 January 2018 Ex NF’s financial
state, with outstanding tax
liabilities of almost $1.9 million, was such that there was a “real
and not remote risk of insolvency”
enlivening the duty of Mr Munneke to
consider the interests of Ex NF’s creditors.
this matter, putting aside the penalties and general interest and any CGT on the
sale of ethereum, Ex NF did not have sufficient
liquid assets to pay all
its liabilities that were due to be paid and to continue trading, placing
Ex NF in jeopardy. Mr Munneke’s
duty to consider the interests
of creditors in complying with his duty to act in the best interests of
Ex NF was enlivened when payment
of Ex NF’s funds to purchase
Ward Street was contemplated. Had he acted in compliance with his duty, he
would have properly
informed himself as to Ex NF’s financial position
and would not have purchased Ward Street if that was going to jeopardise
Ex NF’s solvency.
am not satisfied that Ms Zaccara would have provided funds to Ex NF if
required to pay tax liabilities. In relation to the O’Connell
transaction, she was prepared to take Ex NF’s funds and expose it to
the liability of the ANZ loan without settling
the associated loan or ensuring
financial records correctly recorded her assertion the loan was paid back. She
withdrew $100,000
from the ANZ account in September 2016 for a 24-hour holiday
sale, and she did not contribute funds to pay the ATO liabilities to
EX NF going into liquidation. Whilst she contributed $54,966.90 in June
2016, there is no record other than its deposit in
the NAB account identifying
what it relates to. Further, Ms Zaccara’s evidence about paying $228,000
to Ex NF was proven to
be incorrect and does not engender confidence in her
purported willingness to contribute funds. Ms Zaccara’s evidence about
not seeing or being made aware of ATO notices of assessments and her
psychological block to tax issues also do not imbue confidence
“realistic commercial assessment” about her willingness to pay. I
consider it inherently unlikely that Ms Zaccara
was every going to commit
her personal funds to pay, in particular, tax liabilities, noting her
self-confessed “fear”,
difficulty doing tax, and irrational
relationship with tax.
considered all the evidence, I am led to the conclusion, as the liquidator
reported to creditors in August 2019, that, since
2015, Ex NF was only
able to continue its operations through the non-payment of its tax and
superannuation obligations.
am satisfied that by causing or allowing Ex NF’s funds to be used in
the Ward Street transaction, Mr Munneke breached his
statutory duties as
failed to exercise due care and diligence and breached
reasonable director in his position would have ensured that Ex NF was up to date
with its tax filings and payments and that Ex
NF maintained up-to-date
financial statements. A reasonable director in his position would not have
caused or allowed Ex NF’s
funds to be used to purchase Ward Street
without undertaking any analysis, or alternatively any proper analysis, of
liability in respect of income tax, BAS, and superannuation
liabilities;
to causing or allowing Ex NF’s funds to be used to purchase
Ward Street, Mr Munneke failed to undertake any analysis,
or alternatively
any proper analysis, into the appropriate reserves that would allow Ex NF
to pay the amounts owing to the creditors
of Ex NF and to allow Ex NF
to continue to trade;
Munneke caused Ex NF’s cash resources to be depleted and made it
highly susceptible to insolvency and/or cessation of Ex
operations;
is plainly evident from my findings that the statutory defence, the business
judgment rule prescribed by
, is not available to
Mr Munneke;
did not exercise his powers as a director in good faith and in the best
interests of Ex NF or for a proper purpose and
was in breach of
It was not a proper corporate purpose for Mr Munneke to make a gift of Ex
NF’s property to 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd as a trustee
of a trust held for
his benefit and he further caused Ex NF’s assets to be put out of the
reach of the creditors of Ex NF;
Munneke made improper use of his position as director to gain an advantage for
himself and others and cause detriment to Ex NF
in breach of
is also plainly evident that Mr Munneke’s reliance on Ms Zaccara
and Rowe Partners was not reasonable within the meaning
Corporations Act
am satisfied that by causing or allowing Ex NF’s funds to be used in
the Ward Street transaction, Mr Munneke breached his
fiduciary duties:
making a gift of Ex NF’s property to 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd as
trustee of a trust held for his personal benefit;
obtained no corporate benefit from the Ward Street acquisition;
assets were depleted by the Ward Street acquisition to the extent of the
Munneke’s duty to Ex NF was to ensure Ex NF property was
deployed for a company purpose.
to the issue of ratification, there cannot be assent or ratification unless
there is full knowledge of the nature of the
transaction and its consequences,
it has been duly considered, and the course of action proposed is consented
I agree with the
applicants’ submission that no issue of ratification arises in respect of
Ward Street given Ms Zaccara was,
she says, unaware that Ex NF
ever held cryptocurrency. Therefore, it follows that she was never consenting
to Ex NF’s cryptocurrency
being deployed to purchase Ward Street.
of Ms Zaccara’s knowledge, the interests of creditors having been
enlivened clearly intervened such that the improper
expropriation of
Ex NF’s property in the acquisition of Ward Street was incapable of
ratification by
Ms Zaccara.
I find that
Mr Munneke and Ms Zaccara did not have any idea as to what the ATO liabilities,
including general interest charge and
penalties, were going to be, as made clear
by Ms Zaccara when she said she was shocked and so too was
Mr Munneke.
I find that the use of Ex NF’s funds to purchase Ward Street for the
benefit of 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd as trustee
of the 106 Ward Trust was plainly
an unreasonable-director related transaction pursuant to
Corporations Act
. I am satisfied that:
was a “transaction” within the broad meaning of
Corporations Act
transaction involved a payment of money by Ex NF in the amount of
$1,235,920.08;
payment was made to Mr Munneke or for his benefit;
accept the applicants’ contention that in the circumstances where, at
November 2018, Ex NF owed almost $2 million to the ATO,
a reasonable person
in Ex NF’s position would not have entered into the Ward Street
transaction which was of no benefit to
discussed earlier, I have found that Ex NF is the legal owner of the
cryptocurrency and Ex NF’s funds were deployed in the
acquisition of
Ward Street. I do not accept Mr Munneke’s contention that Ex NF
had no interest in the cryptocurrency or its
proceeds and, thereby, the Ward
Street transaction was relevantly between the vendor and the 106 Ward
do not accept Ms Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd’s submission that, in
the circumstances, and given that the proceeds
of the sale of the cryptocurrency
were used and applied for the benefit of the sole shareholder at her direction,
a release of Ex
NF’s funds to or at her direction, as sole
shareholder, was commercially reasonable. I also do not accept that the release
of funds, where Ex NF is the owner of the cryptocurrency, was a release of
the shareholder’s funds for the sole shareholder
and there was no gift or
transaction at an undervalue.
Ward Street transaction is voidable within the meaning of
s 588FE(6A)
Corporations Act
relief against liability prescribed by
Corporations Act
is not available to Mr Munneke. It only applies where a
director, as an officer of a corporation, has acted honestly and having
to the circumstances of the case ought fairly be excused. The circumstances of
this matter are not such that Mr Munneke’s
conduct ought fairly be excused
from his breaches of the
Corporations Act
conclusion, I have made the following findings in respect of each of the
applicants’ claims.
O’Connell Street claim
Street was purchased on 10 December 2015 by the payment of $1,125,911.59 from
Ex NF’s bank accounts and the
$740,000 ANZ loan. At the time the
O’Connell Street transaction was contemplated, Ex NF’s
financial state was such that
Mr Munneke should have been concerned for its
solvency. There was a “real and not remote risk of insolvency”
the duty of Mr Munneke to consider the interests of
Ex NF’s creditors. By effecting the O’Connell Street
transaction,
Mr Munneke breached
his fiduciary
duties and statutory duties imposed by
Corporations Act
to Ex NF. The statutory defence prescribed by
to a contravention of
, the business judgment rule, is not
available to Mr Munneke. Nor can he avail himself of
as his asserted
reliance on Ms Zaccara and Mr Vijayadass was not reasonable. Further, Ms
Zaccara could not properly excuse his breaches,
and, in any event, the
O’Connell Street transaction was an unreasonable director‑related
transaction.
relief against liability prescribed by
Corporations Act
is not available to Mr Munneke. It only applies where a
director, as an officer of a corporation, has acted honestly and having
to the circumstances of the case ought fairly be excused. The circumstances of
this matter are not such that Mr Munneke’s
conduct ought fairly be excused
from his breaches of the
Corporations Act
The cryptocurrency and Ward
Street claim
Cryptocurrency
bitcoin Mr Munneke purchased in February and August 2014, and the ethereum
acquired using part of that bitcoin in August 2014,
was acquired for Ex NF
and was and remains the property of Ex NF.
Ward Street
proceeds of the sale of ethereum belonging to Ex NF was used to purchase of
Ward Street on 31 January 2018.
the time the Ward Street transaction was contemplated, Ex NF’s
financial state was such that Mr Munneke should have been
concerned for its
solvency. There was a “real and not remote risk of insolvency”
enlivening the duty of Mr Munneke to
consider the interests of
Ex NF’s creditors. By causing or allowing proceeds of the sale of
ethereum belonging to Ex NF to
be used to purchase Ward Street, Mr
Munneke breached his fiduciary duties and statutory duties imposed by
Corporations Act
to Ex NF. The statutory defence
prescribed by
to a contravention of
, the business
judgment rule, is not available to Mr Munneke. Nor can he avail himself of
as his asserted reliance on Ms Zaccara and Rowe Partners was not
reasonable. Further, Ms Zaccara could not properly excuse the breaches,
any event, the Ward Street transaction was an unreasonable
director‑related transaction.
relief against liability prescribed by
Corporations Act
is not available to Mr Munneke. It only applies where a
director, as an officer of a corporation, has acted honestly and having
to the circumstances of the case ought fairly be excused. The circumstances of
this matter are not such that Mr Munneke’s
conduct ought fairly be excused
from his breaches of the
Corporations Act
dismiss the crossclaim filed by Ms Zaccara and 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd.
Declarations and
will hear from the parties regarding the declarations I must make pursuant to
Corporations Act
the form of orders, and
costs for final
The pleadings refer to the
third respondent as 106 Ward Pty Ltd, however, the tender book documents
indicate that the name of the
third respondent is 106 Ward Street Pty Ltd.
The NAB account has the account
number ending in 0380. It appears it was named Nextfaze Pty Ltd Business Cheque
Account until its
name changed to the Nextfaze Pty Ltd Business Everyday Account
in 2016. NextFaze also had a NAB account with an account number ending
named Nextfaze Pty Ltd Business Cash Maximiser (“the NAB Maximiser
The sum of $346,464 was also
deposited into the NAB account.
Pursuant to
Corporations Act
, the transcript of an examination that is
authenticated may be used in evidence against the person examined.
Liquidator’s report to
creditors, Exhibit 2R4 at 5-6.
Mr Munneke pleaded in his
defence – revision 3 in the cryptocurrency Ward Street claim that the
withdrawn sum pursued by the
liquidator is $2,750 which sum excluded $300 used
to purchase bitcoin as a wedding gift for Ric Santos.
Mr Munneke and
Ms Zaccara’s family trust.
Mr Heard’s references to
annexures are references to the annexures to the Heard report.
The source was the NAB
account. Two internet transfers of $20,000 each were made on 19 November
Paragraph 2.2 of the letter
of instructions provides:
2.2 Given the defences filed in the action allege that the funds deployed to
acquire O’Connell St were paid out of [Ex NF] in
the form of a
dividend or reduction and distribution of capital to its shareholder, the
inclusion in the financial statements or
management accounts of any loan as an
asset of [Ex NF] in this respect was an error and no repayments would have
been made to [Ex
NF] in respect of any such loan.
“BAS” means
business activity statement.
Paragraph 2.3 of the letter
of instructions provides:
2.3 Given the defences filed in the action allege that the funds deployed to
acquire Ward St were beneficially the property of someone
[Ex NF], the registered proprietor of Ward St (or any other party) would
not have made any payments to [Ex NF] of the
funds paid out of
[Ex NF’s] account in respect of the acquisition of Ward St.
It appears from the NAB
accounts statements that it was an internal transfer from the NAB Maximiser
account on 21 May 2014.
Being $3,050 less the
amount invoiced to Meeco of $650.
See table in [234] above
for dates and details of the cryptocurrency transactions.
Ms Zaccara later said this
should read “trails” not “tens”.
$121,988.92 remained in the
NAB account following sale of ethereum, which sum was transferred to the NAB
Maximiser account. The
proceeds of the first sale of ethereum were paid into Mr
Munneke’s CBA account, $100,000 was paid out as a deposit on Ward
leaving a surplus of $48,850.74.
On 29 September 2016,
$50,000 was transferred from the ANZ account to Flight Centre and on
30 September 2016 $47,101.65 was transferred
from the ANZ account to Flight
Ms Zaccara submitted
the deposit into the NAB account of $54,996.90 on 28 June 2016 was from the sale
of Parawae Road.
[2019] FCA 354
(2019) 370 ALR 191
[2019] FCA 354
(2019) 370 ALR 191
I infer 0.3 unit is 18
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
at 320-321 (Windeyer J).
This was an incorrect
statement by Ms Zaccara as she had not caught up with BAS.
Taylor v Australia
& New Zealand Banking Group Ltd
(1998) 13 ACLR 780
at 784 (McGarvie J).
Re Newark Pty Ltd
[1993] 1 Qd R 409
Australian Securities
& Investments Commission v Edwards
[2005] NSWSC 831
(2005) 220 ALR 148
[2011] NSWSC 8
(2011) 85 ACSR 512
[2011] NSWSC 8
(2011) 85 ACSR 512
[2011] NSWSC 8
(2011) 85 ACSR 512
[2011] NSWSC 8
(2011) 85 ACSR 512
[2011] NSWSC 8
(2011) 85 ACSR 512
[2011] NSWSC 8
(2011) 85 ACSR 512
[2019] FCA 1846
Corporations Act 2001
Corporations Act 2001
Corporations Act 2001
Termite Resources NL
(in liq) v Meadows, in the matter of Termite Resources NL (in liq) (No 2)
[2019] FCA 354
(2019) 370 ALR 191
, White J summarises the authorities on a
director’s duty of care and skill.
[2023] SASC 88
Slea Pty Ltd v Connective Services Pty Ltd (No 9)
[2022] VSC 136
, [915] (Robson J) and
Macks v Viscariello
at [612] (Lovell J, Corboy and Slattery AJJ).
[2022] FCA 850
[2002] NSWSC 13
(2002) 166 FLR 451
Termite Resources NL (in
liq) v Meadows; in the matter of Termite Resources NL (in liq) (No 2)
[2019] FCA 354
370 ALR 191
Termite Resources NL (in
liq) v Meadows; in the matter of Termite Resources NL (in liq) (No 2)
[2019] FCA 354
370 ALR 191
[1976] HCA 7
(1976) 137 CLR 1
[1994] FCA 1117
(1994) 51 FCR 425
Kinsela v Russell
Kinsela Pty Ltd (in liq)
(1986) 4 NSWLR 722
at 732G (Street CJ), citing
Nicholson v Permakraft (NZ) Ltd (in liq)
[1985] NZCA 15
[1985] 1 NZLR 242.
Angas Law Services Pty
Ltd (in liq) & Anor v Carabelas & Anor
[2005] HCA 23
(2005) 226 CLR 507.
(1986) 4 NSWLR 722
(1986) 4 NSWLR 722
Nicholson v Permakraft
(NZ) Ltd (in liq)
[1985] NZCA 15
[1985] 1 NZLR 242
Kinsela v Russell
Kinsela Pty Ltd (in liq)
(1986) 4 NSWLR 722
Linton v Telnet Pty
[1999] NSWCA 33
(1999) 30 ACSR 465
Re New World Alliance
Pty Ltd; Sycotex Pty Ltd v Baseler
[1994] FCA 1117
(1994) 51 FCR 425
Linton v Telnet Pty
[1999] NSWCA 33
(1999) 30 ACSR 465
at 471, 474.
The Bell Group Ltd (in
liq) v Westpac Banking Corp (No 9)
[2008] WASC 239
(2008) 39 WAR 1
Westpac Banking
Corporation v Bell Group Ltd (in liq)
[2012] WASCA 157
(2012) 44 WAR 1
Westpac Banking
Corporation v Bell Group
Ltd (in liq) (No 3)
[2012] WASCA 157
(2012) 44 WAR 1
Kalls Enterprises Pty
Ltd (in liq) v Baloglow
[2007] NSWCA 191
(2007) 63 ACSR 557
[2020] FCA 1098
(2020) 382 ALR 425
Gordon v Leon Plant Hire
Pty Ltd (in liq)
(2015) 16 ASTLR 185 at [84].
[2014] WASC 431
(2014) 103 ACSR 137
Daniels v Anderson
(1995) 37 NSWLR 438
at 525 (Clarke and Shelley JA).
[2018] HCA 43
(2018) 265 CLR 1
Pilmer v Duke Group Ltd
[2001] HCA 31
(2001) 207 CLR 165
Pascoe Ltd (in liq) v
(1999) 75 SASR 246
(1999) 75 SASR 246
Herrman v Simon
(1990) 4 ACSR 81
Jarrett v Perpetual Trustee Co Ltd
[2007] NSWSC 1231
Re Duomatic Ltd
[1969] 2 Ch 365 (Buckley
Pascoe Ltd (in liq) v
(1999) 75 SASR 246
Pascoe Ltd (in liq) v
(1999) 75 SASR 246
at [266] (Lander J).
Re Freehouse Pty Ltd;
Jordan v Avram
(1997) 26 ACSR 662
Pascoe Ltd (in liq) v
(1999) 75 SASR 246
at [270] citing
Re Duomatic Ltd
[1969] 2 Ch
Angas Law Services
Pty Ltd (in liq) & Anor v Carabelas & Anor
[2005] HCA 23
(2005) 226 CLR 507
Miller v Miller & Miller
(1995) 16 ACSR 73
Macleod v R
[2003] HCA 24
(2003) 214 CLR 230
Angas Law Services Pty Ltd (in liq)
& Anor v Carabelas & Anor
[2005] HCA 23
(2005) 226 CLR 507
, [66]-[68];
Re New World Alliance; Sycotex Pty Ltd v Baseler
[1994] FCA 1117
(1994) 51 FCR 425
[2005] HCA 23
(2005) 226 CLR 507
Re Pine Forests of
Australia (Canberra) Pty Ltd
(2010) 80 ACSR 377 at [13].
(2019) 267 CLR 461
[2010] FCAFC 34
(2010) 183 FCR 358
CEG Direct Securities
Pty Ltd v Cooper as Liquidator of Runtong Investment and Development Pty Ltd (In
(2025) 309 FCR 66
Yang v Wong, Asix North
Pty Ltd (Recs and Mgrs Appt) (In Liq) (No 2)
[2025] FCA 693
CEG Direct Securities Pty Ltd v Cooper as Liquidator of Runtong Investment
and Development Pty Ltd (In Liq)
(2025) 309 FCR 66
Yang v Wong, Asix North
Pty Ltd (Recs and Mgrs Appt) (In Liq) (No 2)
[2025] FCA 693
Weaver v Harburn
(2014) 103 ACSR 416 at [79].
Crowe-Maxwell v
[2016] NSWCA 46
(2016) 91 NSWLR 414
, citing Ford Austin &
Ramsey’s Principles of Corporations Law at [27.220]; also see
(as Joint and Several Liquidator of Wulguru Retail Investments Pty Ltd) (in liq)
v Becon Constructions (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2014] VSCA 14
(2014) 41 VR 445
Corporations Act 2001
s 588FF(1)(d).
This sum comprises
$1,025,911.59 withdrawn from the ANZ account and the deposit of $40,000
withdrawn from the NAB account.
Pascoe Ltd (in liq) v
(1999) 75 SASR 246
[2005] HCA 23
(2005) 226 CLR 507
[2005] HCA 23
(2005) 226 CLR 507
Atco Controls Pty Ltd
(In liq) v Newtronics Pty Ltd (Receivers and Managers Appointed) (In Liq) &
[2009] VSCA 238
(2009) 25 VR 411
Justice White said in
Termite Resources NL (in liq) v Meadows; in the matter of Termite Resources
NL (in liq) (No 2)
[2019] FCA 354
(2019) 370 ALR 191
... [the] test is broader than “nearing insolvency” or
“doubtful solvency”. They indicate that the duty of
directors to
consider the interests of creditors is enlivened when there is a “real and
not remote risk of insolvency”
and when the objective circumstances
require consideration of the interest of creditors.
[2019] FCA 354
(2019) 370 ALR 191
[2019] FCA 354
(2019) 370 ALR 191
[1985] NZCA 15
[1985] 1 NZLR 242.
[2019] FCA 354
(2019) 370 ALR 191
[1985] NZCA 15
[1985] 1 NZLR 242
Comprising the deposit of
$40,000 from the NAB account, $1,025,911.59 from the ANZ account, and $60,000 in
early lease termination
Ms Zaccara and 106 Ward
Street Pty Ltd point out that neither the “blockchain summit” nor
the development course were
taken up with Mr Munneke in cross-examination.
The proceeds of the first
sale of ethereum were paid into Mr Munneke’s personal CBA account on
12 January 2018. It is not
apparent what happened with the surplus of
$46,850.74 from the first sale of ethereum.
On 29 January 2018,
$121,988.89 was transferred from the NAB account to the NAB Maximiser account.
Warner (in his capacity
as joint and several liquidator of Bellpac Pty Ltd (recs and mgrs apptd)
(ACN 101 713 017) (in liq) &
Ors v Hung & Ors (No 2)
[2011] FCA 1123
[2006] NSWCA 196
As I noted earlier, the
proceeds from the first sale were paid into Mr Munneke’s CBA account.
Herrman v Simon
(1990) 4 ACSR 81
Jarrett v Perpetual Trustee Co Ltd
[2007] NSWSC 1231
Macleod v R
[2003] HCA 24
(2003) 214 CLR 230
Angas Law Services Pty Ltd (in liq)
& Anor v Carabelas & Anor
[2005] HCA 23
(2005) 226 CLR 507
, [66]-[68];
Re New World Alliance; Sycotex Pty Ltd v Baseler
[1994] FCA 1117
(1994) 51 FCR 425
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (7.49 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter