URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAET/2025/116.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Alexander v Achievement Collective Pty Ltd (In Liq) and Sims [2025] SAET 116 (21 October 2025)
v Achievement Collective Pty Ltd (In Liq) and Sims
[2025] SAET 116
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNAL
ALEXANDER, Joanne
ACHIEVEMENT
COLLECTIVE PTY LTD (IN LIQ)
First Respondent
SIMS, Jye Owen
South Australian Employment Court
Fair Work Act 2009
ET-25-00679
HEARING DATE:
16 October 2025
JUDGMENT OF:
Honour Deputy President Eaton
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Application for pecuniary penalties
against second respondent personally – First respondent employer in
liquidation, claim against
third respondent withdrawn following settlement by
agreement – Whether applicant entitled to be paid at pay point 7.1 of
Award following promotion – Whether employer superannuation not
paid – Whether contraventions of
Fair Work Act 2009
– Whether second respondent personally involved in contraventions –
Whether contraventions serious contraventions pursuant
– Applicant promoted to and performed duties of general manager,
consistent with classification pay point 7.1
of the Award from 6 July 2023 to 11
December 2024 – Applicant paid at pay point 5.1 – contraventions of
by breach of cls 15.7 and 24.1 of Award – Applicant did not have
employer superannuation paid to her nominated fund from March
2023 ongoing
– Contravention of
by breach of cl 23.2 of the Award from March 2023
and of s 116B of the FW Act from 1 January 2024 – Second respondent person
involved pursuant to s 550 of the FW Act – No evidence that second
respondent aware that contraventions were serious contraventions
as required by
s 557A(5A)(1) – Second respondent to pay pecuniary penalties to
applicant of $12,870 in relation to wages contraventions
and $17,820 in relation
to superannuation contraventions.
Pearce v Return to Work
Corporation of South Australia
[2023] SAET 89
Australian Building and
Construction Commissioner v Pattinson
(2022) 274 CLR 450
Fair Work Ombudsman v Spotless Services Australia Ltd (No 2)
Trade Practices Commission v CSR Ltd
Construction, Forestry Mining and Energy
(2016) FCR 336
; 259 IR 274;
[2016] FCAFC
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Martin
Second Respondent: No
Solicitors:
Applicant: Moloney & Partners
Respondent: Self-representing
decision is on an application by Ms Joanne Alexander for orders imposing
pecuniary penalties on the second respondent, Mr Jye
Owen Sims, on the
grounds that he was a person involved in contraventions of the
Fair Work Act
(Cth) (‘FW Act’) by her former employer, the first
respondent Achievement Collective Pty Ltd (‘Achievement
Collective’).
History of proceedings
what is left of Ms Alexander’s claim for underpayment of wages by
Achievement Collective, and her application for orders
imposing penalties on
Achievement Collective, Mr Sims and the third respondent
Mr Angkham Phanthapangna for the contraventions of
the FW Act related
to the alleged underpayment. Mr Sims and Mr Phanthapangna were both at relevant
times directors of Achievement
Collective.
Achievement
Collective was placed into liquidation on 8 July 2025 so no further action
against it can be taken in these
proceedings.
However, the Court
did not become aware of this until 8 October 2025 when it was noticed internally
during a search of ASIC notices
in an unrelated matter. The whole matter had
been listed on 8 August 2025 for trial to commence 16 October 2025, along with
for the filing of affidavits of evidence.
8 October 2025 the Court advised the parties that it had become aware of the
liquidation of Achievement Collective, but that the
trial would proceed as
listed on the penalties applications against Mr Sims and Mr Phanthapangna
personally.
the commencement of the trial, counsel for Ms Alexander informed the Court that
she had reached a settlement with Mr Phanthapangna,
and wished to proceed only
against Mr Sims. While the terms of the settlement had been finalised but not
yet been completed, counsel
for Ms Alexander and counsel for Mr Phanthapangna
expressed their confidence that they would be by the end of the day. Counsel
Mr Phanthapangna advised the Court that he did not wish to participate in
the proceedings and asked to be excused. She also informed
the Court, in
response to my inquiry, that Mr Phanthapangna’s solicitors had not
informed the Court of the liquidation of Achievement
Collective, of which he was
a director at the time, as they were themselves unaware of it, having not been
informed of it by their
Alexander’s request to proceed rather than adjourn until the next day,
which had been set aside, included an issue with her
witness being unavailable
the next day. As it was by consent of the parties in attendance, I decided to
grant that request noting
that Mr Phanthapangna had elected not to be heard.
Completion of the settlement with Mr Phanthapangna was confirmed the following
morning by Ms Alexander filing an application to withdraw in relation Mr
Phanthapangna. The further references to him in this decision
are for context
in the claim against Mr Sims.
from the hearing was Mr Sims. He had been absent from all the pre-trial
directions hearings except one held by telephone on
26 June 2025, at which time
pre-trial orders were made for the filing and service of affidavits of evidence,
and a further directions
hearing on 8 August 2025.
Sims did not file any evidence and failed to appear at the 8 August 2025
directions hearing with no communication to the Court
or the other parties.
8 October 2025 my chambers emailed Mr Sims to confirm that he was aware of the
trial listed for 16 October 2025, also confirming
that he should contact the
Court immediately if there was any reason he could not attend. The email
further informed him that if
he did not attend then, unless there was a
compelling reason otherwise, the Court may determine the matter in his
Sims then replied by email on 13 October 2025 that, in summary, he was suffering
ill health that would be aggravated if he were
to appear and that he would take
responsibility for any wrongdoing found by the Court.
chambers then responded to him in the following terms:
Thank you for informing us of your ill health. Her Honour notes that you are not
asking for the hearing to be adjourned to await
your recovery. However, her
Honour is concerned to ensure that you have a fair hearing and that you are
aware of the flexibility
that the Court may afford to you pursuant to
South Australian Employment Tribunal Act 2014
This includes the possibility of you giving your evidence and/or any submissions
orally by video-link, only for such time as you
require, rather than attending
personally for the duration of the hearing. There is also the possibility of you
having a support
person with you, and of more frequent than usual breaks in the
hearing to allow for your rest and recovery.
Do you have any medical evidence of your ill health that you would like the
Court to take into account? If so, this would need to
be in form of a medical
report or records, rather than a simple certificate of sickness.
Please reply to confirm that you have read this email, and also if you would
like any of these or other special measures to enable
your participation in the
hearing of the matter.
Sims replied by email on 15 October 2025, in summary that he did not think he
would ever be well enough to get through the proceedings
and that he would
respect and accept any decision the Court made. He did not refer to or provide
any medical evidence.
it is a matter for the discretion of the Court, there is relevant authority that
for a failure to appear to be excused on medical
grounds, medical evidence is
required from a qualified medical practitioner confirming that the medical
condition is of such a nature
or severity that the person is unable to
participate in the
proceedings.
Accordingly
I determined to proceed in Mr Sims’ absence, as I considered that the
Court had complied with its obligation in
South Australian
Employment Tribunal Act 2014
to take measures that are reasonably
practicable to ensure that he had the opportunity in the proceedings to be heard
or otherwise
have his submissions received.
Alexander’s counsel submitted that I could determine her claim summarily,
on the grounds that the response filed by Mr Sims
was brief and vague, and did
not clearly deny the allegations in her application.
considered that the first paragraph of Mr Sims’ Response admitted the
allegation at paragraph 6 of Ms Alexander’s claim,
denied the allegations
at paragraphs 3, 4 and 5, but otherwise the document did not respond to the
remaining allegations of Ms Alexander’s
penalty claim. I therefore
considered it appropriate to proceed by way of evidence.
the hearing I admitted into evidence the affidavits of Ms Alexander and her
supporting witness Ms Teigan Belik, both dated 3 July
2025 and filed in the
Court that same day. In the absence of Mr Sims, there was no challenge to the
admission of the affidavits.
Ms Alexander gave further brief oral evidence
which did not extend beyond what was already in her affidavit.
accept the evidence given by Ms Alexander and Ms Belik, and otherwise consider
the allegations which were not denied as having been
admitted by Mr Sims. Rule
23(4) of the
South Australian Employment Rules 2024
states “Unless
otherwise ordered by the Tribunal, each claim set out in an application and any
liability of the respondent
to pay any money claimed or give any other form of
relief will be taken to be admitted unless specifically denied in a
In this matter I have discerned no reason why I should order
Alexander’s penalty claim relates to contraventions of two civil remedy
provisions of the FW Act. Firstly, a failure to
pay her at the appropriate
classification level of the
Social, Community, Home Care and Disability
Services Industry Award 2010
(‘SCHADS Award’) for her duties
from 6 July 2023 until she stopped work due to a work injury on 11 December
secondly, an ongoing failure to pay the full amount of employer
superannuation throughout the duration of her employment and not
at all after
March 2023. Both are contraventions of s 45 of the FW Act, with the failure to
pay superannuation also a contravention
of s 116B of the FW Act from
1 January 2024.
Factual Background
Achievement
Collective was operating as a business which provided support workers to people
with disabilities, pursuant to funding
that their clients received from the
National Disability Insurance Scheme (‘NDIS’). A key function of
the service was
the rostering of support workers who provided care to multiple
Alexander commenced employment with Achievement Collective on 11 May 2022 as a
Rostering and Recruitment Officer. At that time
the directors of Achievement
Collective were Mr Sims and Mr David Hill. Ms Belik was then the Chief
Executive Officer. There was
at that time no position of General Manager.
Alexander was then promoted to Manager of Service Delivery in May 2023 and her
pay increased to pay point 5.1 of the Award, at
which time she started reporting
directly to Ms Belik.
18 May 2023, Mr Hill ceased as a director and left the company. On the same day,
Mr Phanthapangna became a director.
mid 2023, Achievement Collective expanded its operations to Sydney. Ms
Alexander flew to Sydney to teach the new NSW state manager
the operations of
the business systems, and to meet with Mr Sims.
an airport lounge at Sydney airport awaiting their return flight to Adelaide,
Mr Sims offered Ms Alexander promotion to General
Manager as the new
structure could not have a state manager reporting to the Manager of Service
Delivery. Mr Sims told her that
“the business could not afford to change
[her] pay just yet but that it would in the coming
she immediately accepted the offer of promotion, Mr Sims telephoned Mr
Phanthapangna in her presence and told him that she had
accepted. He also told
her that he would get Ms Belik to organise a contract and that they would wait
until the contract was signed
before her pay increased. Her promotion was
announced to staff by the end of that same week.
Alexander spoke with Ms Belik about the new contract, who said she would prepare
one as soon as Mr Sims approved it.
Ms Alexander commenced her new duties as General Manager immediately, the
promised contract did not appear nor did the promised
pay increase. On her
evidence, which I accept, she raised the issue with Ms Belik over the remainder
of 2023, with the response by
Ms Belik that she could not prepare it without Mr
Sims’ approval. Throughout this time Ms Alexander was also reporting to
Mr Sims and to Mr Phanthapangna.
her affidavit Ms Belik confirms that Ms Alexander was working as the General
Manager and performing the duties that she claimed.
Those duties fall squarely
within the criteria for pay point 7.1 of the Award.
Alexander made further specific enquiries of Mr Sims about her pay rate on 9
April 2024, 11 June 2024, and then by email on 30
September 2024 to which Mr
Sims replied on the same day “Not a problem, just make the pay increase as
of the past pay period.”
However, there was no supporting instruction
from him to the human resources area and the increase was not actioned.
Sims then abruptly left the business and ceased as a director of Achievement
Collective on 25 November 2024.
Phanthapangna had ceased as a director on 24 January 2024, and then resumed on 4
October 2024.
Achievement Collective was not paying employee superannuation as it was obliged
to do by cl 23.1 of the Award and, from
1 January 2024, also by s 116B of the FW
Alexander’s unchallenged claim is that no employer superannuation was paid
on her behalf from March 2023, and that the non-payment
of superannuation was
across the Achievement Collective workforce.
and Ms Belik were receiving complaints from staff, some of whom were approaching
retirement. This included around 90 support workers,
along with a handful of
support coordinators and recovery coordinators.
Mr Sims refused to put out any statement to staff in relation to the issue until
the directors received penalty notices from
the Australian Taxation Office. At
that point, Ms Belik and Ms Alexander drafted a statement for Mr Sims which he
“eventually
approved and sent out.”
Conclusion on contraventions
the evidence of Ms Alexander and Ms Belik, I find that Ms Alexander was
entitled to be paid at pay point 7.1 of the Award
from 6 July 2023 and ongoing
for the remainder of her employment with Achievement Collective. As it was
unchallenged, I accept her
calculations in her claim of the amount owed being
$22,920.93.
relation to the non-payment of employer superannuation,
Ms Alexander’s calculations are that the amount due on what she was
actually paid in salary was $15,096.93, with the additional amount due on the
underpayment being $2,625.91. I accept that Achievement
Collective was obliged
to make those payments, did not make those payments and the shortfall is that
calculated by Ms Alexander.
the liquidation of Achievement Collective, I am unable to make any order for the
payment of these amounts by it to Ms
. The relevance in these
proceedings is to the liability of Mr Sims for the imposition of pecuniary
penalties, which can only arise
if I find that he was a person involved in a
contravention pursuant to s 550 of the FW Act. Consequently that exercise first
finding that there was, as alleged, a contravention by the employer,
whether that employer is a party to the proceedings or not.
Is Mr Sims liable as a person involved in the
contraventions?
Alexander has claimed that the contraventions by Achievement Collective should
be found to be serious contraventions as defined
in s 557A of the FW Act.
And further, that Mr Sims should be found to be liable for those serious
contraventions as person involved
550 of the Act provides that a person who is involved in contravening the Act is
also liable for that contravention, in the
following terms:
550 Involvement in contravention treated in same way as actual
contravention
(1) A person who is involved in a contravention of a civil remedy provision is
taken to have contravened that provision.
Note: If a person (the
involved person
) is taken under this
subsection to have contravened a civil remedy provision, the involved
person’s contravention may be a
serious contravention (see subsection
557A(5A)). Serious contraventions attract higher maximum penalties (see
subsection 529(2)).
(2) A person is
involved in
a contravention of a civil remedy
provision if, and only if, the person:
(a) has aided, abetted, counselled or procured the contravention; or
(b) has induced the contravention, whether by threats or promises or otherwise;
(c) has been in any way, by act or omission, directly or indirectly, knowingly
concerned in or party to the contravention; or
(d) has conspired with others to effect the contravention.
Achievement Collective had a CEO in Ms Belik, Ms Alexander’s evidence
is Mr Sims was actively involved in the running
of the business such that she
reported to him as well as the CEO in her role as general manager, and that it
was Mr Sims who made
the decisions of which she complains.
she also reported to Mr Phanthapangna for part of the relevant period, her
evidence was that it was Mr Sims who appointed
her to the position of General
Manager and personally promised her the pay increase to reflect that role. It
was Mr Sims who failed
to direct Ms Belik to draft a contract and increase Ms
Alexander’s pay rate in accordance with that promise and her increased
responsibilities.
accept Ms Alexander’s evidence that she repeatedly raised this failure to
increase her pay with Mr Sims until his reply to
her email on 30 September 2024
that she could increase her pay rate from the next pay period. This response
did not acknowledge
any entitlement to back pay for the preceding 15 months, and
he further failed to approve what he promised in that email before he
business and the company less than two months later.
Accordingly,
I find that his conduct in relation to the breach of Award pay provisions falls
within the criteria in s 550(2)(c), that
of being directly and knowingly
involved by act and omission in that contravention.
relation to the non-payment of Ms Alexander’s superannuation, I accept her
evidence that Mr Sims was aware of the non-payment
in relation to herself and
staff generally, that he resisted any communication to staff about that ongoing
non-payment and failed,
when it was within his knowledge and power as a
director, to rectify that non-payment in relation to Ms Alexander. I have no
in relation to any rectification for other staff and no claim from
Accordingly,
I find that his conduct in relation to the breach of Award superannuation
requirements and s 116B of the FW Act the criteria
in s 550(2)(c) of being
involved in that contravention.
Serious contravention?
557A(1) of the FW Act currently provides that a contravention is a serious
contravention if the person knowingly contravened
the provision or the person
was reckless as to whether the contravention would occur. It was amended from
its previous form on 26
February 2024.
reference to the criteria in operation up to 26 February 2024, this involves
being satisfied that the principal contravener knowingly
contravened the
provision and that it was part of a systematic pattern of conduct. After 26
February 2024, I must be satisfied that
it either knew or was reckless as to
whether the contravention would occur.
corporation knowingly contravenes a provision if it expressly, tacitly or
impliedly authorised the
contravention.
It does not require
knowledge that such conduct would be a serious contravention.
criteria refers to the principal contravener, which in this case is the
employer, Achievement Collective. On the evidence I
have no difficulty in
characterising the contraventions by Achievement Collective as serious
contraventions.
s 557A(5A) establishes that the criteria for liability for a serious
contravention is narrower for a person involved pursuant
to s 550. It
(5A) Involvement in a serious contravention. A person (the involved person) who
is involved in a contravention of a civil remedy
provision by another person
(the principal) commits a serious contravention
(a) The principal’s contravention was a serious contravention; and
(b) The involved person knew that the principal’s contravention was a
serious contravention
(emphasis added)
find Mr Sims personally liable for a serious contravention, I would need to be
satisfied that he knew the contravention was a serious
contravention. I could
only reach that level of satisfaction by considering evidence as to his state of
this case, I have no evidence from Mr Sims himself and the evidence of Ms
Alexander and Ms Belik does not refer to any correspondence,
communication or
other action or conduct which objectively supports a finding that he had that
knowledge. For example, if there
had been evidence that someone had raised with
him that his failures to pay Ms Alexander her award rate and her superannuation
serious contraventions, that may support a conclusion that he knew.
However, I have no evidence upon which to make such an inference.
it is only open to me to find that Mr Sims is liable in the ordinary sense for
the contraventions in which he was involved.
Pecuniary Penalties - Legislative framework
546(1) of the FW Act provides that:
The Federal Court, the Federal Circuit Court and Family Court of Australia
(Division 2) or an eligible State or Territory court may,
on application,
order a person to pay a pecuniary penalty that the court considers is
appropriate if the court is satisfied that
the person has contravened a civil
remedy provision.
the use of the word ‘may’, the provision establishes that whether to
order penalties, and if so, in which amount, is
an exercise of discretion by the
Court. This is subject to the maximum limits which s 546(2) directs are those
referred to in s 539
of the FW Act, and that the maximum penalty for a corporate
body is five times that for a natural person.
539 of the FW Act identifies the maximum penalties that may be ordered in
relation to each contravention of each civil remedy
maximum penalties, in relation to contraventions in this matter of ss 45
and 116B are up to 60 penalty units for each contravention
by a natural person
which is not a serious contravention. Penalties for serious contraventions are
up to 600 penalty units.
the contraventions in this matter which occurred between 1 July 2023 and 6
November 2024, the applicable amount per penalty unit
is $313, while for
contraventions committed on or after 7 November 2024 the applicable amount per
penalty unit is $330.
means that for a contravention occurring between 1 July 2023 and 6 November 2024
the maximum is $18,780 for a natural person.
For a contravention occurring on or
after 7 November 2024 the maximum is $19,800 for a natural person.
Course of conduct
the purposes of penalties, s 557(1) of the FW Act provides that where multiple
contraventions are committed by the same person
and arise out of the same course
of conduct, they will be taken to constitute a single contravention:
557 Course of conduct
(1) For the purposes of this Part, 2 or more contravention of a civil remedy
provision referred to in subsection (2) are, subject
to subsection (3) taken to
constitute a single contravention if:
(a) the contraventions are committed by the same person; and
(b) the contraventions arose out of a course of conduct by the person.
(2) relevantly includes the contraventions that I have found in this
relation to the breach of the Award cl 15.7 obligation to pay Ms Alexander
at pay point 7.1, the further obligation arising from
cl 24.1 of the Award
was to pay that rate in each pay cycle being either weekly, fortnightly or
monthly. Therefore, there was a
breach of that obligation on each payday that
it was not paid.
multiple failures to pay on each pay day were all the result of a course of
conduct by Mr Sims of his ongoing failure to authorise
payment by Achievement
Collective at the appropriate level. Consequently, they are considered to be a
single contravention for the
purposes of imposing penalty.
the obligation to pay employer superannuation on behalf of Ms Alexander was
an obligation arising from the
Superannuation Guarantee Administration Act
to pay those contributions to her nominated superannuation fund on a
quarterly basis. While each missed quarterly payment was a
breach of the Award
and, after 1 January 2024 also a breach of s 116B of the FW Act, it was the
result of the ongoing failure of
Mr Sims to ensure that those payments were made
by Achievement Collective as legally required. As such it was a course of
by Mr Sims and also considered to be a single contravention for the
purposes of imposing penalty.
General Principles
purpose of the civil penalty provisions is deterrence. This includes both
specific deterrence, which is directed to the person
who has contravened the
Act, and general deterrence which is directed generally to persons (both
corporate and natural) who employ
others. The goal of these provisions is to
discourage both the person who has engaged in the contravening conduct and
others generally
from engaging in similar conduct in the future. This was
confirmed by the High Court of Australia in
Australian Building and
Construction Commissioner v
(‘Pattinson’).
penalties should be sufficiently high to make similar conduct in the future an
economically irrational choice. The penalty may
be greater or lesser than any
amounts owed through the contravention. Proportionality in the imposition of
civil penalties is the
balance between what is necessary for deterrence and what
might be considered oppressive.
Considerations
relevant to sentencing for criminal offences, such as punishment and retribution
have no role to pay. Considerations
such as contrition, restitution and
rehabilitation may be relevant to the extent that they inform the need for
specific deterrence.
That is, if the person has shown contrition and
rehabilitation, a court may consider whether the likelihood of them behaving in
a similar way in future is lower and warrants a smaller penalty.
the exercise of the discretion, a helpful summary was provided by Colvin J in
Fair Work Ombudsman v Spotless Services Australia Ltd (No 2)
The Court has a broad discretion when assessing pecuniary civil penalties to be
imposed under the Act. Assessment of the appropriate
amount requires an
instinctive synthesis of the considerations relevant to penalty to arrive at a
single result: The required process
of assessment is evaluative, not
mathematical: Factors that may be relevant have been listed in the decided
cases, but such lists
should not be approached as a checklist.
(references omitted)
of those other factors include the nature and extent of the conduct; the
circumstances of the conduct; the nature and extent
of the loss; whether there
was similar previous conduct; the size of the enterprise; whether the breaches
were deliberate; whether
senior management was involved; whether there had been
contrition, corrective action and cooperation; the need to enforce compliance
with minimum standards; and weighing the
are factors which were considered prior to the decision of the High Court
, and so may be relevant insofar as they inform the
Court’s consideration of the need for specific and general
deterrence.
this matter, the ongoing failure to pay the appropriate Award rate for the
duties of the promotional position that Mr Sims personally
appointed Ms
Alexander to is a serious matter, and it continued for more than a year.
Likewise the failure to pay employer superannuation,
ongoing from March 2023.
Given the Award pay issue was raised with him by Ms Alexander on several
occasions, and the superannuation
issue by both Ms Alexander and Ms Belik, I
conclude that these failures were deliberate decisions and not a matter of
administrative or otherwise. As one of the directors for much of the
relevant period, and sole director for most of 2024, actively
involved in the
business, he was a senior manager of the organisation responsible for paying her
at the appropriate rate, both in
terms of wages and superannuation.
has been no corrective action. While Mr Sims’ departure from Achievement
Collective meant that he no longer had any decision
making power in relation to
her employment after 25 November 2024, it was open to him to show contrition by
way of an apology, which
he did not offer. While Mr Sims has claimed ill
health, his lack of communication with the Court or the parties and his absence
throughout almost the entire proceedings without providing evidence of such
incapacity indicates a lack of cooperation.
Alexander has suffered a loss of the income to which she was entitled through
her employment, amounting in total to $40,653.20,
along with the interest and
earnings that she could have obtained on those amounts. With the liquidation of
Achievement Collective,
there is no knowing how much she might ever recover of
this loss, if anything at all.
I take into account the seriousness of the consequences for Ms Alexander of
the contraventions, I note that the imposition
of penalties is not and is not
intended to be compensatory in nature. I note the consequences for her in
recognition of the purpose
of the provisions of the Act which have been
breached, which is for the protection and benefit of employees.
have no evidence of Mr Sims’ current or likely future involvement in
employing people. In relation to specific deterrence,
I can only take into
account his past conduct of which I do have evidence. While past conduct is not
always a reliable indicator
of future conduct, in this case it is all that I
have to go on.
relation to general deterrence, employers generally must understand the
importance of paying their employees appropriately for
the work that they do,
and on time. Employees may be assumed to rely on their wages for their expenses
of daily living and on their
superannuation for a retirement income that meets
their needs.
is why the parliament has seen fit to introduce a regime of financial penalties
on employers and persons involved who do not
comply with those obligations to
employees. The FW Act intends that there be personal financial consequences for
those making decisions
which deprive employees of their entitlements.
find that Mr Sims is liable as a person involved the following contraventions of
s45 and s116B by Achievement Collective, being
civil remedy provisions of the FW
80.1. Contravention
of s 45 of the FW Act by failing to a comply with the SCHADS Award:
80.1.1. Between
6 July 2023 and 25 November 2024 failing to pay Ms Alexander at pay point
7.1 in accordance with cl 15.7;
80.1.2. Between
6 July 2023 and 25 November 2024 failing to pay Ms Alexander the full
amount of her wages each pay cycle in accordance
with cl 24.1;
80.1.3. Between
March 2023 and 25 November 2024 failing to pay to Ms Alexander’s nominated
fund her employer superannuation
contributions in accordance with cl
80.2. Contravention
of s 116B of the FW Act by failing to pay to Ms Alexander’s nominated
fund her employer superannuation contributions
as required by that provision
between 1 January 2024 and 25 November 2024.
relation to the wages contraventions of the Award, as these were considered each
to be a single contravention I take the last date
of liability as the relevant
date for the purposes of the maximum penalty. For the date of 25 November 2024,
being the date that
Mr Sims ceased to be a director of Achievement Collective,
that amount is $19,800.
the failure to pay at the rate stipulated in cl 15.7 and at the frequency
stipulated in cl 24.1 arise from the same conduct of
paying a lesser amount than
that to which she was entitled in her regular pay, I consider it appropriate to
impose one penalty in
relation to both breaches of the Award. I consider the
seriousness of these contraventions to warrant a penalty of 65% of the maximum
for a single contravention, being $12,870.
relation to the superannuation contraventions, as they are considered a single
contravention, I adopt the same last date of liability.
I also take this
contravention to be a single contravention of both ss 45 and 116B of the FW Act,
being the same conduct in breach
of two different provisions. However, I
consider the failure to pay any contributions to Ms Alexander’s
superannuation fund
to be more serious than the wages contravention. It was a
complete failure to pay rather than an underpayment. It has also deprived
Alexander of the investment earnings that her fund could have obtained for her
and compound earnings into the future.
these reasons I consider the seriousness of the superannuation contravention to
warrant a penalty of 90% of the maximum, being
consider the total of $30,690 does not require adjustment. As a personal
penalty for the contraventions found, it is sufficient
in my view to meet the
requirements of general and specific deterrence without being oppressive.
is no reason to depart from the usual order that the penalties be paid to the
party which has successfully applied for
Second Respondent, Mr Jye Owen Sims, is to pay the applicant, Ms Joanne
Alexander, the pecuniary penalty of $12,870 for contravention
Fair Work Act 2009
, being breaches of cls 15.7 and 24.1 of the
Social, Community, Home Care and Disability Services Industry Award 2010
between 6 July 2023 and 25 November 2024.
Second Respondent, Mr Jye Owen Sims, is to pay the applicant, Ms Joanne
Alexander, the pecuniary penalty of $17,820 for contravention
Fair Work Act 2009
, being breach of cl 23.2 of the
Social, Community,
between 31 March 2023
and 25 November 2024 and of
Fair Work 2009
from 1 January
2024 to 25 November 2024.
total of these penalties, being $30,690, is to be paid within 14 days of the
date of this order.
Section 500(2)
Corporations Act 2001
prohibits proceeding with or commencing an action
or civil proceeding without leave of the Court. The reference to the Court in
section is defined by
which does not include the South Australian
Employment Court.
[2023] SAET 89
Affidavit of Joanne Alexander -
ASIC record annexure JA5.
Ibid at [18].
Corporations
FW Act s 557B.
Crimes Act 1914
(2022) 274 CLR 450
[2022] FCA 383
Trade Practices
Commission v CSR Ltd
[1990] FCA 762.
Construction, Forestry Mining and Energy Union
(2016) FCR 336
[2016] FCAFC 4
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (277 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter