URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SADC/2025/131.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:55:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DERRIMUT HEALTH & FITNESS P/L v ARETZIS PROPERTIES P/L [2025] SADC 131 (6 November 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
DERRIMUT HEALTH & FITNESS P/L v ARETZIS PROPERTIES
[2025] SADC 131
Judgment of his Honour Judge
6 November 2025
LANDLORD AND TENANT - TERMINATION OF THE TENANCY - FORFEITURE - RELIEF
AGAINST FORFEITURE
LANDLORD AND TENANT - TERMINATION OF THE TENANCY - FORFEITURE - RELIEF
AGAINST FORFEITURE - EQUITABLE RELIEF
The applicant, Derrimut Health & Fitness Pty Ltd, has brought a claim
seeking, in the equitable jurisdiction of the Court, relief
against forfeiture
of a lease (the Lease) that it entered into with the respondent, Aretzis
Properties Pty Ltd, for the lease of
premises at shop 6, 1031-1037 South Road,
Melrose Park (the Premises). The Lease was entered into on 26 August 2019 and
initial period of eight years with a right of renewal for a further
period of five years. The applicant conducted a gymnasium business
The applicant had a long history of failing to pay rent on time and the
respondent had issued over twenty notices to remedy default.
On 20 August 2025,
the respondent terminated the Lease and served on the applicant a Notice of
Re-Entry. In exercising those rights,
the respondent relied upon a term of the
Lease which permitted it to terminate the Lease and re-enter the Premises in the
a winding up petition was presented against the applicant. The Deputy
Commissioner of Taxation had issued a winding up petition against
the applicant
on 25 June 2025. Immediately prior to the termination of the Lease, the
applicant had been in breach of its obligation
to pay rent but remedied that
breach by paying the outstanding rent on 20 August 2025.
The applicant seeks relief against forfeiture on the ground that it is
unconscionable for the respondent to exercise its right to
terminate the Lease
where: (1) the winding up proceedings had not been determined; and (2) in the
winding up proceedings, the applicant
asserts and intends to prove its solvency;
and (3) the respondent had formed the intention to force the applicant out of
and then acted opportunistically to evict the applicant based on the
existence of the winding up petition when it had already determined
to lease the
Premises to a new tenant.
At the time of the hearing, the winding up petition against the applicant was
still extant. The applicant and the Deputy Commissioner
had entered into an
in-principle agreement that would resolve their dispute which was dependent on a
financier providing funding
to the applicant of at least $24 million. The terms
of that agreement had not been adhered to although the Deputy Commissioner had
been prepared to continue to agree to the adjournment of the winding up
proceedings. There were a number of supporting creditors
who were owed about $2
million in total. The applicant had paid all outstanding rent. It was a
condition of the injunction restraining
the respondent from re-entering the
Premises that the applicant pay rent weekly in advance.
(1) The application for relief against the forfeiture of the Lease is
(2) Relief against forfeiture is a remedial order imposed by the Court. It
should be determined at the date of the hearing by reference
to the events and
circumstances then existing. The task of the Court is to determine whether the
exercise of the landlord’s
legal right to terminate is, in all the
circumstances, unconscionable. It is wrong to approach the matter as depending
on the balance
of convenience: Musico Corporation Pty Ltd v Master Truck Service
[2025] NSWSC 1226
(3) Relief against forfeiture may be granted by the Court in its equitable
will intervene is
unconscionability on the part of the landlord to insist upon its legal right to
re-enter: Primary Re Limited v
Great Southern Property Holdings Limited
(Receivers and Managers Appointed) (in liq)
[2011] VSC 242
applied. Relief may
be granted where the primary object of the bargain was to secure a stated result
which can be effectively obtained
when the matter comes before the Court and
where the forfeiture provision is added by way of security to produce that
result: Shiloh
Spinners Ltd v Harding
[1973] AC 691
(4) The right of re-entry in the event of existence of a winding up petition
against the applicant is security for future non-payment
of rent and the risk
that if payments are made, they will have to be disgorged as undue preferences
if a winding up order is subsequently
made: Direct Food Supplies (Victoria) Pty
Ltd v D.L.V. Pty Ltd
[1975] VicRp 34
[1975] VR 358
; Melacare International Ltd (in receivership)
v Daley Investments Pty Ltd
[1999] NSWSC 496
considered.
(5) The default or more accurately, the existence of the event, namely the
winding up petition, has not been remedied and still exists.
The unremedied
breach is not fatal to the application for relief, but is a factor suggesting
that there was no unconscionability
on the part of the respondent, particularly
where there was uncertainty as to whether the default will be remedied: Lontav
v Pineross Custodial Services Pty Ltd
[2011] VSC 485
(6) The Lease was a commercial contract entered into by the applicant and
the respondent and represented their allocation of risk.
The Court should not
lightly ignore the agreement of the parties and impose a lesser form of
protection for the respondent: Kofoo
Sussex Pty Ltd v Commerce Building Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWSC 1079
, Melacare International Ltd (in receivership) v Daley
Investments Pty Ltd
[1999] NSWSC 496
considered.
(7) The applicant has demonstrated in the past a repeated failure to pay
rent in a timely manner and only paid following the issue
of a notice to remedy
breach. Inferences are available that the failure to pay rent in a timely manner
was deliberate and that rent
will not be paid in accordance with the terms of
the Lease in the future: Sneakerboy Retail Pty Ltd trading as Sneakerboy v
Properties Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWSC 996
considered.
(8) The termination and re-entry of the Premises was to secure rights under
the Lease. It was not to secure an extraneous benefit,
which would have made the
exercise of the right unconscionable: Okami SA Newton Pty Ltd v Newton SC Pty
[2024] SASC 151
distinguished.
Retail and Commercial Leases Act 1995
Landlord and
Tenant Act 1936
Conveyancing Act 1919
referred to.
Musico Corporation Pty Ltd v Master Truck Service Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWSC
Shiloh Spinners Ltd v Harding
[1973] AC 691
Lontav Pty Ltd v
Pineross Custodial Services Pty Ltd
[2011] VSC 485
Okami SA Newton Pty Ltd v Newton SC Pty Ltd
[2024] SASC 151
distinguished.
Melacare International Ltd (in receivership) v Daley Investments Pty
[1999] NSWSC 496
Sneakerboy Retail Pty Ltd trading as Sneakerboy v
Georges Properties Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWSC 996
Hyman v Rose
[1912] UKLawRpAC 52
Tanwar Enterprises Pty Ltd v Cauchi
[2003] HCA 57
(2003) 201 ALR 359
v S & S Gikas Pty Ltd
[2006] NSWSC 1314
Primary Re Limited v Great
Southern Property Holdings Limited (Receivers and Managers Appointed) (in
[2011] VSC 242
Legione v Hateley
[1983] HCA 11
(1983) 152 CLR 406
Group Pty Ltd v ASAP23 Pty Ltd
[2022] SASC 141
Kofoo Sussex Pty Ltd v
Commerce Building Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWSC 1079
The Heat Group Pty Ltd v
Paragan Care Limited
[2021] VSC 204
Twinside Pty Ltd v Venetian Nominees
[2008] WASC 110
Wynsix Hotels (Oxford St) Pty Ltd v Toomey
[2004] NSWSC 236
Hayes v Gunbola
(1986) 4 BPR 9247;
Australian Mutual
Provident Society v 400 St Kilda Road Pty Ltd
[1990] VicRp 56
[1990] VR 646
Westminster v Swinton
[1948] 1 All ER 248
Baby Zone (Aust) Pty Ltd
(Administrator Appointed) v Keira Street Ventures Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWSC 528
Re FineTea Pty Ltd (Administrator Appointed)
[2020] VSC 357
Sydney Pty Ltd (Administrator Appointed)
[2015] NSWSC 1312
Della Imports
Pty Ltd v Birkenhead Investments Pty Ltd
[1987] ANZ ConvR 294
Property Holdings Pty Ltd v Australian Postal Corporation
[2010] QCA 55
[2011] 1 Qd R 504
Direct Food Supplies (Victoria) Pty Ltd v D.L.V. Pty Ltd
[1975] VicRp 34
[1975] VR 358
Airservices Australia v Ferrier
(1996) 185 CLR 483
Re Centaur Mining
& Exploration Ltd
[2008] VSC 416
(2008) 221 FLR 217
, considered.
DERRIMUT HEALTH & FITNESS P/L v ARETZIS PROPERTIES
[2025] SADC 131
Introduction
applicant, Derrimut Health & Fitness Pty Ltd (the applicant or Derrimut),
has brought a claim seeking relief against forfeiture
of a lease (the Lease)
that it entered into on about 26 August 2019 for the lease of premises at shop
6, 1031‑1037 South Road,
Melrose Park, (the Premises). The respondent,
Aretzis Properties Pty Ltd (the respondent or Aretzis Properties), is the lessor
the Premises. The applicant conducts a gymnasium business from the Premises.
20 August 2025, the respondent terminated the Lease and served on the applicant
a Notice of Re-Entry. In exercising those rights,
the respondent relied upon
clause 19.1.4 of the Lease which permits the respondent, as lessor, to re-enter
the Premises and repossess
the Premises if a winding up petition is presented
against the applicant in which event the Lease will be determinable. A winding
up petition had been presented against the applicant by the Deputy Commissioner
of Taxation (the Deputy Commissioner) on 25 June
applicant seeks relief against the forfeiture of the Lease on the basis of its
contention that it is unconscionable for the respondent
to exercise its right to
terminate the Lease pursuant to clause 19.1.4 in circumstances where:
(1) the winding up proceedings had not been determined and in the winding up
proceedings, the applicant asserts and intends to prove
that it is solvent;
(2) the respondent formed the intention to force the applicant out of its rights
as lessee and then acted opportunistically to evict
the applicant in
circumstances where it had determined to lease the Premises to a new tenant.
respondent opposes the claim for relief against forfeiture. There is urgency in
determining the matter as the respondent has
entered into a new lease of the
Premises with a third party which is subject to a condition that the respondent
provide vacant possession
of the Premises by 6 November 2025.
the reasons which follow, the claim of the applicant for relief against
forfeiture is dismissed.
Lease was entered into by the applicant and the respondent on about
26 August 2019 for a period of 8 years commencing on 30 December
expiring on 29 December 2028, together with an option to renew for a period of
5 years, subject to the terms of the Lease.
The rent payable under the
Lease by the applicant was, at the commencement of the lease, the sum of
$219,650 per annum and was payable
monthly in advance. The rent was subject to
review in accordance with the terms of the Lease. The permitted use under the
a gymnasium, operating 24 hours a day and 7 days per week.
Lease provides for determination and re-entry in the following circumstances:
19 TERMINATION AND RE-ENTRY
19.1 The Lessor may without notice to the Lessee of its intention so to do
re-enter upon the Premises or any part of it in the name
of the whole and
repossess the Premises and if the Lessor does so, this Lease will be
determinable without prejudice to the Lessor's
rights in respect of any
antecedent breach or non-performance by the Lessee of any of the covenants of
this Lease in any one or more
of the following events (but not otherwise):
19.1.1 if the Rent or any part of it or other moneys payable by the Lessee
under this Lease remains unpaid for the period of fourteen
(14) days after the
Lessee has been notified in writing of the arrears;
19.1.2 if the Lessee fails to remedy any breach or non-observance by it of
any other agreements or terms and conditions on its part
contained in or implied
by this Lease within fourteen (14) days of being required in writing by the
Lessor so to do;
19.1.3 if the Lessee has any of its property in or upon the Premises lawfully
seized or taken in execution of any judgment or other
proceedings;
19.1.4 if the Lessee commits an act of bankruptcy or executes any document
giving effect to an assignment, compromise or composition
for the benefit of its
creditors or (being a body corporate) has a winding upon petition presented
against it or goes into liquidation
voluntarily or compulsorily (except for the
purpose of a reconstruction approved in writing by the Lessor) or a Receiver or
and Manager is appointed in respect of any part of the-Lessee's
property or business.
Nikolaos John Solomos, who is the sole director of the applicant, provided the
respondent with a Deed of Guarantee and Indemnity
whereby he guaranteed to the
respondent the due payment by the applicant of all money due under the Lease and
observance by the applicant
of the terms of the Lease. Mr Solomos also agreed to
indemnify the respondent against any loss that it might suffer as a result of
the breach of the Lease or the non-observance by the applicant of any of the
terms of the Lease.
Property (SA) Pty Ltd (McGees) managed the Premises and the Lease on behalf of
the respondent.
case was largely documentary, although supplemented by the evidence from the
witnesses that were called. Each party called one
applicant called their in-house legal counsel, Ms Nassour, to give evidence. Ms
Nassour reported to Mr Solomos. She was not part
of the finance department of
the applicant. She became involved in the commercial dealings between the
applicant and the respondent
once a breach notice was issued. There was no issue
with her credibility. The issue with her evidence concerned the extent to which
she could give evidence about certain matters and the generality of her
evidence. Ms Nassour gave evidence, which I accept, about
the winding up
proceedings and the negotiations with the Deputy Commissioner. She had the
carriage of these matters on behalf of
the applicant and was in a position to
give that evidence. She also gave evidence about her discussions with the
supporting creditors.
The difficulty with her evidence on these topics was the
weight that could be given to her evidence as to the intentions of the Deputy
Commissioner and the supporting creditors.
solvency was strictly not in issue on the pleadings, Ms Nassour’s evidence
touched upon that issue. The financial
position of the applicant was in issue.
It is clear that Ms Nassour was not in a position to give direct evidence about
the financial
position of the applicant or its solvency and that she relied on
information from others when she expressed any opinions on this
topic. She did
not conduct any assessment herself of the applicant’s financial position.
If the applicant sought more definitive
findings concerning the issue of its
solvency or the financial position, it would have needed to call an insolvency
expert or at
the very least called evidence from its accountant or chief
financial officer. The applicant did not call that evidence. The applicant
did not call direct evidence from the financier which proposes to lend the sum
of $60 million to the applicant and the group
to refinance the group and payout
the Deputy Commissioner and the supporting creditors. In the absence of that
evidence, the Court
is unable to form a conclusion about the likelihood of
finance being obtained.
respondent also called one witness, Mr Dimitrios Aretzis, who is its sole
director and shareholder. He gave evidence about the
history of the tenancy of
the applicant including the repeated failure of the applicant to pay rent in a
timely manner and in accordance
with the terms of the Lease. That evidence was
not challenged and can be accepted. Mr Aretzis also gave evidence about the
circumstances
in which the respondent terminated the Lease and entered into a
new lease with a new tenant which is subject to vacant possession
being given
over the Premises. The objective circumstances surrounding these events was not
the subject of challenge. What was in
controversy were the matters that
motivated Mr Aretzis to act and terminate the Lease. I will deal with that
issue when dealing with
the factual background. I otherwise accept his evidence.
Factual background
applicant is a health and fitness provider that operates in South Australia and
Victoria. It operates about twenty-six gymnasiums
in locations throughout these
States, including from the Premises. The applicant provides associated fitness
services at the premises
from which it operates. The applicant regarded the
Premises as its flagship gymnasium in South Australia and has about 6,500
that use the Premises. Ms Nassour gave evidence about these matters
which was not challenged.
Applicant’s past history of late
applicant has a very poor record of paying rent on time. The respondent issued
notices to remedy breach for failure to pay rent
on numerous occasions including
on 13 January 2021, 15 November 2021, 15 September 2022, 17 April 2023, 17 May
2023, 6 June 2023,
4 March 2024, 6 June 2024, 11 July 2024, 5 August 2024, 5
September 2024, 8 October 2024, 6 November 2024, 9 December 2024, 7 February
2025, 11 March 2025, 10 April 2025, 6 May 2025, 10 June 2025, 8 July 2025 and 5
August 2025. The applicant did not challenge that
evidence or proffer any
explanation for the continued late payments. In these circumstances, it is a
reasonable inference that the
applicant was in the practice of deliberately
breaching the terms of the Lease by making late payments.
up proceedings
findings set out below are made from the documents filed in the Federal Court
winding up proceedings and the evidence of Ms Nassour.
They are not in dispute.
2 April 2025, the Deputy Commissioner issued a statutory demand to the applicant
in which it demanded payment of the sum of $15,023,986.48.
The applicant did not
pay the amount demanded or take any step to set aside the demand. The applicant
did file an originating application
for judicial review with the Federal Court
asserting that the Commissioner ought to have accepted a payment proposal made
applicant. That application was later dismissed. The communications with
the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) indicated that the
applicant had a poor
history of complying with payment plans.
25 June 2025, the Deputy Commissioner issued a winding up petition against the
applicant in the Federal Court on the grounds of
insolvency. A number of other
creditors have appeared at the hearings as supporting creditors. These
supporting creditors included
Fitness Equipment Finance Pty Ltd, Bench Fitness Australia Pty Ltd and Melbourne
Basketball Pty Ltd. Ms Nasour gave evidence that about $800,000 was
currently owed to Fitness Equipment, $200,000 to Melbourne United
and that she
could not recall the amount owed to Bench Fitness. Bench Fitness’s notice
of appearance in the Federal Court stated
that the sum of $597,610 was owed to
it. The notice of appearance of Return to Work in the Federal Court indicated
that it was owed
$60,190.24 by the applicant.
applicant filed a notice of appearance on 11 August 2025 in the winding up
proceedings in which it did not specify any grounds
of opposition to the winding
up. On 21 August 2025, the applicant filed a further notice of appearance which
stated that it opposed
the application for winding up on the ground that it is
solvent. The winding up proceedings have been adjourned from time to time.
last hearing (as at the time of the trial) was held on 16 October 2025 at which
time the proceedings were adjourned to 30 October
2025. The winding up
proceedings are still extant.
s 459C of the
Corporations Act
, for the purposes of the winding up
application, a party that has failed to comply with the terms of the winding up
notice is presumed
to be insolvent. The onus in the winding up proceedings will
therefore fall upon the applicant to prove that it is solvent. Ms Nassour,
behalf of the applicant, instructed the solicitors acting for the applicant in
the winding up proceedings to lodge the notice
asserting solvency. She did not
have personal knowledge of the solvency of the applicant but relied upon advice
from the applicant’s
accountant that it was solvent. In the absence of
evidence from that accountant or anyone with detailed knowledge of the
applicant’s
financial position, including its chief financial officer,
this Court cannot find that there was a reasonable basis for the opposition
the winding up proceedings on the ground of solvency. No positive evidence of
solvency was tendered by the applicant.
applicant has been engaged in negotiations with the Deputy Commissioner and the
supporting creditors. Ms Nassour gave the following
evidence about the in
principle agreement that had been reached between the applicant and the Deputy
Commissioner. I accept that
evidence. The in principle agreement is recorded in
a document, signed on behalf of the applicant and the Deputy Commissioner,
‘Terms of Settlement’, and dated 9 September
The Terms of Settlement
(1) related companies to the applicant will charge and execute mortgages in
favour of the Deputy Commissioner;
(2) by 11 September 2025, Mr Solomos will provide a letter from a financier
stating that the financier will provide finance by 28
November 2025 of at least
$24 million and those funds will be used to pay the tax debts to the Deputy
Commissioner;
(3) the parties will take all steps to discontinue or dismiss the proceedings by
18 September 2025;
(4) by 28 November 2025, all tax debts (of the group, including the applicant)
to the Commissioner will be paid in full which are
estimated to be $24.3
Nassour gave evidence that a letter from the financier has been provided stating
that it will endeavour to provide finance but
it is subject to certain
conditions being satisfied. It is therefore not an unconditional offer of
finance. She said that the financiers
will not provide an unconditional offer
until or at about the time that they release the funds. The Deputy Commissioner
prepared to continue to adjourn the proceedings. The proceedings as at
the date of the hearing have been adjourned to 30 October
2025. Ms Nassour said
that the financier has previously provided finance to the applicant for separate
matters and the applicant
is confident that the financier will provide this
funding. If the funding becomes unconditional, the sum of $60 million will be
for the restructure of the whole group.
is not possible on the evidence before this Court to make a finding as to the
likelihood of the funding being provided and the
debts of the Deputy
Commissioner and the supporting creditors being paid. Ms Nassour gave evidence
that she thought that it was likely
that the finance would be obtained.
Conditional approval had been obtained from the financier but there was no
evidence about those
conditions or the likelihood that they would be satisfied.
No evidence was provided from the financier, either oral or documentary.
applicant could only submit that the financier had indicated realistic
conditions.
follows that the Court is not in a position to make a finding about the
likelihood that the in principle settlement of the winding
up proceedings
between the applicant and the Deputy Commissioner will be effective in resolving
the winding up proceedings. The agreement
is dependent on the financier
providing finance of at least $24 million by 28 November 2025. The terms of the
in principle agreement
have not been complied with in that the applicant has not
provided an unconditional letter from the financier by 11 September 2025
all. There was no evidence from the ATO about their position in relation to the
settlement agreement other than it has been
prepared to date to adjourn the
winding up proceedings. There was no evidence about how the supporting creditors
would be repaid
from the refinancing or how the proceeds of the refinancing
would be distributed. There was no evidence from the supporting creditors
how long they would be prepared to wait to be
was not directly in issue in these proceedings. The parties therefore did not
adduce the necessary evidence to enable the
Court to make a definitive
determination of solvency. In particular, the applicant’s ability to have
access to funds was not
the subject of evidence.
the evidence suggested that at the date of the presentation of the petition by
the Deputy Commissioner on 25 June 2025 and
on 20 August 2025 (when the Lease
was terminated) it was at least likely that the applicant was not solvent. I
make this finding
based on the following evidence:
(1) the aged payable summary of the applicant shows aged creditors (i.e.
creditors beyond 90 days) in the sum of $4.909 million;
(2) in the period from 3 June 2025, the applicant has been consistently in
default of its rental obligations in respect of a number
of its properties,
although not for large sums of monies. The applicant for a period of over 2
years did not pay the respondent rent
on the due date;
(3) the applicant did not pay the sum of $15,023,986.40 which was demanded by
the Deputy Commissioner in the statutory demand issued
on 2 April 2025. The
Deputy Commissioner had rejected payment plans that had been proposed by the
(4) the Deputy Commissioner issued the winding up petition on 25 June 2025. At
that time, the applicant had paid, or was entitled
to credits, in the sum of
$3,357,746.92 such that as at 24 June 2025, the sum of $11,666,239.56 was
outstanding;
(5) throughout September 2025, the applicant owed the Deputy Commissioner over
$12 million;
(6) Melbourne United filed a notice of appearance as a supporting creditor in
the winding up proceedings indicating that it was owed
$222,918.50;
(7) Return to Work Corporation of South Australia filed a notice of appearance
as a supporting creditor in the winding up proceedings
indicating that it was
owed $60,190.24;
(8) Fitness Equipment Finance Pty Ltd filed a notice of appearance as a
supporting creditor in the winding up proceedings indicating
that it was owed
$631,427.98. An affidavit filed on behalf of Fitness Equipment Finance Pty Ltd
on 30 September 2025 deposed to this
debt increasing to $1,111,062.43 as at that
(9) Bench Fitness Australia Pty Ltd filed a notice of appearance as a supporting
creditor in the winding up proceedings indicating
that it was owed
$597,610.53;
(10) AGL Sales Pty Ltd filed a notice of appearance as a supporting creditor in
the winding up proceedings indicating that it was
owed $113,941.24;
(11) the profit and loss statement for the applicant for the year ending 30 June
2024 showed a loss of $5.818 million and the statement
for the year ending 30
June 2025 showed a loss of $1.717 million; and
(12) the in principle agreement with the Deputy Commissioner made on
9 September 2025 indicated that $24 million was required, as
refinancing, to pay the Commissioner.
was no evidence adduced by the applicant that countered that evidence.
the same reasons, it appears that the solvency of the applicant as at the date
of hearing is dependent on the obtaining of finance
from the proposed financier
or from some other source.
Issuing of Notice to Remedy and
Notice of Re-Entry
circumstances that gave rise to the issuing by the respondent of the notice to
remedy breach on 5 August 2025 and the notice
of re-entry dated 20 August 2025
are not in dispute although the motivations of the respondent in issuing those
notices are a matter
of dispute. The objective circumstances are either admitted
on the pleadings or are the subject of evidence from Mr Aretzis which
contentious. I make the following findings:
(1) in early July 2025, Mr Aretzis received advice from various real estate
agencies that the ATO was taking steps to place the applicant
into liquidation.
Mr Aretzis was told that other landlords were seeking to terminate their leases
with the applicant.
(2) in late July 2025, Mr Aretzis and McGees had a conversation about obtaining
a new tenant. Mr Aretzis gave evidence that he had
never had a vacancy at the
Premises. By this time, Mr Aretzis was aware of the winding up notice issued
against the applicant.
(3) on 1 August 2025, McGees, on behalf of the respondent, met with the new
tenant to discuss a proposed lease of the Premises. That
fact was admitted on
the revised pleadings.
(4) on 4 August 2025, Mr Aretzis met with McGees and was advised by McGees that
the new tenant was interested in taking a lease of
the Premises. Mr Aretzis gave
evidence about these matters and the fact of the meeting was admitted on the
(5) on 5 August 2025, the respondent served on the applicant a notice to remedy
breach for the non-payment of rent requiring the
breach to be remedied by 19
August 2025. That fact is admitted on the pleadings. Mr Aretzis gave
evidence that the reason that the
notice was served was because he had not
received the rent that was due and the applicant was therefore in breach of the
the Lease and that the issuing of the notice had nothing to do with the
proposed new tenant. Mr Aretzis said it had been the common
practice of the
respondent to issue notices to the applicant because they had not paid the rent
on the due date.
(6) on 7 August 2025, the new tenant provided a written proposal to McGees. This
was admitted on the pleadings.
(7) on 13 August 2025, Mr Aretzis, on behalf of the respondent, met with McGees
and the new tenant to discuss the new tenant’s
proposal to lease the
Premises. The proposed rent that would be payable by the new tenant was
discussed at that meeting. The rent
was greater than that being paid by the
applicant. Mr Aretzis gave evidence about these matters and the meeting was
admitted on the
(8) the new tenant provided an Agreement to Lease and a Disclosure Statement on
15 August 2025. The Agreement to Lease was subject
to vacant possession being
obtained by 30 October 2025 (that date has now been extended to 6 November
2025). The rent payable under
the Agreement to Lease was $262,350 per annum plus
GST. The new tenant was aware that the ATO had a petition to wind up the
Mr Aretzis gave evidence about these matters.
(9) on 15 August 2025, the new tenant paid a deposit of $26,987.94.
Mr Aretzis gave evidence about this payment which was also admitted
(10) Mr Aretzis gave evidence that he had received enquiries from other agents
advising him that they had potential tenants that
would be interested in taking
a lease of the Premises if it becomes available.
(11) the respondent signed the Agreement to Lease on 19 August 2025. The
respondent signed the Agreement to Lease prior to the expiry
of the period of
time to pay the outstanding rent which was specified in the Notice to Remedy
(12) by the close of business on 19 August 2025, the respondent had not remedied
the breach of the Lease by paying the outstanding
rent. This fact was admitted
on the pleadings.
(13) on 20 August 2025, the applicant paid the outstanding rent that was
required under the Notice to Remedy. Mr Aretzis gave evidence
which was also admitted on the pleadings.
(14) on 20 August 2025, the respondent had arranged for a sheriff to attend at
the Premises to change the locks. The applicant paid
the outstanding rent when
it was advised that the sheriff was in attendance at the Premises. As a
consequence, the sheriff did not
proceed to change the locks. Mr Aretzis said
that at that time he had decided to terminate the Lease.
(15) on 20 August 2025, after the payment of the outstanding rent, the
respondent issued the Notice of Re-Entry, based on the winding
up petition. Mr
Aretzis gave evidence that it was not until the rent was paid on 20 August 2025
that he was advised that there was
another clause in the Lease that permitted
re-entry based on the existence of the winding up petition. He said that he made
decision based on the applicant’s consistent failure to pay rent on
time over the past 5 years and that he had previous experiences
of receivers
stepping in and only receiving a few cents in the dollar. In re-examination, he
expanded on these matters and said further
that the commercial decision that he
made to terminate the Lease was based on the deterioration of the tenancy
including the reduction
in trading hours and the reduced stock being sold by the
applicant out of the Premises, other premises from which the applicant operated
being closed down or the landlords of those premises terminating the lease, the
frequent changes in the chief financial officer of
the applicant and the
aggressive and threatening conduct of Mr Solomos. Mr Aretzis said that he made
the commercial decision to terminate
the Lease because the opportunity arose
because of the ATO winding up petition. He said that he did not want to be in
the position
of getting only a few cents in the dollars and only getting paid
the rent if they were about to send the sheriffs in to change the
applicant issued these proceedings for relief against forfeiture on
22 August 2025. At that time, the respondent had served the
re-entry and termination but had not physically re-entered the Premises. On that
date, the Court ordered an interim injunction
up until 29 August 2025 that the
respondent be restrained from taking any further steps to terminate the Lease
and re-enter the Premises.
On 29 August 2025, that order was extended until
further order.
Aretzis gave evidence that prior to 20 August 2025 it was the respondent’s
preference that the applicant remain as the lessee
of the Premises and pay the
rent but that it had a fallback position if the applicant went
‘bust’. Mr Aretzis denied
that he had formed the view prior to
20 August 2025 that he wanted the Lease terminated and to re-enter the Premises.
Reasons of the respondent for terminating the Lease and
re-entering the Premises
to the motivations of the respondent, I make the following findings. First, by
no later than 15 August 2025 and possibly earlier,
the respondent had made a
decision that it did not wish the applicant to continue as the lessee of the
Premises and wished them to
be replaced by the new tenant. I have made this
finding because:
(a) on 15 August 2025, the new tenant signed the Agreement to Lease;
(b) on the same date, the new tenant paid a significant deposit for that
(c) the respondent counter signed the Agreement to Lease on 19 August 2025; and
(d) on 20 August 2025, the respondent moved immediately to change the locks and
was only thwarted from re-entry on the ground of
the failure to pay rent by the
actions taken by the applicant to then immediately pay the rent.
the respondent formed the view that because of the non-payment of rent and the
long history of non-payment and the fact
that there was a winding up petition
against the applicant, it would act immediately if the rent was not paid within
the 14 days
provided for in the Notice to Remedy Breach. I make this finding
(a) the evidence from Mr Aretzis that both of these matters were relevant
considerations when the respondent re-entered; and
(b) Mr Aretzis was aware of the winding up proceedings and had a past history of
only receiving cents in the dollar in a winding
up or receivership.
do not find that the respondent had formed the view prior to 20 August 2025 that
it would terminate the Lease on the ground that
there was a winding up petition
against the applicant. There is no direct evidence that the respondent held this
view. It is contrary
to the evidence of Mr Aretzis. The short period between the
time in which it became apparent that the respondent could not rely upon
applicant’s failure to pay rent and the notice of re-entry is evidence
from which an inference could be made that the respondent
had already been
determined that it would re-enter based on the winding up petition. However, it
is equally consistent with the respondent
receiving further advice as to the
options open to it. On the available evidence, I do not consider that it is more
probable than
not that the respondent had formed the intention to terminate the
Lease and re-enter the Premises on the grounds of the winding up
petition prior
to 20 August 2025.
Legal principles
applicant has invoked the equitable jurisdiction of the Court as the basis for
its claim for relief against forfeiture. It has
expressly disavowed reliance
upon the statutory jurisdiction that is provided for under
and Commercial Leases Act 1995
(SA) which permits reinstatement of rights
under a retail shop lease that has been terminated. The applicant also did not
place reliance on
Landlord and Tenant Act 1936
Relief under the
Landlord and Tenant Act
may be granted
by the Supreme Court. If an application had been made to the Supreme Court, an
issue would have arisen as to whether
relief could be granted in circumstances
where the right of re-entry was not consequent upon a breach of the lease (but
existence of a fact). The applicant had expressed the view that
relief would not have been available from the Supreme Court because
such relief
operated to relieve a tenant from a breach of the terms of the Lease and there
was no breach in this case. In
Melacare International Ltd (in receivership) v
Daley Investments Pty Ltd
Bryson J expressed the view that
Conveyancing Act
(which is similar in its terms to
Landlord and Tenant
) applied only to cases where there was a breach of a term of the lease
and not to a circumstance where the right of re-entry was
not consequent upon
the breach of a term. Subsequent cases have cast doubt on the correctness of
that conclusion.
However, this is
not a matter that the Court needs to determine in these proceedings.
is no doubt that relief against forfeiture may be granted by the Court in its
equitable jurisdiction.
equitable basis upon which the Court will intervene to grant relief is
unconscionability on the part of the landlord to insist
on its legal right to
Shiloh Spinners Ltd
Lord Wilberforce
stated that where the primary object of the bargain was to secure a stated
result which can effectively be attained
when the matter comes before the court
and where the forfeiture provision is added by way of security for the
production of that
result, relief may be granted in appropriate cases. In
Hyman v Rose,
Lord Lawburn LC spoke of a party not taking advantage of a
breach by forfeiture of the lease from which they are not commensurately
irreparably damaged.
follows that I do not accept the respondent’s submission that relief is
only granted in cases involving fraud, accident,
surprise or mistake. The
passage relied upon by the respondent for that proposition comes from
Tanwar Enterprises Pty Ltd v
where the court
makes it clear that those matters do not exhaustively set out the circumstances
in which equity might
granting of relief against forfeiture is discretionary and not of
Wilkinson v S &
S Gikas Pty Ltd
(Wilkinson),
Campbell J held:
The granting of relief against forfeiture is
discretionary. In relation to a lease, the principle that is generally applied
the power to re-enter or forfeit for non-payment of rent is regarded as
being in substance security for the rent. Provided the lessor
and other persons
concerned can be put in the same position as before the forfeiture or re-entry,
the Court will usually grant relief
against forfeiture upon payment of rent,
costs, interest and other expenses:
Pioneer Quarries (Sydney) Pty Ltd v
Permanent Trustee Co of New South Wales Ltd
(1970) 2 BPR 9562. If those
terms are offered, it is only in a rare case that the Court would refuse relief
against forfeiture. The
principle on which that is done is that, once the
landlord has got all that the right of re-entry was, in equity's eyes, security
for, it would be unconscionable for the landlord to insist on its legal right to
are not rigid rules for the exercise of that
discretion.
discretionary matters that will favour a refusal of relief include the futility
of granting relief (as demonstrated above)
or insolvency of the
whether the default was
wilful, the gravity of the breach and the damage that might be suffered by the
landlord if relief is granted.
There must be a reasonable expectation that the tenant will honour its
obligations in the future.
in making the application for relief against forfeiture can be a relevant
consideration.
Delay is not a
relevant matter in the present application as the applicant instituted
proceedings for relief against forfeiture on
22 August 2025, two days after the
respondent serve the notice of re-entry.
equitable jurisdiction to grant relief has been described as robust. In
Sussex Pty Ltd v Commerce Building Pty Ltd
It may be said of the equity to relieve against forfeiture
that it is a relatively robust equity. It is available to protect defaulters,
and survives proof of a propensity to default. It is not particularly solicitous
of the interests of third parties, unless the third
parties acquire a leasehold
interest in the property with no actual or constructive notice that a prior
lessee may have a right to
apply for relief against forfeiture, even though the
prior lessee may not have acted in an expeditious way to obtain the relief.
the availability of the relief remains an established doctrine of Equity. Little
knowledge of the circumstances that have existed
over previous centuries in
England is required in order to understand the reasons for the development of
the equity. It remains attractive
in the modern world as it provides succour to
susceptible lessees who are down on their luck. However, there is a case to be
that Equity should think carefully about how the doctrine is to be applied
in truly commercial contexts.
cases involving non-payment of rent, the approach is that the right of re-entry
is to be regarded as security for the payment
of rent. If the rent is paid and
the landlord is put back in the same position, then it will be rare or
exceptional not to grant
relief. In such cases there is a heavy burden on the
lessor to establish that relief against forfeiture should not be
If compliance with the
agreement can be achieved without forfeiture, relief will generally be
security granted by the right of forfeiture is not security in the sense of
conferring a charge or similar interest to secure
payment but rather in the
sense of bringing about the payment. These principles are evident from the
passages referred to above in
and from the
The Heat Group Pty Ltd v Paragan Care Limited
unconscionability will arise because the landlord is exercising a right
available to it under the Lease when the exercise of
that right is not needed to
protect its legitimate interests and therefore must be considered to be
exercised for an ulterior or
unnecessary purpose or is disproportionate.
rare or exceptional cases where relief may not be granted even though the rent
has been paid up to date might arise where the
tenant is hopelessly
(as the grant of
relief in such a case might be regarded a futile) or where there have been
previous lengthy defaults in the payment
of rent (as that permits an inference
to be drawn that the rent will not be paid in the future or at least will not be
paid for some
considerable
Kofoo Sussex
Robb J referred to authorities that held relief against forfeiture may be
granted even where there was evidence of reasonably based
concerns of the
ability of the lessee to comply with the financial obligations under the
(including where the
lessee had entered into a scheme or arrangement with its creditors) or where
there were serious concerns as
to the lessee’s ability to pay rent in the
or even where it is
The basis of these
decisions is the principle that equity regards forfeiture of the lease as the
ultimate security mechanism to ensure
compliance with the agreement and if that
can be achieved without forfeiture, relief will be
default, including late payment of rent is a relevant matter to take into
account when the court comes to exercise its
discretion.
The late payment of
rent may impact on a landlord’s ability to meet their own debts and may
cause administrative
inconvenience.
However, the
court will usually grant relief where the outstanding rent will be paid,
notwithstanding that there has been a history
of some delinquency in the timely
payment of rent.
are some specific matters that arise in the context of this claim for
the breach (or in this case, the circumstance giving rise to the right of
forfeiture) has not been remedied. In the usual
case, the breach will have been
remedied. That is not the case in these proceedings as the winding up
proceedings remain on foot
and have not been terminated or dismissed. In
Lontav Pty Ltd v Pineross Custodial Services Pty Ltd
held that an unremedied breach may not be fatal to an application. That is
because relief may be granted on conditions that
will ensure that the terms of
the lease will be observed, despite the existing breach and that the parties are
placed in the same
position as if the terms of the lease had been
referred to a number of cases where relief was granted despite
continuing breaches. They were: (1)
Australian Mutual Provident Society v 400
St Kilda Road Pty Ltd
where there was an ongoing breach of a clause that prohibited sub-letting
without consent; (2)
where the on-going
breach was a failure to comply with a notice to repair and the House of Lords
considered that relief could be
granted on the condition that the appellants
deposit a sufficient sum to secure restoration of the building to its former
at the end of the lease; and (3)
Duke of Westminster v
where relief
was granted where the applicant had contravened the terms of the lease by
sub-letting the premises without consent and
making structural alterations
without consent. Relief was granted to the lessee on the basis that the premises
be restored within
a period of 2 years, a period of time that was within the
term of the lease. Relief was not granted to the sub-lessee because his
was deliberate.
, Dixon J reviewed these cases and held that relief may be granted,
despite a continuing breach, if there is no practical disadvantage
landlord if the breach remains until, but not beyond the end of the term of the
Dixon J held that it was not probable that the breach
would be remedied by the end of the term and therefore the primary object of
bargain would not be secured for the benefit of the landlord. Relief was
therefore refused.
follows from the above analysis that, contrary to the submission of the
respondent that the failure to remedy the default (or,
in this case, the
continued existence of the event) is not fatal to the application for relief. It
will however be a relevant matter.
it follows from the above discussion that relief may be granted on conditions.
Kofoo Sussex
, Robb J quoted with approval a passage from P Butt,
that the court can impose terms on the
grant of relief against forfeiture and may, for example, in addition to
requiring a successful
tenant to pay the arrears of rent, require the
landlord’s costs of the proceedings to be paid and for future payments of
to be made by standing order with a
which was referred to
the House of
Lords imposed a condition that the appellants deposit a sufficient sum to secure
the restoration of the building to
its former condition at the end of the
the court may be cautious about applying the doctrine of relief against
forfeiture in a commercial
The commercial context
of the lease is therefore a relevant circumstance to consider by the court when
exercising its discretion.
Kofoo Sussex
, Robb J held that ‘there
is a case to be made that Equity should think carefully about how the doctrine
is to be applied in
truly commercial contexts’. In
International
, Bryson J held that it was not unconscionable or inequitable
to rely on a contractual right of
termination.
Enterprises Pty Ltd v Cauchi
the High Court made it clear that courts should be reluctant to interfere with
deliberately negotiated contractual rights.
the re-letting of the Premises to a third party is not a bar to granting relief
against forfeiture.
importance of that circumstance, as a matter of discretion, will depend on
whether the third party has acquired rights over the
property without notice of
the tenant’s claim. If the third party knew of the circumstances
surrounding the forfeiture of the
lease, then they may be taken to have notice
of the tenant’s claim to seek relief and will take subject to that
Stanley J in
held that where the
party knew of the relevant circumstances and had notice of the lessee’s
claim to seek relief against forfeiture,
relief may be granted.
the existence of a guarantee of the tenant’s obligations is a relevant
matter, particularly in cases involving non-payment
of rent. In
Forbes J held that
relief is unlikely to be refused where the lease provides a guarantee to cover
the tenant’s obligations.
Robb J made the same observation in
the Court has power, as part of its equitable jurisdiction, to grant relief
against forfeiture, even though the claim does
not relate to non-payment of rent
or even a breach of lease by the
The forfeiture of the
Lease in the present proceedings was based on the occurrence of an event, namely
the issuing of a winding up
petition against the applicant. The basis of the
intervention by equity in such cases is covered by the statement of Lord
Wilberforce
Shiloh Spinners Ltd v
FineTea Pty Ltd (Administrator Appointed)
Re Hi-Fi Sydney Pty
Ltd (Administrator
Appointed),
applied the statement in
Shiloh Spinners Ltd
that there were three situations where equity would grant relief: first, where
it is possible to state the object of the
transaction and of the insertion of
the right to forfeit is essentially to secure the payment of money; secondly,
where there has
been fraud, accident, mistake or surprise (the traditional heads
of equitable jurisdiction); and thirdly, where the primary object
of a bargain
is to secure a stated result which can be effectively obtained when the matter
comes before the court and where the
forfeiture provision is security for the
production for that result. The first and third categories of
Shiloh Spinners
have as their touchstone the principle that forfeiture is seen as a
means of securing the bargain and not to provide the secured party
with benefits
over and above what is necessary to achieve that end and not to impose on the
party giving security a penalty or sanction
over and above the primary purpose
of the bargain.
The conduct of
seeking relief over and above what is necessary gives rise to the
unconscionability required to claim relief against
forfeiture.
Determination
At what time is unconscionability determined
date upon which the alleged unconscionability that is asserted by the applicant
should be determined is in issue in these proceedings.
The respondent submitted
that as a matter of law and the pleaded case of the applicant the question of
unconscionability should
be determined by reference to the events and
circumstances that existed at the date of the termination of the Lease, namely
August 2025. The applicant submitted that the relevant date for
determining unconscionability was the date of the hearing of these
proceedings.
do not accept the respondent’s submission as to when the alleged
unconscionability is to be assessed. A claim for relief
against forfeiture
should be determined at the date of the hearing. If the court grants the relief,
it does so on that date that
it delivers judgment. There is no relief against
forfeiture until the court makes an order. The order of the court is remedial.
orders (similar to a remedial constructive trust) are orders that are
imposed by the court and take effect from the date of judgment.
Matters that
occurred after the termination of the lease and in the period up to the hearing
can be taken into account. For example,
in the traditional claim for relief
against forfeiture because of non-payment of rent, payments of rent after the
termination are
considered. The court forms a view as to the capacity of the
applicant for relief, as at the date of the hearing, to meet future
payments of
rent. It is clear therefore that events and circumstances subsequent to the
termination may be taken into account in
determining whether to grant relief
against forfeiture.
pleaded case of the applicant was that it was unconscionable for the applicant
to exercise its right to terminate the Lease in
circumstances where:
(a) the winding up proceedings had been commenced and not determined and the
applicant asserted and intends to prove that it is solvent
in those proceedings;
(b) the respondent had formed the intention to evict the applicant and had acted
opportunistically to do so.
respondent further submitted that by its pleading the applicant had limited
itself to seeking relief against the termination
of the Lease based on the
circumstances that existed at that time. I accept that the applicant’s
claim is directed to unconscionability
in terminating the Lease. However, the
evidence adduced by the applicant included matters that were clearly directed to
matters after
that time, namely the in-principle agreement with the Deputy
Commissioner, the refinancing and the negotiations with the supporting
creditors. This evidence was adduced without objection.
for the respondent properly conceded that he would not stand in the way of the
Court having regard to the in-principle agreement
and the applicant’s real
case. At the same time, the respondent submitted that the applicant had not
pleaded unconscionability
that occurred after the date of termination of the
Lease. The respondent submitted that the applicant should have pleaded that it
was unconscionable for the respondent to continue to rely on the clause of the
Lease permitting termination and re-entry on the existence
of a winding up
applicant’s real case (as evident from the settlement agreement) was that
it is likely that the winding up order will not
be made (because it intends to
prove that it is solvent) and therefore relief against forfeiture is
appropriate. The parties have
conducted the proceedings on the basis that the
applicant was seeking relief against the re-entry based on the current state of
winding up proceedings and the events and circumstances that have occurred
since the date of the termination of the Lease, including
the in-principle
agreement with the Deputy Commissioner, the refinancing being sought by the
applicant, negotiations for the payment
of the supporting creditors and the
payment of rent since the termination of the Lease. As the applicant submitted,
its pleading
is directed, at least in part, to events after termination, by its
plea that it intends to prove in the winding up proceedings that
it is solvent.
I do not consider that there is any prejudice to the respondent in determining
the applicant’s claim by reference
to the respondent’s continued
reliance on the right of termination and re-entry based on the existence of the
winding up petition
by reference to the events and circumstances that existed as
at the date of the hearing. I am conscious also a statement of claim
always the best method to formulate a claim for relief against forfeiture where
the circumstances may change frequently as
further events occur.
these circumstances, I propose to determine the matter on the basis that the
applicant’s claim is that relief should be
granted because the
respondent’s continual reliance on the notice of termination and re-entry
was unconscionable.
The applicant’s case
applicant submits that it is unconscionable for the respondent to insist upon
its legal right of termination and re-entry and
that the Court, as part of its
equitable jurisdiction, should grant relief against forfeiture. The applicant
submits that it will
lose a valuable right, namely the Lease, if relief is not
granted. It has a right under the Lease to occupy the Premises until 2028
right of renewal of a further 5 years. The applicant submits that the breach or,
more accurately, the non-observance of the
term of the Lease can be regarded as
trivial and therefore the exercise of the right of termination is
disproportionate to the loss
that could be suffered by the respondent. The
respondent will not be irreparably damaged if relief is granted. The applicant
that the rent was being paid and there was overwhelming evidence that
refinancing would occur in the near future and the winding
up proceedings
dismissed with the Deputy Commissioner and supporting creditors paid. The
applicant also contended that the respondent
had acted opportunistically in that
it had formed the intention to evict the applicant for non-payment of rent and
enter into a new
lease with the third party for an increased rent but when the
rent was paid by the applicant, used another means to terminate the
re-enter the Premises.
applicant described the breach of the Lease as trivial. Although the existence
of the winding up petition was not a breach of
the Lease, I do not consider that
it could be described as a trivial event. The winding up petition is an event
that creates a substantial
risk for the respondent.
applicant also referred to the discretionary matters that it submitted favoured
the granting of relief. It submitted that if
relief is not granted, the business
that it conducts from the Premises, including the trading of apparel and
supplements, will likely
be lost or at least severely disrupted. The applicant
referred to the loss of members of the business and the business being the
flagship gymnasium for the applicant’s business in South Australia. It
submitted that none of these matters were contested.
respondent’s defence to the claim for relief against
respondent denies that the applicant is entitled to relief. It submits that it
is entitled to rely on its contractual right to
terminate the Lease. The
respondent referred to the long history of the applicant making late payments of
rent and the practice of
the applicant only to make payment following the issue
of a notice to remedy default. The respondent submitted that it did not now
and could not have known that the applicant was going to assert and intended to
prove in the winding up proceedings that it
was solvent as the applicant did not
file until 22 August 2025 a notice of appearance in the winding up
proceedings stating that
it opposed the winding up proceedings on the basis that
it was solvent. The respondent also submits that the granting of relief would
futile as it could immediately terminate the Lease and re-enter the Premises
based on the continued existence of the winding up
Approach of the Court
Musico Corporation Pty Ltd v Master Truck Service Pty Ltd
Corporation)
point that in exercising its discretion as to whether or not to grant relief
against forfeiture, the Court is not weighing
up factors that may favour the
granting of the relief and those that favour the refusal of relief. Parker J
held that it was fundamentally
incorrect to approach the matter as a matter
depending on the balance of convenience between the parties as the Court would
the hearing of an interlocutory application. Rather, the task of the Court
in hearing a case for relief against forfeiture is to
determine whether the
exercise of the landlord’s legal right to terminate is, in all the
circumstances, unconscionable.
Some of the considerations that are relevant to an assessment as to whether the
actions were unconscionable were referred to by
Keane J (as he then was) in
Ace Property Holdings Pty Ltd v Australian Postal
Corporation
including the conduct of the applicant for relief, including whether the default
was inadvertent or wilful, the gravity of the
breaches, the damage to the
lessor, the relative loss to the lessee and the disparity between the value of
the property forfeited
and the damage caused by the breach. These are all
matters that go to whether, in the circumstances, insisting on the right to
is unconscionable, although they could be referred to as discretionary
considerations. If the conclusion of the Court that the respondent’s
conduct was unconscionable, it would be in rare cases that an order granting
relief would not be made as a matter of discretion.
of the right to determine the Lease and re-enter because of the existence of the
winding up petition
first step in determining the claim for relief is to identify the purpose for
the inclusion in the Lease of the right to determine
the Lease and re-enter
because of the existence of a winding up petition (which is not a breach of the
lease). The existence of winding
up proceedings have been a factor in a
court’s refusal to grant relief against forfeiture for non-payment of
Direct Food Supplies (Victoria) Pty Ltd v D.L.V. Pty
Starke J found that the
lessee would be unable to pay rent in the future or if it did, it may well have
to disgorge such payments
under winding up proceedings. This passage was quoted
by Bryson J in
International
and Robb J in
Sneakerboy.
Melacare International
, Bryson J found that there were strong grounds for
an apprehension that any payment which the lessor received for future rent may
have to be disgorged later or perhaps sooner, under a liquidation or other
insolvency arrangement.
the right of re-entry in the event of there being a winding up petition against
the applicant is security for future non-payment
of rent (on the basis that
there is a risk that they applicant may be insolvent) and further is security
for the risk that if payments
were made, they may have to be disgorged if a
winding up order was subsequently made. In broad terms, the purpose of the right
re-entry in the event that there is a winding up petition is to protect the
respondent from continuing in a relationship with a lessee
who may be wound
applicant submitted that rent was being paid and was up to date and the risk of
a preference claim was small because of the ultimate
effect defence. Therefore,
it contended that the rationale for the granting of relief was not applicable in
the present case.
task of the Court is to determine whether in light of the applicant’s
payment of rent and the steps that have been taken
to refinance which, if
successful, will result in the likely dismissal of the petition, the resort by
the respondent to its rights
under the Lease to re-enter because of the
existence of the winding up proceedings is unconscionable. It is therefore
necessary to
examine the position as to the future payment of rent and the
prospects of a preference being recovered against the respondent if
it received
payments of rent and the applicant later went into liquidation.
to the payment of rent, the respondent has been put back in the position that
the right of entry is (in that aspect) security
for. It is a condition of the
injunction, preventing the respondent from taking any further step to re-enter
the Premises, that the
applicant pay rent weekly in advance. Save for one
occasion when it was a day late in making payment, the applicant has since 22
August 2025 paid rent weekly in advance. The outstanding rent has been paid and
rent is being paid seven days in advance (with the
exception of the one occasion
in which it was one day late).
future payment of rent is dependent on the refinancing. If the refinancing does
not occur, then there is a serious risk that
rent will not be paid. The failure
of the applicant to pay the Deputy Commissioner and supporting creditors
suggests that the applicant
is experiencing cash flow problems and is dependent
on the refinancing to make those payments.
the refinancing takes place, the winding up petition is dismissed and the Deputy
Commissioner and the supporting creditors are
repaid, it is not possible to
determine whether there is a serious risk that the applicant will be unable to
pay rent. There was
no evidence as to how the proceeds of the refinancing would
be distributed and whether they would be sufficient to remedy the cash
problems of the applicant. It might be inferred that the refinancing is for the
purpose of remedying the cashflow problems
of the applicant.
is not possible to make an assessment of the applicant’s solvency at the
present time. It cannot be said that the applicant
is now hopelessly insolvent
or is likely to be unable to pay rent in the future. The Terms of Settlement
with the Deputy Commissioner
record that a financier is to provide at least $24 million to the applicant by
28 November 2025 (subject to certain conditions).
Ms Nassour gave evidence that
the financier is to provide $60 million as part of a restructure of the whole
the assessment of the solvency of the applicant been undertaken without the
evidence of the refinancing, then I would have had
serious doubts about the
solvency of the applicant.
applicant did not adduce any evidence as the likelihood of the refinancing
occurring other than some general evidence from Ms
Nassour that she believed
that it would occur. There was no evidence from the financier. The conditions
that were set by the financier
for the refinancing were not in evidence and
therefore the Court could not make any assessment as to the likelihood that
these conditions
would be satisfied. It was within the power of the applicant to
adduce that evidence but it did not choose to do so. The Court therefore
unable to make an assessment on the likelihood of the refinancing taking place.
The applicant’s contention therefore that
the terms of settlement are
close to being completed and the Deputy Commissioner and the supporting
creditors are content with the
current situation cannot be accepted on the
evidence of the Court.
to the possibility that payments of rent received by the respondent may have to
be disgorged, it is not possible to determine
whether any payments that the
respondent receives while the winding up petition is still on foot will be
recoverable by a liquidator
of the applicant as an unfair preference under ss
588FA and 588FE of the
Corporations Act
in the event that the applicant
is wound up. A claim by a liquidator for an undue preference against the
respondent might be met by
the ultimate effect defence as explained in
Airservices Australia v
Mining and Exploration Ltd
(Re Centaur
Centuar Mining,
Robson J applied the landlord’s defence and held that
payment of rent to enable a company to retain the use of the premises
carried on business, in circumstances where the landlord could take possession
if the payments were not made, did not have
the ultimate effect of
disadvantaging creditors.
find that there is a risk in the event that the applicant went into liquidation
that payments of rent received by the respondent
during the period of the
winding up may have to be disgorged.
Other relevant factors
in considering claim for relief
respondent submitted that there were a number of other factors relevant to the
determination of the claim for relief against
forfeiture and which favour the
dismissal of that claim.
the respondent submits that granting the application for relief against
forfeiture would be futile as there would be nothing
that would prevent the
respondent, if relief were granted, from again immediately terminating the Lease
based on the continued existence
of the winding up petition. The respondent
submitted that the applicant had not applied for an injunction preventing it
from exercising
its rights. I accept that is the case, but if the respondent
terminated the Lease again and re-entered the Premises, then it would
likelihood face a further application for relief against forfeiture. In such an
event, the Court should not engage in speculation
that further application. It cannot therefore be said that the present
application for relief is futile.
the respondent relies upon the prejudice of losing the opportunity to lease the
Premises to the third party if relief is
given. The proposed lease with the
third party is subject to vacant possession being granted by 30 October 2025
(later extended to
6 November 2025). The prejudice that the respondent might
suffer is two-fold. First, it loses the new tenant who is willing to step
almost immediately so that there would be no period without rent; and secondly,
it loses the increased rental that the new tenant
is willing to pay and the
prospect of a better relationship with the tenant with no history of
to the first matter, that is a relevant consideration. If relief is granted, but
the applicant is subsequently wound up, then
it is likely that there will be a
period of time when the respondent does not receive rent for the Premises. That
is the case even
though the evidence from Mr Aretzis was that the respondent had
not had difficulty in the past in attracting a tenant for the Premises.
not likely that the new tenant will be prepared to continue to wait to commence
the tenancy when it is not known when the winding
up proceedings will be
finalised and the Premises will become available.
to the second matter, the respondent commenced negotiations with the third party
prior to sending the Notice to Remedy Breach
or terminating the Lease because of
the winding up petition. It is therefore clear that when commencing the
negotiations the Lease
was still binding on the respondent and that any interest
of the new tenant was subject to the existing Lease. Mr Aretzis admitted
for this reason that a term in the new tenancy was that the lease was subject to
vacant possession. The Agreement to Lease
was signed by the new tenant and the
respondent on 15 August 2025 and 19 August 2015, at which times the Lease had
not been terminated.
In these circumstances, the proposed re-letting of the
Premises to the third party is not a bar to relief. As the respondent and
party knew of the circumstances surrounding the termination, they are taken to
have notice of the applicant’s claim to
seek relief against forfeiture and
will take subject to that
the respondent relies upon the history of late payments of rent that were made
by the applicant. That delinquency frequently
or even invariably required the
respondent to issue Notices to Remedy Default. Over twenty notices of default
have been issued by
the respondent to the applicant for non-payment of rent. The
principle that courts will normally grant relief against forfeiture
provided the
landlord is compensated for any loss from the non-payment will normally mean
that a history of tardy payments is not
in itself a ground for refusing
In the present case, the
history of late payments demonstrates a deliberate disregard of the
respondent’s rights by the applicant
over a period of time and an
unwillingness to pay rent on time without the respondent being forced to take
action. The history of
tardy payments is therefore a relevant matter but not
determinative of the applicant’s claim for
the respondent relies upon the terms of the Lease and its right for the parties
to be held to their bargain. In a commercial
context, this factor has some
weight as the final terms of the lease represents the negotiated agreement upon
which the landlord
grants the lease to the tenant and the tenant accepts that
lease. The negotiated agreement represents the risk allocation agreed
accepted by the parties. In this case, the clause permitting re-entry in the
case of a winding up petition being issued against
the applicant provided
protection to the respondent from being required to continue in a relationship
with a lessee who was subject
to winding up proceedings. That was the agreement
that was reached between the parties. To grant relief would increase the risk of
loss to the respondent. This is therefore a factor in favour of a finding that
there is no unconscionability on the part of the respondent
in terminating the
some of the matters raised by the respondent are not relevant to the issue of
unconscionability or discretion to be exercised
by the Court. I consider matters
such as Mr Solomos’ attitude to the respondent, the hours of operation of
the business, the
lack of stock and the condition of the Premises fall into this
applicant suggested that the respondent may receive the benefit of the fit out
if relief against forfeiture was not granted.
The evidence of Mr Aretzis was
that any fit out undertaken by the applicant was relatively minimal and not of
any value to the respondent.
I do not consider that to be a relevant matter in
determining whether or not to grant relief.
referred to earlier in these reasons, some of the matters raised by the
applicant are more properly regarded as matters that might
be relevant to the
balance of convenience on an injunction hearing rather than a hearing for relief
against forfeiture. The fact
that the applicant would be deprived of members,
that the Premises was its flagship store in South Australia and the loss of
trading of apparel and supplies falls into this category. These matters
are not relevant to the enquiry was to whether it is unconscionable
respondent to assist on its legal right to terminate the Lease and re-enter the
Premises. What is relevant is that the applicant’s
rights under the Lease
are valuable rights and that it would lose the right to carry on its business
from the Premises. Of potential
relevance is the fact that under the terms of
the Lease, Mr Solomos agreed to provide a guarantee of the applicant’s
liabilities
under the Lease. The applicant did not place on reliance on that
fact in its submissions that relief ought to be granted. There was
no evidence
of Mr Solomos’ personal financial position, what other guarantees he had
given and whether, in the event of the
winding up of the applicant, he could
meet all of these guarantees. These matters affect the weight to be given to the
although it is of some weight in favour of granting
Opportunistic deployment of the right of termination
and re-entry
applicant further contended that relief should be granted because the respondent
had formed the intention prior to 19 August
2025 that it wished to terminate the
Lease and re-possess the Premises and lease them to a new tenant and then acted
opportunistically
to evict the applicant because of the existence of the winding
up petition. In making this contention, the applicant relied upon
the decision
of Stanely J in
, Stanley J held:
It is apparent that Revelop had an intention to undertake a
redevelopment on the site from no later than September 2022. So much is
from PlanSA documents. It took active steps during 2023 and 2024 to advance
those plans which were obviously inconsistent
with the applicant’s rights
under the Lease. Those plans were underway for two years before the respondent
took steps to terminate
the Lease for non-payment of rent.
do not consider that the principle outlined in
is applicable to the
claim for relief against forfeiture. The passage quoted above does not represent
some new ground for relief
but is the basis for the finding in that case that it
was unconscionable for the landlord to exercise its right of termination and
It was unconscionable
because the re-entry by the landlord was not to secure its rights under the
Lease but to secure an extraneous
benefit, namely the ability to re-develop the
property in question. In the present case, the termination and re-entry was
the applicant’s poor compliance with the terms of the Lease,
(including the invariable failure to pay rent on the due date)
and the existence
of the winding up petition and not on an extraneous matter such as right to
re-develop the Premises. The respondent
exercised its right of forfeiture to
secure its rights under the Lease. The third party’s rights to lease the
Premises were
subject to vacant possession and therefore not an attempt to
secure an extraneous right.
into account the above matters, I have come to the conclusion that it is not
unconscionable in all of the circumstances for
the respondent to rely upon the
right to terminate the Lease and re-enter the Premises. I have come to this
conclusion for the following
(1) the right of termination and to re-enter (because of the existence of the
winding up petition) is security for the non-payment
of rent and the
disgorgement of rent that is paid in the event of a winding up and found to be
an undue preference. Both of these
objects are relevant to the respondent and
afford protection to the respondent in the state of affairs as they now
(2) it is unclear whether, or if so when, the applicant will obtain finance and
the winding up proceedings subsequently be dismissed
and the Deputy Commissioner
and supporting creditors paid. The default (or the event) is still in existence.
That being so, it is
not clear that the default will be remedied or the event no
longer exist. In the cases where relief has been granted, despite the
not being remedied at the time of the hearing, the court found that the terms of
the lease will be observed in the future.
Therefore the court did not treat the
unremedied breach as fatal to the application. The court could impose conditions
which ensured
that the breach was remedied by the end of the term of lease. The
Court cannot be confident in the present case that the winding
up petition will
be dismissed and therefore the breach remedied;
(3) there is a strong risk that in the absence of finance being provided, the
applicant will be unable to pay rent as and when it
(4) the Lease was a commercial contract entered by two parties. The terms of the
Lease represented their allocation of risk. The
Court should be wary of ignoring
the concluded agreement between the parties and impose a lesser form of
protection for the respondent
as the landlord. The term of the Lease gave the
respondent the right not to continue in a relationship with the lessee which had
a winding up petition issued against it;
(5) the applicant has demonstrated in the past a repeated failure to pay rent in
a timely manner over a significant number of years
and only pay following the
issuing of a notice to remedy breach. The inference from this conduct must be
that those breaches were
deliberate. That permits the further inference to be
made that if relief is given, rent will not be paid in accordance with the terms
of the Lease in the future; and
(6) the respondent has a replacement tenant and will therefore not suffer loss
that it may otherwise suffer if there is a period
where the Premises are vacant
(which might occur if the applicant is in fact wound up).
matters collectively lead me to the conclusion that it is not unconscionable for
the respondent to rely on its contractual
right to terminate the Lease and
re-enter the Premises. The matters that have been raised by the applicant are
not sufficient to
lead to the conclusion that the forfeiture of the Lease was
not a means of securing the bargain that had been agreed upon but was
on the applicant a penalty or was providing a benefit to the respondent that was
over and above or disproportionate to the
primary purpose of the bargain. The
benefit will be excessive if the respondent is put back in the same position
before the forfeiture,
with the breach remedied (or the event no longer in
existence), and its costs and expenses paid. That is not the case in these
proceedings
because the event (the winding up) is still in existence.
the reasons that have been expressed, the applicant’s claim for relief
against forfeiture is
Exhibit R2, tab 80.
Exhibit A6.
[1999] NSWSC 496
for example,
Re Hi-Fi Sydney Pty Ltd (Administrator Appointed)
Della Imports Pty Ltd v Birkenhead Investments Pty Ltd
[1987] ANZ ConvR
Newton Pty Ltd v Newton SC Pty Ltd
[2024] SASC 151
Primary Re Limited v Great
Southern Property Holdings Limited (Receivers and Managers Appointed) (in liq)
[2011] VSC 242
[183] citing Lord Wilberforce in
Shiloh Spinners Ltd v
[1973] AC 691
, 721-725 and endorsed by the High Court in
[1983] HCA 11
(1983) 152 CLR 406
Pty Ltd v ASAP23 Pty Ltd
[2022] SASC 141
[1973] AC 691
[1912] UKLawRpAC 52
[1912] AC 623
[2003] HCA 57
(2003) 201 ALR 359
[2003] HCA 57.
[2024] SASC
Sneakerboy Retail Pty
Ltd trading as Sneakerboy v Georges Properties Pty Ltd
(Sneakerboy)
[2020] NSWSC 996
[2006] NSWSC 1314
; (2006) 12 BPR 98,207 [23] and
[24];. Quoted with approval in
at [69]. See
for a similar statement.
Hyman v Rose
[1912] UKLawRpAC 52
Shiloh Spinners Ltd v Harding
[1973] AC 691
Primary Re Limited v
Great Southern Property Holdings Limited (Receivers and Managers Appointed) (in
[2011] VSC 242
Kofoo Sussex Pty Ltd v Commerce Building Pty Ltd
(Kofoo Sussex
[2014] NSWSC 1079
[2014] NSWSC 1079
Hace Corporation Pty Ltd
v F Hannan (Properties) Pty Ltd
[1995] 7 BPR 14,326.
Twinside Pty Ltd v
Venetian Nominees Pty Ltd
[2008] WASC 110
[2006] NSWSC 1314
[67]-[70], respectively.
[2021] VSC 204
citing P Butt Land Law (Thomson Reuters, 6
[15223]-[15225].
The Heat Group
[2021] VSC 204
[2014] NSWSC 1079
Twinside Pty Ltd v Venetian Nominees Pty Ltd
[2008] WASC 110
Ibid citing
Hotels (Oxford St) Pty Ltd v Toomey
[2024] NSWSC 236
(1986) 4 BPR 9247, 9250-9251.
Kofoo Sussex
[136] citing
Twinside Pty Ltd v Venetian Nominees Pty Ltd
at [36] and
Ibid at [110].
[2011] VSC 485
[1990] VicRp 56
[1990] VR 646
[1912] UKLawRpAC 52
[1912] AC 623.
[1948] 1 All ER 248.
[2014] NSWSC 996
citing P Butt,
Butt’s Land Law
(Thomson Reuters, 6
[1912] UKLawRpAC 52
[1912] AC 623.
[2011] VSC 485
[2014] NSWSC 1079
Melacare International
[1999] NSWSC 496
[2003] HCA 57
(2003) 217 CLR 315.
International
[1999] NSWSC 496
[114] citing P Butt,
Butt’s Land
(Thomson Reuters, 6
[2024] SASC 151
[2021] VSC 204
,[11] citing
Baby Zone (Aust) Pty Ltd (Administrator Appointed) v Keira Street Securities
[2016] NSWSC 528
Wynsix Hotels (Oxford St) Pty Ltd v Toomey
[2020] NSWSC 996
Wynsix Hotels (Oxford St) Pty Ltd v Toomey
International
[1999] NSWSC 496
[1973] AC 691
[2020] VSC 357
[2015] NSWSC 1312
Re FineTea Pty Ltd
(Administrator Appointed)
Re Hi-Fi Sydney Pty Ltd (Administrator
[2025] NSWSC 1226
[122]-[124].
[2010] QCA 55
[2011] 1 Qd R 504
[2010] QCA 55.
Approved in
Re Hi-Fi Sydney Pty Ltd (Administrator
[2015] NSWSC 1312
[1975] VicRp 34
[1975] VR 358
[1999] NSWSC 496
[2020] NSWSC 996
Baby Zone (Aust) Pty Ltd (Administrator Appointed) v Keira Street
Ventures Pty Ltd [
2016] NSWSC 528
International
[1999] NSWSC 996
[17] for a similar expression concerning the
appointment of a receiver.
Exhibit A6.
(1996) 185 CLR 483.
[2008] VSC 416
(2008) 221 FLR 217.
[2014] NSWSC
Shiloh Spinners Ltd v
[1973] AC 691
[2024] SASC 151.
Ibid at [57].
Ibid at [59].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (518 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter