URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SARTTRP/2008/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:04:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McIntyre v Hahndorf Resort [2008] SARTTRP 6 (24 June 2008)
Section 21 - Rent Increase and Excessive Rent, Section 46 –
Imposing Fines - Section 68 - Notice of Termination
Hahndorf Resort (RP08/0011) - 12, 24 June 2008.
Residential Site agreements - Cross applications for possession of premises
and for a declaration that a purported rent increase
and fines were invalid.
Tribunal finds rent increase invalid because less than 12 months since rent
last increased and no evidence that there was an agreement
for rent to increase
therefore rent calculation at the time the notice of termination was served was
incorrect. As the resident
was not in arrears the notice did not terminate the
tenancy. Owner agreed that late payment fines were contrary to the Act and had
already agreed to refund them. The Tribunal declared notice of termination
invalid and ordered owner to account to resident for
fines to be credited.
REASONS FOR ORDER OF THE TRIBUNAL MADE ON
Hearing 12 and 24 June 2008 at Adelaide
MCINTYRE V HAHNDORF RESORT
HAHNDORF RESORT V MCINTYRE (RP08/0011)
This is the determination, in part, of two applications to the Residential
Tenancies Tribunal made under the
Residential Parks Act 2007
A park resident Robert McIntyre lodged an application on the 22 April 2008
seeking orders:-
1. to declare a rent increase from 21 November invalid.
2. to declare fines invalid.
3. to repay invalid fines and overpaid rent.
4. to declare a proposed rent increase invalid.
The park owner, Hahndorf Resort, lodged an application on 16 June 2008
seeking orders:-
1. for vacant possession of the rented premises.
payment of outstanding rent before allowing removal of the resident’s
A preliminary hearing of the resident’s application (together
with six other resident applications) was held on 12 June 2008.
A full hearing,
together with the hearing of the park owner’s application took place on 24
The Tribunal heard sworn evidence from the resident Mr Robert McIntyre and
the park owner’s representative Mr Emanuel Pishas.
Given that the resident is faced with eviction, I propose to make findings in
relation to Mr McIntyre’s application as it relates
to rent payable under
the agreement prior to the service of the notice of termination and I will deal
with the owner’s application
for possession of the premises based on that
notice of termination.
I have reserved my decision in relation to the application made for a rent
increase due in May 2008 to be declared excessive. To
the extent that Mr
McIntyre’s application asks for a declaration that the proposed May rent
increase is invalid, my findings
will be included in a separate order to be
published in due course.
I turn now to consider Mr McIntyre’s
application and the park owner’s application for possession.
The Agreement
The agreement is subject to the
Residential Parks Act, 2007
Resident: Robert McIntyre
Residential Park: Michael Angelou Pty Ltd
trading as Hahndorf Resort and
Convention Centre (“the
The Premises: The site at 24 Bavarian Way, Hahndorf Resort,
145a Main Street, Hahndorf
There is no agreement in writing. The parties agree that when Cavalon Pty
Ltd purchased the Park in about March 2005 from the previous
liquidator and Michael Angelou Pty Ltd took over management of the park, Mr
McIntyre was a resident of the site together
with his wife, son and
granddaughter.
The Park concedes that Mr McIntyre has lived at the premises since the
beginning of 2003 which is Mr McIntyre’s estimate of
when he started
living at the Park. Neither Mr McIntyre nor Mr Pishas was able to state a
specific date for the agreement commencing
but this was not in dispute. Mr
McIntyre owns the dwelling located on the site. Occupiers such as Mr McIntyre
have regarded themselves
as “permanent residents” of the Park,
distinguishable from casual holidaymakers. It is unclear however what, if any,
term was allocated to Mr McIntyre’s agreement before the Park was sold to
Cavalon Pty Ltd. Since May 2005 the Park owner has
charged rent fortnightly in
advance and invoiced the “permanent residents” every month. In this
way the Park appears
to treat the residents like a monthly casual occupier. Mr
Pishas understands this to be the only way the Park may continue the
ongoing occupancy, given that the Local Council has apparently
argued that the Park would otherwise be in breach of zoning regulations.
Under the new management, rent for the site has steadily increased from about
$60.00 in 2005.
Rent increased to $128.00 per week from approximately April 2007. Again a
precise date was not offered by either party but there
is no relevant
On 7 November 2007 Mr McIntyre received a letter from the Park stating that
weekly rent would increase to $192.00 per week from 21
November 2007. Mr
McIntyre does not accept the validity of the rent increase and has continued to
pay rent on the basis of $128.00
The Park concedes that Mr McIntyre has lived at the premises since the
beginning of 2003 which is Mr McIntyre’s estimate of
when he started
living at the Park. Neither Mr McIntyre nor Mr Pishas was able to state a
specific date for the agreement commencing
but this was not in dispute. Mr
McIntyre owns the dwelling located on the site. Occupiers such as Mr McIntyre
have regarded themselves
as “permanent residents” of the Park,
distinguishable from casual holidaymakers. It is unclear however what, if any,
term was allocated to Mr McIntyre’s agreement before the Park was sold to
Cavalon Pty Ltd. Since May 2005 the Park owner has
charged rent fortnightly in
advance and invoiced the “permanent residents” every month. In this
way the Park appears
to treat the residents like a monthly casual occupier. Mr
Pishas understands this to be the only way the Park may continue the
ongoing occupancy, given that the Local Council has apparently
argued that the Park would otherwise be in breach of zoning regulations.
Section 21 of the Act provides for variation of the rent. In general terms
rent may be increased either:
by giving 60
days written notice of an increase which may not take effect unless 12 months
have passed since the agreement began or
the rent was last increased (section
because the
agreement provides that rent changes automatically on a basis set out in the
agreement (section 21(7)).
The Dispute
Mr McIntyre argues that the rent increase is
invalid because it was imposed less than 12 months after the last rent increase
April 2007.
Mr Pishas argues that this was not a rent increase but
rather the rent changed because Mr McIntyre’s son and granddaughter were
living at the premises. He argued that the cost of all park accommodation is
calculated on the basis of two people renting and the
Park is entitled to charge
for additional occupiers (including children over 5 years of age).
He referred me to general newsletters distributed to occupiers of the Park
which set out the cost of renting sites and/or caravans
I reject the submission made by Mr Pishas on the following grounds:-
information disseminated to occupiers of the park informs park users of the
charges being levied and in the case of one newsletter
tendered by Mr Pishas
relating to 2006 site fees, the newsletter reads “The decision was made
not to increase monthly resident’s
fees until (sic) of March 2006. The
rate for the year 2006 will be $125p/w for two persons occupancy”.
Mr Pishas cannot reasonably rely on such a provision to demonstrate
that Mr McIntyre’s agreement made him subject to an automatic
increase of
$64.00 if he were to be joined by his son and granddaughter.
Without an agreement in writing the park must be able to demonstrate to the
Tribunal that the verbal agreement with Mr McIntyre included
a provision that
the rent payable under that agreement would change in some automatic way
“on a basis set out in the agreement”.
Parties to an agreement may
well have a verbal understanding but in the present case the evidence does not
support such a finding.
In any event when Mr Pishas sent the rent increase notice there had been no
“change” in Mr McIntyre’s circumstances.
The park had always
known that Mr McIntyre’s household was four people.
I accept the
resident’s evidence that he was unaware of any calculation which would be
made to increase the rent for his additional
family members.
At the time the
notice was served it was just as likely as not that, as given in evidence by Mr
McIntyre, his son and granddaughter
were no longer living at the site but rather
were frequent visitors, given that Mr and Mrs McIntyre would take their
granddaughter
to and from school.
In conclusion I find that the letter from the Park was an attempt
to increase the rent but it did not comply with the requirements
of Section 21
of the Act and is invalid.
The Rent Record
I have had to rely on the monthly invoices tendered by the parties to
construct the rent record. Entries show rent paid and payable
between the 24
October 2007 and 7 May 2008. Given my findings, the park has incorrectly
charged rent of $192.00 per week from 21
November 2007 to 26 March 2008. On
this basis a calculation was wrongly made that rent was in arrears.
In addition, contrary to Section 46 of the Act, the Park has repeatedly
charged “late payment fines” of $50.00. It is
clear where an amount
of $242.00 is recorded that this includes a $50.00 fine. This has happened five
times. The resident would
therefore be entitled to a refund of $250.00. It is
less clear whether a charge of $175.00 appearing weekly from 2 April 2008
a fine. The rent, even on the owner’s evidence, had reduced once
Mr McIntyre left the park so it is unclear whether the rent
which should have
been charged at $128.00 per week then includes a fine of $48.00. This entry is
unexplained.
Mr Pishas told the Tribunal that late payment fines were not taken into
account when drawing up the notice of termination. Certainly
the Park concedes
that, under the new legislation, these fines are prohibited and Mr Pishas was
satisfied that his office staff had
accurately calculated the appropriate refund
and applied this refund to Mr McIntyre’s rent record. If this is the case
is a calculation which has taken place after the service of the notice of
termination and does not affect my findings in relation
to that notice.
The Notice of Termination
A site agreement may be terminated by the Park owner/operator serving a
notice of termination in the prescribed form (Form A) under
Section 68 of the
The Park served a notice of termination dated 29 April 2008 by affixing a
copy to Mr McIntyre’s door and posting a copy to Mr
McIntyre’s post
office box. I note that by the 29 April 2008 Mr McIntyre was no longer living
at the Park and his dwelling
is now for sale.
Mr McIntyre denies receiving the notice. He said he did not receive a phone
call from the office staff as suggested by Mr Pishas;
that the notice was not
found in his post office box despite clearing his box daily and that his
neighbour, who keeps an eye out
for deliveries to the premises has not passed on
the notice, despite Mr McIntyre seeing him virtually every day.
I do not propose to dwell on whether the notice was properly served as I have
determined that the notice is, in any event, invalid
and has not had the effect
of terminating the agreement.
I make this finding on the basis that the rent was not more than 7 days in
arrears at the time the notice was served.
The earliest tax invoice I have before me starts with a “transfer
debit” of $142.71. If this represents rent arrears
then rent was paid to
9 October 2007 with $113.29 held as a part payment when the, available rent
record began.
Taking into account all the payments recorded as paid by the resident between
the 30 October 2007 and 8 April 2008 (the last payment
made before the notice
was allegedly served) the resident has paid $4,924.00 and been given a credit of
$84.00 (on 27 March 2008).
These payments clearly exceed the amount of 31 weeks
rent at $128.00 per week required to have the rent paid two weeks in
If the calculation is made from the rental week commencing 24 October 2007
and the “transfer debit” is ignored, rent would
have been paid even
further in advance.
I am aware that this calculation does not take into account the purported
rent increase to $195.00 per week from 28 May 2008 but as
the notice of
termination was served on 29 April 2008 the purported increase had not yet come
into effect.
I should comment also that, even if the rent had been in arrears, I would
have had difficulty finding the notice to be valid in any
event. The wording of
the notice is vague. The notice is required under the Act (Section 82) to
“specify and give reasonable
particulars of the ground of
termination”. The notice prescribed by the Regulations (Form A) requires
the Park owner to “include
enough details so that the resident receiving
this notice will know exactly what has to be done to remedy the breach”.
in this case, the notice states “You must remedy the breach as
follows: the full outstanding amount and two weeks up front”.
Before leaving the discussion of the termination notice I refer to the
endorsement placed on the notice by the owner in the following
terms: “You
must remove your building from Hahndorf Resort after all payments have been
received”. The owner should
have regard to Section 26 of the Act. A park
owner is not entitled to destrain goods for non-payment of rent.
The purported
rent increase of the 21 November 2008 was invalid and the resident was only
obliged to pay $128.00 per week under the
agreement until the rent increases.
The Tribunal has yet to determine the validity of a notice of rent increase
which purports to
take effect from 28 May 2008. My findings will be the subject
of a separate order.
The fines levied
by the park owner are invalid and if not already repaid to the resident must be
repaid. Mr McIntyre was confident
that if Mr Pishas was certain that the fines
had been credited to Mr McIntyre’s account that this would have been done.
Unfortunately
Mr Pishas could not provide the evidence at this hearing
to clarify the repayment of the fines which were levied. It would
be appropriate for
Mr McIntyre to have the right to re-list his application for further hearing
if the parties, given time, are not able to confirm that
the repayment of fines
has been accurately calculated and credited to the resident.
to Section 116(1)(n) I declare that the notice of termination served by the park
operator dated 29 April 2008 has not had
the effect of terminating the
Residential Parks agreement.
declare that the late payment fines levied by the Park are invalid and I direct
that the Park operator provide the resident within
7 days of the date of this
order with a detailed calculation of, and proof of, the reimbursement of late
payment fines to the resident’s
rent record.
I give leave to the resident to re-apply within 30 days of this
order to have his application for the repayment of invalid fines
to be re-heard
if a dispute arises as to the calculation of the reimbursement of late payment
reserve my decision in relation to the resident’s request for a
declaration that a notice of proposed rent increase dated
27 March 2008 be
declared invalid.
Deputy Presiding Member
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (81.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter