URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SARTT/2013/36.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:04:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CUTTS v AUSTRALIAN RETIREMENT HOMES LTD [2013] SARTT 36 (19 December 2013)
REASONS FOR ORDER OF THE TRIBUNAL MADE ON 4 FEBRUARY
Hearing 19 December 2013 at Adelaide
CUTTS v AUSTRALIAN RETIREMENT HOMES LTD
(RV13/0036)
The executor of the estate of a deceased resident brought an action against
the administering authority of the retirement village
on the basis that they had
failed to properly market the unit and there were unreasonable delays in the
sale of the unit, another
resident’s car had crashed into the unit causing
damage and further delays and the administering authority had failed to properly
present the unit for sale. The Tribunal found that the damage to the unit had
not occurred through any fault of the administering
authority and the
administering authority had properly discharged its obligations in relation to
the sale of the unit. The application
was dismissed.
This is the determination of an application brought by an executive of the
estate of the deceased resident of a retirement village.
The deceased occupied a
unit of a retirement village pursuant to an agreement which was subject to the
Retirement Villages Act 1987
Sworn or affirmed evidence was given at the hearing by
The executor of the deceased estate of Mrs Scobie, the resident: Mr Graham
The representative of the Administering Authority: Mr
Andrew Macintosh
A witness for the Administering Authority: Mr Gary
Other evidence considered by the Tribunal
Residence agreement
Various email exchanges
Real Estate Listings for Units 35 & 39 of the Retirement Village
Background Facts
her death Mrs Scobie was a resident of a Retirement Village operated by the
Respondent. The Applicant Mr Cutts is one of the
joint & several Executors
of her Estate and brings this application in that capacity with the consent of
his fellow executors.
relevant Retirement Village is a traditional style of “village” with
approximately 40 self-contained and semi-detached
living units, each with
associated carports, and roadways and walkways throughout the village.
Residence Agreement under which Mrs Scobie occupied the unit was dated 1
September 1999.
Scobie died on 4 August 2012. Vacant possession of the unit was given to the
administering authority on 7 September 2012.
was granted to Mr Cutts and his fellow executors on 6 December 2012.
The Nature of the Application
application of Mr Cutts revolved around the following complaints:
in the sale of the unit;
which occurred to the unit by reason of another residence car colliding with the
unit in the middle of 2013, and consequential
further delays in the marketing of
the unit whilst repair work was assessed and undertaken;
The Terms of the Residence Agreement
Residence Agreement is no doubt standard from it is time.
clause 4 it provides for a “loan” to be advanced by the resident to
the Administering Authority. This “loan”
within today’s
parlance is considered the “premium” payable, with the recurrent
maintenance fee, for the right
to occupy the Unit.
4.2 provides for repayment of the loan (subject to a number of deductions) to
occur after:
of the units by the resident; and
successful sale of the unit.
2 of Schedule 3 to the Residence Agreement reserves to the Administering
Authority the right to remarket the unit and to
agree a sale price with any
purchaser. The Administering Authority is not obliged to obtain the agreement of
the outgoing resident
to any sale price. However, pursuant to paragraph 2.6, the
Administering Authority must provide ongoing reports to the outgoing resident
the progress of the sale.
pursuant to paragraph 2.8, the Administering Authority is under a general duty
to take reasonable steps to remarket the unit
for a fair price within a
reasonable time and to provide reasonable advertising for the remarketing.
also observe that the administering authority has a direct interest in the
outcome of any sale process, in that it receives 25%
of the ultimate contract
was accepted by all parties that these clauses applied to the process of sale.
Events immediately following the death of Ms Scobie
Mrs Scobie’s death in August 2012, Mr Cutts undertook the usual processes
that one would expect of a family member
and executor. He arranged for vacant
possession of the units to be given to the Administering Authority (7 September
2012). He with
his fellow executors and the Administering Authority also
addressed the question of how to proceed to deal with the unit following
Scobie’s death and its remarketing.
part of that process, the question of whether the unit should be
“reinstated” or “refurbished” was discussed
between the
executors and the Administering Authority.
“Reinstatement”
involved relatively minimal works to the unit (replacement of floor coverings
and painting of the unit)
which were estimated to cost approximately $7000.
other alternative, being “refurbishment”, involves completely
stripping the unit and replacing all fittings (such
as kitchen cupboards and
other fixed facilities). The estimated cost for these works was in the order of
was shown a document which address these issues from which I note the
anticipated sale price of the unit under the “reinstatement” option
was $240,000;
anticipated sale price of the unit under the “refurbishment” option
was $290,000;
each scenario, the 25% “exit fee” was payable to the Administering
Authority out of the gross sale proceeds, and then
the costs of the respective
works (as well as costs of sale) were to be funded out of the net sale proceeds
otherwise payable to
be outgoing resident.
result of that structure of payment, the anticipated ultimate net return to the
outgoing resident was less under the “refurbishment”
option than
under the “reinstatement” option.
Accordingly,
and not surprisingly, the executors chose the “reinstatement”
was confirmed in a document entitled “estimate of exit entitlement”
(otherwise known as the “EEE”) dated
2 November 2012 which was
signed on that date by all 3 executors.
administering authority then reinstated and commenced to market the
Marketing of the Unit
unit was marketed, after the reinstatement works, essentially “as
is”. There was no attempt to improve the garden.
I was shown photos of the
garden in a very dry and bare state. This formed one of Mr Cutts
complaints.
Cutts also had a complaint concerning the air-conditioning and the pergola.
complaint in respect of the air-conditioning was this:
original air-conditioning system was a fully ducted system;
system had been removed and replaced with a reverse cycle split system which was
not ducted but only serviced one room in that
was taken to the relevant provisions in the Residence Agreement which excluded
amongst other things the air conditioner from the
items of fixtures and fittings
and furnishings which would be provided to Mrs Scobie upon her taking over the
unit in 1999. The reason
for this was, as was apparent from the relevant part of
the Residence Agreement (Paragraph 5.3 of Schedule 1) was of those items
installed by the previous resident of the unit and the Administering Authority
would not take responsibility for them.
the hearing I was assured by Mr Metcalf for the Administering Authority that the
new air-conditioner was of sufficient modern
standard to be able to effectively
service the entire unit, notwithstanding that it only had an outlet in one
the pergola had been removed by the Administering Authority as it was rotten and
a potential danger.
marketing of the unit was undertaken directly by the administering authority,
not through real estate agent. An entry was placed
on the relevant section
devoted to retirement village units on the websites known as
www.domain.com.au
marketing commenced in early December 2012. By that point, the reinstatement
process was complete and around that time as well
Mr Cutts and his fellow
executors were granted probate of the estate of Mrs Scobie.
17 January 2013 a contract was signed for the sale of the unit for $240,000.
That contract was subject to the purchaser selling
an existing property by a
certain date. Regrettably, that condition was not met and the contract
7 March 2013 a contract with a similar structure was signed. Again, the
condition was not met and the contract lapsed.
unit was once again placed on the market.
Damage to the Unit and
30 July 2013 the unit, whilst still in the market, was struck by a vehicle being
driven by another resident of the village. The
unit was extensively damaged and
accordingly was taken off the market whilst repairs were assessed and
undertaken.
took a number of months for assessment of damage to be undertaken by the motor
vehicle insurer for the resident whose vehicle struck
the unit. Quotes were
provided on 10 September 2013. Further quotes were requested in light of the
concern that a structural engineer’s
report would be required. Work was
finally completed on repairs to the unit on 22 November 2013 and the unit was
ready to be re-marketed.
Subsequent remarketing
unit was subsequently re-listed on the domain website, with an asking price of
Cutts tendered a listing running at the same time (and essentially in
competition with the listing for the subject unit) on domain
for Unit 39, a
refurbished unit in the same village. He highlighted that the listing for Unit
39 contained a number of internal
photos, while the listing for Unit 35
contained none.
am told that a contract has been executed for purchase of the unit for $230,000
which is not conditional upon sale of another property.
That contract is likely
to settle if it has not already.
Applicant’s
Submissions
Cutts primary complaint was that he had not been regularly informed of progress
of the sale of the unit. On his submission he had
a right to a monthly report on
the progress of sale of the unit on many occasions it had to follow up the
Administering Authority
for an update on the progress of sale.
had a right to this pursuant to Paragraph 2.6 of Schedule 3 of the Residence
would appear from the emails tended at that hearing that it is in fact the case
that Mr Cutts did have to follow-up for its monthly
will discuss the response of the administering authority on this issue
Cutts complains that the time involved in undertaking the reinstatement works
immediately following the death of Mrs Scobie took
an unreasonably long
Cutts also complains that there was unreasonable delay in the management of the
repairs to the unit following the motor vehicle
also suggested during the hearing that the administering authority was negligent
in failing to install crash barriers to prevent
the kind of accident which did
take place from indeed taking place.
was also concerned about the process of managing the assessment and execution of
those repairs by the driver’s insurer.
Cutts also had concerns in relation to the air conditioner, the pergola and the
gate to the backyard of the unit.
note that the air-conditioner and the pergola were part of the excluded assets.
However, the gate does remain a source of concern.
The gate had fallen off its
hinges during Mrs Scobie’s lifetime and was never repaired.
Cutts took the view that the Administering Authority ought to have repaired the
Respondent’s Submissions
respondent submitted that it had in fact regularly kept Mr Cutts up-to-date on
the process of sale. Where Mr Cutts had to follow-up
the Administering Authority
for a report, it appeared that the delay was claimed to be because events were
moving in relation to
new contracts that day and the Administering Authority was
waiting for those two events to unfold prior to advise Mr Cutts.
respondent also submitted that there was no unreasonable delay in the
reinstatement of the unit. The EEE was signed on 2 November
2012 at which most
recent works commenced. The reinstatement works were completed on 30 November
respondent denied that the failure to install crash barrier was negligent. I
will have more to say on this below.
respondent submitted (correctly in my view) that the air-conditioner and the
pergola were assets which had been taken over by
Mrs Scobie on her occupation of
the unit. The Residence Agreement specifically excludes responsibility for those
items on the part
of the Administering Authority.
to the gate, the respondent submitted that in return for the exclusive use of
the backyard area of the unit, the residents are
required to maintain them as
they are protected by fences attached to those units and are not public areas.
They say this is explained
to Mrs Scobie when she moved into the village. They
also state that Mrs Scobie was reminded of this on a number of occasions by the
village manager.
to the question of the alleged delay in providing monthly reports, it is clear
that on a number of occasions Mr Cutts did have
to follow-up the administering
authority for a report. However, it is also apparent that at least on some of
those occasions, the
explained delay in providing the report was consistent with
the assertion of the administering authority that they were waiting for
events to unfold so that a meaningful report could be given.
any event, I consider it unnecessary to reach a finding on that question in
respect of each and every monthly report. None of the
relief that Mr Cutts seeks
in this application can turn on the question of whether the respondent defaulted
in its obligation to
provide a monthly
Determination
address each of Mr Cutts complaints in turn:
reinstatement
administering authority has highlighted in its submissions the time taken for
the PET to be agreed and works completed. In particular,
on 12 September 2012
(five days after vacant possession was provided by the estate of Mrs Scobie) the
Estate advised that it would
prefer to reinstate. This was based on estimates
provided on 7 September 2012. The more accurate estimate (EEE) was provided four
weeks later after quotes were received for works required. The signed EEE was
received on 2 November 2012 and the reinstatement worse
were completed four
weeks later.
the circumstances, I agree that there has been no unreasonable delay in the
preparation of the unit for sale.
Delay in marketing
Cutts has expressed concern about the delays in marketing the unit, especially
when a contract for the sale of the unit which is
subject to sale of another
property for the sale of the unit is signed. Specifically, he was concerned that
such process takes that
unit of the market for anything up to 90 days whilst
that condition is sought to be met by the purchaser.
the two occasions that the unit was sold in these circumstances, the contracts
were unable be completed due to failure of that
can understand Mr Cutts frustration about this process and his sense of
alienation from it. The Administering Authority entered
into those contracts
without consulting Mr Cutts.
it has to be remembered that the Administering Authority has full authority to
market the unit pursuant to Paragraph 2.8
of Schedule 3 of the Residence
accept Mr Metcalf’s evidence and submission that the Administering
Authority is experienced in the sale of such units and
the circumstances in
which they are purchased.
was informed by Mr Metcalf during the hearing, and accept, that it is common for
purchasers of such units to require to sell their
own property prior to be able
to complete the purchase of a unit in the retirement village.
also note that in addition to its obligations to take reasonable steps to
remarket a unit for a fair price (refer to Paragraph 2.8
(b)(i) of Schedule 3 of
the Residence Agreement) the Administering Authority has an interest in
obtaining the best price possible
as it shares in 25% of the gross sale
Accordingly,
I find that the Administering Authority is not responsible for any delay in sale
of the unit.
is of course unfortunate and frustrating that the first two contracts entered
into did not complete due to the failure of the purchasers
to sell the
respective properties.
The motor vehicle damage
is an unfortunate event in a series of unfortunate events in the sale of this
unit. However, it did occur and was the fault of
no one before the
if there is merit in Mr Cutts argument that the Administering Authority was
negligent in failing to provide a crash barrier to
protect the unit, such a
matter is beyond the jurisdiction of this Tribunal.
Cutts was also concerned that the driver’s insurance did not apparently
cover any consequential loss arising from the delay
in sale of the unit caused
by this accident. As I observed to Mr Cutts during the hearing, the limitation
of the driver’s insurance
policy does not necessarily limit the
driver’s own liability for such consequential loss.
making these comments, I make absolutely no finding as against the Administering
Authority or the other driver. I say this simply
to acknowledge what Mr Cutts
has submitted and to suggest that if he wishes to pursue these lines of
complaint, his forum to do so
is a court within the ordinary civil
have examined the timelines concerning the obtaining of quotes, the need to
obtain engineers reports, and the ultimate repairs to
the unit. I find that the
Administering Authority has not caused through its action or inaction, any of
those delays complained of
by Mr Cutts.
The air-conditioner and
the pergola
noted above, these items were specifically excluded by the terms of the
Residence Agreement from the responsibility of the Administering
Having heard Mr Cutts on these issues, I must dismiss his complaints concerning
Repairs to the gate and the landscaping in the backyard.
accept what the Administering Authority says about the damaged gate. The fences
are for the benefit of maintaining the backyard
enjoyed exclusively by the
residents. Accordingly, any repairs to that fence and its gate are the
responsibility of the resident.
to the presentation of the backyard, I accept Mr Metcalf’s evidence
Presentation
of the backyard is the responsibility of the outgoing resident (i.e. if they
wish to landscape the backyard as part of
a marketing program); and
often the case that a purchaser may prefer to move into a unit which does not
have a landscaped backyard so they can landscape
to their own
reality is that Mr Cutts and the other executors chose not to upgrade the
landscape in the backyard which I accept was their responsibility
if they wished
to that to occur. I understand Mr Cutts was reluctant to do this given that
early on in the marketing of the unit,
two contracts were signed for its
unfortunate the result of those contracts was for the estate of Mrs Scobie,
responsibility for that cannot come back to the
Administering
the reasons above I have to dismiss each of the matters raised in the
application.
is no basis for an early payment of the premium, nor is there any basis for
repayment of reduction of remarketing costs.
is no jurisdiction for the Tribunal to order that the on the administering
authority pay interest for the period that the premises
were not marketed during
the repair works following the motor vehicle accident.
again, I can understand Mr Cutts’ frustration with the process of
remarketing the unit and his sense of alienation from
it. It may be that the
Administering Authority could have been more proactive in providing him with
information as to the process
of obtaining quotes for reinstatement, marketing
the unit, quotes for repairs to the unit and so forth.
ultimately that has not resulted in a loss to the estate of Mrs Scobie. I am
satisfied that the Administering Authority is
not, by its action or inaction,
responsible for the delays that have occurred. They are rather series of
unfortunate incidents between
compound that have caused Mr Cutts and no doubt
the other executors of the estate of Mrs Scobie significant concern.
Accordingly
I dismiss the application.
the preliminary hearing and the full hearing of this matter, Mr Cutts indicated
that he simply wanted to feel like he been
“listened to”, something
which he felt had not happened in his dealings with the Administering
trust now that he is satisfied that he has been “listened to” in
this matter, notwithstanding the result.
understand that there is now an unconditional contract for sale of the unit and
that that may already have settled. If trust that
this has occurred for the
benefit of all the parties in this unfortunate matter.
The application be dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (69.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter