URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAOmbFOI/2022/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:02:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Department of Treasury and Finance 2022/00548 [2022] SAOmbFOI 3 (29 July 2022)
Determination
External review - section 39
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Ms Leah Cassidy
Department of Treasury and Finance
Ombudsman reference:
Agency reference:
Determination:
The determination of the agency is varied.
Date of Ombudsman’s determination:
29 July 2022
Issues considered:
Definition of personal affairs
Unreasonableness (personal affairs)
Adverse effect on business affairs
Contract entered into after
Agency’s decision-making functions
Legal professional
Whether disclosure constitutes an offence
Matter obtained in
Effective performance of agency’s functions
Parliamentary privilege
Exemption clauses relied upon:
7(1)(c), (3)
16(1)(a)(iv)
Legislation considered:
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Terms of the original application:
Investigation report and all associated notes and documentation, including
emails, text messages and Ministerial briefings relating
to the investigation of
complaints of bullying against Minister Corey Wingard claimed by Leah Cassidy,
CEO, Sport SA.
Application for access
application under the
Freedom of Information Act 1991
) the applicant requested access from the agency to:
Investigation report and all associated notes and documentation, including
emails, text messages and Ministerial briefings relating
to the investigation of
complaints of bullying against Minister Corey Wingard claimed by Leah Cassidy,
CEO, Sport SA.
am mindful that since the documents in issue were created there has been a
change in the South Australian Government of the Day
as a result of the 2022
state election. However, for consistency with the documents in issue and the
agency’s determination,
a reference in this determination to ‘the
Minister’ or ‘Minister Wingard’ is a reference to Mr Corey
Similarly, a reference to ‘the Premier’ is a reference to
Mr Steven Marshall.
ease of reference, procedural steps relating to the application and the external
review are set out in Appendix 1.
external review is within the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman as a relevant review
authority under section 39 of the FOI Act.
have exercised my discretion under section 39(4) of the FOI Act to extend the
time for making an application for external review.
am mindful that the application for external review was received only one day
out of time. Having regard to the minimal delay, and
the numerous public holiday
days falling within the 30 day period to apply for external review, I am
satisfied that if I were to
refuse to accept the application, this would
unfairly prejudice the applicant.
Provisional
determination
provided my tentative view about the agency’s determination to the
parties, by my provisional determination dated 14 April
2022. I informed the
parties that subject to my receipt and consideration of submissions from the
parties I proposed to vary the
agency’s determination.
received responses from the applicant, the agency and a number of the interested
parties. Of relevance, the agency provided substantial
submissions have
persuaded me to alter my provisional views. To ensure all parties were afforded
the opportunity to comment on my
revised views I considered it necessary to
issue a revised provisional determination.
provided my revised tentative view about the agency’s determination to the
parties, by my revised provisional determination
dated 29 June 2022. I informed
the parties that subject to my receipt and consideration of submissions from the
parties I proposed
to vary the agency’s determination.
received responses from the applicant, the agency and one of the interested
parties. The applicant has generally submitted that:
disclosure of
the documents is necessary for the applicant to be sure that the investigation
was properly conducted and relevant evidence
was accurately recorded and
interest favours transparency and accountability for elected officials and
public servants
it appears that
the investigation was not properly carried out as:
Premier’s findings as recorded in Hansard do not address the actual
allegations put forward
not clear that an impartial and independent investigation was actually carried
to the final submission, whilst I understand that the applicant’s concerns
around the conduct of the investigation explains
her interest in disclosure of
the documents, it is not for me to comment on the manner in which the
investigation was conducted in
the context of an external review.
to the first two dot points, I agree with those submissions and confirm my view
that in relation to the documents in issue the
public interest generally favours
disclosure. However, my revised view is that the majority of the documents are
exempt on the basis
of clause 10(1). Clause 10(1) simply requires that the
documents are subject to legal professional privilege. Where privilege is
established, the exemption applies regardless of where the public interest lies.
advise the applicant that section 39(12) of the FOI Act states that where I am
satisfied that a document is exempt, I may not make
a determination to the
effect that the document be disclosed.
the applicant has not disputed my assessment of clause 10(1), I maintain my
revised view as to its applicability.
advise that I intend to address the submissions of the agency and interested
party in the body of this determination.
observe that the agency has requested that the content of its submissions be
confidential. I have considered whether the submissions
themselves ought to be
treated as exempt, and to that extent will not disclose the contents of the
submissions. I do however consider
that a portion of the submissions can be
disclosed and that it is appropriate for me to do so to ensure that I comply
with my obligation
to give reasons for my determination.
Relevant law
person has a legally enforceable right to be given access to an agency’s
documents in accordance with the FOI
FOI Act provides that upon receipt of an access application, an agency may make
a determination to refuse access where the documents
are ‘exempt’.
Schedule 1 lists various exemption clauses which may be claimed by an agency as
a basis for refusing access.
following clauses of Schedule 1 of the FOI Act are relevant to my external
6—Documents affecting personal affairs
(1) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter the disclosure of
which would involve the unreasonable disclosure of information
concerning the
personal affairs of any person (living or dead).
(2) A document is an exempt document if it contains allegations or
suggestions of criminal or other improper conduct on the part of
(living or dead) the truth of which has not been established by judicial process
and the disclosure of which would be unreasonable.
(3) A document is not an exempt document by virtue of subclause (1) or (2)
merely because it contains information concerning the person
by or on whose
behalf an application for access to the document is made.
7—Documents affecting business affairs
(c) if it contains matter—
(i) consisting of information (other than trade secrets or information
referred to in paragraph (b)) concerning the business, professional,
or financial affairs of any agency or any other person; and
(ii) the disclosure of which—
(A) could reasonably be expected to have an adverse effect on those affairs
or to prejudice the future supply of such information
to the Government or to an
agency; and
(B) would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest.
(3) A document is not an exempt document by virtue of this clause if it is a
contract entered into by the Crown or an agency after
the commencement of this
9—Internal working documents
(1) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter—
(a) that relates to—
(i) any opinion, advice or recommendation that has been obtained, prepared or
recorded; or
(ii) any consultation or deliberation that has taken place, in the course of,
or for the purpose of, the decision-making functions
of the Government, a
Minister or an agency; and
(b) the disclosure of which would, on balance, be contrary to the public
10—Documents subject to legal professional privilege
(1) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter that would be
privileged from production in legal proceedings on the ground
professional privilege.
12—Documents the subject of secrecy provisions
(1) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter the disclosure of
which would constitute an offence against an Act.
(2) A document is not an exempt document by virtue of this clause unless
disclosure of the matter contained in the document, to the
person by or on whose
behalf an application for access to the document is made, would constitute such
an offence.
13—Documents containing confidential material
(1) A document is an exempt document—
(a) if it contains matter the disclosure of which would found an action for
breach of confidence; or
(b) if it contains matter obtained in confidence the disclosure of
(i) might reasonably be expected to prejudice the future supply of such
information to the Government or to an agency; and
(ii) would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest.
16—Documents concerning operations of agencies
(1) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter the disclosure of
(a) could reasonably be expected—
(i) to prejudice the effectiveness of any method or procedure for the conduct
of tests, examinations or audits by an agency; or
(ii) to prejudice on the attainment of the objects of any test, examination
or audit conducted by an agency; or
(iii) to have a substantial adverse effect on the management or assessment by
an agency of the agency's personnel; or
(iv) to have a substantial adverse effect on the effective performance by an
agency of the agency's functions; or
(v) to have a substantial adverse effect on the conduct of industrial
relations by an agency; and
(b) would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest.
17—Documents subject to contempt etc
A document is an exempt document if it contains matter the public disclosure
of which would, but for any immunity of the Crown—
(a) constitute contempt of court; or
(b) contravene any order or direction of a person or body having power to
receive evidence on oath; or
(c) infringe the privilege of Parliament.
section 48, the onus is on the agency to justify its determination ‘in any
proceedings’. This includes the external
review process.
39(11) provides that the Ombudsman may confirm, vary or reverse the
agency’s determination in an external review, based
on the circumstances
existing at the time of review.
Documents in
agency initially identified 179 documents within the scope of the application
and determined that 12 documents are partially exempt,
122 documents are fully
exempt, and the remaining 45 documents can be released in full.
response to my provisional determination the agency advised that a further 4
documents had been identified as falling within scope.
Those documents are
identified as documents 180-183. The agency claims all 4 documents to be fully
exempt on the basis of clause
Issues in this
regard to the agency’s submissions and the exemption clauses provided in
Schedule 1 of the FOI Act, it is for me to determine
whether to confirm, vary or
reverse the agency’s determination in regard to the documents in issue in
this external review.
Consideration
agency’s determination and submissions
consider it appropriate to first provide some general commentary about the
agency’s initial submissions and my assessment
agency’s initial determination spans four pages, however when not taking
into account the portions dedicated to summarising
the FOI application, quoting
the relevant exemption clauses and the agency’s explanation of the
applicant’s review rights,
the agency has effectively dedicated
approximately one and a half pages to justifying its initial position that 122
documents are
fully exempt and a further 12 documents are partially exempt.
Additionally, much of this page and a half is used to simply assert
requirements of the claimed clauses are met without actually explaining how this
is the case. The agency has also repeated
portions of its determination for
documents partially exempt and documents fully exempt.
agency did not provide any further explanation in its internal review
determination and the initial submissions to my Office merely
repeated the
explanation in the initial determination.
would expect that in taking such an access-averse stance, the agency would
provide a more thorough explanation of how the documents
are exempt in order to
discharge its obligation under section 48 to justify its determination. I accept
that it would not be practical
for the agency to address 134 documents
individually in its determination, however the agency could certainly have made
its general
submissions about each exemption clause more thorough.
particular, my external review was initially restricted due to the
agency’s inadequate explanation for its reliance upon
clause 10(1).
Despite the agency claiming exemption over several documents which, on their
face, do not meet the basic requirements
of legal professional privilege, the
agency simply submitted that:
Under clause 10(1) of Schedule 1 to the FOI Act, information is exempt from
disclosure if it would be privileged from production on
the ground of legal
professional privilege. These documents contain legal advice provided to the
government by its legal advisor,
the Crown Solicitor, information which is
subject to legal professional privilege.
substantial number of the relevant documents do not contain legal advice, nor do
they comprise communications between a client and
a solicitor. Absent any
meaningful submissions from the agency, my provisional views could only be
formed based on the contents of
the documents and the publicly available
contextual information. I provisionally concluded that a large number of the
documents in
issue were not exempt on the basis of clause 10(1).
response to my provisional determination the agency provided a further 27 pages
of submissions, the majority of which was focused
on the agency’s
reiterated reliance upon clause 10(1). The additional information provided me
with sufficient context to be
satisfied that I ought to substantially alter my
provisional views. Accordingly, it became necessary for me to issue a revised
provisional
determination to ensure all parties had an appropriate opportunity
to comment on my revised views.
the agency provided its more thorough submissions to me upon first request, I
would have had sufficient information before me
to reach an informed provisional
view, avoiding the need to issue a revised provisional determination.
to the large number of documents in issue, and to ensure that I avoid disclosing
material claimed to be exempt by the
my determination will
address the agency’s submissions and the claimed exemption clauses
generally. The specific application
of each clause to each document will be
stipulated in Appendix Two.
also consider it appropriate to advise that I have observed a substantial amount
of duplication in the documents. I do not consider
this to be a matter
warranting criticism, but hold the view that it is appropriate to advise the
applicant of the duplication in
order to manage her expectations as to the
actual number of distinct documents found to fall within the scope of the access
application.
response to my provisional determination the agency acknowledged this
duplication and advised that in future it will consider whether
there may be an
alternative approach which reduces such duplication. I reiterate that the
duplication itself is not problematic;
I have mentioned it merely to ensure the
applicant held an accurate expectation as to the number of separate and distinct
Information in the public domain
is evident from the terms of the FOI application, the documents in issue relate
to the investigation of complaints of bullying
against Minister Wingard by the
applicant. I consider it relevant to first note the amount of information on
this topic which is
already in the public domain.
subject of the FOI application has been extensively publicised, and a large
number of articles currently remain in the public
Amongst other things, the
following information remains publicly available:
the applicant
lodged a complaint with the Premier about the behaviour of Minister Wingard and
his senior staffer during a meeting
with the applicant and the president of
Sport SA (the name of the Minister’s senior staffer has been publicly
the complaint
was referred to the Commissioner for Public Sector Employment (
Commissioner
investigation of the complaint was contracted out to a private investigator,
Andrew Hill Investigations (
the applicant
was told not to attend a Zoom meeting attended by Minister Wingard and others
after she raised the bullying allegations
the Premier
received advice from the Crown Solicitor regarding the conduct of the Minister
and from the Commissioner regarding the
conduct of his senior staffer
the Commissioner
advised that there was no reasonable or proper basis for allegations of
misconduct to be put to the Minister’s
senior staffer
the Premier was
advised by the Crown Solicitor that he was able to form the view that Minister
Wingard did not engage in conduct in
breach of the Ministerial Code of Conduct.
is also a letter available on the Sport SA website to its members outlining the
contents of the outcome letter provided to the
applicant, and advising the
applicant’s views about same.
the fact that information is in the public domain is not, alone, sufficient to
conclude that a document containing that information
is not exempt, it is
extremely persuasive, particularly where a public interest test is required or
in instances where I must assess
whether legal professional privilege is
established.
I have considered the
practical impact of the publicly available information in my consideration
Clause 6(1)
agency determined that:
These documents consist of information relating to the personal affairs of
third parties. Under clause 6(1) of Schedule 1 to the FOI
Act, a document is
exempt if its disclosure would involve the ‘unreasonable disclosure of
information concerning the personal
affairs of any person’. This
information fall within the definition of personal affairs under the Act and is
therefore exempt
from release pursuant to clause 6(1).
further explanation for the agency’s reliance upon clause 6(1) was
initially provided, despite the agency applying clause
6(1) to 64 documents.
FOI Act defines ‘personal affairs’ as including a person’s
financial affairs, employment records and personal
qualities or attributes. It
is clear from the terms of the FOI application alone that some of the documents
will touch on the personal
qualities or attributes of people other than the
applicant. It is also clear that many of the documents will satisfy the initial
requirements of clause 6(2) being that they contain allegations or suggestions
of improper conduct.
that the allegations made by the applicant relate to behaviour which occurred in
a professional context, I also accept that
the documents may concern personal
affairs by virtue of containing information which might appear in a
person’s employment
records. Although I consider there to generally be a
distinction between personal affairs and professional affairs, it is clear that
certain documents may fall within both categories. I have considered the
following excerpt from the matter of
Priebe v SA Police:
In the context of employment, the words “record” and
“records” do not have the same meaning. For example,
a prospective
employer may ask a previous employer about a job applicant “What’s
his record”. Usually, neither
of them would expect the answer to be
contained within the applicant’s employment records. It seems to me that
“employment
records” means that information, however preserved and
stored, which pertains to the constable’s status or position as
employee of SAPOL. That is, they relate to the fact of employment, not to the
way in which the constable performed his or her
duties during the course of
employment.
Employment records may well include, if a constable has acted improperly and
has been cautioned or reprimanded, a record of that
am also mindful that the term ‘personal affairs’ has also been held
to involve ‘matters of private concern to
individual’
‘composite collection of activities personal to the individual
concerned’.
Very clearly a
document containing or assessing allegations about a person would be of private
concern to that individual.
light of the above, I am satisfied that a large portion of the documents in
issue concern the personal affairs of people other
than the applicant. I now
turn to consider whether disclosure would be unreasonable.
Unreasonableness
has ‘at its core, public interest
considerations’,
such as the
protection of personal privacy. To this point, I note that the objects of the
FOI Act states that openness and accountability
within government will be
achieved by:
(b) conferring on each member of the public and on Members of Parliament a
legally enforceable right to be given access to documents
held by government,
subject only to such restrictions as are consistent with the public interest
(including maintenance of the effective
conduct of public affairs through the
free and frank expression of opinions)
and the preservation of personal
[emphasis added]
above excerpt makes clear that the right to access to documents is not absolute
and can be outweighed by the need to preserve
personal privacy. That said, other
factors may indicate that disclosure would not be unreasonable, such as the
importance of ensuring
transparency and accountability within government and
enabling members of the public to access information relevant to them.
a previous determination in which I assessed a claim of exemption over documents
relating to allegations about a person other than
the applicant, I observed
To this point, it is noted that the documents in issue relate to matters
which occurred several years ago, and for which the relevant
people have already
been held accountable. I consider that, at some point, it must become
unreasonable for those peoples’ privacy
to continue to be infringed in
pursuit of information about this matter.
I am also mindful that there is already substantial information within the
public domain about the relevant matter... I consider that
the relevant people
have already been subjected to sufficient public scrutiny and that, given the
amount of time which has passed,
it would be unreasonable to continue to
infringe on those people’s privacy in relation to these matters.
consider that the current circumstances warrant a different approach. Firstly,
the allegations the subject of the documents in issue
are approximately 12
months old, which is relatively recent.
and perhaps more relevantly, the opportunity for public scrutiny has been
substantially hindered by the limited amount of
publicly available information
regarding the investigation outcome. I consider it is also relevant to observe
that the final investigation
findings were made by the same government that the
alleged perpetrators were a part of.
accept that the 2022 change of government is relevant to the unreasonableness of
disclosure as any scrutiny enabled by disclosure
will be of Minister Wingard
individually rather than as a member of the Government of the Day. That said, I
consider that the subject
matter is recent enough that such scrutiny is
appropriate; the applicant’s right to access should not be entirely eroded
the timing and outcome of the election.
importance of enabling public scrutiny around the investigation is further
heightened by the seniority of the people the subject
of the complaints, in
particular Minister Wingard. Ministers are expected to conduct themselves to an
exceptionally high standard;
when it is alleged that that standard has not been
met, it is my view that scrutiny of such an allegation ought to be high.
I consider that the substantial amount of information within the public domain
is particularly relevant. Given that the general
nature of the complaints and
the outcome of the investigation are publicly known, it is my view that while
disclosure of information
would enable public scrutiny, the infringement on the
personal privacy of the relevant individuals would be minimal.
note that a number of documents contain information concerning the personal
affairs of people other than the applicant and the people
allegations have been made. Whilst disclosure of that information may help to
clarify the outcome of the investigation,
I consider that the preservation of
the personal privacy of those people ought to be given substantial weight.
is important to be clear that my assessment of whether disclosure would be
unreasonable varies based on the nature of the information,
the roles of the
relevant people affected by disclosure and the extent to which disclosure would
enable accountability and scrutiny.
I have applied my assessment to each of the
documents in Appendix Two.
acknowledge that the attitude of the people affected by disclosure is relevant
to my consideration of
unreasonableness,
and confirm
that I have conducted consultation as required by sections 26 and 39(10) of the
I conducted consultation with 5 interested parties pursuant to section 26 of the
I received only one
response. I have taken the lack of response from the other parties as indicating
that they hold no objection
to disclosure of information concerning their
personal affairs.
interested party who did provide me with a response advised on 13 May 2022 that
they did not object to disclosure of the documents
that the agency had allowed
them to view, but noted that the agency had only allowed access to 6 of the
documents in issue. The interested
party advised that without being able to view
further documents, they objected to disclosure of any other documents which may
their personal affairs.
response raises two concerns. First, that the agency did not properly facilitate
consultation with the interested parties but
secondly and perhaps of greater
concern, that the agency has since provided me with submissions implying a
consultation process contrary
to what actually occurred.
1 April 2022 my Legal Officer advised the agency of my intent to conduct
consultation. Due to the large number of documents in
issue and the agency
having claimed exemption over the vast majority of those documents, it was
proposed that I would not release
any documents to the interested parties, but
would instead advise the parties that access to the relevant documents should be
directly with the agency. On 5 April 2022 the agency provided a
response acknowledging this process.
relevant interested party has confirmed that they were able to view documents 7,
41, 43, 63, 64 and 71. At no stage has the agency
claimed exemption over
documents 7 and 43 and it is my understanding that both documents have already
been released to the applicant.
It is therefore unclear why those documents were
included in the consultation process.
greater concern however is the number of additional documents which concern the
personal affairs of the relevant interested party
which the agency has not
granted access to or provided an explanation of, an obvious example being
document 1. Whilst I acknowledge
that the agency may object to full access due
to the potential applicability of other exemption clauses, the interested
submission appears to suggest that no indication was given by the
agency that other documents might concern their personal affairs.
is particular confusing when considered against the agency’s response to
my provisional determination that:
I don’t press this exception [sic] over the entirety of [document 1],
your intention is to conduct consultation with the persons whose personal
information would be disclosed if you decide that no other
exemptions apply.
agency has abandoned a claim of clause 6(1) over document 1 on the basis that
consultation was being conducted, but then declined
to allow one of the
interested parties the opportunity to access, understand or even be aware of
document 1 for the purpose of consultation,
effectively undermining the
agency’s submissions.
I hold the view that the agency has neglected to afford the interested party a
meaningful opportunity to provide a consultation
response, in light of my
revised views regarding the other claimed exemption clauses I do not consider it
necessary to pursue this
response to my revised provisional determination the agency has addressed my
above criticisms, primarily submitting that:
the email from
my Legal Officer on 2 April 2022 was expressed in ‘weak terms’ and
did not expressly articulate that if
the agency could not provide the interested
parties access to relevant documents, it should instead provide a summary or
information to facilitate consultation
to provide the
interested parties access to the relevant documents would be contrary to the
agency’s maintained claim of exemption,
and it would not be possible to
provide only partial access in any meaningful way.
reject the first submission. The agency is bound by the same consultation
requirements as myself or indeed any other agency. I do
not accept that, absent
an express stipulation of what the agency was expected to do to facilitate a
consultation process, the agency
could not have known how to respond to a
request to view documents. In any event, regardless of the wording used, I am
that the intention of my Legal Officer’s email was
do accept the agency’s submission that it was not appropriate to provide
the interested parties access to partial or entire
documents due to the other
exemption clauses claimed to be applicable, however as the agency has
acknowledged, a proper consultation
process could easily be achieved in other
reviewed the additional information provided by the agency to an interested
party in response to my revised provisional determination,
I am satisfied that
the additional steps taken by the agency were appropriate. I therefore do not
consider it necessary to address
this point further.
do consider it appropriate however to briefly address document 39. The agency
submits that exemption is not pressed noting that
I consulted with people
affected by disclosure of information constituting personal affairs. I advise
the agency that I did not conduct
consultation in relation to document 39 as I
am not satisfied that the information constitutes personal affairs.
also consider it appropriate to briefly address documents 40 and 41
specifically. Both documents were determined to be partially
exempt and although
I am mindful of my obligation to avoid disclosing exempt material, I am
satisfied that the nature of the material
is discernible from the released
portions of the documents; the redacted information in document 40 consists of
email addresses and
the redacted information in document 41 consists of ‘P
numbers’ and role classifications.
that the ‘P numbers’ are phone extensions, I am not satisfied that
the numbers constitute personal affairs. I
do however accept that the role
classifications and a large number of the email addresses constitute personal
said, due to the number of people concerned, I am of the view that it is simply
not reasonably practicable to conduct consultation
in relation to documents 40
Considering
the terms of the FOI application and the applicant’s role in the subject
investigation, in my provisional determination
I speculated that the applicant
would not take issue with the redactions to these documents. The applicant
responded to my provisional
determination on 20 April 2022 advising that she had
no further submissions to make. I therefore maintain the view that the applicant
does not take issue with the redactions to documents 40 and 41.
this basis, I conclude that disclosure would be unreasonable.
addition to the agency’s submissions above that it would not press
exemption over document 1, the agency further submits
that exemption under
clause 6(1) is not pressed in relation to documents 20, 21, 25, 26, 117, 118,
119, 121, 145, 146, 149, 150,
172, 173, 178 and 179 on the basis that the
majority of the contents are within the public domain. I acknowledge the
revised position and observe that the agency does however
maintain exemption under clause 9(1) which will be addressed below.
the agency has reiterated its claim of exemption under clause 6(1) as follows:
I submit that this exception [sic] is applicable to all of the document [sic]
referred to in paragraph 140 (namely
11, 18, 24, 27, 28, 113, 116, 127, 169
), and document
, and the public interest weights
[sic] in favour of non-disclosure for the same reasons explained in respect of
clause 9(1) and 13(1)(b).
to the agency’s submissions, exemption under clause 6(1) requires the
agency to establish that disclosure would be
unreasonable rather than contrary
to the public interest. As already outlined, I accept that unreasonableness has
public interest
considerations, however the two are not interchangeable.
I have considered whether the agency’s submissions in relation to clauses
9(1) and 13(1)(b) raise issues of unreasonableness,
I remain satisfied that the
agency has not justified its views for the following reasons:
the agency did
not dispute any aspect of my assessment of unreasonableness
the agency did
not identify any factors indicating that disclosure would constitute
unreasonable disclosure
of information concerning a person’s personal
the relevant
interested parties were consulted but declined to provide any submissions in
response, which suggests that they do not
object to disclosure.
consider this final factor to be particularly persuasive; it is difficult to see
how the agency could justify a position that disclosure
would be unreasonable
when the people affected by disclosure did not dispute my provisional findings,
and my revised provisional
findings, that the documents are not exempt.
Clause 7(1)(c)
the agency has not relied upon clause 7(1)(c), in light of my assessment of the
other exemption clauses relied upon, I consider
it appropriate to address
whether the clause applies to documents 3, 98 and 103, as well as a portion of
document 67.
am satisfied that the information relates to the business affairs of AHI and is
‘not merely derived from a business or concerning
it or have some
connection with it’.
said, I note that a large portion of the information in documents 3, 98 and 103
is available publicly available via AHI’s
website. It is therefore
difficult to see how disclosure could reasonably be expected to adversely affect
the business.
do however accept that disclosure of the service prices might adversely affect
the business affairs of AHI as this could result
in competitors altering their
prices to be seen as a more attractive option. Additionally, it is unknown
whether the prices in the
documents are standard prices or special prices
specifically offered for government work, or somehow otherwise tailored to the
investigation. In the case of the latter, disclosure might unreasonably
result in other customers demanding the same prices.
said, in the circumstances it appears to me that clause 7(3) would prevent the
application of clause 7(1) to documents 3, 98
and 103. Clause 7(3) states that:
(3) A document is not an exempt document by virtue of this clause if it is a
contract entered into by the Crown or an agency after
the commencement of this
particular regard to the wording at the end of page 2 of the documents, it
appears to me that although the documents have been
characterised by the agency
as each being a ‘Letter’ the documents also ultimately comprise the
contract between AHI
and the agency. Accordingly, the documents cannot be exempt
on the basis of clause 7(1)(c).
small portion of document 67 relays some of the pricing contained in documents
3, 98 and 103. Although document 67 is not itself
a contract, it is my view that
clause 7(3) indicates a clear parliamentary intention that information contained
within a government
contract should not be exempt on the basis of clause 7(1).
Noting also that the same information is proposed to be released in documents
98 and 103, I am satisfied that disclosure would not be contrary to the public
response to my provisional determination, AHI advised by email on 5 May 2022
that it had no further submissions to make.
Clause 9(1)
agency determined that:
These documents contain advice and recommendation prepared for the decision
making of the OCPSE and the Premier. I acknowledge that
there is a strong public
interest around the government’s decision making. In my view, however,
this is outweighed by the need
to ensure that public servants can provide advice
without inhibiting frankness and candour. Disclosure of these documents would
free communication and would, in turn, impede the agency and the
Premier’s deliberative process. I have therefore exempted
this information
pursuant to clause 9(1)(a)(i) of the FOI Act.
accept that the majority of the documents contain opinion, advice and
recommendations which were obtained, prepared or recorded
in the course of the
agency’s decision-making functions. In terms of the public interest, I
also agree that there is a strong
public interest in transparency around
government decision making.
my provisional determination I referred to comments from the matter of
Lianos and Secretary to the Department of Social Security
regarding weighing the public interest under clause 9(1):
Relevant matters include matters such as the age of the documents; the
importance of the issues discussed; the continuing relevance
of those issues in
relation to matters still under consideration; the extent to which premature
disclosure may reveal sensitive information
that may be ‘misunderstood or
misapplied by an ill-informed public’; the extent to which the subject
matter to the documents
is already within public knowledge; the status of the
persons between whom and the circumstances in which the communications passed;
the need to preserve confidentiality having regard to the subject matter of the
communication and the circumstances in which it was
made. Underlying all these
factors is the need to consider the extent to which disclosure of the documents
would be likely to impede
or have an adverse effect upon the efficient
administration of the agency concerned
response to my provisional determination the agency apparently declined to
consider the comments made in Lianos, instead turning
its mind to the
applicability of the public interest considerations set out in
Re Howard and
Treasurer of the Commonwealth
the Howard factors
(i) the higher the office of the persons between whom the communications pass
and the more sensitive the issues involved in the communication,
the more likely
it will be that the communication should not be disclosed;
(ii) disclosure of communications made in the course of the development and
subsequent promulgation of policy tends not to be in
the public interest;
(iii) disclosure which will inhibit frankness and candour in future
pre-decisional communications is likely to be contrary to the
(iv) disclosure, which will lead to confusion and unnecessary debate
resulting from disclosure of possibilities considered, tends
not to be in the
public interest;
(v) disclosure of documents which do not fairly disclose the reasons for a
decision subsequently taken may be unfair to a decision-maker
and may prejudice
the integrity of the decision-making
is unclear to me why the agency would decline to consider the factors outlined
in Lianos and instead rely upon the Howard factors
when the latter has been
treated with caution in various other matters. Although the agency acknowledges
that the Howard factors
have been characterised as ‘general
indicators’ of where the public interest may
I consider it relevant to
note that the Supreme Court has determined that they are not mandatory
considerations required to be taken
into account. The list of factors is neither
definitive nor
exhaustive.
agency has referenced a quote which appeared in the matter of
Attorney-General for South Australia v Seven Network (Operation) Ltd
Seven Network
which appears to support an adoption of the Howard
factors. However Seven Network then went on to depart from that quote and take
different approach.
Additionally,
I query the meaningfulness of the agency having acknowledged that the Howard
factors are general indicators only, noting
that it has then gone on to form the
majority of its submissions based on those factors. in any event, I have
considered the submissions
put forward by the agency.
agency submits that the seniority of the officials involved in the relevant
communications is ‘most notable’. In my
provisional determination I
acknowledged the seniority of the officials between whom the communications
passed, but considered that
this factor is equally balanced by the increased
public interest in disclosure stemming from the seniority of the persons about
the allegations were made. As outlined above, Ministers are held to a high
standard of conduct.
any event, I consider that in the circumstances the seniority of the officials
between whom the communications passed ought to
be given little weight. By their
very nature, documents of this kind will routinely pass between officials of
seniority. It is my
view that this particular factor is intended to apply in
unusual circumstances warranting senior involvement rather than circumstances
which a senior official is simply fulfilling their usual obligations. This is
supported by the fact that the FOI Act expressly
applies to documents held by
Ministers, many of which could reasonably be expected to contain high level but
routine communications.
agency submits that the investigation, and by extension a number of the
documents in issue, are highly sensitive, and that:
The provisional determination does not appear to deal with the sensitivity
point. That the fact of the complaint and the investigation
were in the public
domain does not detract from the sensitivity of the investigation or the issues
issue of sensitivity was in fact considered, however I had concluded that this
was not a particularly persuasive public interest
factor, largely due to my
rejection of the latter portion of the agency’s submissions.
information is that which calls for a level of tactful, careful or cautionary
I acknowledge that
such treatment may have been required while the investigation was ongoing to
ensure its integrity. I also accept
that information regarding a finalised
investigation has the capacity to remain sensitive. However I reject the
assertion that information
already within the public domain can be said to
require ongoing careful or cautionary treatment.
is publicly known that the applicant’s allegations have been investigated
and that the matter is considered to be closed.
A substantial amount of
information about the subject matter of the documents is publicly known.
may well be that the information contained within the documents is considered to
be sensitive to the relevant individuals, however
I consider that this speaks
more directly to a clause 6(1) argument. In the context of balancing the public
interest under clause
9(1), it is my view that ‘sensitivity’ needs
to be assessed based on the contents of the information rather than an
individual’s
attitude to the information.
remain satisfied that the majority of the information contained in the relevant
documents can no longer be characterised as being
‘sensitive’. I
also consider that the extent to which the information already exists within the
public domain is sufficient
for me to be satisfied that disclosure would not
cause misunderstanding to the public.
relation to the agency’s initial submission about ensuring the provision
of frank and candid advice, I noted in my provisional
determination the
following quote from the matter of
Treglown v SA
Similar issues were under discussion in the matter of
Pemberton and The
University of Queensland
where the Information Commissioner, referring to an earlier decision,
commented at [126] that claims:
... that the public interest would be injured by the disclosure of particular
documents because candour and frankness would be inhibited
communications of a similar kind ... should be disregarded
unless a very
particular factual basis is laid for the claim that disclosure will inhibit
frankness and candour in future deliberative
process communications of a like
kind, and that tangible harm to the public interest will result from that
my provisional determination I advised that I agree with this view and do not
consider it likely that the prospect of disclosure
would be sufficient to deter
a senior government official from properly carrying out their functions. I
concluded that absent any
particular factual basis for making this claim, I was
not inclined to accept the agency’s submission on this point.
response to my provisional determination the agency submits that the comments
made in the matter of
Permberton and The University of Queensland
were made in the context of consideration as to
whether ‘loss of candour’ might constitute a substantial adverse
Given that the relevant quote arose in the context of the Commissioner
needing to be satisfied that a ‘substantial adverse effect’
arise, its direct applicability to the present case is significantly reduced.
strongly disagree with this view. Although in Pemberton the above quote appeared
in the context of determining whether disclosure
could cause a substantial
adverse effect, Pemberton is not the original source of the quote. In Pemberton
the Queensland Information
Commissioner was quoting
Re Eccleston,
their own previous decisions.
their original context, the comments were made in the process of considering the
third Howard factor (loss of candour) and are
therefore directly applicable to
the present case and the agency’s submissions. Even if that were not the
case, the South Australian
District Court clearly saw fit to consider those
comments in the context of weighing the public interest under clause 9(1) when
referred to them in
Treglown v SA Police
agency has referred to the following further quote from
Treglown v SA
It appears to me that whilst it may be presumed that the prospect of
disclosure will not ordinarily inhibit candour such as to be
contrary to the
public interest, that presumption is rebuttable and that, indeed, different
considerations may apply in respect of
persons called upon to express opinions
or consult in circumstances where, for example, they may not be duty-bound to do
so or where
they may be so bound but where the particular circumstances might
inhibit complete frankness or where, as in
, the broader public
interest was found to justify the protection of certain referee material
generated by known persons carrying
significant responsibilities, for the
purpose of higher university appointments. It would be idle to speculate as to
the range of
circumstances which might fall outside of that presumption: each
case must be considered on its merits.
accept that the presumption that the prospect of disclosure will not ordinarily
inhibit candour such as to be contrary to the public
interest can be rebutted,
however the fact remains that the agency is yet to provide me with a factual
basis for doing so. It is
unclear to me how disclosure of the specific documents
over which exemption under clause 9(1) is claimed could inhibit the frankness
and candour of voluntary participants to the investigation as those documents
objectively relay the facts of the investigation without
identifying what was
said by any specific person.
Alternatively
the agency may be suggesting that disclosure would diminish the frankness and
candour of the Commissioner. I am not
inclined to accept that potential
disclosure would deter the Commissioner from properly fulfilling her functions
Public Sector Act 2009
I acknowledge that there is a distinction between disclosure of information in
the public interest and information of interest
to the public, I consider that
the high community interest in the subject matter of the documents is certainly
relevant to identifying
where the public interest lies.
consider that there is also substantial public interest in promoting
transparency and accountability around government decision-making,
particularly
in relation to a topic as high profile as a Minister’s conduct. That said,
I do however accept that the public
interest in the accountability of Minister
Wingard is arguably lowered following the 2022 state election.
agency submits that the information already made public, in particular the
Premier’s statements in Parliament on 9 September
2021, already achieves
the right balance between the public interest in transparency and the public
interest in not compromising
the ability of the Commissioner to properly
investigate similar matters in the future:
It cannot be said that this is a case where the public may reasonably have
doubts as to whether the allegations were properly and
independently
investigated, and as to whether the conclusions reached were legal sound.
reject this assertion for several reasons. First and foremost, it is my view
that there is simply not enough information within
the public domain for the
public to be entirely satisfied that the allegations were properly and
independently investigated. The
publicly available information is largely
focused on the essence of the allegations and the outcome of the investigation.
Very little
information regarding the process of the investigation and the
evidence considered is publicly known.
the mere fact that the investigation documents are the subject of an FOI
application would indicate that questions remain
around to the investigation
processes. I acknowledge the agency’s submission that the existence of an
FOI application, alone,
is not an indication of the public interest, and that
otherwise this would render any public interest test redundant. I do not
however the existence of the FOI application is only one reason I have
rejected one of the public interest factors put forth by the
agency; it is not
by any means definitive.
remain satisfied that the fact that the applicant saw fit to pursue this matter
is indicative that there is insufficient information
available for the public to
be satisfied that the allegations were properly and independently investigated.
This is further evidenced
by the applicant’s submissions in response to my
revised provisional determination.
I observed in my revised provisional determination that the findings of the
investigation were received with skepticism as
evidenced by social media posts.
I note that the agency submits that social media is a poor barometer of the
public interest, but
again reiterate that this is simply one reason I have
rejected the agency’s submission above. I have also had regard to numerous
comments made in response to articles published about this matter.
remain satisfied that I should reject the agency’s submission as above.
a tangential comment, it is curious to me that the agency asserts that there can
be no doubt that the matter was ‘independently
investigated’ noting
other submissions from that AHI’s investigation were limited to an
information gathering role, and
the final findings were made by the Commissioner
and the Premier.
note that many of the documents claimed to be exempt on the basis of clause 9(1)
are identified as being drafts. I advise the agency
that the draft status of a
document will not, alone, attract exemption. I consider it necessary to consider
not only the contents
of the documents, but also the extent to which they differ
from their final version.
the agency has referred me to the matter of
Aly v Limestone Coast Local
Health Network
in which it was found that disclosure of selected documents
generated in the course of an investigation would be contrary to the public
interest. In that matter it was noted that Dr Aly had been provided all
documents that formed part of the formal investigation processes,
documents relating to internal deliberations and discussions and proposed draft
correspondence was
accept that the nature of the documents over which the agency claims a clause
9(1) exemption can be likened to the documents found
to be exempt in
Limestone Coast Local Health Network
, however it is my view that there are
several circumstances differing in this matter which justify my reaching an
alternative conclusion.
the relevant parties have not been given all documents that formed part of the
formal investigation process, most notably
the investigation report which
substantially informed the outcome. Additionally the high profile nature of the
investigation and
the amount of information already publicly available tilt the
public interest more heavily towards disclosure.
all of the circumstances I remain of the view that the factors in favour of
disclosure generally outweigh those contrary to disclosure,
acknowledge that various factors carry different weight in relation to each of
the documents. I have applied my consideration
of the public interest to each
document in Appendix Two.
Clause 10(1)
agency determined that:
Under clause 10(1) of Schedule 1 to the FOI Act, information is exempt from
disclosure if it would be privileged from production on
the ground of legal
professional privilege. Sections of these documents contain legal advice
provided to the government by its legal
advisor, the Crown Solicitor,
information which is subject to legal professional privilege. I have therefore
determined to exempt
these sections pursuant to clause 10(1).
to the agency’s reliance upon clause 6(1), the agency initially failed to
provide any further explanation for its reliance
upon clause 10(1), despite the
clause having been applied to 73 documents. In response to my provisional
determination, and then
my revised provisional determination, the agency has now
provided me with substantial further submissions regarding the application
clause 10(1). In light of these submissions I am persuaded to alter my
provisional views.
future matters I would expect the agency to provide more detailed submissions
upon initial request to avoid the need for a revised
provisional determination
to be issued; had the additional information been available to me earlier my
provisional determination
would have been substantially different.
the matter of
Esso Australia Resources Limited v The Commissioner of
the High Court held that a document is
privileged from production if it is a confidential communication between a
client and their
solicitor that was created for the dominant purpose of
obtaining or giving legal advice; or if it is a confidential communication
for the dominant purpose of use, or obtaining material for use in, pending or
anticipated legal proceedings.
professional privilege can be separated into separate categories of advice
privilege and litigation privilege. Having reviewed
the relevant documents, it
does not appear that legal proceedings were either pending or anticipated at the
time of the documents
being created. I am therefore satisfied that my assessment
of clause 10(1) can be limited to a consideration of whether advice privilege
has been established.
claim of legal professional privilege is contingent upon a number of
requirements being met:
has there been a
communication between a client and their solicitor?
communication confidential?
was the dominant
purpose of the communication obtaining or giving legal advice?
if privilege is
established, has it been waived?
accept that privilege attaches not to a specific document, but rather the
communication. I therefore accept that a document which
does not directly
reflect a communication between a client and their solicitor might be privileged
if it relays a privileged communication.
already outlined, it has been publicised that the investigation of the
applicant’s allegations was outsourced to AHI, however
in light of the
agency’s further submissions I consider it is more accurate to state that
AHI’s investigation was limited
to gathering evidence to inform an
internal investigation. This distinction is important to better understanding
the involvement
of the Crown Solicitors Office (
) in this matter, and
therefore assessing whether certain documents are subject to legal professional
Third party communications
it has long been accepted that litigation privilege can be extended to third
party communications,
assess whether the same can be said of advice privilege.
2004, contrary to the existing case law on this topic and reversing the prior
decision of the Federal Court,
the Full Federal Court held that confidential communications originating from a
third party expert were
privileged.
In that matter the
client, a company, sought a report from a firm of accountants with a view to
using that report in drafting instructions
for the company’s solicitor.
decision of the Full Federal Court has received mixed responses, with the
Federal Court of Australia following the
but the New South Wales
Court of Appeal criticising it
and the Full Family Court departing from
Although the decision has
not yet been confirmed or departed from in a South Australian case, I have given
regard to the following
excerpt from the matter of
Douglas v Morgan:
It is difficult to identify a rationale for applying a different
approach when the purpose of the provision of the document to lawyers
provide advice, or non-litigious advice, as opposed to legal representation in
proceedings. In formulations of the rule, albeit
at a general level, by the High
Court, such as the formulation quoted at [41] above, there is no suggestion of
such a distinction.
However, this question does not arise on the present appeal
because Ms Douglas does not contend on appeal that the purpose of obtaining
Investigation Report was for provision to solicitors for
the absence of a more directly applicable South Australian authority, I am
inclined to adopt the position that a distinction should
not be drawn between
advice privilege and litigation privilege when assessing whether privilege
extends to a third party communication.
I therefore accept that, subject to the
other elements of privilege being satisfied, communications between the
agency’s solicitor
and AHI is capable of being privileged.
my provisional determination I advised my view that further documents or
correspondence involving AHI but not the agency or its
solicitor were unlikely
to be privileged. In light of the additional information now provided by the
agency regarding the role of
AHI and the involvement of the CSO I am persuaded
that further documents between AHI and other parties might be capable of
Confidential communication
now turn to whether the relevant communications are confidential, noting the
following observation by McLelland J:
It seems to me to be an essential element in a claim for legal professional
privilege that the material, disclosure of which is sought
to be precluded is,
so far as the person from whom disclosure is sought is concerned,
confidential.
objectively observable fact cannot be privileged as there can be no
confidentiality in such an observation, even if the observation
is made by a
It has also been
observed that confidentiality is a characteristic which can be lost; the moment
confidence ceases, privilege also
agency submits that legal advice will often set out a factual background and
that while it may not be unusual for such factual
information to be publicly
known, this is not sufficient for the communication to lose the characteristic
of being confidential.
I agree with this view. Although the background
information may be widely known, it forms part of a communication which by its
nature is confidential. Additionally, disclosure of publicly available
information might nevertheless reveal something not widely
known, such as the
mere fact that legal advice was obtained.
said, in this particular matter I advise that the question of whether privilege
has been waived is also relevant to portions
of the information which are now
publicly available. I will address this further below.
do however consider that the issue of confidentiality might arise in relation to
documents which are, in themselves, inherently
non-confidential, such as:
...documents which constitute or evidence transactions (such as contracts,
conveyances, declarations of trust, offers or receipts)
even if they are
delivered to a solicitor or counsel for advice or for use in
litigation.
this regard the publicised involvement of AHI in the investigation process is
relevant. While the report of AHI itself may be considered
to be confidential,
in circumstances in which the engagement of AHI is publicly known, the fact that
a report was transmitted could
not be said to be confidential.
Dominant purpose test
turning to the dominant purpose test, I again turn my mind to the abovementioned
2004 decision of the Full Federal Court, in which
it was observed that while
advice privilege is
of extending to third party communications,
there may inevitably be great difficulty in establishing the required dominant
my provisional determination I had regard to the matter of
Gaynor King
in which Fair Work Commissioner Nicholas Wilson rejected the argument that a
workplace investigation report prepared by Minter Ellison
was subject to legal
professional privilege. In that matter, the City of Darwin engaged Minter
Ellison to conduct an investigation
into a complaint of bullying. Minter Ellison
conducted the investigation and advised the City of Darwin of the outcome. The
of Darwin subsequently claimed the outcome report to be subject to legal
professional privilege.
Commissioner
Wilson was not satisfied that the dominant purpose of the investigation report
was for the City of Darwin to obtain legal
advice because, inter alia:
the City of
Darwin employees involved in the investigation knew about the complaints
the employees
involved knew there would be an investigation
employees involved in the investigation were informed of its outcome
the City of
Darwin did not characterise the investigation report as being for the purpose of
legal advice.
agree with Commissioner Wilson’s approach and in my provisional
determination observed that the facts above appeared to be
analogous to the
matter before me based on the fact that the employees involved in the subject
investigation knew about the applicant’s
complaints and the investigation,
and were informed of the investigation outcome.
the dominant purpose test is an objective one, the subjective purpose is also
Whilst normally the
relevant subjective purpose will be that of the person who created the relevant
document, in the current circumstances
the relevant intention is that of the
solicitor rather than
response to my provisional determination the agency submits that the matter of
Gaynor King
is distinguishable from the current circumstances and has
provided me with substantial further information as to the sequence of events
and the true role of AHI in the investigation process.
reviewed the agency’s additional submissions I am persuaded to alter my
views such that I ought to depart from the reasoning
Gaynor King
particularly noting that:
the agency has
provided further details indicating that a solicitor-client relationship existed
before AHI was engaged (as opposed
to the solicitor merely performing
administrative tasks on behalf of the client)
contrary to the
language in the documents and the information made public, AHI did not conduct a
full investigation and make findings.
Rather, AHI’s investigation was
limited to gathering the information necessary for the Commissioner and the
Premier to make
very limited
information was conveyed to the employees involved, and what was relayed is
largely findings rather than content extracted
from AHI’s report
submits that the purpose of obtaining the report from AHI was always to inform
legal advice.
I am now satisfied that the reasoning in
Gaynor King
ought not to be
applied in this matter, I maintain my view that a strong argument could be made
that the report of AHI and the documents
which informed that report do not
constitute confidential communications and do not satisfy the dominant purpose
the matter of
Trade Practices Commission v Ampol Petroleum (Victoria) Pty Ltd
the Federal Court of Australia considered whether the transcripts
produced in the context of an examination under the
Trade Practices Act
(Cth) were privileged. Relevantly, it was held that:
However, in an examination under
, the element of a confidential
communication is absent. Information given by an examinee in the course of an
examination is not given
in confidence. It is given under coercion... The
examination proceeds with the threat of prosecution if the examinee does not
to the questions asked.
The TPC does not conduct examinations under
solely for the purposes of
obtaining legal advice but rather does so in pursuance of its statutory
functions which include gathering
information and evidence with respect to
contraventions or possible contraventions of the
Commissioner has a statutory function under the
Public Sector Act 2009
investigate or assist in the investigation of matters in connection with public
sector employee conduct or discipline. Having
regard to the Commissioner’s
power to compel a person to participate in an examination or respond to
questions, I consider
that an argument could be made that the above case is
applicable to the current circumstances.
said, I am mindful that in the current matter the Commissioner did not exercise
those functions and that the responses provided
to AHI and subsequently to the
Commissioner were provided voluntarily and in line with the Code of Ethics for
the South Australian
public sector.
am also mindful that in the above matter the Federal Court applied the sole
purpose test rather than the dominant purpose test,
the latter having
significantly broadened the potential application of legal professional
privilege. Accordingly, although I consider
the above matter to be substantially
similar to the current case, the application of the dominant purpose test in
this matter is
sufficient for me to reach a different
conclusion.
further consideration required of the dominant purpose test, is whether the
advice sought or provided was in fact legal advice and
not merely administrative
or operational advice. Relevantly:
... it is essential to ensure, particularly in the government context, that
the purpose for which a document was brought into existence
was one which
related to legal advice as opposed to operational, administrative or policy
my provisional determination I observed that, whilst this is not always an easy
distinction to draw, it appeared to me that at
least some of the advice provided
to the agency could not be characterised as being legal advice. Merely
addressing queries to a
solicitor ‘does not necessarily cloak all of the
matters discussed, or all of the documents then produced, with
light of the additional information provided by the agency, particularly the
submissions which go towards establishing that a solicitor-client
relationship
existed at a very early stage in the investigation process, I accept that the
majority of the continuum of communications
between the agency, the CSO and AHI
satisfy the dominant purpose test. Although very clearly some of those
communications do not
explicitly relay instructions or legal advice, they are
peripheral to such communications or made ‘with a view to obtaining
giving legal
agency has provided the following submissions regarding the dominant purpose
test and parts of documents:
Legal professional privilege attaches to communications, and not a document
itself. One view is that, where a document brought into
existence for a dominant
privileged purpose contains information extraneous to that purpose, privilege
nevertheless attaches to the
whole document. However, there is authority for the
proposition that, in such a situation, portions of the document containing
communications should be blanked out or severed from the rest of the
Key to this will be whether the document contains more than one
‘communication’. As Stone J said in
Australian Crime Commission v
It is, of course, possible for one document to contain multiple
communications some of which have the relevant dominant purpose and
which do not. There may be some differences of opinion concerning whether in
such a case it is possible to sever or redact
the privileged part of the
document and allow the remainder to be inspected: see Pratt at [17]-[18] where
Kenny J discussed but did
not need to decide the issue.
Theoretically I do not see that there should be much difficulty provided
that one keeps in mind that legal professional privilege
attaches to
communications not documents. If there is only one communication, albeit having
multiple purposes, then the issue is
the dominant purpose of that
communications. If the dominant purpose is such as to attract privilege then the
whole of that communication
must be privileged and no question of severance
arises. If there is more than one communication in the document then the same
must be applied to each. If the communications are sufficiently independent
as to be characterised as two communications then it
is unlikely that there will
be much difficulty in redacting or otherwise maintaining the confidentiality of
one and retaining the
Thus, if severance is not possible because the document is one communication,
it may be necessary to characterise the whole document
as privileged.
[references omitted]
do not disagree with the agency’s submissions on this point and advise
that I do not propose to sever the documents in issue
based on an application of
the dominant purpose test. I do however consider these submissions to be
relevant to my consideration
of whether privilege has been waived.
legal professional privilege has been established, I have considered whether
that privilege has been waived. Waiver may be express
or implied, but
essentially:
Waiver occurs where the party entitled to privilege performs an act which is
inconsistent with the confidence preserved by
my provisional determination I advised my view that the Premier’s
statement in Parliament on 9 September 2021 was sufficient
to waive privilege
over some communications, the making of that statement in a public fashion being
inconsistent with a claim that
privilege is maintained. To this point, the
agency submitted that:
While these words, spoken in another context, may amount to a waiver of
privilege, the statement was made in parliament and the protection
afforded by
parliamentary privilege must therefore be considered.
Therefore, I submit it is not open to you to find that there has been a
waiver of legal professional privilege on the basis of the
statement in parliament, as this would require an impermissible examination of
and drawing an inference from parliamentary
proceedings. It is not open, in the
same way that the Premier’s statement in parliament could not be accepted
in evidence before
a Court for the purpose of proving that legal professional
privilege has been waived over advice and to seek an order for discovery
such advice.
response to my revised provisional determination, the agency has elaborated on
this point by referring me to the matter of
British American Tobacco
Australia Ltd v Secretary, Department of Health and Ageing
. The Full Court
of the Federal Court considered whether a document tabled in the Commonwealth
Senate, which contained reference to
legal advice, was exempt on the grounds of
legal professional privilege and concluded:
If one looks at this issue in the round, rather than as one question in a
sequence of separate questions, one can see that the appellant
is confronted by
a dilemma. To avoid the threat presented by s 16(3) of the PP Act, the appellant
is driven to say that it seeks
to refer to the tabling of the Government
Response in the Senate only to show that the words were published. However if
not go further and invite the inference that the reference reveals an
inconsistency in the position of the respondent in now seeking
to maintain legal
professional privilege, then there can be no basis for the conclusion that the
privilege has been waived. If the
appellant seeks to show the inconsistency
necessary to make good its waiver argument, it must be gored by s 16(3) of the
In our opinion, it is not possible to avoid the conclusion that the appellant
does indeed seek to make use of the tabling of the Government
Response to permit
the drawing of an inference adverse to the government. Since inconsistency in
maintaining the privilege is the
point on which waiver turns, for the appellant
to succeed it must persuade the Court that the conduct of the respondent in
upon the privilege is inconsistent with the publication of the
Government Response by tabling it in the Senate. That is precisely
the kind of
reflection which may not be made upon the conduct of those whose published
statements are within the protection of s
16(3) of the PP Act.
am satisfied that the common law position with respect to parliamentary
privilege in South Australia is sufficiently similar to
section 16(3)
Parliamentary Privileges Act 1987
such that I should have regard to the
above matter.
the Premier’s statement was made in a public forum, and remains publicly
available through Hansard, for the reasons
provided in my assessment of clause
17(c) I am satisfied that the statement is nevertheless subject to parliamentary
privilege, and
therefore cannot be relied upon as a basis for establishing that
legal professional privilege has been waived.
have applied my assessment of whether privilege is established, and maintained,
for each of the relevant documents in Appendix Two.
16(1)(a)(iv)
agency determined that:
These documents contain information that relates to a function of OCPSE in
receiving and assessing complaints made in relation to
the Public Sector.
Disclosure of such information would be detrimental to the integrity and
effectiveness of OCPSE’s capacity
to appropriately assess these matters
and prejudice the flow of information from complainants in the future because
the risk of having
those complaints made public would discourage any full or
frank disclosures being made to government.
I acknowledge that there is a strong public interest in the openness and
accountability of government to the public. In my view, however,
outweighed by the need to ensure the integrity and the ability of the OCPSE to
handle highly sensitive matters is not undermined.
Disclosure of these documents
would hinder free communication and would, in turn, impede the agency’s
deliberative process.
the circumstances I am not satisfied that disclosure would discourage the
provision of information from complainants to the agency.
As outlined above, the
knowledge of the subject complaint is within the public domain and the applicant
has in fact made some of
that information public herself. Further, it appears to
me that the applicant is in fact dissatisfied that further information about
complaint and subsequent investigation has not been made public. It is difficult
to see how disclosure of information
with the apparent consent of the
complainant
would deter future complainants from providing information to
the agency.
Additionally,
I do not accept that disclosure could reasonably be expected to impact the
effectiveness of the Commissioner’s
capacity to assess complaints as the
Commissioner is able to compel the provision of information in accordance with
Public Sector Act 2009
my provisional determination I concluded that I was not satisfied that the
agency had established that the initial requirements
of clause 16(1)(a)(iv) are
met. I did however consider that a number of the relevant documents are exempt
on the basis of other exemption
clauses. Whilst some of those clauses have been
discussed above, I considered that clauses 12(1) and 13(1)(b) are both relevant
not having been relied on by the agency.
the agency has provided no further submissions regarding clause 16(1)(a)(iv), I
maintain the views expressed in my provisional
determination.
Clause 12(1)
12(1) of the FOI Act provides that a document is an exempt document if it
contains matter the disclosure of which would constitute
an offence against an
Act. I am aware that the information in the documents relates to a specific
South Australian Act (
the relevant Act
), however to ensure I comply with
my obligation to avoid disclosing exempt
I do not consider it
appropriate to identify the relevant Act.
relevant Act provides that it is an offence to disclose information in relation
or connected with a matter that is subject to
the relevant Act. I am satisfied
that documents 57, 58, 92-94, 99 and the relevant portions of documents 72 and
80 fall within this
category. I am also satisfied that none of the legislated
exceptions to the offence are applicable.
that I am unsure whether any of the information within the documents is known to
the applicant, a question arises as to whether
it would be an offence to
disclose information under the relevant Act if the information was already known
to individuals seeking
the information under the FOI Act.
my view, regardless of whether or not the information is known to a person, or
whether certain information has already been revealed,
in the circumstances of
this matter, I consider that any disclosure of information would be an offence
against the relevant Act.
reaching this view, I have given regard to the matter of
Ward v Courts
Administration Authority
). In that matter, the District Court considered clause 12(1) of
the FOI Act and the confidentiality provisions of the since repealed
Children’s Protection Act 1993.
Children’s Protection Act provided that under section 58, a person
‘must not divulge’ information of a certain
kind, and that the act
of divulging information of that kind would be an offence.
District Court made the following observation in relation to the construction of
what it meant to ‘divulge’ information
of the kind captured by
section 58 of the Children’s Protection Act:
In my view, the plain and ordinary meaning of “divulge” is to
disclose. It does not necessarily convey the imparting of
that which is
previously unknown.
District Court also went on to consider the principles underlying the
Children’s Protection Act.
consider that the observation by the District Court in Ward is relevant to the
circumstances of this matter. As held by the District
Court, I consider that to
‘divulge’ is ‘disclose’. Further, having regard to the
principles of the relevant
Act, I consider that ‘disclose’ should be
given a similarly broad interpretation in this case.
my view, the meaning of ‘disclose’, in the context of the relevant
Act in this matter, includes disclosure of information
that may already be known
to certain parties. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the documents listed above
are exempt on the basis
of clause 12(1), regardless of whether their contents
are known to the applicant.
Clause 13(1)(b)
establish exemption under clause 13(1)(b), each of the following criteria must
be satisfied:
the matter in
the document must have been ‘received under an express or inferred
understanding that [it] would be kept
confidential’
that disclosure
of the information might reasonably be expected to prejudice the future supply
of such information to the Government
or an agency
that disclosure
of the matter would, on balance, be contrary to the public
reviewed the contents of the documents, I am satisfied that the information
within the documents described in the agency’s
schedule of documents as
‘Transcript of interview’ was provided under an express
understanding of confidence. I also
consider that, although the information was
initially provided to AHI, the expectation of confidentiality would extend to
being a recipient of the information.
outlined above, I acknowledge that the Commissioner has the power to compel the
provision of information for the purpose of discharging
her functions, including
the investigation of the conduct of a public sector employee. That said, I
consider that the assurance of
confidentiality is crucial to ensuring that
information is not only provided on a voluntary basis, but in a frank and
thorough fashion.
I therefore accept that disclosure of the interview
transcripts could reasonably be expected to prejudice the future supply of
information
to the agency.
now turn my mind to assessing where the public interest lies. I consider the
following factors to be relevant:
In favour of disclosure:
furthering the
objects of the FOI Act which promote disclosure of government information
transparency around the Commissioner’s legislated functions
the community
interest and highly publicised nature of the subject matter of the documents
accountability around the conduct of government officials, in particular
enabling scrutiny as to whether that conduct is
in line with the Code of Ethics
for the South Australian Public Sector and the Ministerial Code of Conduct
respectively
Contrary to disclosure:
furthering the
objects of the FOI Act which promote the importance of the preservation of
personal privacy
expectation of the interviewees that the transcripts would remain confidential
safeguarding the
voluntary provision of frank and thorough information to the Commissioner
maintaining a
positive and trusting relationship between the Commissioner and public sector
again acknowledge that the ordinarily substantial public interest in promoting
accountability around the conduct of a Minister is
somewhat lessened by the
recent change in government.
also consider that, given the raw nature of the documents, safeguarding the
voluntary provision of frank and thorough information
to the Commissioner ought
to be given substantial weight.
am satisfied that, on balance, disclosure of the interview transcripts would be
contrary to the public interest. Although I take
the opposite approach in
relation the transcript of the applicant’s interview, this point is now
somewhat moot noting that
I am persuaded that the transcripts are also exempt on
the basis of clause 10(1).
my provisional determination I observed that:
Although other documents such as the Final Report repeat portions of the
transcripts, it is my view that the public interest weighs
differently in that
case. Where the transcripts are a verbatim records which include a mixture of
relevant and irrelevant information,
the information repeated in the Final
Report has been intentionally chosen by AHI as being directly relevant to the
Commissioner’s
investigation. Additionally, a portion of the information
has been re-worded or summarised in a professional manner.
In that case, I consider that promoting transparency and accountability ought
to be given substantial weight. I also note that the
allegations were first
publicised long before any of the interviews took place. Whilst it may be
reasonable for the interviewees
to expect that the transcripts would remain
confidential and that all information would remain confidential whilst the
investigation
was ongoing, I consider that a reasonable person would be aware of
the possibility that information relevant to the investigation
outcome may
become public upon the conclusion of the investigation.
response to my provisional determination the agency submits that the public
interest still weighs in favour of the Final Report
not being released as:
although the
Commissioner has coercive powers to compel the provision of information, the
quality of evidence obtained by the use
of such powers is poorer compared with
evidence voluntarily obtained
reasonable person would be aware that some information relevant to the
investigation will become public, they would not
reasonably expect the volume of
information in the report to be made public
people sometimes
raise particularly sensitive complaints (for example regarding sexual
harassment) and the prospect of an investigation
report concerning their
complaint being released would have a chilling effect on their willingness to
make complaints and provide
above submissions were specifically made in relation to the Final Report,
however the agency has also pressed exemption over other
documents ‘for
the same reasons articulated regarding the investigation report’. As I am
now satisfied that the Final
Report is exempt on the basis of clause 10(1), I
have only considered the above submissions in relation to the remaining
the Final Report, the additional documents do not specifically identify which
information was provided by which employee. I
consider this to be particularly
relevant as anonymity would substantially reduce any ‘chilling’
effect which could reasonably
be expected from disclosure.
accept that some complaints will be more sensitive than others, but I do not
consider this to be particularly relevant to this matter;
a determination that
information be disclosed in this context will not automatically warrant the same
conclusion in other circumstances.
Each access request must be assessed on its
merits, and in another matter the sensitive nature of a complaint might weigh
against disclosure. That is not the case here.
relation to the additional documents over which the agency claims exemption
under clause 13(1)(b) I remain satisfied that disclosure
would not be contrary
to the public interest.
Clause 17(c)
agency determined that:
These documents are briefing notes or draft briefing notes prepared
specifically for use in Parliament, the disclosure of which would
infringe the
privilege of Parliament.
These documents are Hansard extracts, the disclosure of which would infringe
the privilege of Parliament.
the agency has not properly justified its position that the briefing notes are
exempt, I am satisfied that a Parliamentary
Briefing Note is certainly a kind of
document the disclosure of which would infringe the privilege of Parliament.
Although some of
the documents are in draft form, I do not consider this to be
fatal to the application of clause 17(c).
Re Saffioti and Minister for Transport; Housing
the Western Australian
Information Commissioner referred to a decision in which the UK Information
Commissioner listed the types
of information that would normally fall within the
parliamentary privilege exemption, including:
- bills, amendments and motions,
including those in draft
, where they
originate from Parliament or a Member rather than from parliamentary counsel or
another government department.
[emphasis added]
do not consider that it is the intention of clause 17(c) that only final
versions of documents may be exempt and am therefore satisfied
that documents
140, 142 and 154 are exempt pursuant to clause 17(c).
now to the Hansard extracts, in my provisional determination I observed that
each of the extracts appeared to be publicly
available via the South Australian
Parliament website. That said, I nevertheless accept that the documents are
subject to parliamentary
concept of Parliamentary privilege has developed from Article 9 of the
of Rights 1688
, which states that ‘freedom of speech and debates or
proceedings in Parliament ought not be impeached or questioned in any
place out of Parliament’. The intention behind the privilege is, inter
alia, to allow Parliament to proceed with parliamentary
business without undue
interference.
the Commonwealth, an Act to regulate parliamentary privilege has not been
enacted in South Australia,
however the privilege is preserved in South Australia by
Constitution
which provides:
38—Privileges, powers etc of Council and Assembly
The privileges, immunities, and powers of the Legislative Council and House
of Assembly respectively, and of the committees and members
respectively, shall be the same as but no greater than those which on the
twenty-fourth day of October, 1856, were held,
enjoyed, and exercised by the
House of Commons and by the committees and members thereof, whether such
privileges, immunities, or
powers were so held, possessed, or enjoyed by custom,
statute, or otherwise.
Parliamentary
privilege is generally accepted to cover all words spoken in Parliament. Very
clearly, Hansard extracts will fall within
this category and, unlike legal
professional privilege, parliamentary privilege is absolute and cannot be
I therefore accept that
the Hansard extracts are subject to parliamentary privilege.
said, clause 17(c) does not prevent the disclosure of documents merely because
they are subject to parliamentary privilege, rather
the document will only be
exempt if disclosure would infringe that privilege. Relevantly, privilege acts
to prevent material being
the subject of civil or criminal
my provisional determination I concluded that:
Given that parliamentary privilege is absolute, I consider that the Hansard
extracts would remain privileged regardless of whether
they are disclosed under
the FOI Act. Additionally, it is difficult to see how disclosure under the FOI
Act would facilitate the
material being used in a civil or criminal action given
that it is already publicly available.
If the applicant were to tender the extracts in a court proceeding, this may
of course infringe the privilege of parliament, however
I consider that this
would be a matter entirely separate from disclosure under the FOI Act. I again
reiterate that the applicant
could access the information regardless of this
determination.
In light of the above, I am not satisfied that disclosure of published
Hansard extracts would infringe the privilege of parliament.
response, the agency submits that:
are publicly available documents –
being extracts from published Hansard. They are accordingly exempt from release
in accordance
with section 20(1)(b) of the FOI [Act] - regardless of whether
parliamentary privilege would be infringed by their release.
are draft versions of Hansard, and each document
is marked with the words “Confidential and Subject to Revision”. I
your provisional determination that the disclosure of these document
[sic] would not infringe on the privileges of parliament, was
made on the basis
these are “published Hansard extracts”. As they are confidential
drafts, I respectfully submit that
the privilege of parliament would be
infringed if released – as this would undermine the parliament’s
claim of confidentiality
over these draft documents.
relation to documents 56 and 86, I consider that the agency’s submissions
reflect a misunderstanding of the application of
section 20(1)(b). Firstly,
section 20(1)(b) is a grounds for refusing access to a document, its application
does not render the documents
exempt. Secondly and more importantly, the section
applies to documents available for inspection at an agency in accordance with
legislative instrument, not merely documents which are publicly available. I am
not satisfied that section 20(1)(b) is applicable.
to documents 156-167, my provisional view was not based on the documents in
issue specifically being ‘published Hansard extracts’,
the fact that the information contained therein appears in published Hansard
extracts. Whilst the documents in issue might
specifically be the
‘confidential’ drafts which preceded publication, the contents
appear to be identical to what was
ultimately published. I do however
acknowledge that these contents span 449 pages and invite the agency to alert me
to any variations
between the documents and the published Hansard extracts I may
have inadvertently missed.
response to my revised provisional determination the agency advised that it has
not compared the documents as this would be an
‘onerous’ task, and
submits that the more prudent course of action would be for me to determine that
documents 156-167
are exempt. I remind the agency that it bears the onus of
justifying its determination.
the agency has not alerted me to any variations between the documents, and has
not otherwise disputed my assessment, I maintain
the views expressed in my
revised provisional determination.
that the information already exists within the public domain, it would stand to
reason that any use of the information which
might infringe the privilege of
parliament would be attributed to the publication of the information rather than
a subsequent release
under the FOI Act.
Additionally,
clause 17(c) specifically refers to the ‘public disclosure’ of
matter. In the matter of
Department of Treasury and Finance v Mullighan
the South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal observed that
‘disclosure’ means:
...a revelation for the first time. However, this is not to be understood to
refer to the document itself but to the information.
If the information, though
not necessarily the document, is within the public domain, to that extent
release of the document containing
the information may not constitute a
disclosure as there may not be a
revelation.
Although the above comments were made in the context of a consideration of
clause 1(1)(e), I consider that they can be equally applied
to clause 17(c). The
information in documents 156-167 cannot be ‘disclosed’ in the sense
intended by clause 17(c) as
the information has already been revealed.
wording of clause 17(c) supports an interpretation that consideration be given
to the contents of the documents, rather than the
documents themselves as the
clause refers to ‘matter.
Accordingly,
I remain satisfied that documents 156-167 are not exempt.
Determination
light of my views above and subject to my receipt and consideration of
submissions from the parties, I vary the agency’s
determination in
accordance with Appendix Two.
response to my revised provisional determination the agency submitted that
Appendix Two ought to be amended to reflect which exemptions
maintains are applicable. I consider that it is most appropriate for Appendix
Two to relay the agency’s position
as first communicated to my Office.
This will ensure that Appendix Two provides an accurate overview of the effect
of my entire external
confirm that I have amended the title of column three to make clear that the
column represents the agency’s views at the commencement
of my external
review, and I acknowledge that those views have since changed.
Wayne Lines
SA OMBUDSMAN
Procedural steps
18 October 2021
The agency received the FOI application dated 18 October 2021.
15 November 2021
The agency determined the application.
17 December 2021
The agency received the internal review application dated 17 December
31 December 2021
The agency confirmed the determination.
31 January 2022
The Ombudsman received the applicant’s request for external review
dated 31 January 2022.
1 February 2022
The Ombudsman advised the agency of the external review and requested
submissions and documentation.
15 February 2022
The agency provided the Ombudsman with its submissions and
documentation.
14 April 2022
The Ombudsman issued his provisional determination and invited further
submissions from the parties.
20 April 2022
The applicant advised that she had no further submissions to make.
One of the interested parties advised that they had no submissions to make.
13 May 2022
One of the interested parties provided submissions in response to the
provisional determination.
27 May 2022
The agency provided submissions in response to the provisional
determination.
29 June 2022
The Ombudsman issued his revised provisional determination and invited
further submissions from the parties.
11 July 2022
One of the interested parties provided submissions in response to the
revised provisional determination.
12 July 2022
The applicant provided submissions in response to the revised provisional
determination.
15 July 2022
The agency provided submissions in response to the revised provisional
determination.
APPENDIX TWO
Description (as per agency’s schedule of documents)
Agency’s position at the commencement of the external review
Ombudsman’s determination
Information to be released
Final Report
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 10(1) and 13(1)(b)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Release in full
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Release in full
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 9(1) and 10(1)
Release in full
Release in full
Release in full
Release in full
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Draft document
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 9(1)
Release in full
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 9(1)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 6(1)
Release in full excepting the first sentence of the fourth bullet point
under ‘Other events’ and the second half of recommendation
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 16(1)(a)(iv)
Release in full
Release in full
Attachment from 014 – Letter
Release in full
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 6(1)
Release in full
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 16(1)(a)(iv)
Release in full
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 9(1)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 6(1)
Release in full excepting the first sentence of the fourth bullet point
under ‘Other events’ and the second half of recommendation
Release in full
Letter – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 9(1)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 6(1)
Release in full excepting the second to last paragraph of the letter
Letter – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 9(1)
Release in full
Letter – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 9(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Letter – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 9(1)
Release in full
Minute – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 9(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Letter – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 9(1)
Release in full
Letter – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 9(1)
Release in full
Letter – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 9(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Minute – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 9(1)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 6(1)
Release in full excepting the first sentence of the fourth bullet point
under ‘Other events’ and the second half of recommendation
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Attachment to 029 – Letter
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 10(1)
Attachment to 029 – Letter
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 10(1) and 13(1)(b)
Attachment to 029 – Transcript of interview
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 10(1) and 16(1)(a)(iv)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 13(1)(b)
Attachment to 029 – Transcript of interview
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 10(1) and 16(1)(a)(iv)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 13(1)(b)
Attachment to -29 – document
Release in full
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Release in full
Attachment to 035 – Final Report
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 10(1) and 13(1)(b)
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 9(1)
Release in full
Transcript of interview
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 10(1) and 16(1)(a)(iv)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 13(1)(b)
Associated with 038
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 16(1)(a)(iv)
Release in full
Associated with 038 – ORSR Distribution list
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 6(1)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 6(1)
None – as per agency’s determination
Associated with 038 – ORSR Org chart
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 6(1)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 6(1)
The P numbers, suspected to be phone extensions
Transcript of interview
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 10(1) and 16(1)(a)(iv)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Attached to document 042 – Letter
Release in full
Attached to document 042 – Letter
Release in full
Attached to document 042 – Letter
Release in full
Associated with 042 – Email
Release in full
Associated with 042 – Letter
Release in full
Associated with 042 – Email
Release in full
Associated with 042 – Email
Release in full
Associated with 042 – Notes
Release in full
Transcript of interview
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 10(1) and 16(1)(a)(iv)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 13(1)(b)
Associated with 051 – Letter
Release in full
Associated with 051 – Letter
Release in full
Transcript of interview
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 10(1) and 16(1)(a)(iv)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 13(1)(b)
Transcript of interview
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 10(1) and 16(1)(a)(iv)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 13(1)(b)
House of Assembly Estimated Committee A
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 17(c)
Release in full
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 16(1)(a)(iv)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 12(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 16(1)(a)(iv)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 12(1)
Release in full
Attachment o 059 – Letter
Release in full
Release in full
Attachment to 061 – Letter
Release in full
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
The email dated 26 July 2021 at 9:45 AM
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
The email dated 26 July 2021 at 9:45 AM
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Attachment to 65 – Letter
Release in full
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Release in full
Release in full
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 10(1) and 16(1)(a)(iv)
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 10(1) and 12(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Release in full
Release in full
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Release in full
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 9(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Release in full
Release in full
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 16(1)(a)(iv)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 12(1)
Release in full
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Attachment to 082 – Letter – DRAFT Fully exempt on the basis of
clauses 9(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 9(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 6(1)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 6(1)
Release in full
Attachment to 085 – Minutes – House of Assembly Estimates
Committee A
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 17(c)
Release in full
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Release in full
Attachment to 088 – Letter
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 16(1)(a)(iv)
Release in full
Attachment to 088 – Letter
Release in full
Attachment to 088 – Letter
Release in full
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 16(1)(a)(iv)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 12(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 16(1)(a)(iv)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 12(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 10(1) and 16(1)(a)(iv)
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 10(1) and 12(1)
Attachment to 094 – Memorandum
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Attachment to 094 – Letter
Release in full
Attachment to 094 – Letter
Release in full
Attachment to 094 – Letter – AHI to CSO re investigation quote
[same as 003]
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Release in full
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 16(1)(a)(iv)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 12(1)
Attachment to 099 – Memorandum
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Attachment to 099 – Letter
Release in full
Attachment to 099 – Letter
Release in full
Attachment to 099 – Letter – AHI to CSO re investigation quote
[same as 003]
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Release in full
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Attachment to 105 – Letter
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Attachment to 108 – Letter
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Release in full
Attachment to 108 – Final Report
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 10(1) and 13(1)(b)
Attachment to 108 – Transcript of interview
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 10(1) and 16(1)(a)(iv)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 13(1)(b)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Attachment to 112 – Letter – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 9(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Attachment to 115 – Minute – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 9(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Attachment to 115 – Letter - DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 9(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Attachment to 115 – Letter – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 9(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Attachment to 115 – Letter – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 9(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Attachment to 120 – Letter – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 9(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Release in full
Attachment to 123 – Final Report
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 10(1) and 13(1)(b)
Release in full
Attachment to 125 – Final Report
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 10(1) and 13(1)(b)
Attachment to 125 – Minute
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 9(1)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 6(1)
Release in full excepting the first sentence of the fourth bullet point
under ‘Other events’ and the second half of recommendation
Release in full
Attachment to 128 – Advertiser article
Release in full
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 9(1)
Release in full
Attachment to 130 – DRAFT document
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 9(1)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 6(1)
Release in full excepting the first sentence of the last dot point on page
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 9(1)
Release in full
Attachment to 133 – DRAFT document
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 9(1)
Release in full
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 9(1)
Release in full
Attachment to 133 – DRAFT document
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 9(1)
Release in full
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 9(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Attachment to 137 – Letter – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 9(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Release in full
Attachment to 139 – DRAFT – Parliamentary Briefing note
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 17(c)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 17(c)
Release in full
Attachment to 141 – DRAFT – Parliamentary Briefing note
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 17(c)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 17(c)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 6(1)
Release in full
Attachment to 143 – Letter – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 9(1)
Release in full
Attachment to 143 – Letter – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 9(1)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 6(1)
Release in full excepting the second to last paragraph of the letter
Attachment to 143 – Letter – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 9(1)
Release in full
Attachment to 143 – Document – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 9(1)
Release in full
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 6(1)
Release in full
Attachment to 143 – Letter – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 9(1)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 6(1)
Release in full excepting the second to last paragraph of the letter
Attachment to 143 – Letter – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 9(1)
Release in full
Attachment to 143 – Document – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 9(1)
Release in full
Attachment to 143 – Letter
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1) and 9(1)
Release in full
Release in full
Attachment to 153 – Parliamentary Briefing note
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 17(c)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 17(c)
Release in full
House of Assembly Hansard Extract (page 6579 - 6760)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 17(c)
Release in full
House of Assembly Hansard
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 17(c)
Release in full
House of Assembly Hansard Extract (page 6934)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 17(c)
Release in full
House of Assembly Hansard Extract (page 6915 – 6916)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 17(c)
Release in full
Legislative Council Hansard Extract (page 4135 - 4136)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 17(c)
Release in full
House of Assembly Hansard
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 17(c)
Release in full
Legislative Council Hansard
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 17(c)
Release in full
Legislative Council Hansard Extract (page 4139 - 41364144
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 17(c)
Release in full
House of Assembly Hansard Extract (page 7044 - 7046)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 17(c)
Release in full
House of Assembly Hansard Extract (page 7058 - 7059)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 17(c)
Release in full
House of Assembly Hansard
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 17(c)
Release in full
Legislative Council Hansard Extract (page 4191)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 17(c)
Release in full
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Attachment to 168 – draft letter
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 9(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 9(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Attachment to 170 – Draft document
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 9(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Attachment to 170 – Letter – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 9(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Attachment to 170 – Letter – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 9(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 9(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 9(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Attachment to 176 – Draft document
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 9(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Attachment to 176 – Letter – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 9(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Attachment to 176 – Letter – DRAFT
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 6(1), 9(1) and 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 10(1) and 12(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 10(1)
Freedom of Information Act
section 12.
Freedom of Information Act
section 39(15).
Wingard cleared of bullying
misconduct,
InDaily, 10 September 2021;
SA Sport Minister Corey Wingard
cleared of intimidating Sport SA boss as separate bullying allegations
, ABC News, 9 September 2021;
External investigator to probe Wingard
, InDaily, 30 July 2021.
Noting that confidentiality is
a crucial aspect to the maintenance of legal professional privilege.
[2007] SADC 119.
Commissioner of Police v
District Court of New South Wales
(1993) 31 NSWLR 606, 625, citing
Williams and Registrar of Federal Court of Australia
[1985] AATA 226
(1985) 8 ALD 219
Young v Wicks
[1986] FCA 169
(1985) 13 FCR 85
Commissioner of Police v
District Court of New South Wales
(1993) 31 NSWLR 606, 625, citing
Wong and Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1984) 2 AAR 208
Colakovski v Australian
Telecommunications Corporation
(1991) 29 FCR 429 per Lockhart J at 438.
Freedom of Information Act
section 3(2)(b).
Treglown v SA Police
[2011] SADC 139
, at [133].
Further consultation was
undertaken with one other interested party pursuant to section 27 of the FOI
It is noted that in
response to my revised provisional determination the agency now submits that
disclosure would constitute an
unreasonable disclosure of personal affairs, but
has not provided any explanation directly applicable to clause 6(1).
Croom and Accident
Compensation Commission
(1989) 3 VAR 441
; The President's view regarding the
Interpretation of business affairs' was upheld on appeal to the Full Court of
the Supreme Court
Accident Compensation Commission v Croom)
[1991]2VR322).
Re Lianos and Secretary
to the Department of Social Security
[1985] AATA 38
Re Howard and Treasurer
of the Commonwealth
[1985] AATA 100
South Australia v
Brokenshire MLC
[2015] SADC 68
Attorney-General for the
State of South Australia v Seven Network (Operations) Ltd
[2019] SASCFC 36
[2019] SASACFC 36
referencing
Secretary, Department of Justice v Osland
[2007] VSCA 96.
Merriam-Webster
definition of ‘sensitive’, accessed online 8 June 2022.
[2011] SADC 139
[1984] QICmr 32
Re Eccleston and
Department of Family Services and Aboriginal and Islander Affairs
, at [132].
Aly v Limestone Coast
Local Health Network
[2021] SACAT 50.
[1979] FCA 33.
Daniel v Western
[1999] FCA 1541
(1999) 94 FCR 537
Mitsubishi Electric Australia Pty Ltd v
Victorian WorkCover Authority
(2002) 4 VR 322.
Commissioner of Taxation
v Pratt Holdings Pty Ltd
[2003] FCA 6
(2003) 195 ALR 717.
Pratt Holdings Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Taxation
[2004] FCAFC 122
(2004) 207 ALR 217.
Most recently in the matter
Roberts-Smith v Fairfax Media Publications Pty Ltd (No 23)
Metyard v Love
[2005] NSWCA 444
(2005) 65 NSWLR 36.
Strahan v Strahan
[2013] FamCAFC 203
(2013) 50 Fam LR 434.
[2019] SASCFC 76
Ritz Hotel Ltd v Charles
of the Ritz Ltd (No 22)
(1988) 14 NSWLR 132
, at [133].
National Crime Authority
[1991] FCA 234
(1991) 29 FCR 203
Parkhurst v Lowten
[1819] EngR 598
(1818-19) 2 Swans 194
Baker v Campbell
(1983) 153 CLR 52
Pratt Holdings Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Taxation
[2004] FCAFC 122
(2004) 207 ALR 217
Esso Australia Resources
Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1979] FCA 33
Mitsubishi Electric
Australia Pty Ltd v Victorian Workcover Authority
(1994) ALR 533.
WorkCover Authority
(NSW) (General Manager) v Law Society of NSW
(2006) 65 NSWLR 52
Osland v Secretary, Dept
(2008) 234 CLR 275
Trade Practices
Commission v Sterling
[1979] FCA 33
(1979) 36 FLR 244
Mann v Carnell
[1999] HCA 66
(1999) 201 CLR 1
Osland v Secretary, Department of Justice
(2008) 234 CLR 275.
Freedom of Information
section 39(15).
Ward v Courts
Administration Authority
[2003] SADC 18.
Ward v Courts
Administration Authority
[2003] SADC 18
Re Maher and
Attorney-General’s Department
(1986) 7 ALD 731
Re Saffioti and Minister
for Transport; Housing
[2012] WAICmr 10
(11 April 2012), [32].
Parliamentary
Privileges Act 1987
Parliamentary privilege
and the common law of parliament: can MP’s say what they want and get away
Carren Walker, (2018);
Prebble v Television New Zealand Limited
(1994) 3 All ER 407-20
Report relating to the use of or
reference to the records of proceedings of the House in courts
Representatives Committee of Privileges, (1980), page 154.
Parliamentary privilege
and the common law of parliament: can MP’s say what they want and get away
Carren Walker, (2018).
Freedom of Information
section 48.
Department of Treasury
and Finance v Mullighan
[2021] SACAT 28
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (968 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter