URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCT/2016/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
[2016] SAET
Juett v Return to Work SA (Scania Australia Pty Ltd)
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNAL
WORK SA (Scania Australia Pty Ltd)
JUETT, Adrian
4740 of 2015E
WORKERS COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
JUETT, Adrian
Australia Pty Ltd)
Applications to set aside
HEARING DATE:
30 November 2015
JUDGMENT OF:
Deputy President M Calligeros
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Applications to set aside decisions of
a conciliation officer - Transitional issues considered and discussed - One
application heard
in WCT under s 97 WRC Act, and the other in SAET under s 110
RTW Act - With the compensating authority’s application, the conciliation
officer was entitled to find there was undue delay as the compensating authority
responded to a request for an assessment of lump
sum compensation by organising
a medical review with a doctor who could not make such an assessment - Decision
varied to change the
year of injury and prescribed sum. With the worker’s
application, the conciliation officer was entitled to find there was no
delay and to dismiss the application and make an adverse costs order -
Discussion of the ambit of powers exercisable under
Thompson v WorkCover Corporation (Australian Meats Pty
[2015] SAWCT 26
WorkCover Corporation of SA v Davey
Mitsubishi Motors Australia Ltd v Kowalski
[2004] SASC
WorkCover/CGU (Pyrotech Fire Protection Pty Ltd) v Blocki
DJL v The Central Authority
[2000] HCA 17
; (2000) 201 CLR
Grassby v R
[1989] HCA 45
; (1989) 168 CLR
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr J
Respondent: Mr S Cole
Solicitors:
Applicant: Palios Meegan
& Nicholson
Respondent: Sparke Helmore Lawyers
June and July 2015, a conciliation officer heard and decided five applications
for expedited determination (AEDs) filed by Mr Juett
under s 97 of the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
(the repealed Act).
Juett and Return to Work SA (RTW SA) have each applied to set aside one of the
five decisions made by the conciliation officer.
Juett sustained a low back injury in 2002. He has received weekly payments for
that injury since that time. The present issues
arise in the context of him
seeking lump sum compensation pursuant to s 43 of the repealed Act for
impairments said to arise as a
sequel to, or consequence of, the accepted 2002
low back injury.
SA seeks to set aside the order made in action 4740/2015E that Mr Juett be
paid lump sum compensation of $24,689 pursuant to s
43 of the repealed Act for a
14% whole person impairment (WPI) for a gastrointestinal injury.
Juett seeks to set aside orders in action 5417/2015E which dismissed his AED
which sought payment of an account of Dr D’Onise
for a medical report and
which directed that he pay RTW SA its costs of the AED fixed at $400.
matters are complicated by the legislative transition from the repealed Act to
AED in action 4740/2015E was filed on 9 June 2015. On 26 June 2015, the
conciliation officer ordered that Mr Juett be paid $24,689
for a 14% WPI. RTW
SA’s application to set aside that order pursuant to s 110 of the RTW
Act was filed on 16 July 2015 in South
Australian Employment Tribunal (SAET).
Despite that, RTW SA’s application was subsequently treated as if it was
or should have
been filed in WCT.
AED in action 5417/2015E was filed on 23 June 2015 and was determined by the
conciliation officer on 10 July 2015. Mr Juett’s
application to set aside
the conciliation officer’s orders was brought pursuant to s 88H of the
repealed Act on 27 July 2015.
Both the order in action 5417/2015E and the
application to set it aside made under s 88H were filed in WCT.
the sake of convenience, the respective applications against the conciliation
officer’s decisions, whether under s 110 of
the RTW Act or under s 88H of
the repealed Act, are referred to in these reasons as either RTW SA’s
application (4740/2015E)
or Mr Juett’s application (5417/2015E).
present purposes, there is no material difference between s 88H(1)(c) of the
repealed Act and s 110(b) of the RTW Act. Section
88H(1)(c) allows an order of
the Tribunal to be set aside if “the interests of justice require that the
judgment or order be
amended or set aside”. Section 110(b) is in
identical terms to s 88H(1)(c) except it uses the word “decision”
of the word “judgment”. Nothing turns on the
difference.
Transitional and jurisdictional issues
Warren, counsel for Mr Juett, says his client’s application is properly
brought under s 88H of the repealed Act because s
16(1)(c) of the
Interpretation Act 1915
(SA) provides that the repeal of the repealed Act
“(c) affect any right, interest, title, power or
privilege created, acquired, accrued, established or exercisable, or any status
or capacity existing, prior to the repeal, amendment or
Warren is correct in my view. Mr Juett’s AED was filed on 23 June 2015 but
was not decided by the conciliation officer until
10 July 2015, after the
repealed Act ceased to operate.
repeal of the repealed Act means that Mr Juett’s right to challenge the
conciliation officer’s decision would be
lost unless s 16(1)(c) of the
Acts Interpretation Act
is applied. Section 16(1)(c) is specifically
designed to cover the sort of situation which has arisen in this
Section 16(2) of the
Interpretation Act
allows the application to be brought and maintained. It
“(2) Any such investigation, legal proceedings or
remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any such penalty,
or punishment may be imposed and enforced, as if the repeal or
amendment had not been effected or as if the expired Act or enactment
expired (as the case may be).”
Cole, counsel for RTW SA, submits his client’s application is properly
brought under s 110 of the RTW Act because of cl 50(2)
of Sch 9 of the RTW
Act. Clause 50 provides
“(1) Subject to this Part, an application or
other proceedings commenced before WCT under the repealed Act before the
day may be continued and completed (and any appeals initiated or
completed) under the repealed Act (and, if relevant, after applying
provision of this Part that is relevant to the proceedings).
(2) A right to make an application or to bring proceedings before WCT under the
repealed Act in existence before the designated
day and not exercised before
that day will be exercised as if Part 6 of this Act were in operation before
that right arose so that
the relevant proceedings will be commenced before SAET
rather than WCT.
(3) Without limiting any other provision—
(a) the regulations may make provision for or with respect to the interaction
between this Part and the repealed Act in order to
ensure that SAET and WCT can
operate under both sets of provisions (including, if necessary, by modifying any
provision of the repealed
Act or section 7 of this Act so that SAET can exercise
the jurisdiction conferred by subclause (2)); and
(b) the President of SAET may take other steps to ensure the smoothest possible
transition from 1 jurisdiction to the other in connection
with the operation of
this clause (including by giving directions as to any procedural matter which
will then have effect according
SA’s application flows from a decision made on 26 June 2015 under
s 97B(1)(b) of the repealed Act. At that time, the repealed
Act was still
operating. The application to set aside that decision was made on 16 July
2015, by which time, the repealed Act had
ceased to operate, and the RTW Act had
Cole contends that his client’s application therefore comes under
cl 50(2) of Sch 9 because the right to make the application
existed before
1 July 2015 (the designated day), but was not exercised before that day.
my view, Mr Cole is correct. Although it could be argued that cl 50(1) of Sch 9
applies here, as it allows for an appeal against
a decision on an application
made before the designated day to be initiated or completed, an application
under s 110 is not an appeal.
It is an application to set aside an order.
Further, the language of cl 50(2) better suits the present facts than the
language of
cl 50(1). RTW SA has made an application to set aside an order of
WCT made under the repealed Act. In my view, RTW SA’s application
properly made under s 110 of the RTW Act. Part 6 of the RTW Act includes s 110.
RTW SA’s application should continue to
be treated as being made to SAET.
If I am wrong about that, I would have made orders permitting the application to
have been lodged
in WCT in any event.
applications can be entertained - RTW SA’s application by SAET under s 110
of the RTW Act, and Mr Juett’s application
by WCT under s 97 of the
repealed Act.
status of RTW SA’s application needs to be clarified given that subsequent
to it being filed in SAET, it appears to have
been treated as a WCT matter. In
my view, no issue arises as a result. It is not clear how RTW SA’s
application became treated
as a WCT matter. The application was properly brought
in SAET. If it was thought SAET did not have jurisdiction to entertain the
application, it could have been refused under r 14 of the SAET Rules 2015. The
application was filed and accepted in SAET, but subsequently,
it was wrongly
treated as a WCT matter.
SA’s application is clearly a “proceeding” as defined by rule
5 of the SAET Rules 2015.
my view, there is no proper basis for treating an application properly commenced
in SAET as being before WCT.
58 of the SAET Act
provides that
the Tribunal has power, in relation to matters within jurisdiction, to make
interlocutory orders.
32 of the SAET Act provides that SAET is to adopt procedures “with the
minimum of formality” and “according
to equity, good conscience and
the substantial merits of the case without regard to legal technicalities and
forms”. Clause
50(3) of Sch 9 of the RTW Act speaks to the importance of
achieving a smooth transition from WCT to SAET.
the extent that any document filed in action 4740/2015E subsequent to the
Application for Directions dated 16 July 2015 has apparently
or purportedly been
filed in WCT or on a form which is or purports to be a WCT form by either party,
pursuant to s 58 of the SAET
Act, I order that the document be treated as if it
was filed in SAET.
The compensating authority’s application
Cole contends that there was no undue delay by his client in the case of action
4740/2015E. RTW SA was provided with Dr Thoo’s
assessment of
Mr Juett’s permanent impairment by letter dated 29 April 2015. RTW SA
responded by seeking further information,
including clarification of the
compensation sought.
request for clarification was unnecessary in my view. The letter from
Mr Juett’s solicitors expressly sought s 43 lump sum
compensation.
Cole’s main complaint about the conciliation officer’s decision is
that RTW SA was deprived of an opportunity to properly
investigate the basis of
Mr Juett’s gastro-intestinal injury. Part of the injury is referred to in
the medical reports as gastro-oesophageal
reflux disease (GORD). In addition to
GORD, Mr Juett also experiences constipation as a result of using opioid
medication. Together,
these two pathologies are referred to in these reasons as
the digestive impairment injury or claim.
respondent was waiting on a medical report from Dr Donald Reid, consultant
physician and consultant gastroenterologist, before
it determined the digestive
impairment claim.
Cole relied upon the report of Dr Reid, dated 30 July 2015, to further this
submission. Based on his examination of Mr Juett on
15 July 2015, Dr Reid
concluded that Mr Juett’s constipation was caused by the use of opioid
medication and that if he was
weaned off opioids, he may not have those
problems. He did not consider the GORD to be caused by the back injury or
opioids. He said
weight gain can contribute to GORD. He made no positive
assertion about what did cause the GORD.
Difficulties
arise if one adopts Dr Reid’s views in the context of this application. Mr
Juett had been taking opioid medication
for about ten years as a result of a
compensable injury he sustained on 4 February 2002. He first experienced
GORD and constipation
between 2006 and 2008. The test for permanence of injury
for the purposes of making an assessment under an earlier form of s 43 of
repealed Act used to be whether the impairment was likely to persist
indefinitely. Although the criterion under s 43 immediately
prior to its repeal
was whether maximal medical improvement (MMI) from the injury had been achieved,
that test also has regard to
the likelihood of there being some future change to
the injury or the impairment being assessed:
“Maximal medical improvement refers to a date from
which further recovery or deterioration is not anticipated, although over
there may be some expected
the glossary to AMA5, MMI is described as:
“A condition or state that is well stabilized and
unlikely to change substantially in the next year, with or without medical
treatment. Over time there may be some change; however, further recovery or
deterioration is not
anticipated.”
Reid’s view of the constipation claim is a hypothetical one. He does not
assert that Mr Juett does not need opioid medication,
or even that he should
cease having it. Dr Reid simply says that if Mr Juett ceases taking opioid
medication, his gastro-intestinal
symptoms may improve. Even if Dr Reid is not
implying that Mr Juett should cease taking opioid medication, unless that
is ceased, there is no way to test the hypothesis. Presumably Mr
Juett is aware that the medication causes his GORD, but takes the
medication for
pain relief anyway.
relation to Mr Juett’s GORD, Dr Reid’s view that weight gain may
have caused the GORD still leaves open the possibility
that the weight gain is
related to the 2002 back injury. In short, Dr Reid’s opinion raises more
questions than it answers.
Warren complained that in response to a request that RTW SA determine Mr
Juett’s permanent impairment, an opinion about compensability
of the GORD
was sought. Mr Warren also said that rather than addressing the impairment
assessment issue at the AED hearing, RTW SA
focused on there being no accepted
SA decided to deal with the issue of compensability alone rather than try and
assess the digestive impairment claim under s 43
or attempt to do both things at
or close to the same time.
conciliation officer expressed frustration at the “step by step”
process advocated for by RTW SA.
my view, the conciliation officer was entitled to take issue with the approach
taken here. Dr Reid’s opinion did not challenge
the compensability of the
constipation claim, and it took matters no further in relation to the GORD
claim. Both injuries had been
present for a long time and both had been linked
over that time to the 2002 back injury. Those facts, and the opinion eventually
obtained from Dr Reid, supported the conciliation officer’s approach in my
bringing the AED in action 4740/2015E, Mr Juett had previously sought the
Tribunal’s intervention in an earlier AED for
the digestive impairment
claim filed on 16 May 2015.
application was dismissed. As a result, RTW SA was aware that the digestive
impairment claim was going to be pursued, sooner
more likely than later.
present application was filed on 9 June 2015 following a letter sent by Mr
Juett’s solicitors dated 25 April 2015. That
letter made it plain that Mr
Juett sought lump sum compensation for digestive impairment flowing from the
2002 injury.
response to the letter of 25 April 2015 from Mr Juett’s solicitors, by
letter dated 28 May 2015, RTW SA’s claims agent
advised that it
“...not be making a determination for the below
injuries as the below injuries have not been accepted as
compensable.”
is trite and very well established law that a claim under the repealed Act is a
claim for a monetary benefit or an
entitlement.
There was no basis to
approach this matter in disregard of that well established principle and assert
that ‘compensability’
needed to be established before a s 43
determination could be made. Some claims are for a s 43 lump sum (s 58 RTW Act)
and nothing
I understand that a compensating authority would not want to pay compensation
for an injury which was not compensable, there
was ample evidence attributing
the digestive impairment injury to the 2002 low back injury. Many injuries are
accepted with less
evidence, expert or otherwise, than was available in this
compensating authority may have been concerned that acceptance of the various
permanent impairment assessments sought by Mr Juett
may have meant that he
qualified to be treated as a seriously injured worker under s 21 of the RTW Act.
However, that consideration
should not influence whether or not there had been
undue delay, although it may be a relevant consideration when deciding what
should be made on the AED.
my view, the conciliation officer was entitled to be concerned about the matter
because cl 44 of Sch 9 of the RTW Act provides
that a worker who has received a
determination for non-economic loss under the repealed Act is not entitled to an
assessment of non-economic
loss under the RTW Act. In other words, if Mr
Juett’s potential lump sum entitlement for the digestive impairment claim
not determined prior to 30 June 2015, he may have lost his right to
prosecute the claim.
have been why the conciliation officer chose to decide the matter
personally.
Thompson v WorkCover Corporation (Australian Meats Pty
Gilchrist DPJ
varied the order made by a conciliation officer on an AED because the order
ignored the potentially adverse impact
of cl 44 of Sch 9 of the RTW Act on
the worker’s entitlement to lump sum compensation.
were two medical reports assessing Mr Juett’s digestive impairment which
were before the conciliation officer. Dr D’Onise
assessed the GORD and
constipation together as producing a 14%
Dr Thoo assessed a 3% WPI
attributable to the upper digestive tract and a 9% WPI attributable to colonic
and rectal impairments.
The conciliation officer preferred the assessment of Dr
D’Onise. Why he did so is not apparent.
s 110(b) of the RTW Act, the Tribunal may amend or set aside the CO’s
“if the interests of justice require that the
decision or order be amended or set aside.”
Warren submitted that caution needs to be exercised when exercising what is a
supervisory jurisdiction under s 110(b). That submission
has force. It is not
appropriate that I simply substitute my view of the evidence for the view taken
by the conciliation officer.
my view, the conciliation officer had a proper basis for deciding the matter
himself under s 97B(1)(b) of the repealed Act. He
was satisfied there was undue
delay in deciding the matter. At that point, the conciliation officer had to
decide whether to give
directions to expedite the determination of the matter or
decide the matter himself. He chose the latter course. In doing so, the
conciliation officer was entitled to prefer the assessment of Dr D’Onise
to that of Dr Thoo.
the time in question, there was the potential for rights to be lost or
diminished as a result of the transition from the repealed
Act to the RTW
A large number of AEDs were
lodged at the time as a
conciliation officer determined that Mr Juett’s digestive impairment
injury should be treated as having occurred in 2015.
He considered that it was a
gradual onset injury which would attract a deemed date of injury, presumably
under s 113 of the repealed
Act. The conciliation officer therefore considered
it was not appropriate to use the 2002 prescribed sum to fix the year of injury.
He selected 2015 as the year of injury as that was the year when the digestive
impairment claim was made.
Theodore, who appeared for Mr Juett at the AED hearing, advised the conciliation
officer that 2002 was the appropriate year to
attribute the digestive impairment
injury to, as it was a sequel to or a consequence of the compensable lower back
injury of 4 February
my view, Ms Theodore was correct in making that submission. I also note and
adopt Mr Cole’s submission to the same effect.
is clear that Mr Juett experienced symptoms as a result of his digestive
impairment injury for many years prior to 2015. It is
equally clear that the
injury can and should be treated as a sequel to or consequence of the 2002
injury. Because of that, it is
not appropriate to deem it as occurring when it
was first claimed or when incapacity from it first arose as can be done under s
of the repealed Act or s 188 of the RTW Act. Proceeding under those sections
may well be appropriate with a ‘standalone’
injury, but is not
appropriate with a sequel or consequential injury.
interests of justice dictate that I should amend the order made by the
conciliation officer so the prescribed sum applicable to
the award he made is
the prescribed sum for 2002.
Mr Juett’s application
Juett’s solicitors forwarded the account of Dr D’Onise for a medical
report to RTW SA’s claims agent on 4 June
2015. The AED was lodged
nineteen days later, on 23 June 2015 after the account had not been paid, and
there had been no communication
from the claims agent about the report fee.
Juett’s solicitors had asked by letter for an indication of the attitude
of the claims agent to the report fee of Dr D’Onise.
Mr Warren submitted
that there was no reason why the claims agent could not have communicated its
response about whether it would
pay for the report fee within fourteen
conciliation officer stated he “could not accept that any reasonable
person would believe that nineteen days to pay an account
let alone ‘undue delay’.”
conciliation officer said it was inevitable that he would dismiss the
application, and made an award of costs against Mr Juett
under s 88F of the
repealed Act and fixed $400 as a fair amount having regard to s 97C and the
regulations made under it.
Warren submitted there are three prerequisites to be satisfied in order to bring
an AED. First the worker or employer must have
a subjective belief that there
has been undue delay. This comes from the language of s 97(1)
“(1) A worker or employer
who believes there
has been undue delay
in deciding a claim or other matter affecting the
worker or employer may apply to the Tribunal, in the manner and form prescribed
by regulation, for expedited determination of the matter.” (Underlining
s 97(3) provides that an AED cannot be made “until at least 14 days
after the day the matter was placed before the decision-maker
whose decision is
there must have been no determination of the claim or matter at the time the AED
is brought.
Warren submitted that the Tribunal can take objective circumstances into account
in considering what power to exercise under s
97B and in considering what the
order for costs should be, but it follows from the three propositions set out
above that any discretion
to do so must be exercised having regard to those
three propositions. It was said that the conciliation officer erred by
considering
objective reasonableness in construing the AED, and also erred in
disregarding the fact fourteen days had passed since the claim
Because fourteen days
had passed, then
prima facie
there was delay within the meaning of s
Warren submitted that in a case like this one, where the three prerequisites
required by s 97 are all present, the conciliation
officer could not simply
dismiss the AED as he did.
also submitted that the fact Mr Juett’s solicitors advised in advance that
an AED would be issued if there was any delay,
and the fact that Dr
D’Onise’s payment terms were fourteen days are
s 97 of the repealed Act has three prerequisites that need to be satisfied in
order to make an AED, that does not mean that
s 97 informs or proscribes the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction under Part 6B of the Act when the Tribunal deals
with an AED.
97B of the repealed Act details the powers the Tribunal exercises when dealing
with an AED. Section 97B provides:
“97B—Powers of Tribunal on application
(1) On an application for expedited determination of a matter, the Tribunal
(a) give directions the Tribunal considers necessary to expedite the
determination of the matter; or
(b) decide the matter itself.
(2) A person to whom a direction is given by the Tribunal under subsection (1)
must comply with the direction.
Maximum penalty: $5 000.
Prosecution of non-compliance as an offence does not prejudice enforcement of
the direction in other ways.
(3) If the Tribunal decides a claim under this section, the decision—
(a) is to be treated as a decision of the relevant compensating authority; and
(b) is a reviewable decision.”
needs to be taken when ascertaining the ambit of the Tribunal’s
WorkCover Corporation of SA v
the Full Supreme Court
found that the Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to determine a question which
was collateral to the disputed
decision, namely whether the Corporation had
afforded procedural fairness to a worker when ceasing weekly payments. It was
the provisions of the repealed Act afforded procedural fairness and that
any additional procedural fairness requirements were not
Full Court also held that the Tribunal did not have power to dismiss or set
aside a decision of a compensating authority because
the decision may not have
complied with a provision of the Act. The Full Court held that such a dispute is
to be referred to judicial
determination pursuant to s 92D of the Act so
that its substantive merits can be considered.
Full Court found that the Tribunal misapprehended its jurisdiction when it set
aside a decision based on technical non-compliance
with the Act without
conducting a judicial determination of the issues in dispute:
“The Tribunal is to make a judicial determination
of a disputed claim. It is to do so without regard to decisions taken in earlier
proceedings and, to repeat the terms of section 85, it is to do so acting
according to equity, good conscience and the substantial
merits of the case
without regard to technicalities and legal forms. The Tribunal is not charged
with making decisions on collateral
issues concerning procedural fairness. The
Tribunal acted without
85 of the Act provides that the Tribunal is to act “according to equity,
good conscience and the substantial merits
of the case without regard to
technicalities and legal forms.”
this case, there is no collateral issue being considered. The question is
whether the Tribunal can dismiss an AED where it considers
there has been no
undue delay in the exercise of its jurisdiction under Part 6B of the Act.
Mitsubishi Motors Australia Ltd v
the Full Supreme
Court concluded that the Tribunal is a “court of the State” for the
purposes of s 39 of the
Supreme Court Act
Court also held that the Tribunal is invested with judicial
main role of a conciliation officer is to conciliate disputes under Division 4
of part 6A of the repealed Act. Either a Presidential
member or a conciliation
officer can conciliate a dispute under s 92. When Tribunal members are engaged
in conciliation, they are
not exercising judicial power. Although orders about
the actions parties are required to undertake can be made at conciliation, a
binding determination of rights and liabilities cannot then be made. However,
when a Tribunal member, exercises jurisdiction under
Part 6B, he or she is
determining rights and liabilities.
WorkCover/CGU (Pyrotech Fire Protection Pty Ltd) v
a Full Bench of the
Tribunal declined to strike out parts of a statement of claim filed by a worker
which concerned matters which
were said to be beyond the tribunal’s
under s 79 of the Act. He said of the Tribunal:
“As such, it does not possess any inherent
statute. But it does not follow that it is necessarily limited to that
It can be safely
assumed, absent an express provision to the contrary, that Parliament intended a
statutory court or tribunal to
possess such jurisdiction as is necessary to
properly discharge its
DJL v The Central Authority,
the High Court had cause to consider the ambit of the jurisdiction of the
Family Court of Australia. Like the Tribunal, the Family
Court is a creature of
statute. The High Court held that although a court exercising jurisdiction
conferred by statute it was “unable
to draw upon the well of undefined
powers” available to common law courts as part of their inherent
had such powers as were “incidental and
necessary to the exercise of the jurisdiction or the powers so
conferred.”
In doing so
the court had regard to an earlier statement made by Dawson J to the same effect
Grassby v R
where the issue was whether a NSW magistrate had power to
stay committal proceedings as an abuse of
acknowledging that care needs to be taken to ensure that a court of limited
DJL v The Central
is authority for the proposition that the Tribunal needs such
powers as are necessary and incidental to allow its jurisdiction to
exercised. It would be unusual and restrictive if the Tribunal was unable to
dismiss an application it considered did not have
the position contended for Mr Juett is correct, then in the case of a death
claim, an AED could be lodged by a distant relative
of the deceased worker
fourteen days after a claim is made for the death, where the cause and
circumstances of the death are not
known, and where no evidence has been
provided about dependency. Because the preconditions of s 97 are satisfied, if
there is no
power to dismiss the AED, the Tribunal must make some sort of
dispositive order in the claimant’s favour.
such a case, a determination accepting or rejecting the claim could not safely
be made because of a lack of evidence. Therefore
the Tribunal would presumably
need to give directions about expediting the decision, even if not satisfied
there was no undue delay
because of the claimant’s subjective belief there
had been undue delay.
analysis of Part 6B indicates Parliament did not intend such a result.
the word “undue” suggests that s 97 is designed to remedy
unacceptable or unreasonable delay. To my mind, ascertaining
whether there is
undue delay is a matter for the Tribunal. What amounts to undue delay in one
case may not do so in another. Any
delay beyond fourteen days in the case of a
routine medical expense of a type previously claimed and reimbursed may be undue
Delay well beyond 14 days to obtain medical evidence in relation to a
rare or unusual disease where medical experts are few and far
between may not be
undue delay.
the reference to “
14 days” (underlining added) in s
97(3) of the Act also points to there being a discretion for the Tribunal to
decide whether
or not there is undue delay having regard to the case at hand. Mr
Warren disagreed with this proposition when put to
However to my mind, the
words “at least” have no work to do unless in some cases, more than
fourteen days may need to
pass before there is undue delay within the meaning of
the language of s 97B (and the language of s 115 of the RTW Act) is not cast in
mandatory terms. The Tribunal “may”
give directions to expedite the
hearing of the matter or it “may” decide the matter itself. The
Tribunal does not have
to do either of those things. It may also dismiss an AED
if appropriate to do so in my view.
6B of the repealed Act contains a number of references that point to the need to
exercise discretion when considering an AED.
While there is no express mention
of a power to dismiss an AED in Part 6B, in my view, that is because Parliament
intended and assumed
that the Tribunal should have that power. Such a power is
fundamental to the proper functioning of a judicial body. The alternative
is that Parliament intended the Tribunal’s jurisdiction under Part 6B to
be subservient to the subjective belief of
an applicant there has been undue
my view, it is a necessary incident of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction that it
be able to dismiss an AED:
DJL v The Central
is not a case like
where process of judicial determination under s
92D of the Act has been circumvented. Rather, in the exercise of its
under Part 6B of the Act, the Tribunal has determined there was no
undue delay. In order to dismiss the AED, the Tribunal had to
consider the
merits of the application in the context of Part 6B. Doing so is not avoiding or
circumventing jurisdiction under Part
find that the conciliation officer had power to dismiss Mr Juett’s
decisions made by the conciliation officer here show the importance of the
Tribunal having a broad discretion when dealing with
action 4740/2015E, the conciliation officer stepped into the shoes of the
decision maker and decided the matter personally. He
gave his reasons for doing
The Corporation complains
that the conciliation officer should not have decided 4740/2015E as he did or at
all. However, by failing
to be expeditious and by not dealing directly with the
claim before it, the Corporation lost the ability to decide the matter for
itself. If the AED was not made in the context of legislative change, the result
may have been different.
action 5417/2015E, the conciliation officer did not consider there was undue
delay and dismissed the application. Mr Juett complains
that his AED seeking
payment of a medico-legal report fee should not have been dismissed. The
conciliation officer was not persuaded
that nineteen days was long enough to
warrant intervention and the making of an order in Mr Juett’s favour. The
urgency that
was warranted in the case of action 4740/2015E was not found to be
present with the medical report fee payment request.
my mind, each decision was able to be made by the conciliation officer based on
the materials before him. Unless the interests
of justice dictate otherwise,
both decisions should be left to stand.
relation to Mr Warren’s argument that I should have regard to the contract
for the report between Dr D’Onise and Mr
Juett’s solicitors, any
contractual terms which may have existed between those two parties are not
relevant to the AED. The
fact that Dr D’Onise may or may not insist on
payment within fourteen days is not to the point. RTW SA did not contract with
Dr D’Onise – Mr Juett’s solicitors did so. Privity of contract
means a third party cannot be bound by what may
have been agreed between
Dr D’Onise and Mr Juett’s solicitors. In any case, there is no
proper evidence that can be relied
upon in relation to this issue.
also submitted that although the quantum of the costs order made against Mr
Juett was small, where there is clear error
and monetary prejudice to a worker,
the Tribunal ought to interfere with the
However, I have found
there was no clear error made by the conciliation officer in the substantive
order he made to dismiss the AED
in action 5417/2015E.
6 of the repealed Act concerns the WCT. Section 88F is in Part 6 and confers a
broad discretion in relation to costs. It provides:
“Subject to this Act, the costs of proceedings
before the Tribunal are in the discretion of the
95 of the repealed Act also deals with costs and is found in Part 6A of the
repealed Act. Part 6A concerns dispute resolution.
It is not easy to discern a
consistent delineation between the ambit of Part 6 and that of Part 6A, however
I consider the conciliation
officer was able to rely upon s 88F as he did. In
any event, the conciliation officer did not consider Mr Juett’s AED was
reasonably, so s 95(3)(a) also permitted him to make an adverse costs
order. Mr Warren acknowledged that absent error, there should
be no fetter on
the broad discretion that exists in relation to
conciliation officer was entitled to make an adverse costs order in action
5417/2015E after finding there was no undue delay.
There is no basis for
disturbing the costs order he made in the interests of justice.
will hear from the parties before making final
NOTE CAREFULLY:
If a party wishes to appeal against any part of a decision which can be
appealed pursuant to s 86(1) of the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
such appeal must be filed with the Registrar in accordance
with the form titled Notice of Appeal within 14 days of the delivery of
decision, and must be served on all parties.
If a party wishes to appeal against any part of a decision which can be
appealed pursuant to s 67(1)(a) of the
South Australian Employment Tribunal
, such appeal must be filed with the Registrar in accordance with
the form titled Review and Appeals within 14 days of the delivery
decision, and must be served on all parties.
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
It is the practice of this
Tribunal to publish its reasons for decision in full on the Internet. If any
party or person contends that
these reasons for decision should not be published
in full the party or person must make an application within seven days of the
delivery of these reasons. The application shall be by an Application for
Directions with a supporting affidavit and should be addressed
to the presiding
member(s). If no such application is lodged within the time specified these
reasons will be published in accordance
with the Tribunal’s usual
The repealed Act ceased
operating on 30 June 2015 and the RTW Act commenced on 1 July 2015.
Schouwenaar v Woolworths
[2015] SAET 5, paras 64 – 68.
South Australian Employment
Tribunal Act 2014.
Guides to the Evaluation of
Permanent Impairment
of the American Medical Association,
Edition, referred to in these reasons and generally as AMA5,
AMA5, p 601.
Mastromihalis v Return
[2015] SAWCT 67.
In the context of claims for lump sum
compensation, the compensating authority changed the purpose of a medical
examination originally
arranged to advise on compensability to be used to
assess the worker’s permanent impairment.
Affidavit of Eloise Marie
Theodore, 27 November 2015, para 17.
WCT action 3635/2015E.
Cristea v Workers
Rehabilitation and Compensation Corporation
(1993) 61 SASR 487,
Mitsubishi Motors Australia Ltd v Harbord
(1997) 69 SASR 75
Edmonds v WorkCover Corporation/Employers Mutual Ltd (Mission
[2010] SAWCT 61
Thompson v WorkCover Corporation (Australian
Meats Pty Ltd)
[2015] SAWCT 26
paras 16 – 23.
Regulation 5 of the
on 1 July 2015, four days after the CO made the subject decision, to ameliorate
the effect of cl 44.
[2015] SAWCT 26
Permanent Impairment
Assessment Report dated 13 May 2015.
Watson v The State of
[2015] SAET 5 paras 4, 11 – 13, 42 – 43 and 46.
In May and June 2015, 459
and 504 AEDs were lodged respectively. By comparison, the average number of AEDs
lodged in WCT per month
since 2001 is 144.
Affidavit of Eloise Marie
Theodore, 27 November 2015, paras 42 – 43.
Affidavit of Eloise Marie
Theodore, 27 November 2015, para 26.
Tr, 18, 40 to 19, 2.
Tr 19, 4 – 11.
Tr 17, 11 – 17.
Tr 15, 18 – 28 and 42
[2011] SASFC 66.
Supra at paras 70 –
Supra, per Gray J at para
[2004] SASC 302.
Supra at para 31.
[2000] SAWCT 92.
Supra at para 9.
[2000] HCA 17
; (2000) 201
Supra, para 25.
[1989] HCA 45
; (1989) 168
CLR 1 at para 21.
Tr 16, 42 – 46.
See para 35
Tr 19, 23 – 33.
Tr 17, 44 – 47.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (310 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter