URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAOmbFOI/2022/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:02:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Department for Correctional Services 2022/01991 [2022] SAOmbFOI 2 (14 July 2022)
Determination
External review - section 39
Freedom of Information Act 1991
XXXXXXXXXXXXXX
Department for Correctional Services
Ombudsman reference:
Agency reference:
CEN/22/0058; CEN/22/0080; CEN/22/0082; CEN/22/0083; CEN/22/0084;
CEN/22/0085; CEN/22/00121; CEN/22/0122; CEN/22/0123; CEN/22/0124;
CEN/22/0142;
CEN/22/0143; CEN/22/0144; CEN/22/0145; CEN/22/0147; CEN/22/0148; CEN/22/0184;
CEN/22/0185 and other unknown references
Determination:
The determination of the agency is reversed.
Date of Ombudsman’s determination:
14 July 2022
Issues considered:
Whether applicant demonstrated financial hardship
Exemption clauses relied upon:
Legislation considered:
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Summary of the original application:
Request for waiver of application fee
Application for access
21 separate applications under the
Freedom of Information Act 1991
) the applicant requested access to the agency’s
documents. ...
ease of reference, the procedural steps relating to the application are set out
in the appendix.
external review is within the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman as a relevant review
authority under section 39 of the FOI Act.
Provisional
determination
provided my tentative view about the agency’s determination to the
parties, by my provisional determination dated 9 May 2022.
I informed the
parties that subject to my receipt and consideration of submissions from the
parties I proposed to reverse the agency’s
determination.
email dated 23 June 2022 the agency provided submissions in response. I have
considered these submissions in this determination.
person has a legally enforceable right to be given access to an agency’s
documents in accordance with the FOI
On application for access to
documents, or on application for review by an agency of its determination, an
application fee of $38.25
is payable by the applicant to the agency.
a person liable to pay an FOI application fee satisfies the agency that they
hold a concession card or that payment of the fee
would cause financial
hardship, the agency must waive or remit the
53(3) of the FOI Act requires an agency to review a fee or charge upon request
of an applicant. Section 53(4) further provides:
(4) A person dissatisfied with the decision of an agency on an application
for review of a fee or charge may apply to the Ombudsman
for a further review
and the Ombudsman may, according to his or her determination of what is fair and
reasonable in the circumstances
of the particular case—
(a) waive, confirm or vary the fee or charge;
(b) give directions as to the time for payment of the fee or charge.
section 48, the onus is on the agency to justify its determination ‘in any
proceedings’. In my view this includes
both a determination to refuse to
waive an application fee and the external review process.
Issues in this review
regard to the agency’s submissions and the applicant’s request for a
fee waiver, it is for me to determine what
is fair and reasonable in the
circumstances of this particular case and waive, confirm or vary the application
fee accordingly.
Consideration
hardship’ is not defined in either the FOI Act, or the
Information (Fees and Charges) Regulations 2018
the regulations
The term ‘hardship’ has no fixed legal meaning and should therefore
be interpreted in the statutory context of the
legislation in which the term
Given that the objects of
the FOI Act promote access to agency documents, I consider it appropriate to
apply a slightly more lenient
threshold of what constitutes financial hardship
than might be applied in other contexts.
has been observed that:
...“financial hardship” means hardship caused to the applicant by
reason of the financial burden of being obliged to meet
the costs of the
application from its own resource. ... It is not enough, ... for the applicant
to assert that if it is obliged to
meet its own costs, it will deplete the funds
otherwise available to it to pursue its objects. Every successful applicant, no
how wealthy, would suffer financial hardship on that
all of the circumstances I consider that financial hardship will be established
if I am satisfied that payment of the application
fee by the applicant would
result in the applicant being unable to pay for necessary expenses from his own
applicant lodged a total of 18 FOI applications before submitting a completed
financial hardship claim form. The applicant requested
that the form be applied
to all pending FOI matters. After the applicant submitted the form, but before
the agency had provided a
response, the applicant lodged a further three FOI
applications. Noting that the agency’s Financial Hardship Claims Guideline
stipulates that an assessment of financial hardship will remain valid for a
period of 14 days, I consider it appropriate that my
assessment also extend to
the later three FOI applications.
Freedom of Information (Fees) Notice 2021
prescribes that a fee of $38.25
is payable upon lodgement of an FOI application. The same fee is also payable
upon lodging an internal
review application.
my experience, many FOI applications lodged with the agency become deemed
refusals. Additionally, where a determination is made
within time it is rarely,
if ever, made by the agency’s principal officer. Both of these factors
mean that an internal review
is required in most instances where an FOI
application is lodged with the agency. In light of this, I consider that in
whether payment of the application fee would cause the applicant
financial hardship, it is appropriate for me to consider both application
totalling $76.50 per application.
its response to my provisional determination the agency submits that it is
unreasonable for me to consider the combined application
fees as there are a
number of circumstances in which an internal review may not be required. Whilst
I agree that the FOI Act envisages
that an internal review will not be necessary
for every FOI application, as outlined above, this is certainly the case for
the applications lodged with this agency.
53 permits me to make my decision based on a determination of what is fair and
reasonable in the circumstances. In circumstances
in which the agency rarely
makes an initial determination within time, leaving the applicant no choice but
to apply for an internal
review, I remain satisfied that it is fair and
reasonable for me to consider both application fees.
any event, I am satisfied that the applicant has established that even payment
of one fee of $38.25 would cause him financial hardship.
his financial hardship claim form the applicant states that the number of FOI
applications pending is relevant as ten pending applications
essentially means
that the applicant is seeking waiver of $382.50 rather than $38.25, the former
being a substantially higher amount.
With 21 FOI applications pending and the
fees for each matter totalling $76.50, the applicant seeks waiver of a total
amount of $1,606.50.
said, in considering whether an application fee should be waived I do not agree
that the total amount should be the figure considered.
It would not be
appropriate to excuse every individual fee on the basis that the total
cumulative payment cannot be made. To do so
would allow applicants to take
advantage of this process to establish financial hardship by lodging multiple
applications at once
or superficially splitting an application into multiple
applications in order to raise the total amount of fees to an unpayable amount.
is my view that the correct approach is to consider whether the applicant can
pay $76.50 for the first FOI matter. If financial
hardship is not established,
the applicant can request a new assessment for subsequent FOI matters and it
should then be taken into
account that the applicant now has $76.50 less.
the applicant requesting some explanation from the agency in his review
application, in both its initial assessment and its
review decision the agency
neglected to provide any explanation for its decision, stating simply:
It is the decision of the Department that you have not demonstrated that
payment of the charge will cause financial hardship and consequently,
has been rejected.
my view the agency ought to provide reasons for its decision not to waive a fee.
An agency’s decision might be primarily
based on missing or misunderstood
information. If this is the case, by providing reasons for its decision, the
applicant can then
address those deficiencies in a review request.
its submissions to my Office the agency stated that:
I have attached an excel spreadsheet that was created by the FOI Team
reviewing XXXXXXXXX general accounts and it shows the average
amount of money he
has in his account over the last three months. This is to ensure that the
hardship is assessed taking into account
every [sic] changing financial
circumstances. The threshold for the financial hardship with DCS is $100 or
less, which XXXXXXXXXX
does not meet the threshold for as he averaged $200+
during the period he was lodging the applications.
concern with this submission is that it indicates that the agency’s
assessment was not in accordance with its own guideline.
It appears in fact that
the agency may have not even considered the information provided in the
financial hardship claim form or
review request, merely reviewing the
applicant’s account balance to reach a conclusion.
also query the basis on which the agency concluded that financial hardship is
only established if an applicant has access to less
than $100. Again noting that
the total amount of fees per FOI matter is $76.50, the agency appears to hold
the view that it is reasonable
for an applicant to deplete more than two thirds
of their money to progress an application. In my view this expectation falls far
short of being reasonable.
having reviewed the excel spreadsheet provided, I consider that the
agency’s method of ascertaining the average amount
of money which the
applicant had access to is flawed. Even if I accept that it might be reasonable
to review the applicant’s
account balance over a period of time rather
than only at the time of lodging an FOI application, the agency appears to have
to take into account how and why that balance fluctuated.
agency has calculated out a mean average of the applicant’s balance for
the three months prior to each application being
lodged. The issue with this
approach is that the final figure is distorted by a few outliers within the data
set. The applicant’s
balance largely sat between $100 and $200 at most
times, however at one stage in late November 2021 or early December 2021 his
jumped to over $3,000. This might be an error or alternatively might
reflect an instance when the applicant received money from an
external source
which was immediately used almost in full. Either way, absent an explanation as
to where the money originated from
or how it was spent, I am not inclined to
accept that this figure is a true representation of the money ordinarily
available to the
applicant, however this one figure has substantially swayed the
mean average.
light of the above, I consider that a mode or median average might be more
appropriate. By either measure the average amount of
money held by the applicant
during the period of time when the applications were lodged sits somewhere
between $100 and $140.
acknowledge that the applicant submitted that at the time of lodging the
financial hardship claim form his account balance was $60.00.
Although this
might be the case, I consider that the average of $100-$140 is the more
appropriate figure for me to take into account.
Again, accepting only the
balance at the time of lodging the FOI application might allow applicant’s
to take advantage of the
fee waiver process by timing the lodgement of
applications strategically. I now turn to consider the remainder of the
information
provided in the financial hardship claim form.
applicant has not provided his resettlement balance stating ‘this money is
not to be used for anything other than resettlement’.
Having reviewed the
information obtained from the agency by my Legal Officer about this, I agree
that the resettlement balance should
not be taken into account. The money is not
accessible to incarcerated applicants and cannot be withdrawn or transferred.
applicant submits that he earns approximately $32 per week in prison wages, and
that he spends approximately $60 per week on telephone
and other necessary
expenses. Put simply, the applicant’s income covers approximately half of
his expenses.
applicant has also provided substantial further information about other upcoming
expenses including replacing his sunglasses and
exercise footwear, and repairing
his broken watch. The applicant submits that the former are necessary for
medical purposes and the
latter is necessary to ensure he adheres to his
commitments.
am satisfied that these are expenses which could be characterised as necessary,
but which the applicant is unable to immediately
all of the circumstances it is clear that the applicant’s income is
insufficient to meet his ordinary and necessary living
expenses from his own
resources. Payment of the FOI fee would further diminish the applicant’s
capability to pay for necessities.
acknowledge that since lodging the financial hardship claim form the applicant
has been released on parole and the information in
the form may no longer
reflect his current financial circumstances. However section 53 requires me to
waive, confirm or vary the
fee based on a determination of what is fair and
reasonable in the circumstances. It is my view that it is most fair and
to reach my decision based on the information available to the agency
in making its decision.
its response to my provisional determination the agency submits that:
...you have determined that it is
circumstances to only consider information that was available to the Agency at
the time of making its decision. With respect,
I submit that approach is
inconsistent with the general operation of the FOI Act and is the opposite of
what is fair and reasonable
in the circumstances. By way of example, section
39(11) of the FOI Act provides that on external review you may, based on the
circumstances
existing at the time of the review, confirm, vary, or reverse the
determination the subject of the review. While that provision directly
to determinations made under that division and does not apply to a review under
section 53(4) of the FOI Act, it illustrates
that the scheme of the FOI Act
generally involves the consideration of circumstances arising at the time a
decision is made.
disagree with this submission. As the agency has noted, section 39(11)
specifically requires me to consider the circumstances at
the time of conducting
my review. The same wording could have been utilised in section 53 but was not;
I can only conclude that this
was intentional.
consider that my interpretation of section 53 is the preferred one as it more
closely aligns with the objects of the FOI Act which
favour disclosure of
information. It is my view that section 39(11) requires a consideration of the
current circumstances as there
may be good reason why a document which was
appropriately exempt when considered by an agency could subsequently be
disclosed upon
review. A consideration of only the information available to the
agency has the potential to result in an absurd outcome, for example
determining that a document must remain exempt despite it having been made
public. Clearly such an outcome would be contrary to
the objects of the FOI Act.
I consider that if I were
to consider the circumstances as they
exist at the time of reviewing whether an application fee ought to be waived,
this would have
the potential to result in unfair prejudice to the applicant. In
this particular matter, it is my view that the agency’s initial
to refuse to waive the application fees was the incorrect one.
is important to again note that this matter differs from an external review
conducted under section 39. Rather than considering
the extent to which access
to a document should be granted, this review considers whether the applications
are even valid. As I consider
that the agency’s refusal to waive the
application fees was incorrect, it follows that my view is that the applications
in fact valid between 29 December 2021 and 9 February 2022. I am not
reviewing a determination to refuse access to documents; I am
reviewing the
correctness of a conclusion as to the validity of the applications.
light of this, unless the applicant’s circumstances had changed so
drastically that a waiver of the application fees would
appear to be ridiculous,
I remain satisfied that the most fair and reasonable course of action is for me
to consider the information
which was available to the agency in making its
initial decision.
any event, I remind the agency that it bears the onus of justifying its
determination,
and note that the
agency initially declined to comment on the applicant’s current
circumstances. The agency now submits that
the applicant holds a concession
card. Accordingly, even if I were to consider the circumstances existing at the
time of this review,
I would reach the same conclusion that the application fees
ought to be waived.
Determination
agency advised in response to my provisional determination:
It was identified through a recent case note, that the applicant has received
a medical certificate stating that he is unfit for work
until the end of August,
which has been provided to Centrelink. Further to this, the Agency has received
a new FOI application from
XXXXXXXXXX where a photocopy of his concession card
was attached.
In light of this recent information, the Agency will be processing the 18
applications...
is my view that this submission indicates that as of 21 June 2022, the date of
the agency’s submissions, the agency had revised
its view such that it had
agreed to waive the 21 application fees.
light of my assessment above, I waive the application fee for the 21 FOI
applications lodged by the applicant between 29 December
2021 and 9 February
2022. That said, in light of the agency’s submissions above, it is my view
that the 21 applications became
valid on 21 June 2022 when the agency agreed to
waive the application fees.
SA OMBUDSMAN
14 July 2022
Procedural steps
7 January 2022
The agency received two FOI applications dated 29 December 2021.
11 January 2022
The agency received two FOI applications dated 5 January 2022.
14 January 2022
The agency received three FOI applications dated 6 January 2022.
19 January 2022
The agency received five FOI applications dated 8 January 2022.
28 January 2022
The agency received six FOI applications dated 20 January 2022.
7 February 2022
The applicant lodged a financial hardship claim form.
14 February 2022
The agency determined that the application fee would not be waived for 14
of the FOI applications.
15 February 2022
The agency received three FOI applications dated 9 February 2022.
22 February 2022
The agency determined that the application fee would not be waived for an
additional 2 FOI applications.
4 March 2022
The agency received the review application dated 22 February 2022. The
application sought review in relation to all applications made
since 1 December
2021 which had not yet been processed due to the application fee not having been
17 March 2022
The agency reviewed the application fee and decided not to waive it.
4 April 2022
The Ombudsman received the applicant’s request for external review
dated 4 April 2022.
4 April 2022
The Ombudsman advised the agency of the external review and requested
submissions and documentation.
12 April 2022
The agency provided the Ombudsman with its submissions and
documentation.
The Ombudsman issued his provisional determination and invited submissions
from the parties.
23 June 2022
The agency provided submissions in response to the provisional
determination.
Freedom of Information Act
section 12.
Freedom of Information
(Fees and Charges) Regulations 2018
regulation 5.
McKechnie v VCAT
, at [101].
Brighton-Stangstins v
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2008] AATA 773
Freedom of Information Act
section 48.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.01 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter