URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAHPT/2019/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gupta v Medical Board of Australia [2019] SAHPT 6 (18 February 2019)
Gupta v Medical Board of Australia
[2019] SAHPT
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL OF SOUTH
GUPTA, Ashok
MEDICAL BOARD OF
Application pursuant to s 18(4) of Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (South Australia) Act 2010
5277 of 2018
HEARING DATE:
DECISION OF SA HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL:
constituted
by: President M Ardlie
Dr J Middleton
DELIVERED ON:
18 February
CATCHWORDS:
Board took immediate action against the
appellant by imposing conditions on the appellant’s registration –
appellant seeks
an order revoking some of the conditions imposed pending the
outcome of the hearing of the complaint – Board maintains that
it formed a
reasonable belief that because of the appellant’s conduct he posed a
serious risk to persons and it was necessary
to take immediate action to protect
public health or safety –
: the conditions numbered 2, 3 and 4
imposed upon the appellant’s registration be revoked –
s 18(4), 155, 156, 157, 158
and 159 Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (South Australia) Act 2010
R and Medical Board of
[2013] WASAT 28
Shahinper v Psychology Board of Australia
[2013] QCAT 593
Pearse v Medical Board of Australia
[2013] QCAT
Liddell v Medical Board of Australia
[2012] WASAT 120
Lindsay v New South Wales Medical Board
[2008] NSWSC 40
Medical Board of Australia
[2011] SAHPT 18
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: Mr M Abbott
Respondent: Ms G Walker
Solicitors:
Appellant: Wallmans
Respondent: Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency
letter dated 8 November 2018, the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation
Agency (AHPRA), on behalf of the Board, notified the
appellant that the Board
had determined to take immediate action under s 156 of the
Practitioner Regulation National Law (South Australia) Act 2010
Law) by imposing conditions upon the appellant’s registration.
to the provisions of s 18(4) of the National Law, the appellant seeks an order
from the Tribunal revoking the conditions
so imposed.
appellant provided a ‘chronology of relevant matters’ which was not
in any way contested by the Board. The chronology
provides relevant background
information to the application made by the appellant.
first date contained in the chronology is 22 August 2017. On that date a member
of the South Australian Police (SAPOL) notified
AHPRA of the fact of the
appellant’s arrest and that he was charged with three counts of aggravated
indecent assault. On the
same day the appellant’s lawyers also notified
conducted an investigation and on 29 August 2017 (having been supplied with
documentation), gave notice of proposed immediate
action in relation to the
appellant’s registration and the imposition of conditions upon his
registration, because of the nature
of the criminal charges, and because the
Board believed that the appellant posed a serious risk to persons so as to
warrant immediate
31 August 2017, the appellant’s legal advisers wrote to AHPRA on behalf of
the appellant, rejecting the assertion that the
appellant posed a serious risk
to persons so as to warrant immediate action.
4 September 2017, the Board decides to take immediate action on the basis that
it reasonably believes that the appellant poses
a serious risk to persons and
that it is necessary to take immediate action to protect public health or
safety. The reasons for the
belief are said to be the information supplied by
SAPOL. The letter from AHPRA states that ‘you have been charged with
indecent assault where the alleged offending has occurred in the
course of your practice’. The letter thereafter states, ‘given
nature of the criminal charges it is considered appropriate that immediate
action be taken to impose conditions on your registration
that restrict you from
consulting female patients’.
16 October 2017, the appellant’s legal advisers advise AHPRA that the
charges have been dismissed.
26 October 2017 the appellant swears an affidavit which is forwarded to AHPRA
denying the allegations. On the same date the appellant’s
legal advisers
write to AHPRA seeking removal of the conditions imposed by way of immediate
6 November 2017, the Board decided to remove all conditions imposed on the
appellant’s registration noting that such conditions
were imposed because
‘you were charged with three counts of aggravated indecent assault which
related to a female patient.’
the matter rested until April 2018. On 26 April 2018 AHPRA wrote a letter to the
appellant’s legal advisers confirming
that it had obtained further
information and it was conducting a further investigation. Counsel for the
appellant said that the further
information arose from AHPRA obtaining a further
statement from the patient which was no more than a recitation of the same
allegations
that had been made to the police and on which the three charges had
been founded.
for the appellant also said that whilst the Board will say there was additional
material after November 2017, at which time
it had decided to remove all
conditions, the additional material is to be categorised as further material,
but not corroborative
and not supportive.
said that a further statement was taken from the patient’s husband. The
content of the statement in no way supports
or confirms or corroborates the
complaint by the patient, his wife. The Board also had Professor Nigel Stocks
prepare a report, on
which great emphasis is laid in the immediate action of
November 2018. In regard to this report counsel pointed out that Professor
Stocks was asked to assume guilt, and asked to opine whether or not it was
appropriate for what the patient said had happened, to
have happened.
Unsurprisingly, Professor Stocks said it was not appropriate. Counsel contended
that such an opinion did not support
the taking of immediate action.
21 May 2018, the appellant’s legal advisers responded to the letter from
AHPRA of 26 April 2018, again denying the same allegations
previously made.
16 August 2018, AHPRA wrote to the appellant’s legal advisers indicating
that the investigation is continuing and should
be concluded within the next
three months.
5 October 2018, AHPRA wrote to the appellant’s legal advisers advising
that ‘[o]n 24 September 2018 the Board decided
to refer the matter to...
the Tribunal... because it reasonably believes that you have behaved in a way
that constitutes professional
misconduct’.
16 October 2018, AHPRA wrote to the appellant’s legal advisers advising
that on 16 October 2018 the Board again proposed
to take immediate action in
relation to the appellant by placing conditions on the appellant’s
registration for the same reasons
it had previously given in 2017. The letter
from AHPRA states that ‘[t]he Board regards [the patient’s] evidence
as credible
and prefers her version of the events, which are precise, and are at
least, to some degree either independently reinforced, or corroborated
sources of evidence (as detailed above).’ As the appellant points out in
his outline of submissions, no other sources
of evidence were in fact detailed.
The only other ‘evidence’ was a statement from the patient’s
husband which said
nothing about the four alleged incidents said to constitute
the conduct referred to in paragraph (a) on pages 1 and 2 of the letter
October 2018.
letter dated 25 October 2018 the appellant’s legal advisers responded to
the allegations and again denied the conduct notified
in August 2017, pointing
out that ‘with the exception of the report of Professor Stocks dated 20
September 2018 the Board has
had all information on which the current decision
to propose immediate action was made by at least 10 January
29 October 2018, the appellant and his legal adviser attended a meeting with the
Immediate Action Committee, at which time the
Immediate Action Committee
indicated that it proposed to take immediate action in relation to the
appellant’s registration.
5 November 2018, AHPRA wrote to the appellant’s legal advisers, giving
further notice of the Board’s proposed immediate
action and inviting the
appellant to make further submissions.
8 November 2018, AHPRA wrote to the appellant’s legal advisers, advising
that the Board now reasonably believes ‘[t]hat
because of [the
appellant’s] conduct he poses a serious risk to persons and it is
necessary to take immediate action to protect
public health and safety.’
AHPRA again reiterated that the Board preferred the patient’s version and
apparently relied
upon what the Board said was ‘the independent opinion of
Professor Nigel Stocks’ (although he was asked to assume that
patient’s allegations had in fact occurred). The Board advised that it had
imposed conditions on the appellant’s
registration.
Board commenced proceedings by way of Complaint dated 13 November 2018,
filed in the Tribunal on 19 November 2018, in respect
of the conduct the subject
of the notification by SAPOL.
14 November 2018 the appellant appealed against the decision of the Board to
take immediate action and to impose conditions on
his registration.
said that the current immediate action cannot properly be construed as immediate
action when the terms of s 156 of Schedule
2 are taken into consideration. The
Board in November 2017 determined to remove the conditions imposed by way of
immediate action.
In November 2018,
the Board again gave notice of a decision to take immediate action. Such a
decision is not immediate action.
way in which the Board have approached the interpretation of s 156 is
wrong. Relevantly, s 156 states:
(1) A National
Board may take immediate action in relation to a registered health practitioner
or student registered in a health profession
for which the Board is established
National Board reasonably believes that –
(i) because of
the registered health practitioner’s conduct, performance or health, the
practitioner poses a serious risk to
persons; and
necessary to take immediate action to protect public health or safety;
on the topic of what the Board was to do when applying s 156 made reference
R and Medical Board of
where the Tribunal
said, ‘under section 156 of the National Law, the Board, and therefore the
Tribunal, needs only to form
a reasonable belief that the practitioner poses a
serious risk to persons and that it is necessary to take immediate action to
the public health or safety.’
156 does not require the board to come to a conclusion about the conduct
alleged. The power to take immediate action is predicated
not on a conclusion
or innocence as regards the conduct,
that is the wrong test, the wrong approach.
The determination of guilt or innocence is done by another process, namely by
Complaint to the Tribunal, followed by a hearing. If the Board did
determine guilt, then it follows that the practitioner posed a
serious risk, and
it was necessary to take immediate action.
Board then proceeded under s 158 of the National Law to give notice of the
immediate action it had decided to take, and the reasons
for deciding to take
the immediate action.
then referred to the context in which the Board made its decision. The events
said to constitute the conduct last occurred
in June 2016. No risk to the public
had in fact been demonstrated to have occurred since that date. The Board should
have had regard
to the fact that the risk had not materialised from June 2016 to
November 2018, at which time it had cause to assess the risk.
Furthermore,
the Board had gone through the process in 2017 as regards the alleged conduct.
On 4 September 2017 it decided to take
immediate action. On 6 November 2017 it
decided to remove all conditions it had imposed on the appellant’s
registration.
then referred to the reasons for the decision made by the Board. In particular
para 2 under the heading ‘reasons for
decision’ where the Board
The Board does not accept that it is estopped from taking
immediate action now, in circumstances where it previously elected to end
period of immediate action in respect of Dr Gupta in November 2017. Further,
there is no limitation imposed on the exercise of
that power that would prevent
the Board from taking immediate action in circumstances where they have
previously ended the period
of immediate action. While Dr Gupta submitted that
the evidentiary basis is identical, for reasons outlined below in relation to
the significance of Professor Stocks’ evidence, this is not the case.
However, even if it were the case, the Board does not
accept that it is
constrained in this way, with public protection being the paramount
consideration.
maintained that the power is to take immediate action, which the Board did, and
then subsequently it removed the conditions.
The only basis on which it could be
revived would be new allegations and the exercise of a new power. However the
Board is saying
that the same power in relation to the same allegations can be
exercised time and time again.
is the significance of Professor Stocks’ evidence? Counsel said that
Professor Stocks was asked to assume that what the
patient alleged had happened,
had in fact happened. Not surprisingly he opined that there was no justification
for a doctor doing
what the patient said happened. Given that he was asked to
assume that the patient’s allegations had in fact occurred, the
Professor Stocks is not a sufficient basis for the immediate action process to
Board’s task is not to engage in an assessment of guilt. Its task is to
engage in assessment of risk on the basis of the
alleged conduct. The reasons
advanced proceed on the basis that the Board must have accepted that the conduct
had been proved to
have occurred. Counsel referred to paras 18 and 19 of the
letter from AHPRA of 8 November
which he said clearly
demonstrates that the Board is proceeding on the basis that the appellant is
patient has not provided anything new to the Board. The statement of the
patient’s husband does not say anything about any
of the alleged
does the Board say that ‘the level of risk associated with the
conduct...is persistent’.
last event was alleged to have occurred in June 2016.
Board has not complied with the limited power given to it in relation to
immediate action under s 156 of the National Law. Pursuant
to s 18(4) of the
National Law, the appellant seeks revocation of the conditions imposed.
for the Board referred the Tribunal to the material the Board had before it
leading to its decision to take immediate
She said the investigation
by AHPRA did not come to an end when the police action came to an end. AHPRA was
looking at the broader
picture and that is where the questions about the
couple’s sex life and other comments come in.
said the patient provided a lengthy and detailed statement. There was nothing
that she could identify which would benefit
the patient from bringing and
maintaining the allegations. The patient continues to maintain her position even
after the charges
were dropped by the police.
responses from the appellant have been limited and consist mainly of denials
together with an indication that everything he did
was medically warranted. The
Board tested that by putting the patient’s allegations to Professor Stocks
who indicated that
there was nothing that he could see that was medically
warranted. That is the evidence that the Board considered. The reasons advanced
by the Board are careful and considered and when read as a whole it should be
seen that the Board did not make a finding of guilt.
referred to
Shahinper v Psychology Board of
It is a decision
of Judge Horneman-Wren SC, Deputy President of QCAT. While discussing the
approach to be taken when considering
whether the Board had a reasonable belief,
based on the evidence before it, that the appellant poses a serious risk to
persons because
of his conduct; and whether it is necessary to take immediate
action in the form of imposing conditions to protect public health
and safety,
His Honour said:
at [41] to [46], I
analysed what I consider to be the proper approach to those issues, based on the
decisions in
Liddell v Medical Board of
Lindsay v New
South Wales Medical Board
I v Medical Board of
, the State Administrative Tribunal of Western Australia observed,
after referring to the New South Wales Supreme Court’s decision
The practicality of that approach is readily apparent. Where, for example,
two allegations of criminal conduct involving serious sexual
misconduct by a
medical practitioner are made (as in
I v Medical Board of Australia
would be impractical for s 156 to require the Medical Board make urgent findings
of fact as to the practitioner’s guilt
or innocence. Rather, the mere fact
and seriousness of the charges, supported by the untested depositions of
witnesses, might well
be sufficient to create the reasonable belief as to the
existence of a risk because of the alleged conduct of the health
practitioner.
That is not, of course, to say that material available to the Board need not
be carefully scrutinised in order to determine the weight
to be attached to it.
The requirement to provide the practitioner with an opportunity to make
submissions prior to the Board taking
immediate action, and to have regard to
those submissions, reinforces that
obligation.
maintained that the approach taken by the Board herein is in accordance with the
approach detailed by His Honour. The Board
has not determined guilt or
innocence. It has not made final findings of fact. It has formed a reasonable
belief that the appellant
poses a serious risk to persons.
cannot be said that the Board is prohibited from taking immediate action simply
because there is a complaint made about conduct
that occurred in June 2016.
Section 155 defines what is meant by immediate action. There is no time limit
specified. Section 156
is the power given to the Board to take the steps defined
156(1) establishes a two limbed approach, namely the Board reasonably believes
the conduct poses a serious risk to persons
and it is necessary to take
immediate action to protect public health or safety. The seriousness of the
allegations, and the nature
of the conduct alleged, are sufficient to underpin a
reasonable belief that the appellant poses a serious risk to persons, and in
absence of any explanation or other material which undermines the
patient’s allegations, it was necessary to take immediate
in response said s 156 is the power to take immediate action. What precedes the
section is that part of the National Law dealing
with notifications. Counsel
said it is quite clear from the structure of the National Law that the immediate
action presupposes a
temporal connection between the Board receiving the
information by way of a notification, and the Board exercising the power. In
case at hand, a delay of 15 months could never be considered to be immediate or
require the exercise of the power to take immediate
action. That is why the
appellant says the Board had no power.
appellant is only seeking revocation of conditions 2, 3 and 4.
is no obligation on any person in respect of whom allegations are made to
proffer any explanation as to why a complainant may
have made such an
allegation. There is nothing in the National Law that in any way abrogates or
does away with the presumption of
innocence or privilege against
self-incrimination.
Consideration-Order
matter is somewhat unusual. As the structure of the National Law
notifications of
conduct are made to the National Agency. Thereafter the National Agency must
refer the notification to the National
Board that registered the health
practitioner.
National Board may, under Division 7 ss 155-159 of the National Law, take
immediate action if as s 156 provides, ‘it reasonably
believes that
because of the health practitioner’s conduct, the practitioner poses a
serious risk to persons and it is necessary
to take immediate action to protect
public health or safety’.
On 22 August 2017 notification of the fact of the arrest of the appellant and of
the fact that he was charged with three counts of
aggravated indecent assault
was made to AHPRA. On 29 August 2017 AHPRA gave notice of the Board’s
proposed immediate action.
Thereafter the Board received written submissions
from the appellant’s lawyers. On 4 September 2017 the Board decided
immediate action. Inter alia conditions were imposed on the
appellant’s registration which restricted him from consulting female
16 October 2017 the appellant’s legal advisers advised AHPRA that the
police charges had been dismissed. Following the provision
of an affidavit from
the appellant together with a letter from his legal advisers the Board decided
on 6 November 2017 to remove
all conditions imposed on the appellant’s
registration.
Investigations
proceeded and on 5 October 2018 AHPRA wrote to the appellant’s legal
advisers indicating that on 24 September
2018 the Board decided to refer the
matter to the Tribunal because it reasonably believed that the appellant had
behaved in a way
that constitutes professional misconduct. In other words they
were giving advice that a Complaint was to be issued. In fact the Complaint
instituted by the filing of the same on 19 November 2018. The Complaint was
dated 13 November 2018. The subject matter of the
Complaint was the conduct
which had been the subject of the notification by SAPOL.
the Complaint was filed in the Tribunal, on 16 October 2018 AHPRA wrote to the
appellant’s legal advisers, indicating
that the Board again proposed to
take immediate action in relation to the appellant by placing conditions on the
appellant’s
registration.
had been no notification of any further conduct on the part of the appellant.
The decision to take immediate action was in relation
to the same conduct which
had been the basis for the previous immediate action.
Tribunal is of the view that s 156 taken in context empowers the Board to take
immediate action upon receiving notification of
conduct. Immediate action had
taken place in relation to the conduct and the Board had subsequently seen fit
to remove all conditions
from the appellant’s registration following the
dismissal of the charges by SAPOL. The appellant as a consequence had been
practising without restriction from 6 November 2017 until 8 November
was no additional ‘new’ information. All that had occurred was the
assembling of statements and obtaining a report
from Professor Stocks, all
necessary to proceed with the Complaint which ultimately will test the veracity
of the allegations made
by the patient. If the allegations are not made out,
Professor Stocks’ report falls away.
Tribunal is unanimously of the opinion that the Board is unable to rely on the
powers contained in s 156 to again take immediate
action in relation to the same
alleged conduct. How could the Board reasonably believe that the practitioner as
at November 2018
posed a serious risk to persons, having decided he did not in
November 2017, at which time it removed all conditions imposed on his
registration? Immediate action means just that. A notification is made, and if
the conduct is so serious that it warrants intervention,
then provided there is
reasonable belief as to the components of s 156, namely, that the conduct poses
a serious risk and it is necessary
to take immediate action to protect the
public, then immediate action may proceed.
to s 18(4) of the National Law, conditions 2, 3 and 4 imposed on the
registration of the appellant on 8 November 2018 are
or statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registrar of the Health Practitioners
See Chronology Of Relevant
Matters at [8].
The Board filed a Complaint in
the Tribunal on 19 November 2018 alleging that the appellant has behaved in a
way that constitutes
professional misconduct.
The Complaint is listed to be
heard by the Tribunal on 13, 14 and 15 March 2019.
Ex A1 p 125.
[2013] WASAT 28
Ex A1 pp 125-134.
Ex A1 p 133 at [21] –
AHPRA letter 8 November 2018.
[2013] QCAT 593.
Pearse v Medical Board of
[2013] QCAT 392.
[2012] WASAT 120
[2008] NSWSC 40.
[2011] SAHPT 18.
Pearse v Medical Board of
[2013] QCAT 392
Ss 140-147.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (192 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter