URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACAT/2025/51.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:53:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v HRA [2025] SACAT 51 (30 June 2025)
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia
NEUTRAL CITATION
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v HRA
[2025] SACAT 51
Senior Member Lazarevich
Member McMahon
Member Girdler
30 June 2025
HEARING DATES
2 June 2025
SACAT FILE NO.
2024/SHP000027
The Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia (the Board) referred a
complaint to the Tribunal pursuant to section 193 of the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (South Australia)
(the National Law), alleging that
the respondent had behaved in a way that constituted professional misconduct and
unprofessional
conduct. The first ground of the complaint related to the
respondent’s failure to provide his child with adequate food and
nutrition, seek appropriate medical care, and ensure his child’s education
and other development needs were met. The second
ground was that the respondent
failed to provide written notice to the Board within seven days of being charged
with criminal neglect
and failing to provide necessary food to a child contrary
to s 130 of the National Law.
The respondent did not participate in the Tribunal proceedings and the
Tribunal proceeded to hear the matter in his absence.
The Board submitted that the second ground constitutes unprofessional
conduct, and that both grounds together constitute professional
misconduct. The
Board sought an order that the respondent be prohibited from providing any
health service until such time as he becomes
re-registered, rather than for a
specified period of time, under s 196(4) of the National Law.
Held, finding professional misconduct and unprofessional conduct and
imposing sanctions:
The Tribunal
decides pursuant to s 196(1) of the National Law that the respondent has behaved
in a way that constitutes professional
misconduct (Ground 1) and unprofessional
conduct (Ground 2);
The respondent
is reprimanded;
The respondent
is disqualified from applying for registration as a registered health
practitioner for a period of 5 years from the
date of this order;
The respondent
is prohibited from providing any health service as defined in the National Law
until the respondent is re-registered
in a health profession under the National
Health practitioners – Complaint by the Nursing and Midwifery Board
of Australia – Professional misconduct – Unprofessional
Unlawful or improper behaviour outside of workplace – Failure to notify
Board of convictions or charges - Reprimand
– Disqualified from applying
for registration for 5 years – Prohibited from providing any health
service until re-registered
in a health profession
LEGISLATION CONSIDERED
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (South Australia) Act
ss 5, 130, 195, 196
CASES CONSIDERED
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
[1990] HCA 33
Boyd v Carah Coaches Pty Ltd
[1979] HCA 56
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Craig v Medical Board of South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
Hughes and Vale Pty Ltd v State of New South Wales (No 2)
Kearney v Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia
[2020] VCAT
Marin v Chiropractic Board of South Australia
[2020] SASCFC 74
Medical Board of Australia v Brown
[2023] VCAT 1075
Medical Board of Australia v Piesse
[2022] VCAT 82
New South Wales Bar Association v Evatt
[1968] HCA 20
(1968) 117 CLR 177
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v TQF
[2021] VCAT
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Morrison
[2022] ACAT
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Tay
[2024] SACAT 9
Osteopathy Board of Australia v Ratliff
[2021] VCAT 658
Pharmacy Board of Australia v Roberts
[2022] SACAT 111
Physiotherapy Board of Australia v Adey
[2017] SAHPT 3
Board of Australia v PYP
[2021] VCAT 876
Psychology Board of Australia v Griersmith
[2019] VCAT 52
REPRESENTATION
Mr Hurburgh appeared for the applicant in person
The respondent did not attend
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s decision pursuant to
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
. The parties and participants of the proceedings have been
de-identified in accordance with the Tribunal’s anonymisation policy.
Other facts and details that may lead to the identification of any person may
have also been anonymised or omitted. These changes
do not affect the
Tribunal’s decision or its reasons for decision.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Order Imposing Disciplinary Action
Made under the
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (South Australia) Act 2010
Findings of the Tribunal
application dated 30 September 2024, the Nursing and Midwifery Board of
Australia (Board) has referred two allegations about the
conduct of a formerly
registered nurse, the respondent, to the South Australian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (Tribunal) under
s 193(1)(a) of the
Practitioner Regulation National Law
(‘National Law’) in
Schedule 2 to the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (South
Australia) Act 2010
respondent first obtained registration as a registered nurse in May 1987.
held registrations with the Board as follows: a general registration between 1
July 2010 and 31 January 2011; a general registration
between 6 November 2013
and 30 June 2015; a provisional registration between 9 October 2017 and 30
November 2018; and a general registration
from 30 November 2018.
surrendered his registration on 6 May 2020 and is currently not registered with
registered, the respondent was subject to the requirements of the National Law,
and the Professional Standards set out in the
Board’s Code of Professional
1 of the Application alleges that the respondent failed to provide his child
with adequate food and nutrition; failed to seek
appropriate medical and/or
other healthcare, advice, and/or interventions on behalf of his son, including:
prior to changing his
diet; and, after such time, as his son’s physical
decline in health was apparent. It is also alleged the respondent failed
ensure the child’s education and other development needs were met; and
that there was a failure to take all reasonable steps
to protect the child from
Board alleges that the conduct in the Ground 1 constitutes professional
misconduct.
2 alleges that the respondent failed to comply with s 130 of the National Law by
failing to give written notice to the Board
within seven days of being charged
with the offence of criminal neglect on 15 April 2020.
Board contends that Ground 2 constitutes unprofessional conduct under the
National Law, and that Grounds 1 and 2 taken together
constitute professional
misconduct.
12 November 2024, Senior Member Stevens made an order that:
Pursuant to s 60 of the SACAT Act 2013, the Tribunal prohibits the publication
of the name of, or any material tending to identify,
the respondent or any
member of his family.
have in these reasons accordingly avoided naming the witnesses or school that
could identify the child.
respondent was contacted by the Senior Member at the first directions hearing by
telephone. The summary of hearing of 12 November
2024 identifies that the
respondent became agitated, and stated that he did not wish to participate in
the proceedings. Senior Member
Stevens granted leave to proceed in the
respondent’s absence.
respondent was served with the notice of this hearing, and provided a copy of
the ‘Book of Documents’ tendered by
the Board. At the start of the
hearing the Tribunal tried to contact the respondent by telephone, but was
unable to speak to him.
In the circumstances we were satisfied that it was
appropriate to proceed in his absence.
approach these proceedings on the basis that the Board must prove its case on
the balance of probabilities, taking into account
the principles in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
Board tendered five volumes of documentary evidence, comprising just under 2300
pages. No oral evidence was called.
documentary evidence includes: communications between Australian Health
Practitioner Regulation Agency (‘AHPRA’) and
South Australia Police
(‘SAPOL’); records of interviews; affidavits; medical records;
hospital admission records; ambulance
records; documents from Child Protection
Services (‘CPS’); school records; documents from the Department of
Child Protection
(‘DCP’); psychological reports; neurological
reports; physiotherapists reports; General Practitioner (‘GP’)
Notes; National Disability Insurance Scheme (‘NDIS’) documents;
communications with the Office of the Director of Public
Prosecution
(‘ODPP’); photographs; correspondence from the Board to the
respondent; and Professional Codes and Guidelines.
Given the quantity of the
material, we do not set out each of the 197 different items or exhaustively
summarise the same.
respondent was born in 1965. He is married, and had a child, born in December
child unfortunately suffered from significant health issues from birth. He has
an acquired brain injury. He suffered episodes
of stiffening associated with
apnoea and shaking of arms and legs, was diagnosed with cryptogenic infantile
spasms, and developmental
delay. He was also diagnosed with Autism Spectrum
Disorder. He has been wheelchair bound and is dependent on his parents.
psychologist’s report from 2011 referred to language and motor
disabilities as an issue, but identified the main hinderance
to his cognitive
development was a severe intellectual disability. Issues were identified in
relation to gross motor skills, fine
motor skills, self-care and safety. In her
view, those difficulties would continue throughout his school years and
family initially resided in Victoria until about 2013 or 2014.
2014 medical note refers to the child being able to crawl but not walk, that he
likes music but cannot talk. The medical notes for
the periods between 2015 and
2017 suggest the child could stand with assistance, walk about 20 steps in 15
minutes using his walker,
crawl on his hands and knees, and vocalise in a way to
indicate yes or no. A student profile in 2017 described him as a happy, sociable
student who liked cars, trucks, trains, cause and effect toys, food and
documentation demonstrates a substantial decline in the child’s health and
development from 2017 to 2019, particularly in
the period from late 2018 to
early 2019.
School Services Officer swore an affidavit in August 2020 stating that she first
met the child seven years previously. At that time,
he was a ‘happy and
contended child’ who ate well. He was able to crawl, bear weight, and
stand for a short amount of
time with limited support. He was smiley but
non-verbal. From 2017 she noticed a decline in the child. He lost weight. He
ability to crawl and stand. She described him as ‘floppy’,
compared to what she previously observed, which was that he
used to arrive,
‘upright, happy, and ready for the day’. He would come to school
with avocado, salmon, homemade bread
and maybe fruit, but she considered the
quantity of food was inadequate when compared to other children of his age. She
met the respondent and described him as ‘frightening’. In
2019 she only saw the child once or twice at the beginning
of term. She said:
It was distressing to see this beautiful boy in the state he was. [He] was thin,
limp, lethargic, disengaged, and non-responsive
– this was in stark
contrast to how [he] presented when I first met him. [He] was there in body, but
not in mind.
Sometime later in 2019 he visited again with his new carers and
‘had a big beautiful smile, he was alert, happy, and gained
looked like the old [child]’.
teacher deposed that she first met the child in August 2018, and taught him
until 2019. She said that in 2019 he attended
school only once. She said he
slept a lot during the day. When she first met him, he was attentive and
responsive to interactions
with staff and had a love of music. As time went on,
he slept more and stopped responding to interactions. He went from alert,
and engaged with his surroundings, to a state of displaying little
interest or awareness. His head would often be down on his chin
resting on his
chest. This change occurred over a period of 14 weeks and was dramatic. She said
he was provided with half an avocado
and slices of smoked salmon with little
variation. She considered the amount of food to be insufficient. She noted the
concerns about
food in the ‘communication book’ and in a note to his
parents, however nothing changed. On the day he attended in 2019
‘looked dreadful’ and ‘gaunt’ and was completely
unresponsive to all forms of stimulation. At the end
of Term 3 he visited again
with his new carers to say goodbye. On that day he was bright, with his head up,
with facial expression
and displaying emotions of joy. She said that was the
child she first met in 2018.
teacher deposed that she first met the child in 2016 whilst Deputy Principal.
She said that the child was a ‘well fleshed
happy little boy; he could
stand; sit on the floor without support and play with staff’. From about
2018, she noticed a gradual
increase in the child’s absenteeism. He was
more serious and smiling less. He was visibly lethargic. In 2019 she observed
lying on a mat in the classroom, looking very thin, emaciated, lethargic and
‘very floppy’. His condition ‘shocked
the members of the
teaching Unit’ and child abuse notifications were made.
co-ordinator at the school deposed that the school did not receive any
information from the child’s parents about the formal
diagnosis of the
child’s disability, which was recorded on the enrolment form as
‘acquired brain injury’. Her dealings
were with the child’s
mother rather than the respondent. She said when she first met the child, he was
sitting upright in his
wheelchair, could self-stimulate, feed himself and had
his own personality. His attendance record was quite poor, which of itself
not unusual for children with disabilities. Several issues were raised with the
child’s mother including with respect to
his food being too thick to eat,
and him being given an inadequate amount of food. The child’s mother said
that the child was
on a ‘ketogenic diet’ and that the mother did not
want the child to eat more food as he did not move much, and she didn’t
want him to get fat. The co-ordinator thought that over time the child’s
mother was getting ‘overwhelmed’. She
said that the child arrived at
school ‘soiled and wet’, and that when attempts were made for speech
pathologists, occupational
therapists or physios to provide in home care that
the child’s parents would not let them into the house. The coordinator
that from about 2017 there was a decline in the child’s health, that
he was losing weight, his ‘personality stopped’
and that he was
‘immobile’.
coordinator at the school deposed that the child had a mid-range vision
impairment and that there were strategies that could
be put in place to help
improve his vision but that the child did not attend school frequently enough to
benefit from these strategies.
October 2018 Novita, a disability organisation, communicated with the mother by
email and referred to a lack of medical information
on file, and raised concerns
over ‘significant weight loss’.
medical records show that a referral to a neurologist occurred at a visit in
August 2018, and then another referral was done in
January 2019. The applicant
says that this demonstrates a delay in actioning recommended advice during a
time that the child’s
health was deteriorating. The applicant also points
to large gaps in the medical records in terms of large gaps between visits and
assessments. In between the August and January referrals the child did see a
neurologist who prepared a report stating that the child’s
development was
‘quite poor’ and that it was ‘difficult to know where to
go’. The applicant refers to the
focus of the report being on seizures
with no mention of weight loss.
coordinator at the child’s school, who started working in March 2019
described her attempt to engage with the mother
non-attendances. The mother asserted the child was suffering seizures and
constipation, but when asked as
to whether the child had seen a doctor, said no.
The coordinator suggested the child be taken to the Emergency Department at the
Women’s and Children’s Hospital (‘WCH’). The mother said
that if the child did not improve, she would take
him to a doctor. On 15 March
there was a conversation with the mother about the need for a medical
certificate for the continued
absences and the mother expressed frustration at
the request.
material on file also includes a number of ‘intake’ reports in 2018
and 2019 reflecting the notification of concerns
to the DCP.
October 2018 intake report referred to the child appearing malnourished; his
legs were the size of the notifier’s wrists;
he required blankets to be
kept warm; his bones in his joints were prominent; he was lethargic and passive,
requiring support to
reposition him in the wheelchair and to keep his head
intake report of 1 February 2019 refers to the child being at school on 30
January 2019 and appearing to be significantly dehydrated
with dry and split
lips, drifting in and out of consciousness and emaciated.
15 March 2019 SAPOL attended the respondent’s home following a Care
Concern Notice. The child was described as ‘skeletal’
appearance.
Detective Sargeant deposed as to this attendance. He said he attempted to
explain concerns about the child to the parents. He said
the respondent was
‘dismissive and hostile’. He expressed concern as to the
parents’ mental health.
Constable deposed that on 15 March 2019 the respondent spoke to Police at this
attendance, and admitted suffering anxiety and that
he took anti-depressants.
The Constable said the respondent alluded to not having the energy to deal with
the child’s situation
and may have lost the perception of the gravity of
the situation due to being around the situation so long and deposed:
[the respondent] wavered between giving reasons for thinking [the child] was in
reasonable physical health to a medical assessment
may be helpful. He explained
that [the child’s] gastro-intestinal track did not function normally.
[The respondent] said, "He lives on avocado and salmon, so we don't feed him
anything .... It's all vegetable based and he still
gets really, really bunged
up. Sometimes with people who become obstructed, then there would be signs and
symptoms of obstruction,
they wouldn't be eating, they would be vomiting, and
he's never done that, he's vomited but not for those reasons."
I said, "When's the last time he has done a poo?"
He said, "Well, yesterday, umm, but, you know, as I say, we use this to massage
his abdomen".
Constable deposed that in the discussions on the 15 March 2019 that the
respondent said words to the effect that ‘this is
an absolute disgrace,
can you put yourself in our situation, our child is sick. And when we explain
that to people its busy bodies’.
The Constable said it was concerning that
the respondent explained that the child often gets constipated and that an
electronic massage
machine was used to help with the constipation.
transcript of interview was prepared. From the transcript there was a debate
told his wife during
that interview that the child needs assessment, but his wife preferred to call a
locum rather than take the
child to hospital. In relation to weight loss, his
wife referred to the need to see a nutritional expert, but this hadn’t
because she was ‘educating myself [herself] on it’.
transcript refers to the respondent referring to himself as a ‘registered
nurse’ and asserting that the child’s
condition hasn’t
deteriorated since he’s seen the neurologist. He admitted at one point
that the child was not well enough
to go to school, and was ‘worryingly
thin’. When asked about assistance on offer the respondent was critical of
which he described as a waste of time, and that he had plenty of
experience in nursing.
another point in the transcript he refers to the child going ‘really,
really well’ and then ‘heartbreakingly’
the seizures started
up again. He referred to saying to his wife that the child ‘seems flat and
seems listless’. He said
that the constipation caused problems and
‘he lives on salmon and avocado, so we don’t feed him
anything’. At another
point he referred to the weight loss but said his
pulse and respirations were fine and that the weight loss might be due to a
spurt, but that he was listless. He later said that he would prefer a GP
locum to a hospital, and that he was not an emergency case
to go to hospital but
‘you know I’m not denying the fact you’re right, he may need
to be, he may need to be in
hospital’. The transcript records that
attempts were then made to call a locum, and some argument between the
respondent and
his wife, including as to whether the child should go to hospital
or whether to wait for a locum.
returned later in the day, and the child was admitted to the WCH.
paramedic from South Australian Ambulance Services deposed that on picking up
the child it was immediately apparent that the child
was emaciated and
malnourished.
admission records refer to a ‘history from the mother’, which
includes: the child deteriorating over the last six
months; that he had been on
a ketogenic diet in an attempt to improve health and seizures, but that the
seizures were increasing.
The neurologist was last seen in November 2018, with
no medical contact since. The mother reported that the nocturnal seizures were
increasing and leading to fatigue, and that the weight loss was
‘expected’ with the ketogenic diet.
child was in the WCH from 15 March 2019 to 30 May 2019. There was a diagnosis of
severe weight loss, with various complications
including constipation, dental
disease, vitamin A deficiency and malnutrition. His weight on discharge from
hospital had grown to
report of a forensic paediatrician for CPS, and working at the WCH, of 31 May
2019 referred to the child being malnourished, having
no fat stores and evidence
of wasting in his upper arms, thighs, and buttocks. His weight was significantly
below the 3rd percentile
minimum expected for a child of his age, as well as
being significantly down on previous weighing.
child’s weight at the time of admission was 25kg. This compared to 41kg
when he was eight, and 37kg when he was nine.
forensic paediatrician said that prior to seeing the child there was a short
interview with the respondent and the child’s
mother during which they
expressed their anger and distress about SAPOL’s involvement, and that the
mother preferred to have
the child see a locum rather than medical practitioners
at the WCH. The mother said that she thought that the weight loss was not
related to diet, but to seizures which had recurred 6-12 months after the
ketogenic diet was started. When questioned as to why the
diet would be
persisted with if there were increased seizures the mother became agitated and
did not wish to continue the discussion.
forensic paediatrician was critical in the report of the mother making dietary
decisions without medical or dietician consultation.
She referred to the child
being severely constipated and that this had been ongoing for some time. She
said that a known effect of
the ketogenic diet was constipation. She was
critical that even though the constipation was so severe as to preclude school
that no medical treatment had been sought for the constipation. She
was critical that whilst the child’s condition was deteriorating
he only attended two school days in 2019 and was absent from 12 February,
reportedly due to fatigue from overnight seizures,
that the parents did not seek
even though concerns had
been raised by the school and Novita therapists. She
said that it was the parents’ responsibility to seek appropriate care,
they did not do so. She was also critical about using alternative therapies, and
a lack of engagement with supports that were
offered in relation to vision
forensic paediatrician prepared a table which reviewed the known medical history
and made comments thereon, which were critical
of a lack of follow up by the
mother including not attending further appointments where those had been
recommended, and where records
made no mention of advice being sought or
discussions taking place on the child’s weight loss. There were lengthy
delays between
referrals being made and appointments booked.
physiotherapist from Novita deposed to meeting the child in April 2018 and
describing him as bright and alert. There was a downturn
in his health between
terms three and four in 2018. By late term four the child could no longer
initiate steps when placed in the
walker. He appeared fatigued. In discussions
with the mother the mother reported that she wanted the child to avoid exercise
requested treatments that the physiotherapist said were not ‘evidence
based’. The physiotherapists thought that the mother
was finding the NDIS
funding process to be frustrating and that ‘everyone was trying to make
her life difficult’. A referral
was made to a neurologist but not followed
up and discussions took place with the mother about this lack of follow up, as
concerns about the child’s bowel movements. The physiotherapist
said that in appointments after the child had been removed
parent’s care that his health had significantly improved and that he had
gained weight.
parenting capacity report was prepared for the DCP by a psychologist, and a
social worker. It notes that the respondent did not
participate in the
assessment despite DCP asking him to. The mother was shown various photos of the
child, before and after his weight
loss, and she described the child as
‘fat and overweight’ and consistently said that no-one had brought
to her attention
that the child was underweight, and sought to blame doctors.
The report stated that the respondent’s role was unclear, but
mother had described his role whilst they lived in Melbourne as ‘very
involved’ but that once they were in Adelaide
the mother was the primary
carer and the respondent had faced challenges in relation to his own physical
and mental health. The mother
described the respondent as having fluctuating
moods and that she and he faced an imminent separation. The report’s
was that the child was extremely vulnerable, reliant on his
caregivers, dangerously underweight, and that his needs were neglected
the care of the mother and respondent.
GP had consulted with the child in October 2014, June 2015 and September 2018.
The first consultation, with the mother, was to request
a clearance for his
swallowing status. The second, with the respondent, was to get a letter for the
school to give paracetamol for
the child when required and requests were made
for forms to be completed for a disability parking permit and conductive
The September 2018 consultation through the mother related to Seizure
Care Plan paperwork. The GP said the consultations were largely
paperwork, and that clinical issues were not raised.
GP from the same practice deposed that he consulted with the child in January
2019 but did not examine him and presumes the
consultation related to a
referral. He said that he did not see any signs of neglect, but as he did not
have any prior dealings he
did not have a point of reference to gauge what a
normal presentation was.
child’s mother made a report to police. The report was transcribed. She
blamed the DCP for the breakdown of her marriage
and said the school provided
critical misinformation. She said that she had never refused to attend any
meetings requested by the
school and never refused to take him to a doctor and
that the forensic paediatrician accepted information without validating facts.
She denied that the child was on a ‘ketogenic diet’. She said that
in late 2018 she was feeling pressure from numerous
stressors including about
the child’s seizures and weight, was having disrupted sleep, was the
primary provider and manager
of finances and that she was assisting her
ex-husband (the respondent) to complete a ‘bridging course’ to
nurses’ registration. She said the child was underweight but
not malnourished. She asked that charges be laid against the school,
and various
staff members of the school, against various people in child protection, and
against various health practitioners.
20 March 2019 an application was made by the DCP for care and protection orders.
An interim order was made on 25 March 2019. A
report in support of final care
and protection orders of August 2019 noted significant improvement in the
child’s function
since he was removed from his parents’ care,
including being able to move independently, being able to sit up on his own for
a period whereas at the time of being admitted into care he had lost the ability
to even hold his head up independently.
15 April 2020 the respondent was arrested and charged with criminal neglect
pursuant to
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(‘CLCA’) and failing to provide necessary food to a child
without lawful excuse pursuant to
of the CLCA. The ‘Facts of
Charge’ and ‘Charge Sequencing Report’ refer, amongst other
things, to a ‘noticeable
deterioration’ in his weight and overall
health in the three years before being taken into care; that he was not given
appropriate
physical care; that he was put on a diet which was unsuitable
without consulting a dietician, and where the food he was provided
insufficient in quantity. This was alleged to have contributed to poor health,
and in turn poor school attendance. Some 40% of
his weight was alleged to have
been lost. It was alleged that his dental health was poor, and he subsequently
underwent four dental
extractions and four fillings. It was alleged that there
was no evidence that the child had ever been to a dentist. He had vision
problems requiring corrective glasses. It was alleged that his parents had
failed to ensure that his optical needs were provided
for. It was alleged that
the parents did not co-operate with the parent assessment by the CPS Social
30 April 2020 AHPRA advised the respondent that a notification had been received
against him in relation to the criminal charges
that had been made. The file
note of Ms Emmerson who spoke to the respondent states:
Introducing myself and my role. Explaining we’ve received a notification
from SAPOL in relation to the charges laid.
Requesting a copy of the charge sheet. [The respondent] is not interested in
AHPRA any more. “You can rip up my registration,
finished”. [The respondent] does not want to practice any more, he
“would rather be on the street and do that
work again.”
... [the Respondent] does not want me to contact him again.
He got some bad news today and “really don’t want to have it out
[The Respondent] saying to toss his registration into the trash bin. Reiterating
he would rather be on the street than work as a
nurse, work “is for
slaves”. [The Respondent] saying we should bring the migrants in, like we
have been for doing the
work. “Treat them like the dirt you treat me
[The Respondent] saying “get back to your job now love” and
terminated the call.
4 May 2020 the respondent sent AHPRA a notice to surrender his
registration.
5 June 2020 the Youth Court of South Australia made consent orders to place the
child under the guardianship of the Chief Executive
of the DCP until he turned
18 years old.
charges against the respondent were dismissed on 17 March 2021.
substance and particulars alleged in respect of Ground 1 in so far as they
relate to conduct of the respondent are as follows:
3. The Respondent failed to:
3.1. provide his child C (a pseudonym) with adequate food and
3.2. seek appropriate medical and/or other health care, advice and/or
interventions on behalf of C, including:
3.2.1. prior to changing C’s diet; and
3.2.2. after such time as C’s physical decline in health was
3.3. ensure C’s education and other development needs were met;
3.4. to take all reasonable steps to protect C from risk of harm.
Particulars
all relevant times the Respondent was married to AA (a pseudonym). AA held
registration as a psychologist between 1 July 2010
and 30 December 2018 (save
for two short periods).
5. The Respondent and AA had a biological son, C, born on 21 December 2006.
6. At all relevant times C:
6.1. lived with the Respondent and AA, who had shared care of him;
6.2. had numerous health issues including:
6.2.1. an acquired brain injury;
6.2.2. a seizure disorder; and
6.2.3. other physical disabilities, including being unable to walk;
6.3. has significant intellectual disabilities;
6.4. was non-verbal;
6.5. required full time care and was entirely dependent on others for all of his
physical and developmental needs;
6.6. was a National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) participant with a plan
within the meaning of the
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
2014, C was enrolled at the [the School] which provides education and assistance
programs for children with severe and multiple
disabilities.
in or around 2017 staff at the School and therapists who were involved in
C’s care at the School observed that C’s
physical condition and
development deteriorated, including losing weight and changes to mobility and
interactions. C had a high rate
of absenteeism from the School, in particular in
9. On 15 March 2019:
9.1. at approximately 1.50pm South Australian Police (SAPOL) attended the home
of the Respondent and AA (Residence) to conduct a
welfare check on C, at the
time aged 12 years;
9.2. the Respondent and AA were present;
9.3. SAPOL officers observed C was lying in a bed and was “very thin,
immobile and listless” and “almost skeletal
appearance”;
9.4. SAPOL officers spoke with the Respondent and AA about the need for C to be
medically assessed;
9.5. SAPOL officers left the Residence at approximately 2.28pm;
9.6. SAPOL officers returned to the Residence at approximately 5:00pm. The
Respondent and AA were again present;
9.7. SAPOL officers arranged for SA Ambulance to attend the Residence;
9.8. SA Ambulance formed the opinion C needed to be transported to hospital;
9.9. the Respondent and AA did not agree to C being taken to hospital;
9.10. SAPOL removed C from the Residence and care of the Respondent and AA
pursuant to the powers under
Children and Young People (Safety)
9.11. SAPOL executed a general search warrant at the Residence;
9.12. SA Ambulance officers transferred C to the Women’s and
Children’s Hospital (WCH);
9.13. C was admitted to the WCH.
10. At the time of his admission to the WCH, C:
10.1. was malnourished, having no fat stores, with evidence of wasting of his
upper arms, thighs, and buttocks;
10.2. weighed 25kg which was significantly below the 3rd percentile minimum
expected for a child of his age and his weight was significantly
previous weights; at 8 years old he was 41kg and at 9 years old he was 37kg;
10.3. had poor dental health;
10.4. had a vision impairment which required corrective glasses;
10.5. there was no record of immunisations since immunisations in 2012;
11. Between 2016 and March 2019:
11.1. C had attended a general practitioner on only 7 occasions;
11.2. C was never assessed or examined by any medical practitioner;
11.3. there are no records of any medications being prescribed or dispensed to
12. C was admitted to WCH from 15 March 2019 to 30 May 2019.
Respondent’s conduct was inconsistent with the applicable professional
standards, including the:
19.1. 2013 Code of Conduct, in particular conduct statement 9.1 and 9.2;
19.2. 2018 Code of Conduct, in particular clauses 1.2 and 4;
19.3. 2013 Code of Ethics, in particular value statement 2.4;
19.4. 2018 Code of Ethics, in particular elements 1 and 2.
following facts referred to in those particulars are established from the
documentary material tendered to the Tribunal: 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12.
We have not set out paragraphs 16 to 18 which relate to the fact that the
respondent was charged but
ultimately the charges were withdrawn. Those facts
are also made out on the evidence. The fact of a charge, and that it was
does not mean that a criminal offence was committed.
9.9 needs some further elaboration. The assertion is that the respondent and his
wife did not agree to the child being
taken to the hospital. The finding we make
based on the record of interview is slightly more nuanced. The respondent
himself did
not say that the child could
go to hospital. The
child’s mother was more resistant, wanting the locum to attend, and
promising to call police once the doctor
had arrived, and the respondent said
that if the locum said the child needed to go to hospital then they would take
him to hospital,
and wanting the general practitioner ‘to make that
assessment’. The statement of a SAPOL detective then indicates that
following that earlier discussion (with two constables) police attended later in
the day and advised they were going to take the
child to the WCH in an
ambulance. The detective said that the mother was ‘borderline
obstructive’ and that they dealt
with the mother rather than the
respondent. The respondent did not
the police in this process,
but he did not positively
in making a positive decision to take
the child to hospital as opposed to waiting for a locum.
gravamen of Ground 1 is found in paragraph 3 of the application.
3.1, that the child was not provided with adequate food and nutrition is made
out on the evidence. Whilst it appears that
the mother was the person whose idea
it was to place the child on a restricted diet, and was the primary person with
whom the school
communicated its concerns:
65.1. The respondent had
the training skills and experience of a nurse.
65.2. The respondent was living with the child and the mother.
65.3. It was apparent to the respondent that the child was losing weight.
65.4. The respondent knew that the child was on a diet consisting largely of
avocado and salmon, and knew that he was suffering from
constipation. It was
apparent that there was a change in the child’s energy levels.
to paragraph 3.2.1 there was a decision made to place the child on a diet.
Although the mother subsequently asserted the child
was not on a ketogenic diet
that is inconsistent with earlier admissions, and we find that the child was
placed on a ketogenic diet.
No consultation was made with a doctor or dietician
on the topic of diet or weight loss. Whilst it is debatable as to whether a
in diet required consultation beforehand, it is clear as set out in 3.2.2
that no specific medical advice was sought once the child’s
started deteriorating whilst he was on the diet. At the latest that decline was
apparent by late 2018. Whilst the child
did see a neurologist in November 2018,
and obtained a further referral in January 2019, no reference was made to the
topic of diet
or weight loss. Further, whilst there were limited GP appointments
in 2018, they were in relation to the topics of paperwork rather
than raising
serious concerns about the child’s decline and weight loss.
the mother may have been more active in the care of the child, the respondent,
as a nurse, and as a father, should have seen
that the condition of the child
was deteriorating and stepped in to make sure that he was given proper medical
failure to take action led to serious weight loss, functional decline, and
malnutrition. It led to him not being able to be in
a fit enough state to attend
school. We are satisfied that 3.2 is made out in the following terms:
The respondent failed to: seek appropriate medical and/or other health care,
advice and/or interventions on behalf of C, after such
time as C’s
physical decline in health was apparent.
3.3 is made out in relation to the following topics, based in particular on the
reports of the forensic paediatrician dated
31 May 2019 and the Parenting
Assessment Report of 5 July 2019: diet and its link to education (in the sense
that the poor diet led
to his loss of functioning and inability to attend
school); exercise (in the sense that the child had available supports in the
of physiotherapy but this was not actively pursued); lack of dental care;
and vision (in the sense that the child was identified
as having vision
impairment issues but there was insufficient engagement to ensure that the
child’s vision issues were treated).
3.4 is made out in that reasonable steps would have been:
child should have been taken to a GP in 2018 to address his weight loss and
deterioration of function;
70.2. When it reached the stage that the child was in the state he was in
late 2018 and early 2019, he should have been taken to hospital
well before
being taken by police to hospital.
findings in paragraph 3 then relate to the allegations in paragraph 19.
2013 Code of Conduct at 9.1 states:
Nurses, maintain and build on the community’s trust and confidence in the
nursing profession.
Explanation.
conduct of nurses maintains and builds public trust and confidence in the
profession at all times.
unlawful and unethical actions of nurses in their personal lives risks
adversely, affecting both their own and the professions
good reputation and
standing in the eyes of the public. If the good standing of either individual
nurses or the profession were to
diminish, this might jeopardise inherent trust
between the nursing profession, and the public necessary for affective
therapeutic
relationships and effective delivery of nursing care.
2013 Code of Conduct was replaced by the 2018 Code of Conduct. It is not clear
that the 2013 Code is relevant to the issues surrounding
the deterioration in
the child’s health over late 2018 and into 2019.
2018 Code of Conduct at 1.2 refers to ‘Lawful Behaviour’:
1.2 Lawful behaviour
Nurses practise honestly and ethically and should not engage in unlawful
behaviour as it may affect their practice and/or damage
the reputation of the
profession. Nurses must
the nurse-person professional relationship by not taking possessions and/or
property that belong to the person and/or their
with relevant poisons legislation, authorisation, local policy and own scope of
practice, including to safely use, administer,
obtain, possess, prescribe, sell,
supply and store medications and other therapeutic products
participate in unlawful behaviour and understand that unlawful behaviour may be
viewed as unprofessional conduct or professional
misconduct and have
implications for their registration,
that making frivolous or vexatious complaints may be viewed as unprofessional
conduct or professional misconduct and have
implications for their
registration.
are not convinced that paragraph 1.2 is relevant. The applicant was charged with
a criminal offence, but the charge was dismissed,
and the particulars of the
allegations are not framed explicitly by reference to the respondent being
guilty of ‘unlawful behaviour’.
2018 Code of Conduct refers at clause 4 to: professional boundaries,
advertising, legal insurance and other assessments, conflicts
of interest,
financial arrangements and gifts. We are not convinced that clause 4 is relevant
to this matter.
also did not find the reference to the paragraphs of the Code of Ethics referred
to in the particulars to be relevant to this matter.
have not found that the respondent breached the paragraphs of the 2018 Code of
Conduct or Code of Ethics referred to in the application.
do find that Ground 1 however is made out as particularised in paragraph 3 of
the application, with the explanation in respect
of paragraph 3.2 referred to
question then becomes whether those findings made out a complaint of
professional misconduct or unsatisfactory conduct.
events occur outside the formal role of patient vis professional. That is, it
was not part of the respondent’s professional
practice to care for his
definition of professional misconduct under the National Law is:
professional misconduct,
of a registered health practitioner,
(a) unprofessional conduct by the practitioner that amounts to conduct that is
substantially below the standard reasonably expected
of a registered health
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience; and
(b) more than one instance of unprofessional conduct that, when considered
together, amounts to conduct that is substantially below
the standard reasonably
expected of a registered health practitioner of an equivalent level of training
or experience; and
(c) conduct of the practitioner,
whether occurring in connection with the
practice of the health practitioner's profession or not
inconsistent with the practitioner being
a fit and proper person
registration in the profession.
wording of subparagraph (c) of the definition of professional misconduct
includes conduct whether occurring in connection with
the practice of the health
practitioner’s profession or not.
phrase fit and proper is not defined in the National Law, but allows for a wide
range of matters to be
considered.
includes not only whether a person has the necessary honesty, knowledge and
ability but also whether the person possesses sufficient
moral integrity and
rectitude of character to permit them to be accredited to the public as a person
to be entrusted with the sort
of work the relevant registration or licence
The decision maker needs
to make a value judgment and, in so doing, must make an assessment of the
seriousness or otherwise of the
particular conduct for evaluation. The same
approach is to be applied to weighing matters in favour of the person. The test
be applied in the context of what the person will be authorised to do if
the relevant permission is
Unprofessional
conduct has a non-exhaustive definition, the preamble of which is:
unprofessional conduct
, of a registered health practitioner, means
professional conduct that is of a lesser standard than that which might
reasonably be
expected of the health practitioner by the public or the
practitioner's professional peers...
have been cases where health practitioners have been found to have engaged in
conduct that amounts to professional misconduct
outside the scope of
professional conduct.
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Morrison
[2022] ACAT 92
ACT Tribunal stated, in the context of a matter concerning domestic violence:
The definition of ‘professional misconduct’ in section 5 of the
National Law expressly includes conduct of the practitioner,
whether occurring
in connection with the practice of the health practitioner’s profession or
not, as do the professional standards
applicable at the time of the conduct.
There are numerous examples of a court or tribunal finding that conduct
involving family violence constituted professional misconduct
notwithstanding
that the conduct occurred outside the practitioner’s practice. Those cases
recognise the harm done to public
confidence in health services when individual
service providers perpetrate family violence.
The following observations made by the tribunal in
Medical Board of Australia
, a case involving a medical practitioner who committed an act of
family violence against his wife, apply equally to other providers
services, including nurses:
Our community rightly expects that medical practitioners will not commit a crime
of this nature. Conduct of this kind impacts on
the standing of and the trust
that the community holds in the medical profession.
Medical practitioners are and need to be seen by the community as people who are
law abiding, trustworthy and safe to be in proximity
to, and respectful,
including of women.
An offence of this kind has particular resonance for medical practitioners who
may be the first point of contact for a person who
is themselves a victim of an
act of family violence. This is because the public expects that they will be
able to provide good medical
care for those who are experiencing abuse and
violence, as well as to identify and respond appropriately to the perpetrators
an immediate action decision,
Kearney v Nursing and Midwifery Board of
[2020] VCAT 1216
the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
was dealing with allegations about the treatment of children outside the
and before the practitioner became a nurse. The Tribunal said:
the circumstances of this case differ from those where the conduct of the
practitioner is alleged to have taken place in
the workplace. Here, in contrast,
the offences are alleged to have occurred during the period 2004 – 2008,
and Ms Kearney only
became registered and commenced work as a nurse in 2009. So
she was not under the ethical obligations of a nurse at the time of the
conduct. Further, it is accepted that there have been no complaints about her
conduct as a nurse, and she is well regarded.
Beech submitted that the present case is to be distinguished from
, in the sense that, for the reasons
mentioned in the above paragraph, there is no nexus between Ms Kearney’s
work as a nurse
and the alleged conduct.
, the victim was an Iranian refugee who felt vulnerable in terms
of his immigration status, and was exploited as an employee in a
non-medical
business by Dr Farshichi. There was also a concern about Dr Farshchi prescribing
medication for his employee, without
the records disclosing a proper basis, but
this was not the primary issue.
, the connection was less direct. It was a case of conduct during
a consensual sexual relationship out of hours and away from work,
between two
doctors who worked at different hospitals.
Board’s response was that Ms Kearney commenced studying for her nursing
qualification in February 2008, and completed her
course in December 2008. She
was first registered as a nurse in January 2009. The Board submitted that if the
alleged conduct had
become known at that time, the predecessor Board would have
had to consider whether she was a fit and proper person to be registered.
Board submitted that as a foster parent Ms Kearney was responsible for the care
of the two children. She was placed in a position
of trust. As a nurse,
similarly, she is in a position of trust.
our view, these points are well made. The two children were obviously in a
position of great vulnerability while in Ms Kearney’s
care. There is in
our view great similarity between the moral and ethical position of a foster
parent and a nurse in terms of their
responsibility for vulnerable persons in
their care. The more vulnerable the child/ patient, the higher the duty of care.
patients for whom nurses are responsible are frequently in a very
vulnerable position.
key aspect of the public interest here is public confidence in the nursing
profession, and in the provision of services by nurses.
is a caring profession. Caring encompasses kindness, fairness, trustworthiness,
integrity, emotional stability, empathy and
compassion. It requires a connection
with people sometimes at the worst moments of their lives. The alleged conduct
exhibits the
opposite of these qualities when caring for two young children in
our view the conduct alleged, if proved, would rightly provoke outrage due to
the way in which vulnerable children were treated.
It would raise the issue of
Ms Kearney’s fitness to be registered.
alleged conduct goes to the heart of the characteristics required by a nurse.
Providing care for people when they are at their
most vulnerable is fundamental
to nursing. Of course, Ms Kearney was not subject to the formal ethical
obligations applicable to
nurses 2004-2008. But she was subject to a similar
fundamental ethical duty as a foster parent.
this complaint has not been framed as involving the commission of a crime,
(although the neglect of a child is capable of
constituting a criminal offence
– the particulars here referred to the fact of the charges being laid and
withdrawn but did
not state that a crime had been
committed):
90.1. The conduct in question is failing to provide
appropriate care to a person with whom the respondent had a duty to provide care
(i.e. parent child).
90.2. The child was in a position of vulnerability and dependent on his
90.3. Not providing an appropriate level of care to a vulnerable person is
not consistent with what the public would expect from a
nurse. The conduct is
incompatible with the respondent being suitable to have, as one of his core
responsibilities, the care and
wellbeing of patients who are sick and
vulnerable.
find that, based on the findings made in Ground 1, that the applicant has
engaged in professional misconduct.
respect of Ground 2, s 130 of the National Law provides (in part):
130—Registered health practitioner or student to give National Board
notice of certain events
(1) A registered health practitioner or student must, within 7 days after
becoming aware that a relevant event has occurred in relation
practitioner or student, give the National Board established for the
practitioner's or student's health profession written
notice of the event.
(2) A contravention of subsection (1) by a registered health practitioner or
student does not constitute an offence but may constitute
behaviour for which
health, conduct or performance action may be taken.
(2A) To avoid doubt, a registered health practitioner is not required to give
the National Board written notice of an event within
the meaning of paragraphs
(e) or (f) of the definition of relevant event if the notification is prohibited
Health Insurance Act 1973
of the Commonwealth.
(3) In this section—
relevant event, in relation to a registered health practitioner, means—
(a) the practitioner is charged with—
(i) a scheduled medicine offence; or
an offence punishable by 12 months’ imprisonment or more, whether
in a participating jurisdiction or elsewhere; or
respondent was charged on 15 April 2020 with offences that were punishable by 12
months or more imprisonment, and that this was
a ‘relevant event’
for the purposes of
s 130(3)(a)(i)
of the National Law.
respondent was accordingly obliged to give the Board written notice of the
charge within seven days under
such written notice was given.
Board knew of the charges shortly after the relevant period through a
notification from elsewhere and discussed the same with
the respondent, however
the intention of the National Law is clear – the obligation is on the
practitioner to advise.
definition of unprofessional conduct in s 5 includes, in the list of
matters that are included in the definition:
(a) a contravention by the practitioner of this Law, whether or not the
practitioner has been prosecuted for, or convicted of, an
offence in relation to
the contravention; and
respondent has contravened a provision of the National Law, namely
agree with the Board’s submissions that the contravention is appropriately
classified as unprofessional conduct.
Craig v Medical Board of South
Chief Justice Doyle,
(Williams & Martin JJ agreeing) stated:
The purpose of disciplinary proceedings is to protect the public, not to punish
a practitioner in the sense in which punishment is
administered pursuant to the
criminal law. A disciplinary tribunal protects the public by making orders which
will prevent persons
who are unfit to practise from practising, or by making
orders which will secure the maintenance of proper professional standards.
disciplinary tribunal will also consider the protection of the public, and of
the relevant profession, by making orders which will
assure the public that
appropriate standards are being maintained within the relevant profession.
imposition of disciplinary action may serve one or more the following
practitioners who are unfit to practice from practising;
maintenance of professional standards;
assuring members
of the public and the profession that appropriate standards are being maintained
and that professional misconduct
(or unprofessional conduct) will not be
bringing home to
the practitioner the seriousness of their conduct;
deterring the
practitioner from any future departures from appropriate standards;
deterring other
members of the profession who might be minded to act in a similar way;
restrictions on the practitioners' right to practice so as to ensure that the
public is protected.
protection of the public may sometimes require action that has a greater adverse
effect on a practitioner that may be warranted
if punishment was the relevant
consideration, and, unlike in criminal sentencing, the personal circumstances of
the practitioner
are of limited significance in working out what sanction is
necessary in the public interest.
196 of the National Law provides:
196—Decision by responsible tribunal about registered health
practitioner
(1) After hearing a matter about a registered health practitioner, a responsible
tribunal may decide—
(a) the practitioner has no case to answer and no further action is to be taken
in relation to the matter; or
(b) one or more of the following—
(i) the practitioner has behaved in a way that constitutes unsatisfactory
professional performance;
(ii) the practitioner has behaved in a way that constitutes unprofessional
(iii) the practitioner has behaved in a way that constitutes professional
misconduct;
(iv) the practitioner has an impairment;
(v) the practitioner's registration was improperly obtained because the
practitioner or someone else gave the National Board established
practitioner's health profession information or a document that was false or
misleading in a material particular.
(2) If a responsible tribunal makes a decision referred to in subsection
(1)(b), the tribunal may decide to do one or more of the
(a) caution or reprimand the practitioner;
(b) impose a condition on the practitioner's registration, including, for
(i) a condition requiring the practitioner to complete specified further
education or training, or to undergo counselling, within
a specified period;
(ii) a condition requiring the practitioner to undertake a specified period of
supervised practice; or
(iii) a condition requiring the practitioner to do, or refrain from doing,
something in connection with the practitioner's practice;
(iv) a condition requiring the practitioner to manage the practitioner's
practice in a specified way; or
(v) a condition requiring the practitioner to report to a specified person at
specified times about the practitioner's practice;
(vi) a condition requiring the practitioner not to employ, engage or recommend
a specified person, or class of persons;
(c) require the practitioner to pay a fine of not more than $30 000 to the
National Board that registers the practitioner;
(d) suspend the practitioner's registration for a specified period;
(e) cancel the practitioner's registration.
(3) If the responsible tribunal decides to impose a condition on the
practitioner's registration, the tribunal must also decide
a review period for
the condition.
(4) If the tribunal decides to cancel a person's registration under this Law or
the person does not hold registration under this
Law, the tribunal may also
decide to do one or more of the following—
(a) disqualify the person from applying for registration as a registered health
practitioner for a specified period;
(b) prohibit the person, either permanently or for a stated period, from doing
either or both of the following—
(i) providing any health service or a specified health service;
(ii) using any title or a specified title;
(c) impose restrictions, either permanently or for a stated period, on the
provision of any health service or a specified health
service by the person.
the respondent is no longer registered as a practitioner.
consider it is appropriate to reprimand the practitioner.
also consider it is appropriate to disqualify the respondent from applying for
registration for a period of five years.
reaching that conclusion we take into account the nature and extent of the
departure from proper professional standards, doing
so in the context that the
conduct incurred outside the professional setting (i.e. in the familial
setting), but where the conduct
manifested qualities that are incompatible with
the respondent being a fit and proper person to hold registration.
respondent has not demonstrated any contrition or remorse to the Board or
Tribunal. It is likely that the respondent has suffered
from mental health
issues, though the precise details of that are not available to the Tribunal. He
did not engage in the Tribunal
process, and in the telephone conversation with
the AHPRA employee referred to the above made comments to the effect that his
registration
could be ‘ripped up’ and that he was
‘finished’ and would rather be on the street than work as a
do not overlook that caring for a child with the high levels of needs that this
child had would be incredibly stressful and have
a profound effect on the
respondent. The criminal charges and the child going into care of the State
until he was 18 would also likely
be highly distressing to the respondent.
making our decision we are not looking to punish the respondent for the
situation he and his family found themselves in. Rather,
his reaction to that
situation in terms of neglecting the needs of the child is not compatible with
being fit to practise as a nurse,
and the period of disqualification we have
chosen is intended to maintain public confidence in the profession of nursing
system of regulation of that profession.
next issue is whether the respondent should be prohibited from providing any
other health service, or a specified health service
either permanently or for a
stated period (s 196(4)). The language of s 196(4) is different to
s 196(2)(d) in that under s 196(2)(d)
any disqualification must be for
a specified period, whilst under s 196(4) the prohibition can be either
permanently, or for a specified
Marin v Chiropractic Board of South Australia
[2020] SASCFC 74
), the Full Court was dealing with a matter where the
Tribunal at first instance had made a disqualification order that was permanent
and a prohibition order. On appeal to a single judge the Court found that
s 196(2)(d) did not authorise the making of a permanent
disqualification
and substituted an order disqualifying the practitioner from practising for 10
years but otherwise dismissed the
appeal. On the appeal to the Full Court, Chief
Justice Kourakis upheld the prohibition order and noted the wide definition of
services and stating at [7] that ‘At least one reason for defining
health services beyond those health services more commonly
provided by each of
the 16 recognised health professions is to strengthen disqualification orders by
prohibiting a disqualified health
professional from providing any of those other
Osteopathy Board of Australia v Ratliff
[2021] VCAT 658
the Victorian
Civil and Administrative Tribunal stated at [144] (in the context of an
osteopath):
It would undermine the effectiveness and reputation of the system for the
regulation of the profession, if a practitioner who is
disqualified from seeking
registration as an osteopath for six years is able, and seen to be able, to work
as a masseur. That is,
carrying out work which has many similarities to, and
utilises many of the same skills, as osteopathy. It would be seen as a
way of overcoming orders for cancellation and
disqualification.
Board submits that it is appropriate to make a prohibition order. We agree,
given that the same reasons that make it inappropriate
for the respondent to
practise as a nurse would apply with equal force to other health services. The
Act defines these other services
as being hospital services, mental health
services, pharmaceutical services, community health services, health education
welfare services necessary to implement the other services, services
provided by dietitians, masseurs, social workers, speech pathologists,
audiologists or audiometrists.
Board has sought an order that the prohibition be expressed in terms that it
operate until such time as the practitioner becomes
registered rather than for a
period of months or years, the rationale being that it is through the
registration process that the
Board can assess whether a practitioner has
undergone sufficient reformation or rehabilitation that they no longer pose a
the public. Orders in such terms have been made in
Medical Board of
Australia v Brown
[2023] VCAT 1075
Medical Board of Australia v
[2022] VCAT 82
Tribunal noted the tension in statutory language and considered whether an order
in such terms was for a ‘specified period’
and concluded that the
statutory language favoured a broad
interpretation.
issue was considered by this Tribunal in
Nursing and Midwifery Board v Tay
[2024] SACAT 9
where the Tribunal stated:
have considered the power of the Tribunal under s 196 of the National Law to
prohibit the respondent from providing any health
service until she gains
re-registration in a health profession. Section 196(4) relevantly
If the tribunal decides to cancel a person’s registration under this Law
or the person does not hold registration under this
Law, the tribunal may also
decide to do one or more of the following-
(a) disqualify the person from applying for registration as a registered health
practitioner for a specified period;
(b) prohibit the person, either permanently or for a stated period, from doing
either or both of the following-
(i) providing any health service or a specified health service;
(ii) using any title or specified title ...
drafting of this sub-section is somewhat curious. Paragraph (a) makes no
reference to a “permanent” disqualification,
strongly suggesting
that such is not contemplated. The District Court of South Australia so held in
Marin v The Chiropractic Board of Australia
). The Court
held that disqualification must be for a “specified” finite period.
There was no challenge to this in the
subsequent appeal to the Full Court of the
Supreme Court.
a prohibition order can clearly be permanent. As pointed out by this Tribunal in
Chinese Medical Board of Australia v Zhou
, a person could be disqualified
for a specified period but prohibited permanently from providing any health
service. After the specified
period has elapsed, the person could apply for
registration but is still prohibited from providing a health service. We
respectfully
suggest that this is an issue on which legislative clarification
would be helpful. The issue does not arise in this case.
second observation concerning sub-section (4) is that paragraph (a) refers to
“a specified period” whilst paragraph
(b) refers to “a stated
period”. Normal principles of interpretation would suggest that these
phrases were intended to
have different meanings.
are aware of cases in which this Tribunal and tribunals in other States have
made orders prohibiting a person from providing a
health service until the
person is able to gain reregistration. However, there are at least two cases in
which the power to make
such an order has been doubted.
Chinese Medicine Board v Zhou
this Tribunal expressed the concern that
the “lack of specificity” of the time period would likely offend
against the
language of the section, leading to the same error as occurred in
Marin. The Tribunal suggested that the prohibition needed to be
for a finite
period and not be of indefinite or open-ended duration.
Victorian Tribunal in
agreed and held that the prohibition
must be for a stated period or permanent.
neither of these cases did the tribunal refer to the difference in wording,
namely “specified period” and “stated
period”, and
discuss the significance of that difference.
issue was considered in detail in
MBA v Piesse
. The Tribunal held that
“a stated period” could be a period which is described with complete
precision, albeit that it
is not stated at that point of time by reference to
exact dates. The Tribunal considered that it had power to prohibit until
registration
was obtained. It considered that this interpretation was more
consistent with the statutory objectives.
agree with the decision in
. The difference in wording strongly
suggests that the period does not have to be “specified” as was the
case with the
disqualification order in
. A period can be
“stated” without specifying exact dates. It can be stated by
reference to a future event, after which
the period will end.
interpretation is more consistent with the objectives of the National Law. It
allows more adequately for the protection of the
public. Otherwise, a person
whose registration was cancelled could (after the prohibition period expired)
provide health services
to the public without ever demonstrating that their
disqualifying characteristics had been addressed. Furthermore, it would be a
strange outcome if a person could not be prohibited under paragraph (b) (ii) of
subsection (4) from using a specified title until
registration was
7 to the National Law contains provisions relating to interpretation. Clause 7
of that schedule provides:
(1) In the interpretation of a provision of this Law, the interpretation that
will best achieve the purpose or object of this Law
is to be preferred to any
other interpretation.
(2) Subclause (1) applies whether or not the purpose is expressly stated in
We consider that the Tribunal is empowered to make the prohibition order as
requested and we do so.
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v TQF
[2021] VCAT 1176
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal in a decision earlier than
The proposed order was expressed to operate ‘until such time as [TFQ] is
once again granted registration as a nurse under the
National Law’. We
consider that language to be too open-ended or indefinite and do not consider
that it meets the requirements
of s 196(4)(b). The prohibition must either be
for a stated period or permanent.
We regard it as appropriate that the prohibition match the period of
disqualification.
debate between the authorities may need to be resolved at some stage in a
superior Court. In this matter we are mindful that there
was no contradictor to
the Board’s position and note that the matter is not free from doubt. We
also note that other decisions
of this Tribunal are not ‘binding’ on
us. Nonetheless it is desirable to have some uniformity of approach. On balance
we are satisfied it is appropriate to make the order in the manner suggested by
the Board, and agree with the submission that the
order, in the terms suggested,
is for a ‘specified period’. It is not the same issue as in
where there was an invalid order making a permanent disqualification where
that was not authorised by the statute.
195 of the National Law empowers the Tribunal to make an order for costs. The
common practice of the Tribunal is to award
costs in respect of professional
disciplinary proceedings brought under the National Law to the successful party.
We consider that
it is appropriate to make an order for costs in favour of the
Orders of the Tribunal
Tribunal decides pursuant to s 196(1) of the National Law
1.a. The respondent has behaved in a way that constitutes
professional misconduct (Ground 1).
1.b. The respondent has behaved in a way that constitutes unprofessional
conduct (Ground 2).
Tribunal imposes the following disciplinary action:
respondent is reprimanded.
2.b. The respondent is disqualified from applying for registration as a
registered health practitioner for a period of 5 years from
the date of this
2.c. The respondent is prohibited from providing any health service as
defined in the National Law until the respondent is re-registered
in a health
profession under the National Law.
respondent must pay the costs of the Board to be agreed or fixed by the
Paragraph amended as per
Tribunal Order issued 4 July 2025.
Paragraph amended as per
Tribunal Order issued 4 July 2025.
Psychology Board of
Australia v Griersmith
[2019] VCAT 52.
Hughes and Vale Pty Ltd v
State of New South Wales (No 2)
[1955] HCA 28
Boyd v Carah Coaches Pty
[1979] HCA 56.
Australian Broadcasting
Tribunal v Bond
[1990] HCA 33.
[2001] SASC 169
at 553-554. See also
New South Wales Bar Association v Evatt
[1968] HCA 20
(1968) 117 CLR 177.
Physiotherapy Board of
Australia v Adey
[2017] SAHPT 3
Pharmacy Board of Australia
[2022] SACAT 111.
This paragraph amended as per
Tribunal Order dated 4 July 2025.
This paragraph amended as per
Tribunal Order dated 4 July 2025.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.4 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter