URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCFC/2024/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:07:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
LEGAL PROFESSION CONDUCT COMMISSIONER v HARRAP [2024] SASCFC 2 (26 July 2024)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Full Court)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
LEGAL PROFESSION CONDUCT COMMISSIONER v HARRAP
[2024] SASCFC 2
Judgment of The Full Court
(ex tempore)
(The Honourable Acting Chief Justice Livesey,
the Honourable Justice Bleby and the Honourable Justice S David)
26 July 2024
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES - LAWYERS - COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE -
DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS - GENERALLY
The Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner sought an order that the name of
the respondent (the practitioner) be struck from the roll
of legal practitioners
maintained by this Court.
The practitioner consented to the application and asked to be excused from
attending the hearing.
Following an ICAC investigation, the practitioner was charged with one count
of conspiracy to improperly exercise power held in public
office whilst a
sitting magistrate, and two counts of deception concerning two traffic
infringements. The conspiracy charge related
to a secret arrangement made with
the solicitor for a party to hear the party’s case and impose an agreed
sanction. The deception
charges related to the protection of the
practitioner’s driver’s licence by putting forward other people as
the drivers
of the practitioner’s car on the days he was detected
In December 2020, the practitioner was sentenced having pleaded guilty. The
sentence was appealed, and the practitioner was re-sentenced
by the Court of
Appeal to a term of imprisonment of 21 months and a non-parole period was fixed
at 12 months, both backdated to when
the practitioner was first taken into
custody. The practitioner has now served his sentence.
Held (the Court) striking the practitioner’s name from the roll of
practitioners:
primary function of disciplinary powers such as strike off are to protect the
public and the administration of justice rather
than merely to punish an
individual practitioner.
are cases where the misconduct by a practitioner is so serious and its capacity
to undermine confidence in the legal profession
so clear, that no order short of
striking off is appropriate notwithstanding what is otherwise a creditable
career of service to
the community.
connection with each charge, the offending involved dishonest conduct by a
sitting magistrate. When the offending is viewed as
a whole, as it must be, the
absence of personal integrity and the disregard for the law are striking. No
sanction short of strike-off
would be appropriate.
order for strike-off must be made in the exercise of this Court’s
supervisory jurisdiction over the legal profession, to
reassure the community
practitioners, especially serving
judicial officers.
Practitioners Act 1981
, referred to.
Einfeld v The Queen
[2010] NSWCCA 87
(2010) 200 A Crim R 1
Law Society of South
Australia v Murphy
[1999] SASC 83
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v
[2012] SASCFC 43
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v
[2021] SASCFC 39
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v
[2022] SASCFC 1
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v
[2023] SASCFC 2
Legal Profession Conduct Commission v
[2024] SASCFC 1
(2021) 138 SASR 569
considered.
LEGAL PROFESSION CONDUCT COMMISSIONER v
[2024] SASCFC 2
Full Court – Civil: Livesey A/CJ, Bleby and David JJA
THE COURT (
Introduction
an originating application dated 16 July 2024 the Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner (the
Commissioner
) seeks an order that the name of the
respondent, Mr Robert Bruce Harrap (the
practitioner
), be struck from the
roll of legal practitioners maintained by this Court.
application is made pursuant to
Legal Practitioners Act
(SA) and pursuant to the Court’s inherent jurisdiction.
application is made with the consent of the practitioner. In correspondence to
the Commissioner dated 13 June 2024, the practitioner
requested that his name be
removed, “effective immediately”. He explained:
wish to make any further submission to the Commissioner as I take full
responsibility for my past actions and consider this
to be the most appropriate
course of action.
It is my submission that this request will result in the finality of the
investigation currently being conducted.
the practitioner consents to this application it is nonetheless necessary for
this Court to independently review the application
and the material produced in
support of it and form its own view. The practitioner asked to be excused from
attending the hearing
today, due to what he described as his mental health
issues. The practitioner was excused from attending today.
the following reasons, the practitioner’s name will be struck from the
Background to the application
commencing legal practice as a solicitor in 1982, the practitioner practiced on
his own account as a criminal lawyer until
he was appointed a magistrate in
2007. He has not held a practising certificate since.
a few years of his appointment, the practitioner was given supervisory
responsibilities as the Regional Manager of the Elizabeth
Magistrates Court. For
most of the remainder of his service as a magistrate, the practitioner held
supervisory positions in charge
of the Criminal Division in the Magistrates
Court at Adelaide, Berri and finally, Christies Beach.
27 July 2020, the practitioner pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy to
improperly exercise power held in public office and
to two counts of deception.
practitioner was sentenced on all matters in the District Court on
4 December 2020. Subsequently, the Director of Public Prosecutions
applied for permission to appeal on the ground that the sentences were
manifestly inadequate. The practitioner applied for permission
to appeal on the
ground that the sentences were manifestly excessive.
respective applications for permission were resolved by the Court of Appeal by a
judgment delivered on 14 April 2021.
practitioner’s application for permission to appeal against the sentences
imposed for the deception offending was granted
and the appeal allowed on the
ground that they were manifestly excessive. The Director’s application for
permission to appeal
those sentences was dismissed.
Director’s application for permission to appeal the conspiracy sentence
was granted and the appeal was allowed on the ground
that it was manifestly
inadequate.
JA (with whom Livesey JA agreed) imposed a final sentence of
21 months’ imprisonment and fixed a non-parole period of
both backdated to when the practitioner was first taken into
The circumstances
of the offending
offending is described in some detail in the reasons of the Chief Justice in the
Court of Appeal.
present purposes, an overview of the offending is sufficient. The conspiracy
represented an arrangement made between the practitioner
and a former domestic
partner, a solicitor Ms Moyse, to list a matter before the practitioner. The
matter concerned an administrative
appeal made by a client of Ms Moyse against
the cancellation and disqualification of the client’s provisional
licence. In a telephone conversation intercepted by the office
of the Independent Commissioner Against Corruption (
practitioner and Ms Moyse discussed the procedure for making the application and
agreed that the practitioner would arrange
to have the matter listed before him.
It was agreed that he would grant the application after giving a stern lecture.
The practitioner
added that, if for any reason he could not hear the
application, he would influence his colleague, another magistrate, to grant the
application.
deception offending concerned traffic infringement notices forwarded to the
practitioner for two speeding offences committed
by him with the use of a car
from the Courts Administration Authority (
) fleet of government
vehicles. The use of the car was allocated as part of the practitioner’s
remuneration as a magistrate.
The practitioner was fearful that the accruing of
demerit points associated with these infringements would result in the loss of
his driver’s licence. Accordingly, he persuaded his domestic partner at
the time, a Sergeant of Police, to allow him to nominate
her as the driver at
the time of the first offence. He then persuaded his magistrate’s clerk to
allow him to nominate her as
the driver at the time of the second offence. He
obtained their licence details and then sent email correspondence nominating
as the drivers of his vehicle on those occasions.
was anticipated, this had the effect of deceiving a business administration
officer of the CAA who swore statutory declarations
which were false.
connection with the ICAC investigation, a statement was obtained from the
practitioner’s magistrate’s clerk and text
messaging between the
practitioner and his domestic partner was obtained.
Court of Appeal viewed the conspiracy charge as more serious than the deception
charges, though all were serious given that they
were committed by a sitting
magistrate. In relation to the offending, the Chief Justice
... The object of
the conspiracy was to have Mr Harrap control the listing ... so that he could
hear it, ostensibly in accordance
with his oath, without favour or partiality,
when in fact the outcome had been scripted in a private conversation between
and Ms Moyse ... It is difficult to conceive of an abuse of
judicial office more serious in the nature of its commission. Only the
character of [the administrative appeal] and the absence of any direct material
benefit flowing to Mr Harrap, operate to deny
the offence being dealt with as
amongst the most serious conspiracies which might be committed by a judicial
officer ...
The deception offences are undoubtedly grave. Mr Harrap hoped to gain a
significant benefit by saving on taxi fares and to avoid
the great personal
inconvenience and restriction on his freedom of movement that the loss of his
licence would cause. Moreover,
his offending entailed deceiving [the business
development officer] into unwittingly swearing false declarations for the
of obstructing the proper application of the statutory demerit point
scheme of the
Motor Vehicles Act 1959
(SA) to Mr Harrap’s
offending. Again, condign punishment was necessary ...
the course of his reasons, Lovell JA explained why the sentencing judge erred in
characterising the deception charges more seriously
than the conspiracy
There is an
obvious distinction between the offending. The deception charges could be
committed by any member of the community. While
the offending is made more
serious by Mr Harrap’s position as a Magistrate, this offending did not
involve the use, or abuse,
of his judicial power. I accept, as observed by
Kourakis CJ, that the offence did involve the influence and trust that Mr Harrap
enjoyed because of his judicial office. However, while he, reprehensibly,
pressured his clerk into assisting him to commit the offence,
the pressure came
from his power over her employment rather than his use or abuse of his judicial
power. The same cannot be said
of the conspiracy charge.
Lovell JA explained his view of the conspiracy
The gravamen
of the offending of Mr Harrap and Ms Moyse is that they entered into a secret
arrangement to fix or rig the outcome of
a judicial proceeding. The fact that
the outcome can be seen, objectively, to have been one that was likely to have
occurred in any
event appears to have distracted counsel and the Sentencing
Judge from correctly characterising the offending. To decide the case
preferring his personal relationship with Ms Moyse rather than obeying his
judicial oath undermined the rule of law. The agreement
between Mr Harrap and Ms
Moyse struck at the very heart of the justice system and their conduct was a
betrayal of their respective
obligations. Undoubtedly their conduct, when
brought to the public’s attention, seriously undermined the
community’s
trust in the justice system.
brief concurring reasons, Livesey JA explained his
circumstances described, the conspiracy offending was more serious than the
deception offending because secret arrangements
between the court and one of the
parties regarding the outcome of litigation necessarily undermines public
confidence in the judiciary
and the administration of justice. In the case of
the deception offending, that they were committed by a Magistrate makes them
serious than if committed by someone who was not expert in the law, sworn
to uphold it. There is, nonetheless, a need to avoid “accentuated
sensitivity” concerning this
These considerations were
not reflected in the sentences imposed on Mr Harrap. The conspiracy sentence
was seriously inadequate
and the deception sentences were excessive. As for the
Freeman deception, this was a second deception offence which depended upon
imbalance of power between a Magistrate and his clerk. Accordingly, it was more
serious than the Foulkes deception. Nonetheless,
as both deception offences
represented a course of conduct designed to protect Mr Harrap’s
driver’s licence, with the
offences committed a few days apart, there was
obvious scope for concurrency.
practitioner has now served his sentence of imprisonment.
determination of the Commissioner’s application
this case, it is the nature of the offending which was punished, as explained by
the Court of Appeal, that furnishes the basis
for this Court to determine
whether it is necessary to make an order striking the practitioner’s name
from the roll.
may be accepted that, but for this offending, the practitioner was otherwise of
good character and made significant contributions
to the community. In the
course of his sentencing hearing there was a large number of character
references, including two from retired
magistrates. The practitioner was
described as an effective court manager and he enjoyed good working
relationships with other magistrates,
court staff and lawyers. Many attested to
the high regard and confidence in which the practitioner was held.
are cases where the misconduct by a practitioner is so serious and its capacity
to undermine confidence in the legal profession
so clear, that no order short of
striking-off is appropriate notwithstanding what is otherwise a creditable
career of service to
Disciplinary
powers such as strike-off are exercised so as to protect the public and the
administration of justice, rather than merely
to punish an individual
practitioner. As was recently
necessary to protect the public from legal practitioners who lack personal
integrity and who are indifferent to rudimentary
professional
It follows that
because the Court is acting in the public interest and not with a view to
punishment, the personal circumstances
of and any extenuating circumstances
relating to a practitioner are of less importance than if punishment was the
only objective.
important purpose of making orders in the exercise of this Court’s
disciplinary jurisdiction is to publicly deter others
from engaging in similar
misconduct. Associated purposes include the need to maintain professional
standards and to preserve public
confidence in the legal profession.
is evident from the reasons of the Court of Appeal that the criminal wrongdoing
of the practitioner represented very stark and
serious failures to adhere to the
standards the community reasonably expects of legal practitioners, particularly
judicial officers.
In connection with each charge,
the offending involved dishonest conduct by a sitting magistrate. When the
offending is viewed as
a whole, as it must be, the absence of personal integrity
and the disregard for the law are striking. No sanction short of strike-off
would be appropriate.
the practitioner no longer holds a practising certificate, for so long as his
name remains on the roll he is effectively being
held out by this Court as fit
to practise the profession of the
follows that the order for strike-off must be made in the exercise of this
Court’s supervisory jurisdiction over the legal
profession, to reassure
the community about the standards of conduct and propriety the Court expects
from legal practitioners, especially
serving judicial officers.
practitioner’s name will be struck from the roll of legal practitioners
held by this Court.
, [15]-[16].
, [115] (Lovell JA).
, [131] (Lovell JA).
, [145] (Livesey JA).
Einfeld v The Queen
[2010] NSWCCA 87
(2010) 200 A Crim R 1
, [80]-[83] (Basten JA): that is, just as it is necessary
to avoid the perception that “members of the legal profession ...
their own”, it is necessary to avoid dealing “more harshly than ...
appropriate with those from within their
own ranks who transgress”.
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Mancini
[2022] SASCFC 1
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v O’Bryan
[2023] SASCFC 2.
Legal Profession Conduct
Commission v Radin
[2024] SASCFC 1
, [109] (Livesey P, Bleby and
David JJA).
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Clisby
[2012] SASCFC 43
Law Society of South
Australia v Murphy
[1999] SASC 83
, [30] (Doyle CJ);
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Clisby
[2012] SASCFC 43
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Kaminski
[2021] SASCFC 39
, [12] (Livesey P, Bleby and David
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v Radin
[2024] SASCFC 1
[115] (Livesey P, Bleby and David JJA).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (343 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter