URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASC/2025/171.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:05:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
FLEMING v FLINDERS UNIVERSITY [2025] SASC 171 (15 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
FLEMING v FLINDERS UNIVERSITY
[2025] SASC 171
Judgment of the Honourable
Justice Gray
15 October 2025
TORTS - NEGLIGENCE - STANDARD OF CARE, SCOPE OF DUTY AND SUBSEQUENT
STATUTES - ACTS OF PARLIAMENT - ENFORCEMENT OF STATUTORY RIGHTS AND
REMEDIES - BREACH OF STATUTORY DUTY
EDUCATION - INSTITUTIONS - UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY
INSTITUTIONS
The applicant, Ms Fleming, claims in negligence that the respondent, Flinders
University, breached its duty of care, and that the
respondent breached its
statutory duty of care. The applicant contends that the respondent is
vicariously liable for the actions
of its staff.
Ultimately, the applicant’s claim seeks to place herself in the
position she held as an undergraduate with a granted extension
to meet the final
requirements of her bachelor’s degree.
Six separate incidents were the subject of factual disputes, being:
1. The events of the first mentor meeting on 23 March 2018;
2. The events at the lecture theatre on 23 March 2018;
3. The events of the second mentor meeting on 6 April 2018;
4. The events at the lecture theatre on 4 May 2018;
extent to which appeals were instituted and pursued concerning decisions by the
respondent concerning the applicant; and,
extent to which staff of the respondent were acting recklessly or in concert to
adduce a consequence of the applicant being excluded
from completing all of the
required topics to graduate with a Bachelor of Laws and Legal Practice degree.
The applicant contended that she had not done anything wrong during either
the mentor meetings or the lectures. She further contended
that she had
exhausted her appeal rights regarding the allocation of the fail grade.
The respondent claimed it had not breached any duty to Ms Fleming and no
relevant duty was properly pleaded. The University claimed
Ms Fleming had not
suffered any relevant loss as a consequence of any alleged breach of duty, and
Ms Fleming had not established
any particular act or omission giving rise to
identifiable loss or damage.
Held, dismissing the applicant’s claim:
evidence of the applicant in relation to the factual issues in dispute is
rejected. Factual findings are made accepting the version
of events given at
trial by the respondent’s witnesses: at [71], [79]-[81], [92]-[93],
[115]-[117], [123]-[124] and [159];
cause of action is established in the tort of negligence. No particular act or
omission is established on the evidence to support
such a cause of action, and
no identified act or omission is linked to identifiable loss or damage: at
applicant has not on the facts of this case established a statutory duty arising
pursuant to
Flinders University Act 1966
(SA) or pursuant to
University Statute 6.4 and a breach of that duty giving rise to any identifiable
loss or damage: at [191]-[192];
4. No basis for the remedies
sought has been established by the applicant: at [198].
Flinders University Act 1966
Liability Act 1936
, referred to.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation v Lenah Game Meats Pty Ltd
(2001) 208 CLR 199
Byrne v Australian Airlines Ltd
24; (1995) 185 CLR 410;
CGU Insurance Limited v Blakeley
[2016] HCA 2
(2016) 259 CLR 339
Cole v South Tweed Heads Rugby League Football Club Ltd
[2004] HCA 29
(2004) 217 CLR 469
Darling Island Stevedoring &
Lighterage Co Ltd v Long
[1957] HCA 26
(1957) 97 CLR 36
[1971] HCA 45
(1971) 126 CLR 61
Edwards v Santos Ltd
[2011] HCA 8
(2011) 242 CLR 421
Graham Barclay Oysters Pty Ltd v Ryan
[2002] HCA 54
(2002) 211 CLR 540
Griffith University v Tang
(2005) 221 CLR 99
Jackson v Sterling Industries Ltd
(1987) 162 CLR 612
Neindorf v Junkovic
[2005] HCA 75
(2005) 80 ALJR
O’Connor v SP Bray Ltd
[1937] HCA 18
(1937) 56 CLR 464
Tame v New South Wales; Annetts & Anor v Australian Stations Pty Ltd
[2002] HCA 35
(2002) 211 CLR 317
Waugh v Kippen
[1986] HCA 12
(1986) 160 CLR 156
Wyong Shire Council v Shirt
[1980] HCA 12
X (Minors) v Bedfordshire County Council
[1005] 2 AC 633,
considered.
FLEMING v FLINDERS UNIVERSITY
[2025] SASC
Civil: Claim – Tort, Equity
Introduction
matter concerns events that occurred in 2018 whilst Ms Kim Fleming, the
applicant, was undertaking a Bachelor of Laws and Legal
Practice degree at
Flinders University, the respondent (“the University”). The events
included an incident on 4 May
2018 which resulted in police attending the
University’s Victoria Square campus and escorting Ms Fleming from the
Fleming claims in negligence that the University breached the duty of care that
the University owed to her. Ms Fleming also claims
that the University breached
an applicable statutory duty of
Ms Fleming contends that the
University is vicariously liable for the actions of the staff of the University.
Fleming did not allege that there was a failure by the University to follow its
policies or procedures. Ms Fleming expressly
stated that she did not seek any
form of administrative review of the University’s
Ms Fleming’s case was that certain University staff were reckless in
the actions that they took against her, and the
University is vicariously liable
for the actions of its staff.
Fleming claimed to have been individually harmed by University staff and that
the identified staff acted in concert to harm
Ms Fleming frames her case as
being that the manner in which the University implemented its policies and
procedures, through the
actions of certain staff members, was reckless,
resulting in the University breaching its duty of care.
University claims that it has not breached any duty to Ms Fleming and no
relevant duty is properly pleaded in these
proceedings.
Further, the
University claims that Ms Fleming has not suffered any relevant loss as a
consequence of any alleged breach of duty
by the University so as to establish
any cause of action.
University’s position is that Ms Fleming did not establish that any
particular act or omission was the basis of her cause
of action in negligence
and Ms Fleming did not link any such act or omission to any identifiable
loss or damage.
The University
denies any breach of a statutory duty of care.
Fleming completed a Bachelor of International Studies Degree on
30 October 2017. She also successfully completed all topics to
graduate with a Bachelor of Laws
Ms Fleming did not
however, complete the required topics to graduate with a Bachelor of Laws
Legal Practice
degree. The outstanding topics that needed to be completed
as at 2018 were LLAW7001 (Practical Legal Training: Legal Practice Management)
and LLAW7002 (Practical Legal Training: Transactional Legal
matters set out below detail, in chronological form, matters that were
considered in the course of the trial concerning Ms Fleming’s
These matters emerge largely from documents which were tendered at trial. The
occurrence of the events to which the documents
refer were largely undisputed at
trial. What is in dispute is the details of the events that occurred and the
reasons for those
events occurring. I address separately, later in this
judgment, by reference to the witness evidence the factual findings I make
respect of disputed aspects of the evidence.
was not in dispute at trial that it was a requirement of the University that, in
the absence of an extension being granted, the
degree in which Ms Fleming was
enrolled was required to be completed within 10 years. On 15 December 2017, Ms
Fleming was granted
an extension beyond the 10-year limit to complete the
Bachelor of Laws and Legal Practice degree. The extension was granted until
end of semester 2 of 2018.
would have provided Ms Fleming with the opportunity to complete LLAW7001
and LLAW7002. Following successful completion of those
two components, Ms
Fleming would then have been eligible to graduate from the University with a
Bachelor of Laws and Legal Practice
semester 1 of 2018, Ms Fleming enrolled in the LLAW7002 topic. The topic
included an optional engagement in a mentoring program
which involved students
being assigned into small groups and being allocated a mentor who was a member
of the legal profession (“the
Mentor Program”). The mentor’s
role included meeting with the group on a regular basis during the topic and
general guidance to the students in a group
environment.
Ms Fleming was
assigned to mentor group 13 (“the Mentor Group”).
23 March 2018, Ms Fleming attended her first mentor meeting session at a
café located in Victoria Square (“the first
mentor meeting”).
Following the first mentor meeting Ms Fleming attended a lecture in the LLAW7002
topic concerning succession
law which was presented by Ms Vanessa Varga. There
is a factual dispute about what occurred at both the first mentor meeting and
the lecture on 23 March 2018. I address these events later in my
assessment of the evidence.
following week on 27 March 2018, Ms Fleming sent an email to Dr Michael
McNamara, Lecturer in Law and Legal Practice at the University
outlining a
series of concerns that she had in relation to the first mentor meeting. On the
same day, Dr McNamara responded to Ms
Fleming stating that he had forwarded her
email to Ms Melissa Huish, the then Acting Director of Professional
6 April 2018, the Mentor Group met once again at a cafe in Victoria Square
(“the second mentor meeting”). There is
a factual dispute about
what occurred at the second mentor meeting, and I address that factual dispute
later in my assessment of
the evidence.
6 April 2018, Ms Fleming sent an email to the Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Students)
of the University, Ms Clare Pollock. Ms Fleming
raised concerns about the
Mentor Program. In the course of that correspondence, she indicated that she
felt she had been “harassed
and bullied by educators and ...
students” at the University. Ms Fleming requested an appointment
with the Deputy Vice‑Chancellor
(Students).
7 April 2018, Ms Fleming sent a further email to the Deputy
Vice‑Chancellor (Students) again raising her concerns and requesting
response. In Ms Fleming’s view, she said that her mentor was an
“unstable and potentially dangerous
the same day, Ms Fleming also sent an email directly to the mentor raising her
concerns about the Mentor Group.
The mentor responded on the same day stating that Ms Fleming’s email would
be forwarded to Ms Huish.
occurred and Ms Huish then forwarded the email to Professor Mary Heath, Dean of
Education, College of Business, Government
& Law of the
University.
12 April 2018, Ms Fleming emailed Ms Huish raising her concerns about the second
mentor meeting.
Ms Fleming said
that she was concerned for her safety with attending the remaining three mentor
meetings. She also stated that
she had not yet received a response from Ms
Huish regarding her previous concerns. Ms Huish replied on the same day
stating that
she was away but could arrange a time to speak on the following
24 April 2018, Ms Fleming sent an email in response to an email that she had
received from Professor Heath. Ms Fleming’s
email outlined a series of
questions in relation to her ongoing involvement with the Mentor Program and the
effect of a potential
exclusion from the Mentor Program on her progress in the
26 April 2018, Professor Heath responded to Ms Fleming acknowledging her
concerns. In relation to Ms Fleming’s queries
the Mentor Program, Professor Heath advised that Ms Huish would be in contact.
Professor Heath stated that
she had not decided to exclude Ms Fleming from the
Mentor Program.
were two emails sent on 3 May 2018 by Ms Huish to Ms
3 May 2018, at around 2:23 pm Ms Huish sent an email to Ms Fleming confirming
that the mentor group of which she had been a
had been disbanded and Ms
Fleming would not be re-allocated to another mentor group at that time. The
email gave notice to Ms Fleming
that under the University’s
Work‑Integrated Learning Procedure
a decision had been made to
withdraw Ms Fleming from participation in the Mentor Program for the
remainder of the LLAW7002 2018 course.
email went on to state that the decision to withdraw Ms Fleming from
participation in the Mentor Program had been made based
on reports that had been
received about Ms Fleming’s behaviour during the Mentor Group meetings
held on 23 March 2018 and 6
The email records that
the reports had raised concerns about Ms Fleming’s behaviour, which was
described as aggressive, discourteous,
unprofessional and outside the acceptable
boundaries of professional behaviour.
email also stated that the withdrawal from the Mentor Program did not prevent Ms
Fleming from satisfactorily completing the LLAW7002
topic. The email noted that
there was a statement of assessment methods for the LLAW7002 topic and this,
, included a requirement not to lose all five stars in the
professional scheme (“the 5 Star Professional Assessment Scheme”).
The email noted that the 5 Star Professional Assessment Scheme allowed for
ongoing assessment of professional behaviour, and that
all students would be
written to that day concerning their progress in the 5 Star Professional
Assessment Scheme as part of a mid-semester
review. Evidence at the trial
indicated that to successfully complete the LLAW7002 subject, students were
required not to lose all
email noted that if Ms Fleming sought to review the decision to withdraw her
from the Mentor Program or the decision not to reallocate
her to another mentor
or to another mentor group, she was advised to contact the Dean of Education,
College of Business, Government
around 3:37 pm on 3 May 2018, a second email was sent by Ms Huish to Ms Fleming
informing Ms Fleming that the outcome of the 5
Star Professional Assessment
Scheme review was that she had lost a total of four stars. The email indicated
that three stars were
lost as a consequence of Ms Fleming’s behaviour at
the second mentor meeting. Ms Fleming’s behaviour was described in
email as being rude, discourteous and disrespectful to a fellow student and to
the mentor, being a member of the legal profession.
Ms Fleming’s
behaviour was also described in the email as diminishing the reputation of the
University, Flinders Law and her
fellow students, and bringing the reputation of
the University, Flinders Law and her fellow students into disrepute through her
in a public place. The email also indicated that one star was lost for
inappropriate comments made by Ms Fleming about drug use
by legal practitioners
during class on 23 March 2018, which comments were described in the email
as bringing the legal profession
4 May 2018, Ms Fleming attended a lecture as part of the LLAW7002 course. There
is a factual dispute about what occurred in the
lecture theatre that day. It is
however not in dispute that police attended and escorted Ms Fleming from the
lecture theatre. I
address separately later in this judgment the factual
findings that I make concerning what occurred in the lecture theatre on
4 May 2018, a letter was sent from the Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Students) to
Ms Fleming.
stated that Ms Fleming had been reported to have behaved inappropriately and
aggressively towards a law faculty staff
member and another student in front of
a class that was held that morning. It stated that Ms Fleming refused to follow
a direction
from a staff member and security to leave the University premises.
As a result, the police were called, and Ms Fleming was removed
premises. The Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Students) determined as a consequence
that it was appropriate for Ms Fleming to be
suspended from the University for a
period of 28 days.
the period of suspension, there would be an investigation into
Ms Fleming’s behaviour. If Ms Fleming had any queries
letter, she was advised to contact Mr Robert Houghton, Senior Student
Policy and Integrity Advisor. Mr Houghton was appointed
by the Deputy
Vice-Chancellor (Students) to conduct the investigation.
8 May 2018, Ms Fleming sent an email to Professor Heath asking how she was to
complete the LLAW7002 topic whilst under the 28-day
suspension.
Professor Heath responded on the same day stating that she appreciates
Ms Fleming’s concerns and took them seriously. She
said that Ms
Fleming’s email would be referred to the Office of the Deputy
Vice-Chancellor (Students).
Later that morning, Ms Fleming also sent an email to Ms Huish querying how she
was to complete the compulsory topic during her
suspension.
letter dated 9 May 2018, Ms Fleming replied to the suspension letter dated
4 May 2018.
acknowledged the events that had transpired at the University on 4 May 2018 and
requested an appointment with the Deputy
Vice‑Chancellor (Students) to
discuss her studies and how she could return to the University.
9 May 2018, Mr Robert Houghton, Senior Student Policy and Integrity Advisor
wrote on behalf of the University to Ms
Mr Houghton’s
correspondence, inter alia,
have been awarded a Fail (F) grade for the topic LLAW7002, and given that this
topic is not offered in Semester Two 2018, you
will not be in a position to pass
your last two topics for the Bachelor of Laws and Legal Practice within the time
frame of your
extension. In this context, you may wish to consider the option of
exiting from the Bachelor of Laws and Legal Practice with the
Bachelor of Laws
degree. You may then consider the option of undertaking Practical Legal Training
with another provider.
10 May 2018, Ms Fleming sent an email to Professor
That email, amongst
other things advised that Ms Fleming regretted not leaving the premises on 4 May
2018, as that matter had impacted
her studies
Amongst other things,
Ms Fleming raised that it was her intention to pursue an investigation within,
or external to the University,
as Ms Fleming alleged that what had happened at
the University to her during the course of her studies was not acceptable. Ms
advised of her wish to appeal the grade and sought advice as a matter of
urgency as there was only four weeks left before the end
of the course which was
described as being a 9-unit Practical Legal Training
Heath replied on 10 May 2018, indicating that she would attend to the matter as
soon as she was able to do so.
Professor Heath then wrote again on 14 May
asking Ms Fleming to state
her grounds of appeal.
11 May 2018, Mr Houghton replied to Ms Fleming’s letter dated
9 May 2018 which was sent to the Deputy Vice-Chancellor
(Students).
Mr Houghton
confirmed that he had been appointed to undertake a preliminary investigation
into the incident that had occurred at
the University on 4 May 2018. Mr
Houghton indicated that he would be conducting interviews with relevant persons
in relation to
the matters and would interview Ms
Fleming replied to Mr Houghton’s email raising a number of questions in
relation to the decision for her to be suspended
and removed from the LLAW7002
15 May 2018, Professor Heath responded to Ms Fleming’s
She stated that Mr
Houghton would respond to Ms Fleming regarding her questions about the
suspension. Professor Heath also responded
to Ms Fleming’s questions about
the LLAW7002 topic. She also outlined the procedure to request a review of the
on 15 May 2018, Mr Houghton sent an email to Ms Fleming making it clear that the
investigation into the events that had transpired
on 4 May 2018 and Ms
Fleming’s grade for the topic of LLAW7002 were two distinct matters.
Mr Houghton then outlined the situation
regarding the
suspension.
24 May 2018 Ms Fleming requested a 10-day extension to lodge an appeal
concerning her fail grade.
25 May 2018, Professor Heath sought confirmation that Ms Fleming sought 10
working days until 21 June 2018.
On 28 May 2018, Ms Fleming asked further questions of Professor Heath concerning
the appeal.
29 May 2018, Professor Heath granted the extension until
21 June 2018.
20 June 2018, Ms Fleming appealed against her final
On 26 June 2018, the
appeal was refused and Ms Fleming was advised that she could submit a written
complaint to the Deputy Vice-Chancellor
(Students) under
section 6.7
Student Appeals and Complaints
The reasons for the
refusal referred to the loss of five stars by Ms Fleming in the LLAW7002 topic.
Part of the requirements of
that topic was that a student not lose all five
professional stars.
was notified by Ms Huish on 3 May 2018 that she had lost four
The letter of 26 June
2018 records that Professor Heath notified Ms Fleming of the loss of the fifth
and final star as a consequence
of her conduct on 4 May 2018. As indicated
above, Mr Houghton notified Ms Fleming of her fail grade on 9 May 2018.
The fail grade
was awarded due to the loss of all five stars. The course
requirements as indicated above stipulated that a student who lost all
stars would be afforded a fail grade.
is a factual dispute about whether a written complaint to the Deputy
Vice-Chancellor (Students) under
of the Student Appeals and Complaints
Policy was instituted. I address this issue later in my assessment of the
30 May 2018, the Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Students), Ms Pollock advised
Ms Fleming that the suspension had been extended for a
further 14 days
(i.e., until midnight on 15 June 2018) to enable Mr Houghton to
complete his investigation and provide a report on
That correspondence
reiterated the University’s position that Ms Fleming was not permitted
access to the University’s
letter dated 13 June 2018
from Ms Pollock, Ms Fleming received a formal warning and under clause
Policy and Procedures for Handling a Matter under Statute
6.4: Student Conduct
Under that policy, following investigation of a complaint, the Deputy
Vice-Chancellor (Students) could take one of a number of
actions including,
, finding no case to answer, or finding a prima facie case of
misconduct and referring the matter for hearing before a Board of Inquiry.
Pursuant to the
Policy and Procedures for Handling a Matter under Statute
6.4: Student Conduct
the outcome of a Board of Inquiry could include
expulsion or suspension from the
University.
issuing of a formal warning was an option available to the Deputy
Vice‑Chancellor (Students) pursuant to clause 5.5(c)
Procedures for Handling a Matter under Statute 6.4: Student
That clause
provided that the Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Students)
determine that
there is a prima facie case of misconduct, but that the actions of the student
do not warrant referral to a Board of
Inquiry. In this case, the Deputy
Vice-Chancellor (Students) will issue a formal warning to the student to
discontinue the alleged
misconduct and inform the student of any actions the
University may take in the event of any further occurrence of the alleged
misconduct.
the letter dated 13 June 2018, the formal warning directed Ms Fleming’s
attention to clause 3 of Statute 6.4. Clause 3 of
Statute 6.4
must respect the rights and welfare of other persons who use the University, and
the reasonable freedom of such other persons
to pursue their studies, research,
duties or activities. A student will not wilfully damage or use without
authority the property
of the University and will ensure that his or her conduct
does not infringe the rights of other members of the University.
Fleming was advised to ensure that, in the future, she respect the rights of
staff and other students of the University, including
by using respectful
language. She was instructed to desist from shouting and to be respectful and
follow any instructions from University
Ms Fleming was
reminded that in the event of any further occurrences of inappropriate
behaviour, she would be immediately suspended
from classes and referred for
formal investigation by a Board of Inquiry. Ms Fleming’s temporary
suspension from the University
ceased from the date of the decision.
or around 30 August 2018, Ms Fleming made an application for a further extension
to the 10-year rule, given that, as noted above,
in 2018, Ms Fleming was
completing her degree pursuant to a one-year extension that she had been granted
on 15 December 2017.
documents indicate that by letter dated 21 September 2018 Ms
Fleming’s application for a further extension of the 10‑year
was refused.
appealed against that decision to the Student Appeals Committee and she was
advised on 16 July 2020 that that appeal
unsuccessful.
above matters appear from the documents adduced at trial, many of which were put
forward by the applicant as part of her case.
As indicated above, the
authenticity of these documents are not in dispute and the documents speak for
themselves as to the chronology
of events. No party challenged that the
documents accurately represent the correspondence that was sent. I make factual
that such correspondence was exchanged and that the correspondence
accurately records the dates on which events occurred.
were however as I have indicated, a number of factual issues in dispute between
the parties, and the witnesses called in this
matter gave varying accounts of
events that occurred at the University relevant to the complaints that Ms
Fleming advances. What
is in dispute is whether what is recorded in the
documents accurately describes what occurred. So, whilst I make factual
as to the chronology of events set out above and as to the
correspondence that was sent, and in respect of the non-contentious matters
out above, I address separately below the evidence given at trial concerning the
factual issues in dispute.
I explain in my assessment of the evidence, Ms Fleming’s version of
various events differed from the accounts given by the
witnesses called by the
University.
Evidence at trial
to considering the factual issues in dispute I make the following preliminary
observations concerning the evidence of the witnesses.
I also note that the
civil standard of proof on the balance of probabilities applies and that is the
standard I apply in making
factual findings. Ms Fleming bears the onus of proof
in establishing her claim.
Ms Kim Fleming
Fleming gave evidence at trial. She did so in part by adopting her written
witness statements and in part by oral
Ms Fleming’s
oral evidence concerned, amongst other matters; the first mentor meeting, the
events in the lecture theatre of
23 March 2018, and the second mentor meeting.
For the reasons explained further below I do not accept the version of events
Ms Fleming gave in respect of these three events. Ms Fleming’s
evidence differed markedly from that given by other witnesses
called by the
University.
Fleming also gave evidence concerning the events in the lecture theatre on 4 May
2018. Her oral evidence about what occurred
on that day was inconsistent with a
number of other witnesses’ accounts. Ms Fleming’s evidence was to
the effect that
she did not do anything wrong, and she was unaware that she had
done anything wrong.
evidence is difficult to accept. It is inconsistent with the other evidence
given by Ms Fleming in which she admitted that
she refused to leave the premises
even when she was informed by a security officer that police would be
have addressed below, in relation to each event, the reasons for rejecting
Ms Fleming’s version of the events described above.
I also have had
cause to scrutinise carefully Ms Fleming’s evidence, because her evidence
across numerous different events
differed from that presented by other
witnesses. I find on balance that it is unlikely that a number of other
witnesses would be
independently lying about such a number of different events.
relation to the topic of the extent to which appeals were instituted, and the
case advanced that members of the University staff
were acting recklessly or in
concert to achieve a consequence of Ms Fleming being excluded from completing a
Bachelor of Laws and
Legal Practice degree, Ms Fleming claimed at various
times that the documents supported her version of events. The documents upon
which Ms Fleming relied to corroborate her perspective were either not produced
by Ms Fleming,
or the documents
which Ms Fleming pointed to simply did not support the inference that Ms Fleming
sought to draw from them.
find that Ms Fleming was not a witness of truth and that she held a false and
distorted perception of events. Ms Fleming’s
version of events appeared to
be based upon her perspective that she was a victim of actions that were
undertaken without regard
to the harm of such actions upon her. In contrast,
other witnesses largely saw Ms Fleming as being the aggressor in verbal
in the University setting, with University staff acting in accordance
with policies and procedures to address this behaviour.
Melissa Huish
Melissa Huish was the Acting Director of Professional Programs and topic
co-ordinator for the LLAW7002 program in which Ms Fleming
was enrolled. Ms
Huish had significant involvement with Ms Fleming’s engagement in the
Mentor Program. Ms Huish was also
present on 4 May 2018 when Ms Fleming was
removed from the lecture theatre by police. Ms Huish was involved in both the
of the five stars from Ms Fleming during the course of her enrolment in
the LLAW7002 program and in the subsequent decision to accord
Ms Fleming a fail
grade for that subject.
Huish was cross-examined at length by Ms Fleming. Ms Huish presented as a
witness who was very detail-orientated and was very
fixed and rigid in her
evidence. Ms Huish answered most questions put to her at length and by
repeating the evidence that she gave
in evidence-in-chief in her written
statement. Ms Huish at times expressed her opinion about the question being
asked of her, even
when objection was not being taken, by the respondent’s
counsel. These matters contributed in some way to the length of time
Ms Huish’s evidence to be completed. Ms Huish was at some points
emotional in the evidence she gave, and it was
clear that she was significantly
impacted by her interactions with Ms Fleming. I take all these matters
into account in assessing
Ms Huish’s evidence. In my view, these matters
do not affect the veracity of the evidence that Ms Huish gave, and I find Ms
Huish to be a witness of truth. Where Ms Huish’s evidence differed
from the account given by Ms Fleming, as indicated below,
I prefer the version
of events given by Ms Huish. Her evidence for the reasons I outline below was
largely corroborated by other
witnesses, including a number of independent
student witnesses.
Ms Despina Anagnostou
Despina Anagnostou was a legal practitioner assigned as a mentor to the Mentor
Group. Ms Anagnostou gave evidence about both
the first mentor meeting and the
second mentor meeting. Her evidence was considered and detailed.
Ms Anagnostou in her answers to
questions and under cross-examination
exhibited a genuine concern for her students and a genuine desire to assist in
the Mentor Program
and to ensure that the students had a positive experience as
part of their involvement in that program. For the reasons outlined
find Ms Anagnostou to be a truthful witness, and I accept her
Mr Robert Houghton
Robert Houghton gave evidence primarily concerning the investigation that he was
appointed by Ms Pollock to conduct into Ms Fleming’s
conduct on 4 May
2018. In 2018, Mr Houghton was the Senior Student Policy and Integrity Advisor.
His role involved the conducting
of investigations concerning alleged student
misconduct and his evidence is relevant to the allegation that various members
University were “acting in concert” with a view to excluding
Ms Fleming from completing the degree for which she enrolled.
Mr Houghton’s evidence in this context below. For the reasons
outlined below, I find Mr Houghton to be a truthful
Mr Thomas Hill
Thomas Hill was a law student who was part of the Mentor Group, of which
Ms Anagnostou was the mentor. Mr Hill gave evidence concerning
involvement in the first mentor meeting and the second mentor meeting. Whilst
Mr Hill could not recall the exact detail of conversations
that were had during
the course of the mentor meetings, the effect of his evidence was that he did
not recall Ms Anagnostou’s
conduct or behaviour being inappropriate, nor
did he feel uncomfortable during the course of the first mentor meeting.
Hill presented in a very straightforward manner. Mr Hill was clearly doing his
best to give his evidence to the best of his recollection.
Mr Hill’s evidence was corroborative of Ms Anagnostou’s version
of events and did not support the version
of events given by Ms Fleming. It was
clear that Ms Fleming’s behaviour whilst observed by Mr Hill did not
impact him greatly.
I make no criticism of Mr Hill’s lack of recall of
events. The events occurred some six years ago, and did not, on his evidence,
have a significant impact upon him. As a consequence of the fact that Mr
Hill’s recollection of events was less detailed than
the recollection of
other witnesses, I place less weight upon his evidence. Mr Hill presented
as a witness of truth.
Professor Mary Heath
2018, Professor Mary Heath was a Professor of Law and the Dean of Education for
the College of Business, Government and Law at
the University. Professor Heath
was a careful witness who expressed genuine compassion and concern for Ms
Fleming’s well‑being
in relation to the decisions she made and the
actions she took in her role of Dean of Education. I address Professor
evidence below. Professor Heath’s evidence is primarily
relevant to the factual issues in dispute concerning whether Ms Fleming
to appeal her fail grade and whether Professor Heath acted together with other
staff of the University “in concert”
with a view to having Ms
Fleming excluded from the degree in which she had enrolled. I find Professor
Heath to be a witness of truth.
Ms Clare Pollock
2018, Ms Clare Pollock was the Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Students) at the
University. Ms Pollock gave evidence primarily concerning
her involvement in
the investigation concerning Ms Fleming’s conduct that resulted in Ms
Fleming being escorted from the lecture
theatre on 4 May 2018. Ms
Pollock’s evidence is relevant to the factual issue in dispute between the
parties concerning whether
certain University staff were acting “in
concert” to ensure that Ms Fleming was prevented from completing the
in which she was enrolled in 2018 and is dealt with in that context
below. Ms Pollock was a truthful witness.
2018, Ms Tania Leiman was the Deputy Dean of Law at the University. Ms Leiman
gave evidence concerning her involvement with decisions
made in respect of the
incidents involving Ms Fleming. This evidence concerned both the incidents
arising related to the Mentor
Program and the 4 May 2018 incident.
Ms Leiman also gave evidence concerning her understanding of the 5 Star
Professional Assessment
Scheme and the nature of the law course offered at the
University. The effect of Ms Leiman’s evidence was that the University
longer offers a combined Bachelor of Laws and Legal Practice degree and that
students undertaking the current law degree at Flinders
University which is
entitled Bachelor of Laws Legal Practice Entry Degree are required on completion
of that degree to undertake
further studies to complete any Practical Legal
Training requirements. Ms Leiman was not cross-examined about the evidence
she gave concerning the legal practice degrees that are offered, and this
is relevant to the nature of the relief that Ms Fleming
seeks in these
proceedings.
Ms Leimann’s evidence.
Ms Alexandra
Douvartzidis
Alexandra Douvartzidis gave evidence in a clear, concise and upfront manner. Ms
Douvartzidis was clear about those matters she
did recall and those she did not.
Ms Douvartzidis gave detailed evidence about the events at the lecture on 23
March 2018, which
is referred to below, as well as more brief evidence
concerning the incident that occurred on 4 May 2018. Ms Douvartzidis was a
truthful witness.
Mr Thomas McCourt
Thomas McCourt was upfront about what he could recall and could not recall. His
evidence primarily concerned the lecture on 23
March 2018 and the incident on
4 May 2018. I have considered the evidence about the 4 May 2018 incident in
my assessment below.
I accept Mr McCourt’s
Other student witnesses, Mr Anthony Stoks and Ms
Meghan Fitzpatrick
Anthony Stoks and Ms Meghan Fitzpatrick gave evidence concerning the
4 May 2018 incident and I address the evidence of these witnesses
that context below.
Factual issues in dispute
are six significant factual matters about which oral evidence was given, with
each of those matters having vastly differing
versions of events given in
evidence. These matters are:
events of the first mentor meeting;
events at the lecture on 23 March 2018 which followed the first mentor
events at the second mentor meeting;
events in the lecture theatre on 4 May 2018;
extent to which appeals were instituted and pursued concerning decisions made by
the University concerning Ms Fleming; and,
extent to which University staff were acting recklessly or in concert to adduce
a consequence of Ms Fleming being excluded from
completing all of the required
topics to graduate with a Bachelor of Laws and Legal Practice
Events of the first mentor
evidence of Ms Fleming concerning the first mentor meeting was that Ms
Anagnostou “went on a tirade for an hour using
expletives”,
and that the
events constituted “a public display that was offensive, loud and
indicated that the words, “fuck” and “fuckhead” had been
used 13 times over 45 minutes, and that
Ms Fleming considered that to be
were some inconsistencies in Ms Fleming’s evidence about what was said
during the course of the first mentor meeting.
In particular, there were
inconsistencies in the evidence that Ms Fleming gave concerning the words that
were used. Initially,
Ms Fleming said Ms Anagnostou used the words
“fucking fuckwits”, “fucking fuckheads” and
“fuckheads”.
Fleming clarified in cross‑examination that it was only the words
“fuck” and “fuckhead” that were
effect of Ms Anagnostou’s evidence was that during the first mentor
meeting, Ms Fleming did not pay attention or seem attentive
to other people when
they were speaking and would often interrupt or speak over others.
Ms Anagnostou noted that Ms Fleming’s
personality was
“prickly” particularly towards Ms Anagnostou. Ms Fleming was said
to be standoffish, confrontational
and did not appear to be receptive to the
matters discussed by Ms Anagnostou or any other members of the mentor
Ms Anagnostou
indicated that she formed the view from the beginning of the first mentor
meeting that Ms Fleming did not appear to
have any respect for
Ms Anagnostou as a mentor or as a solicitor. Ms Anagnostou also observed
that Ms Fleming lacked self‑awareness
and demonstrated a lack of concern
for the effect of her interruptions and manner upon the other members of the
mentor group.
Anagnostou denied the allegations that Ms Fleming made about what occurred at
the first mentor meeting and denied in her evidence
that she said the words
“fuck” and “fuckhead” repeatedly. Ms Anagnostou
acknowledge that she did use the
word “fuck” during the course of
the first mentor meeting, but it was used on no more than five occasions and in
context of explaining a case specific example of the inappropriate use of
Anagnostou’s evidence was that Ms Fleming did not pay attention during the
first mentor meeting nor was she attentive to
other people when they were
speaking and would often interrupt or speak over others.
Hill, a law student who was part of the same mentor group, gave evidence that
although he could not recall the detail of the conversations
during the course
of the mentor meetings, he did not recall Ms Anagnostou’s conduct or
behaviour being inappropriate, nor did
he feel uncomfortable during the course
of the first mentor meeting.
Hill presented in a very straightforward manner and gave his evidence in that
way. His version of events was generally corroborative
of Ms Anagnostou’s
version of events and did not support the version of events given by Ms
find on balance that Ms Anagnostou’s account of the events of the first
mentor meeting to accurately represent the events
that occurred during the first
mentor meeting. Ms Anagnostou’s account of events is to be preferred.
Ms Anagnostou’s
evidence was considered and detailed. In her
evidence-in-chief and also in cross-examination, Ms Anagnostou exhibited a
concern for her students. Ms Anagnostou’s evidence is also
corroborated to some extent by the evidence of Mr Hill. I reject
the evidence
of Ms Fleming concerning the allegation that Ms Anagnostou went on a 45-minute
tirade repeatedly using the words “fuck”
and “fuckhead”.
Ms Fleming’s evidence of events was not consistent. It would seem
implausible that events would
have occurred as described by Ms Fleming and not
be the subject of concern by other students. Ms Fleming’s evidence on
topic appeared to represent a reconstructed or distorted view of events in
which Ms Fleming perceived herself to be the victim, whereas
other witnesses
such as Ms Anagnostou viewed Ms Fleming as generally self-centred and aggressive
in her interactions with others.
The events at the lecture on
23 March 2018 which followed the first mentor meeting
was not in dispute between the parties that following the first mentor meeting,
the students from Ms Fleming’s mentoring
group and other students
undertaking the LLAW7002 course attended a lecture that same day on succession
law presented by Ms Varga.
Fleming gave evidence that during the course of that lecture, there was a
discussion about defendants taking drugs. Ms Fleming’s
evidence was that
in the context of that discussion, she expressed an opinion to the effect that
“where a defendant must disclose
any drug use or prescription drug use, so
too should a person who is going to, a legal representative who is going to
represent that
defendant.”
Ms Fleming denied that she said words to the effect of “most lawyers are
on antidepressants anyway so there is no real
difference”.
Fleming’s evidence of the incident at the lecture theatre, like a number
of the other events in relation to which her evidence
differed from the account
given by other witnesses, was fixated on a particular version of those events.
The account of the incident
in the lecture theatre on 23 March 2018 given by Ms
Fleming contained some identical phrases in both examination-in-chief and
cross‑examination;
for example, her concern that defendants would be
“at risk of losing their
Douvartzidis gave evidence in a clear, concise and upfront manner about the
lecture on 23 March 2018. She was clear about those
matters she did recall and
those she did not. The effect of Ms Douvartzidis’ evidence was that
during the course of the succession
law class discussion that occurred during
the 23 March 2018 lecture, there was general discussion concerning how
to navigate preparing
and executing wills when the solicitor is aware the client
is taking medication to treat or manage mental
Ms Douvartzidis gave
evidence that during the course of such discussion, Ms Fleming said words to the
effect of “there is
no difference between someone with drug tracks and
people on antidepressants, they both alter your
Douvartzidis’ evidence indicated that she was shocked and angered by Ms
Fleming’s comments as she considered the
viewpoint expressed to be
outdated and to stigmatise mental illness. Ms Douvartzidis responded at
the time indicating that she considered
that Ms Fleming’s comment was
ridiculous and inappropriate. That day, following class, Ms Douvartzidis emailed
Ms Huish as
the topic co-ordinator about what had been said, explaining and
expressing her concerns.
was further exchange by way of email correspondence between Ms Douvartzidis and
Ms Huish. Ms Douvartzidis gave evidence that
she also met with Ms Huish to
discuss the matter. However, as matters transpired and given other commitments
in Ms Douvartzidis’
life, she did not ultimately pursue the matter
Huish gave evidence that she received a complaint from Ms Douvartzidis in
respect of comments made by Ms Fleming in the 23 March
evidence was that as Ms Douvartzidis did not wish to proceed with a formal
complaint against Ms Fleming, Ms Huish
did not take any further action
under the University’s complaints policies and procedures to investigate
the allegations about
the 23 March 2018 class incident, nor did Ms Huish
formally refer the matter to Professor
The matter was however
considered further by Ms Huish in the context of the removal of stars from Ms
McCourt’s evidence primarily concerned the lecture on
23 March 2018 and the incident on 4 May 2018. Mr McCourt was
indicated that he recalled that during the 23 March 2018 lecture,
made a comment which inferred that if people took medication to treat mental
illness, such as antidepressants or antipsychotics,
they lacked testamentary
capacity. Mr McCourt indicated that he could not recall the exact words now
used but the comment was words
to the effect that if people were taking
antidepressants or antipsychotics, they lacked testamentary capacity.
McCourt was clear in cross-examination that he rejected any suggestions that the
context in which these comments were made concerned
the representation of a
client in a criminal matter. Mr McCourt indicated that he considered the
comments made by Ms Fleming in
the 23 March 2018 lecture to be offensive and
tone deaf. He described this as meaning that the comments occurred in the
the class having recently learned about the mental health issues
which are present in the legal profession. Mr McCourt gave evidence
Fleming’s comments were not “encouraging a constructive discourse
around medication and capacity” and failed
“to take into account
some of the broader discussions [they’d] had about mental health
challenges that do plague the
profession.”
Mr McCourt’s evidence was that he was offended by the comments that
Ms Fleming made, and he considered them to be offensive
however, he could not be
bothered making a complaint and he was very upfront about his actions in that
find that Ms Douvartzidis’ account of the events of the 23 March 2018
lecture to accurately represent the events that occurred
during that lecture.
Ms Douvartzidis’ account of events is to be preferred as Ms
Douvartizidis was a clear and careful witness
and Ms Douvartzidis made a written
record of what occurred.
also corroborated in a general way by the evidence of Mr McCourt, who I find was
also an upfront and truthful witness. Whilst
Mr McCourt was more general in
what he recalled, it is clear that he recalled the context of the discussion
being testamentary capacity.
were some differences between the accounts of Ms Douvartzidis and Mr McCourt.
For example, Ms Douvartzidis recalled a comment
referring to “drug
tracks” and “people on anti-depressants”, whereas Mr McCourt
recalled a more general reference
to people taking medication and the question
of testamentary capacity. I find those differences are to be expected as Ms
Douvartzidis
was more affected than Mr McCourt by the comments which were made.
I do not find those differences as being a reason to reject Ms
Douvartzidis’ account of the event and I find her account of events on the
balance of probabilities to reflect what occurred.
reject the evidence of Ms Fleming that the conversation in the lecture theatre
on 23 March 2018 concerned the representation of
a criminal client. Ms
Fleming’s version of events was inconsistent with the evidence given by
two independent students who
were present. Ms Fleming’s version of events
also seems less plausible as there was no cogent explanation for the discussion
concerning representation of a criminal defendant. It is more likely that a
class discussion in a succession law class would concern
testamentary capacity.
I find that Ms Fleming made comments during the class discussion on 23
March 2018 about drug use, including
prescription drug use by legal
practitioners, that a number of students found to be offensive.
The events at the second mentor meeting
relation to the second mentor meeting, Ms Fleming’s evidence was to the
effect that she was asked to outline her experience
and there was some
discussion concerning a mentor
Ms Fleming indicated
that she considered the discussion was focused on her and she asked for the
attention to be taken off of
Ms Fleming indicated that
she asked another student to speak about their experience as a way for her to
have a break.
stated that she didn’t know what happened but that the next minute Ms
Anagnostou was screaming at the top of her
lungs for her to
relation to the second mentor meeting, there was some inconsistency in the
evidence Ms Fleming gave concerning what occurred.
In particular, she stated
that she did not believe the whole coffee shop would have heard Ms Anagnostou
telling her to leave,
her evidence that Ms Anagnostou was “screaming at the top of her
inconsistency was put to Ms Fleming, she denied that the two matters were
inconsistent.
Anagnostou also gave evidence concerning the second mentor meeting and her
evidence was detailed. Ms Anagnostou indicated that
one of the female mentees
was sitting to her left and Ms Fleming was siting to her right and that two male
mentees were sitting opposite
her. Ms Anagnostou’s evidence of the second
mentor meeting was that Ms Fleming repeatedly wanted to talk about herself, and
Ms Fleming was antagonistic.
Anagnostou explained in detail the efforts she made throughout the meeting to
try and calm the situation, however towards the
end of the meeting, Ms Fleming
became increasingly agitated and began pointing her finger at the female mentee
to the left of Ms
Anagnostou. Ms Anagnostou’s evidence was that
whilst Ms Fleming was not standing up as she spoke, she was raising herself
of the chair and speaking in a very aggressive way to the other
Ms Anagnostou
indicated that she sensed that the other student was very uncomfortable with
this behaviour, and so she asked Ms Fleming
to pack her bag and leave. Ms
Anagnostou’s evidence was that she had to repeat this request a number of
times. Ms Fleming
did not respond to Ms Anagnostou’s first request to
leave the mentor meeting,
she had to call an end to the mentor meeting.
Anagnostou sent an email to Ms Huish at 9:41 am on 6 April 2018 about the second
mentor meeting.
Anagnostou’s email made certain allegations about Ms Fleming’s
behaviour during the course of the second mentor meeting,
including that Ms
Fleming did not listen to what Ms Anagnostou was saying during the meeting.
Ms Fleming was reported to have acted
aggressively and angrily towards Ms
Anagnostou and other students. Ms Fleming interrupted and spoke over Ms
Anagnostou, was argumentative
and became angry, using an angry tone. In the
course of the second mentor meeting, Ms Fleming accused Ms Anagnostou of
running the
mentoring meetings in an unequal way which Ms Fleming alleged
was disadvantageous to
Anagnostou categorically rejected the version of events of the second mentor
meeting put to her by Ms Fleming. Ms Anagnostou
Ms Fleming’s conduct in the second mentor meeting as being belittling
and confronting to witness.
Ms Anagnostou indicated both in her evidence-in-chief and in
cross‑examination that she considered the second mentor meeting
an unsafe environment for students and particularly for the female mentee who
was seated to the left of Ms
Anagnostou.
Ms Anagnostou
described Ms Fleming’s behaviour as appalling and unprofessional and
behaviour that she considered to be dangerous
to herself and the rest of her
mentor group.
Anagnostou categorically denied in both her evidence-in-chief and in
cross‑examination that during the second mentor meeting
she singled Ms
Fleming out or in any way insisted Ms Fleming had not provided an introductory
letter to her as required by the
University.
Ms Anagnostou
was consistent in the evidence she gave that it was Ms Fleming who appeared to
want to only talk about herself and
not to listen to any other students, rather
than Ms Anagnostou directing any particular attention towards Ms Fleming, other
what was necessary to address Ms Fleming’s
Anagnostou accepted that she needed to speak in a tone that was louder than a
conversational tone to be heard at the end of the
second mentor meeting to
appropriately address Ms Fleming’s behaviour. Ms Anagnostou denied that
she was yelling at the top
6 April 2018, Ms Huish received an email from Ms Anagnostou at 9:41 am on 6
April 2018 about the second mentor
Anagnostou’s email made certain allegations about Ms Fleming’s
behaviour during the course of the second mentor meeting,
including that Ms
Fleming did not listen to what Ms Anagnostou was saying during the meeting.
Ms Fleming was reported to have acted
aggressively and angrily towards Ms
Anagnostou and other students. Ms Fleming interrupted and spoke over Ms
Anagnostou and accused
Ms Anagnostou of running the mentoring meetings in
an unequal way which Ms Fleming alleged was disadvantageous to
Ms Huish was also
copied into an email sent at 11:50 am that day by Ms Anagnostou to the
other students in the Mentor
Ms Huish discussed
the matters with Professor Heath and received advice from Professor Heath. Ms
Huish then wrote to the other
students of the Mentor Group and offered those
students the opportunity of seeking support from health and counselling services
the University.
cross‑examination, Ms Huish indicated she did not, at that stage,
following the second mentor meeting, write to Ms Fleming
offering her health
and counselling services, however such an offer had been extended previously to
Ms Fleming by Dr McNamara in
response to Ms Fleming’s
communications concerning the first mentor
Huish gave evidence that she spoke to Ms Anagnostou over the weekend on
Saturday, 7 April 2018, and it was on that date that Ms
Huish formed the view
that the mentoring relationship between Ms Fleming and Ms Anagnostou had
irretrievably broken down.
During the 7 April 2018 conversation, Ms Huish also discussed with Ms Anagnostou
the allegations that had been made by Ms Fleming
concerning Ms
Anagnostou’s behaviour during the 23 March 2018 mentor
Hill gave evidence concerning the second mentor meeting. In respect of the
second mentor meeting, Mr Hill could not recall in
great detail what was being
discussed but he did recall that the discussion escalated to the extent that he
described there being
an argument between Ms Anagnostou and Ms Fleming. His
recollection was that Ms Fleming was being unreasonable which he described
evidence as being that she was refusing to let issues go and enable the group to
move on with its discussion. Mr Hill gave evidence
that Ms Anagnostou was
trying to diffuse the situation and was becoming frustrated when her attempts to
do so were unsuccessful.
The effect of Mr Hill’s evidence was that he did
not consider that Ms Anagnostou was verbally abusive towards Ms Fleming at
I accept Mr
Hill’s evidence.
Fleming’s account of events in respect of the second mentor meeting
differs from the account provided by Ms Anagnostou.
I prefer the evidence given
by Ms Anagnostou. I accept Ms Anagnostou’s account of events and find
that Ms Anagnostou accurately
describes the events that occurred on 6 April
2018. Ms Anagnostou’s version of these events is supported by the
contemporaneous
report that she made some forty minutes after the second mentor
meeting to Ms Huish.
The report is detailed and describes the circumstances and events in a manner
which was generally consistent with the evidence Ms
Anagnostou gave both in
evidence-in-chief and cross-examination. Ms Anagnostou’s evidence is also
corroborated in a general
way by the evidence of Mr Hill.
reject the evidence given by Ms Fleming as to what occurred at the second mentor
meeting. I note and repeat the concerns expressed
above concerning
Ms Fleming’s evidence. Ms Fleming’s evidence concerning what
occurred at the second mentor meeting
was inconsistent and appeared to be
fixated upon a view of the events in which she was the victim. I find that
although Ms Anagnostou
spoke in a louder than conversational tone at the end of
the second mentor meeting and asked Ms Fleming to leave, she was not yelling
screaming at the top of her lungs. I find that Ms Fleming acted in an
aggressive manner to another student in the second mentor
meeting and did not
leave the meeting when first asked to do so by Ms
Anagnostou.
The events in the lecture theatre on 4 May
events of 4 May 2018 in the lecture theatre occurred during the mid-morning
break which was scheduled as part of the weekly timetable
and usually lasted
approximately thirty minutes.
Ms Fleming gave evidence that at that time she was excited to report to Ms Huish
the feedback she had had from an interview that
she had been involved in the
previous day.
Fleming indicated that she sat at the back of the lecture theatre and in the
mid-morning break she proceeded to the front of the
lecture theatre to speak to
Ms Huish. Once at the front of the class, Ms Fleming indicates that she
spoke to Ms Huish and said,
“I only have LPEAC feedback is great. Would
you rather I come back and give it later or shall I do it
responded, on Ms Fleming’s version of events by saying “No, you
can give it.”
Fleming stated that she proceeded to wait in line, as there was a student with
Ms Huish, then another student before her. Ms
Fleming indicated all the
students in line were female
indicated that she was chatting to the student in front of her and asking if the
student had had her LPEAC
Ms Fleming’s account, the next minute Ms Huish said “I’d
like you to pack up your things now and
To which Ms
Fleming replied, “What for, I haven’t done
Ms Huish is
said to have replied, “If you don’t leave, pack up your things and
leave I will call
indicated that she was concerned about the effect of leaving on her studies as
there was a compulsory attendance requirement,
so she returned to her seat at
the back of the lecture theatre in the hope that the matter would “blow
Fleming explained that Ms Huish then left the lecture theatre and some 15 to 30
minutes later a female security officer attended
and asked Ms Fleming to leave
and indicated that if Ms Fleming did not leave then Ms Huish would call the
Ms Fleming reports
being distressed at this
The security officer
left and a little later police
indicated that upon police attending, she packed up her things and left
immediately.
Fleming was cross-examined about her recall of these events. Her evidence in
cross-examination on this topic was largely consistent
with the evidence she
gave in chief.
Fleming’s version of events differs in some significant respects from the
accounts given by other witnesses.
Huish gave evidence that her personal practice was to stand at the lectern at
the front of the classroom and provide students
with an opportunity of coming to
the front of the classroom and forming an orderly line in which they could then
take turns if they
wished to speak to Ms Huish about
effect of Ms Huish’s evidence was that she remained at the eastern lectern
at the front of the classroom during the mid–morning
break on 4 May 2018
and engaged in a private conversation with a student. During the course of that
conversation, Ms Huish gave
evidence that Ms Fleming approached from the eastern
side of the classroom and was in effect pushing in front of the line ahead of
other students waiting to speak to Ms
Huish’s evidence was that Ms Fleming came and stood quite close to where
Ms Huish was discussing a matter with the first
student and tried to interrupt
that conversation.
gave evidence that she responded to Ms Fleming in the same way she had to a
previous student and used words to the effect
that Ms Fleming had to wait
her turn, and back away as she was having a private conversation. Ms Huish
indicated that Ms Fleming
did not initially move away and started querying how
long it would be before she could be spoken to. Ms Huish stated that she needed
to repeat the request for Ms Fleming to wait and move away, and that she was not
prepared to enter into a discussion with Ms Fleming
as she had to wait her turn.
Ms Huish said that Ms Fleming eventually moved away a few paces and Ms
Huish had to ask her to move
Huish then observed as she was speaking to another student that Ms Fleming
physically poked, using her finger, another student
who had been waiting to
speak to Ms Huish and in a loud voice, using an aggressive tone said words to
the effect of “is your
said Ms Fleming then began questioning other students waiting at the front of
the classroom whilst pointing her finger
in an aggressive manner and asking the
other students whether their issue was confidential or private. Ms Huish
indicated that she
became concerned about Ms Fleming’s behaviour at that
point in time and was concerned that her behaviour may escalate. Ms
evidence that she said words to Ms Fleming to the effect of “Kim you
can’t speak to other students like that,
and you cannot touch other
students like that, please return to your
Huish indicated that Ms Fleming reacted adversely and angrily, yelling
aggressively at Ms Huish very loudly. Ms Huish could not
recall all of the
words that Ms Fleming used when yelling at her. The effect of Ms Huish’s
evidence was that she requested
Ms Fleming to return to her seat and that
although Ms Fleming did return to her seat, she continued to yell at Ms
Ms Huish indicated
that she recalled suggesting to Ms Fleming that she leave the class that day in
a further attempt to de-escalate
refused to leave and continued yelling loudly and aggressively. Ms Huish then
demanded Ms Fleming pack up her belongings
and leave the class for the
Ms Fleming remained in
her seat and refused to leave, continuing to
Ms Huish gave evidence
that as a consequence, she called security to assist using the University phone
located on the eastern
Ms Huish gave
evidence that Ms Munro, a security officer, arrived at the classroom fairly
quickly and at about the same time Dr
McNamara returned to the classroom. Ms
Huish gave evidence that she then left the classroom in a further attempt to
de-escalate
the situation.
Ms Huish returned to the lecture theatre after the mid-morning break. Ms
Huish repeated in cross-examination the version of events
that she described in
her evidence-in-chief.
Douvartzidis’ evidence concerning the incident of 4 May 2018 was briefer
than the evidence she gave concerning the events
at the lecture theatre on 23
March 2018. Although Ms Douvartzidis recalled the incident occurring during the
mid-morning break,
she had stepped out of the classroom during the break and was
only just re-entering the classroom as the incident continued to unfold.
did however indicate that she recalled Ms Huish saying to Ms Fleming words to
the effect of “I’m giving you another
opportunity to
Douvartzidis’ evidence indicated that she recalled security attending and
then leaving, and then police arriving and escorting
Ms Fleming from the
classroom. Ms Douvartzidis also provided a statement about the incident on
4 May 2018, which statement was dated
Ms Douvartzidis was
cross-examined about her evidence concerning the 4 May 2018 incident, however
her evidence in cross-examination
did not alter from the evidence she presented
as her evidence-in-chief. Ms Douvartzidis’ evidence was generally
corroborative
of the evidence of Ms Huish.
McCourt gave evidence about the 4 May 2018 incident. Mr McCourt was one of the
students who was waiting in line at the front
of the class to speak to
Ms Huish one-on-one about some employment opportunities that he was
considering. Mr McCourt’s evidence
was very corroborative of the
version of events that Ms Huish gave concerning the 4 May 2018 incident.
In particular, he indicated
that, whilst he was waiting in line, standing a few
metres away from Ms Huish, he saw a second student skip the queue and
Ms Huish, standing directly behind the first student as they were
having a discussion with Ms Huish. In response, Mr McCourt indicated
that Ms Huish explained to the second student that they needed to step back as
she was having a private conversation, and she would
speak to the student
concerned shortly.
effect of Mr McCourt’s evidence was that within the first few moments of
the second student following Ms Huish’s
direction and returning to their
desk, Ms Fleming repeated what the second student had done by skipping the
queue and approaching
Ms Huish and standing close to her while she was talking
to the first student. Mr McCourt indicated that he recalled Ms Huish repeating
to Ms Fleming what she had told the second student, that is, words to the
effect that Ms Fleming needed to stand back and give the
first student some
space as she was having a private conversation with the first
McCourt gave evidence that he recalled that Ms Fleming appeared to be offended
when Ms Huish asked her to stand back and that
Ms Fleming started behaving
erratically. Mr McCourt explained in his oral testimony that by behaving
erratically, he meant that Ms
Fleming appeared to be offended and to be in a
heightened state with a level of unpredictability to her
indicated that Ms Fleming started approaching other students in the line
intensely, asking these students if their conversation
with Ms Huish was
private. Mr McCourt recalled that Ms Fleming’s questions were very
loud, forceful and erratic. Mr McCourt
indicated that he recalled thinking that
Ms Fleming’s conduct was inappropriate and that she was trying to inflame
the situation.
McCourt gave evidence that there was then a verbal exchange between
Ms Huish and Ms Fleming, and although Mr McCourt could not
detail of that conversation, he could recall that Ms Huish warned Ms Fleming and
asked her to return to her seat, or she
would be asked to leave. Mr McCourt
gave evidence that Ms Fleming did not return to her seat, and he recalled Ms
Huish then asking
Ms Fleming to leave for the day and that Ms Fleming refused to
indicated that he recalled thinking that Ms Huish was handling the situation
entirely appropriately in the circumstances.
Mr McCourt then left the classroom
with Ms Huish to discuss a matter in private. Mr McCourt indicated that when he
returned to
class most students were seated, and it was time to resume class
following the break.
McCourt indicated that his recollection of what occurred after that was more
vague, but he did recall subsequently Ms Fleming
returning to her seat and
security attending to remove her from the class. It was his belief that Ms
Huish had called security.
Mr McCourt’s evidence was to the effect that Ms
Fleming refused to leave when security arrived, and this resulted in police
having to be called.
McCourt indicated that South Australia Police arrived and, after some discussion
with Ms Fleming, they escorted her from the class.
Mr McCourt could not recall
the verbal exchange between Ms Fleming and the police. He described his memory
of those events as being
I make allowances for the difficulties that Mr McCourt had in recall in relation
to specific aspects of his evidence, overall
Mr McCourt’s evidence is
consistent with and corroborative of the evidence that Ms Huish gave about the
events of 4 May 2018.
Mr McCourt was less emotional than Ms Huish in the manner
in which he presented his evidence, and whilst I take into consideration
McCourt openly acknowledged that his memory at certain points was patchy,
overall, his evidence was clear, concise and factual.
I accept the truth of Mr
McCourt’s evidence.
Stoks gave evidence primarily concerning the 4 May 2018 incident.
Mr Stoks was clear in the evidence he gave, however, much of
the evidence
that Mr Stoks gave was based on a reconstruction having regard to a statement
May 2018, which statement was dated
31 May 2018. I do not rely upon the evidence he gave about events as
the distinction between
those matters about which Mr Stoks had an independent
recollection and those about which he relied upon his statement provided in
was less clear than that adduced through other witnesses. I make no criticism
of Mr Stoks’ lack of recall of events that
occurred some time ago and did
not appear to trouble him.
evidence of Ms Fitzpatrick was direct and clear and concerned primarily the
incident on 4 May 2018. Ms Fitzpatrick was upfront
not have a clear and independent recall of the events many years later, although
she could recall the
general sequence of the events, and she could also recall
Ms Fleming becoming quite upset and Ms Huish saying to Ms Fleming words
the effect of “I think it’s best that you leave”. Ms
Fitzpatrick recalled that Ms Fleming did not leave the
class, and that
security was called to remove Ms Fleming from the class and when she
refused the South Australia Police were called
and then South Australia Police
escorted Ms Fleming from the
Fitzpatrick also made reference to her statement that she gave on
29 May 2018 however, again, a number of the matters in the statement
made in 2018 were no longer within the independent recollection of Ms
Fitzpatrick. I take this into consideration in the weight I
Fitzpatrick’s evidence, and no criticism is made of Ms Fitzpatrick
who was very clear about what she could recall
and could no longer recall of her
own independent recollection. The sequence of events given by Ms Fitzpatrick
was generally corroborative
of the version of events provided by Ms Huish and
the other students other than Ms Fleming. I accept the truth of Ms
Fitzpatrick’s
evidence of Ms Huish, Ms Douvartzidis, Mr McCourt and Ms Fitzpatrick concerning
the events in the lecture theatre on 4 May 2018
was largely consistent. Each
presented a version of events in which Ms Fleming behaved erratically when
spoken to by Ms Huish at
the front of the classroom. The only one minor area of
difference between the evidence of Ms Huish and the evidence of Mr McCourt
also the later evidence given by Ms Fitzpatrick, is that Ms Fitzpatrick and
Mr McCourt recall Ms Huish indicating prior to leaving
the lecture theatre
that she would call security or the police if she needed to, whereas Ms
Huish’s evidence suggested that
the involvement with the police was a
consequence of the invoking of the critical incident policy and occurred when
she was in her
office with Mr McCourt after having left the classroom.
This difference does not cause me to doubt the veracity of the evidence
these witnesses. The exchange between Ms Fleming and Ms Huish became intense
and I accept that Ms Huish may have mentioned
calling police at that point in
time. It is unnecessary that I make any finding as to when reference was first
made by Ms Huish
as to when South Australia Police would be called. Save in
respect of this matter of when Ms Huish first made reference to calling
police in relation to which I make no finding, I accept the version of events
given by Ms Huish about the events that occurred in
the lecture theatre on 4 May
reject Ms Fleming’s version of events. Ms Fleming’s version of
events portrays Ms Huish as making unreasonable demands
of Ms Fleming, in
circumstances where Ms Fleming asserts that she was acting reasonably.
Ms Fleming in evidence portrayed herself
as the victim of unjustified
treatment. Ms Fleming’s version of events is inconsistent with the
version of events given by
at least four other witnesses. I find that Ms
Fleming holds a distorted and untruthful view of the events that occurred on 4
find that Ms Fleming was acting aggressively towards other students when she was
first asked to leave the lecture theatre by Ms
Huish. I find that Ms Fleming
then began behaving erratically and refused to leave the lecture theatre. Where
Ms Huish’s evidence
differed from the account given by Ms Fleming
concerning the events of 4 May 2018, I prefer the version of events given by Ms
I find that Ms Fleming’s failure to leave as directed by Ms Huish
resulted in security being called. I find that Ms Fleming’s
leave the lecture theatre when asked to by security resulted in police being
The extent to which appeals were instituted and
pursued concerning the fail grade accorded to Ms Fleming
was a dispute between the parties as to whether Ms Fleming instituted and
pursued an appeal concerning her fail grade. Whilst
Ms Fleming stated that she
did file a further appeal,
she did not adduce any documents to support that proposition.
Fleming gave evidence on the third day of trial that she appealed against the
allocation of a fail grade for LLAW7002, but it
unsuccessful.
Ms Fleming denied the proposition that she was given a fail grade because
of losing all five stars, stating that the grade was in
fact a consequence of Ms
Huish’s “false
allegations”.
cross-examination, on the fourth day of trial, it was put to Ms Fleming
that she appealed against the fail grade to Professor
Heath. That appeal was
dismissed by Professor Heath by letter dated 26 June
It was further put to
Ms Fleming that she did not appeal further and had not exhausted her
appeals on that issue within the
University.
denied that proposition and said it was untrue.
Fleming gave evidence that she filed further appeals concerning the decision to
accord her a fail grade.
Fleming indicated in cross‑examination that she had documents which proved
that she appealed the decision of Professor
Heath dated 26 June 2018.
Ms Fleming indicated she had not brought those documents to court, but she
wished to adduce those documents
as part of her case.
The matter was adjourned to
enable that to occur.
the matter resumed, on the fifth day of trial Ms Fleming was not able to
produce those documents.
did Ms Fleming adduce those documents at any subsequent time prior to judgment
being reserved.
respondent’s version of events is that on 9 May 2018 Ms Fleming was
advised by Mr Houghton of her fail grade for the subject
LLAW7002 and that, as a
consequence, Ms Fleming was no longer able to be sent for placement for the
subject LLAW7001.
was advised that she would no longer be in a position to complete the Bachelor
of Laws and Legal Practice degree within
the current extension, and that she
should consider exiting with a Bachelor of Laws degree and undertaking Practical
Legal Training
with another provider. Ms Fleming was advised that she
could appeal the fail grade to Professor Heath.
respondent states that on 10 May 2018 Professor Heath emailed the applicant
acknowledging receipt of her
On 11 May 2018,
Professor Heath emailed Ms Fleming requesting particulars for the
On 11 May 2018,
Ms Fleming responded but did not provide written
On 14 May 2018,
Professor Heath sent a further email asking Ms Fleming for written grounds if
she wanted to review the fail
On 15 May 2018,
Professor Heath wrote repeating that if Ms Fleming wished to review her fail
grade she should provide
On 24 May 2018, Ms
Fleming requested a 10-day extension to bring an appeal concerning her fail
grade. On 25 May 2018, Professor
Heath confirmed that the extension would be
granted until 21 June 2018 if that was
On 28 May 2018, Ms
Fleming wrote to Professor Heath asking further questions as to the
On 29 May 2018,
Professor Heath wrote granting the extension to 21 June
On 20 June 2018, Ms
Fleming appealed her fail
On 26 June 2018,
Ms Fleming was advised that the appeal was refused and that she may submit a
written complaint to the Deputy Vice-Chancellor
(Students) under
section 6.7
the Student Appeals and Complaints
respondent’s position is that no further appeal was filed.
accept the evidence adduced by the respondent on this topic. I reject the
evidence of Ms Fleming that she filed a further appeal
from the decision of
26 June 2018.
Section 6.7
of the Student Appeals and Complaints
provides that if a
student is dissatisfied with the outcome of a complaint, such as the outcome in
the letter of 26 June 2018, then
a written complaint may be made to the Deputy
Vice-Chancellor (Students). A student who is still dissatisfied with the
outcome may
then appeal to the Student Appeals Committee on limited
respondent’s version of events in respect of this topic is supported by
contemporaneous documents. In contrast, Ms Fleming’s
evidence was not
supported by documents. Although Ms Fleming indicated that documents existed
supporting her version of events,
she did not produce these documents. I find
that Ms Fleming had not exhausted the appeal mechanisms within the University to
her fail grade.
find that no further appeal was filed by Ms Fleming from the decision of
26 June 2018.
The extent to which University staff were
acting recklessly or in concert to adduce a consequence of Ms Fleming being
excluded from
completing all of the required topics to graduate with a Bachelor
of Laws and Legal Practice degree
Fleming gave evidence to the effect that University staff and in particular, Ms
Huish, Professor Heath, Mr Houghton and Ms Pollock,
were acting recklessly or in
concert to adduce a consequence of Ms Fleming being excluded from completing all
of the required topics
to graduate with a Bachelor of Laws and Legal Practice
the basis of this claim is difficult to discern, it appears that
Ms Fleming’s claim is to the effect that the loss of
the stars which
resulted in her fail grade were wrongfully attributed to conduct that did not
This claim faces
significant difficulty given the factual findings above.
Fleming also gave evidence to the effect that the actions of Ms Huish and
Professor Heath which related to Ms Fleming’s
fail grade were part of a
process whereby Ms Huish and Professor Heath were acting together with Mr
Houghton and Ms Pollock, who
were responsible for decisions concerning Ms
Fleming’s suspension and investigation into her conduct following the 4
Fleming repeated her concerns at various points in her evidence. She indicated
that that she was being
targeted by Melissa
Fleming also asserted that she had
been and continued to be
harassed and bullied by educators and cliques of
Fleming as part of her evidence-in-chief presented an account of her removal
from the Flinders online learning portal. Ms Fleming
gave evidence to the
effect that this occurred as a number of the University staff were “acting
in concert”
her, and that this was supported by the documents. Ms Fleming identified
seven documents as supporting this
allegation.
Fleming was dogmatic in the evidence that she gave about the approach that she
said the University should have
She indicated that
the University should have spoken to her first about the events that were said
to have occurred on 4 May 2018
and the allegations that had been made against
her concerning those events.
Fleming indicated that it was too long for the University to wait until
21 May 2018 when she received a letter from Mr Houghton
outlining the
nature of the allegations made against
respondent’s version of events differed in significant respects from the
version of events presented by Ms Fleming. The
respondent states that the
actions of Mr Houghton, Professor Heath and Ms Pollock were all essentially of a
routine nature and there
is no basis for criticism of their
Further, the
respondent claims that the two actions of Ms Huish amounted to two separate
actions by which the applicant lost five
stars with a consequence that she
received a fail grade for LLAW7002. As a result of the ten-year rule, Ms
Fleming was unable to
complete the degree in which she had enrolled within the
required timeframe. However, the respondent states to the effect that Ms
acted appropriately in removing the five stars from Ms
have considered all of the complaints that Ms Fleming made related to this
aspect of the case that Ms Fleming advanced at trial.
For the following
reasons, I find that the actions of University staff had the consequence that
Ms Fleming was prevented from completing
the degree in which she was
enrolled. However, I find that University staff did not either individually or
collectively take actions
recklessly or for the purpose of adducing a result
whereby Ms Fleming would be harmed and excluded from completing all of the
topics to graduate with a Bachelor of Laws and Legal Practice degree.
Rather, for the reasons I outline below, I find University
staff were acting in
accordance with the policies and procedures of the University to address
Ms Fleming’s behaviours and to
appropriately manage these behaviours
in the context of the University’s policies and procedures and to
implement and enforce
the course assessment criteria.
were a number of interactions between University staff and meeting of staff
concerning Ms Fleming’s behaviour. However,
those interactions, for the
reasons I explain below, do not, as Ms Fleming suggests, amount to University
staff acting recklessly
or in concert to adduce a consequence of Ms Fleming
being harmed and excluded from completing all of the required topics to graduate
with a Bachelor of Laws and Legal Practice degree.
12 April 2018, Ms Huish received an email from Ms Fleming. The email was titled
‘Notice regarding second incident of mentor
meeting’. In that
email, Ms Fleming raised concerns about the second mentor meeting and also
referred to the first mentor
meeting. Ms Fleming expressed concerns for her
safety and made a number of allegations about Ms Anagnostou. Various
conversations
were had by the University about the matters involving Ms Fleming.
Ms Leiman, Professor Heath and Ms Huish were involved in these
effect of Ms Huish’s evidence was that by 16 April 2018, it was agreed
that Professor Heath would manage the mentor meeting
concerns and complaints
that had been raised by Ms Fleming. Professor Heath would be the complaints
handler and central point of
complaints and anything that arose from that date about those
16 April 2018, Professor Heath and Ms Huish also decided that it would be in the
best interests of all of the students (including
Ms Fleming) and in
Ms Anagnostou’s best interests for the Mentor Group be disbanded. It
was also decided that the students
in the Mentor Group, other than
Ms Fleming, would be reallocated to another mentor group. Ms Huish gave
evidence that Ms Anagnostou
would no longer be required to continue her mentor
role for semester 1 of 2018. It was also decided that Ms Fleming would not be
reallocated to another mentor group for the time being, and that further
enquiries would need to be undertaken before any alternative
arrangements for Ms
Fleming’s ongoing participation in the Mentor Program could or would be
considered.
That decision
was also discussed with, endorsed, and agreed to by Ms Leiman later on that
evidence indicated that, as part of the course requirements for the LLAW7002
program, students were allocated five stars. A
loss of all five stars by a
student during the program resulted in a fail grade. The effect of Ms
Huish’s evidence was that
she deferred any decision about
Ms Fleming’s performance in the LLAW7002 program including whether
Ms Fleming’s conduct
would result in the loss of any stars, until
such time as Professor Heath had completed her investigation concerning the
mentor meetings.
effect of Professor Heath’s investigation findings of 24 April 2018 were
understood by Ms Huish to be that Ms Fleming’s
allegations about the first
mentor meeting and the second mentor meeting were rejected and
Ms Fleming’s allegations against
and about Ms Anagnostou in both
mentor meetings were unfounded and unsubstantiated.
Huish gave evidence that, on 24 April 2018, after having received Professor
Heath’s email, she had a conversation with Ms
Leiman in her capacity as
the Dean of Law as to various issues including the investigation findings, and
her intention to conduct
a cohort-wide audit under the five star scheme of the
LLAW7002 2018 cohort.
Ms Huish gave evidence that that decision was not made specifically due to
concerns about Ms Fleming’s conduct or behaviour
3 May 2018, two emails were sent to Ms Fleming from Ms Huish.
first email on 3 May 2018 was sent at 2:23
That email indicated
that the mentor group of which Ms Fleming had been a member had been disbanded
effective immediately. That
email also informed Ms Fleming that she had
been withdrawn from the mentoring
Ms Fleming was also
informed by that email that withdrawal from the mentoring program did not
prevent her from satisfactorily completing
Huish sent Ms Fleming a second email on 3 May
In that email, which
was sent at 3:37 pm, Ms Fleming was informed by Ms Huish that she had lost four
stars in respect of the 5 Star
Professional Assessment Scheme. Three stars were
lost as a consequence of Ms Fleming’s behaviour at the second mentor
and one star was lost for inappropriate comments made by Ms Fleming
March 2018, which
comments were said to bring the legal profession into disrepute.
effect of Ms Huish’s evidence was that these actions were taken in a
considered way,
in accordance
with relevant policies and having regard to the best interests of the persons
involved. I accept that evidence. Ms
Huish rejected the suggestion put to her
in cross-examination that she was in any way making false allegations against Ms
I accept the
evidence of Ms Huish on this issue. I find that the loss of four stars by Ms
Fleming in LLAW7002 was action taken
in a considered way and consequent upon the
application of the course requirements.
Houghton presented as a softly spoken witness who was careful and considered in
the evidence he gave. The effect of Mr Houghton’s
evidence was that he
was appointed by Ms Pollock to conduct an investigation into
Ms Fleming’s conduct on 4 May 2018. Mr Houghton
gave evidence by
reference to relevant University policies and procedures as to the actions that
he took. Mr Houghton’s evidence
was that, in accordance with those
policies and procedures, procedural fairness was accorded to Ms Fleming during
the conduct of
the investigation, and this included the requirements to
particularise the allegations that had been made concerning
Ms Fleming’s
conduct. Mr Houghton indicated that the allegations
were particularised after a number of witnesses had been spoken to. During
course of the investigation and after having spoken to Ms Fleming, Mr Houghton
gave evidence that he identified the need to speak
to further witnesses given
the differing accounts of the events of 4 May 2018, given by Ms Huish and
by Ms Fleming. Mr Houghton gave
evidence that he was also appointed to
be the single point of contact for Ms Fleming, to communicate relevant matters
from the University
Houghton gave evidence that it was his practice to either via email or via
telephone communicate with Ms Fleming about the interview
to be conducted with
her, including informing Ms Fleming of the entitlement to have a support person
present with her at the interview.
Mr Houghton’s evidence was that on or
around 25 May 2018, he conducted an interview with Ms Fleming and put to her the
allegations
for her response and that he recalled Ms Fleming attending the
interview without a support
Mr Houghton also
gave evidence that it was his usual practice when interviewing to offer a
student such as Ms Fleming the opportunity
to adduce any further evidence that
she wished to adduce.
Houghton’s evidence was that his report to Deputy Vice-Chancellor Pollock
following the interviews conducted with the students
was based upon the accounts
of events that he
Houghton was challenged by Ms Fleming in cross-examination concerning the manner
in which he conducted the interview. It was
suggested to Mr Houghton that he
acted together with Deputy Vice-Chancellor Pollock, Professor Heath and
Ms Huish to adduce a result
whereby Ms Fleming was excluded from
participation in the final two subjects of her degree so that Ms Fleming
would not complete
the combined degree for which she had enrolled. Mr Houghton
denied the allegation put by Ms Fleming and Ms Fleming did not adduce
evidence to support the allegation that the purpose of the investigation was to
achieve a particular outcome. Mr Houghton indicated
that he had many years
of experience in conducting investigations into student conduct and that he
conducted this investigation without
a view to a particular outcome in
Houghton presented as a careful and considered witness, and I find that evidence
that he gave was truthful. I accept his evidence,
and I find that in respect of
the investigation into Ms Fleming’s conduct on 4 May 2018, that
investigation was undertaken
by Mr Houghton in accordance with University
policies and procedures in a careful and considered way, and that Mr Houghton
Ms Fleming procedural fairness. I find that the findings of Mr
Houghton were based upon the evidence that he obtained and I reject
suggestion that Mr Houghton undertook the investigation for the purpose of
adducing a particular outcome.
Heath gave evidence concerning the support she provided to Ms Huish in
addressing the issues that arose from the various
incidents involving Ms
Fleming. Professor Heath also gave evidence about her involvement in removing
Ms Fleming’s access to
the Flinders Online Learning
The effect of
Professor Heath’s evidence was that she responded to
Ms Fleming’s concerns about her four-week suspension
and her fail
grade in various emails, during the course of which she explained to Ms Fleming
the distinction between an appeal of
her fail grade for LLAW7002 and the
investigation that was being conducted into the 4 May 2018 incident and the
related suspension.
Professor Heath invited Ms Fleming to submit her grounds if she wished to
proceed with an appeal against her fail
. Professor Heath gave
evidence of the concerns that she expressed for Ms Fleming’s
wellbeing to other staff at the University
and that she made representations
occurring in 2018 were
not consistent with Ms Fleming’s usual
Heath denied that she acted either, on her own accord or together with
Mr Houghton, Ms Pollock and Ms Huish in a manner
which was careless and
consequent upon a desire to achieve an outcome whereby Ms Fleming’s
progress through the degree of Laws
and Legal Practice was
terminated.
Heath presented as a clearly compassionate witness. She was clear about the
role that she had, and it was evident that
she sought to fulfill that role in a
professional and compassionate way. I find it implausible that Professor Heath
would have acted
carelessly or recklessly in the manner in which she fulfilled
her role. The seven documents upon which Ms Fleming
to support the
allegation that University staff were acting against her in relation to her
removal from the online portal do not
substantiate the allegations Ms Fleming
makes. Whilst the documents show certain decisions were made following
interactions between
University staff, these documents do not show a deliberate
attempt by University staff to act with the purpose or intent of ensuring
Ms Fleming did not complete the degree in which she
The email of 15
May 2018 from Professor Heath to Ms
records that Ms
Fleming was notified of the loss of a fifth star as a consequence of her
behaviour in the break between morning classes
The fifth star was
recorded as being deducted because Ms Fleming’s behaviour was rude,
discourteous and disrespectful to students
The consequence of
the loss of that fifth star was Ms Fleming received a fail grade for the topic
find that the loss of the fifth star by Ms Fleming in LLAW7002 was an action
undertaken by University staff in a considered way
and consequent upon the
application of course requirements. I find that the according of a fail (F)
grade to Ms Fleming for the
topic LLAW7002 was consequent upon actions
undertaken by University staff in a careful and considered way and consequent
application of course requirements. I accept the evidence given by
Professor Heath and I find that she acted appropriately and compassionately
implementing the University policies and procedures.
Pollock presented as an impressive and considered witness who had a clear
understanding of the University’s statutes, policies
and procedures.
Ms Pollock gave evidence which indicated she was very cognisant of her role
and responsibility as Deputy Vice-Chancellor
(Students) and her responsibility
to ensure the safety and welfare of the general student population and staff at
the University.
Ms Pollock gave evidence particularly concerning her
involvement in the aftermath of the 4 May 2018 incident and the reasons that
appointed a complaints officer, Mr Houghton, to investigate the matters.
Pollock gave evidence concerning the consideration that she gave to the
appointment of the complaints officer, the first four-week
suspension, the
second two-week extension of the suspension, and the decision to impose a formal
warning upon Ms Fleming following
the investigation of the 4 May 2018
Pollock was cross-examined, and it was suggested to Ms Pollock that she acted
together with Mr Houghton, Professor Heath and Ms
Huish for the purpose of
achieving an outcome whereby Ms Fleming was removed from the degree in which she
had enrolled.
denied the allegations put against her and explained again in cross-examination,
the reasons for her decision, including
her concern for the safety and welfare
of students and the importance of her responding appropriately to relevant
incidents, having
regard to the application of the University’s critical
incident policy. I accept the evidence of Ms Pollock. I find that
did not, in appointing Mr Houghton or in making decisions concerning the
investigation into Ms Fleming’s conduct,
act (either individually or with
others) for the purpose of to adduce a result which harmed Ms Fleming and
resulted in Ms Fleming
being excluded from the degree in which she had enrolled.
I find that Ms Pollock acted in accordance with the University’s
and procedures cognisant of the importance of the wellbeing and safety of staff
and students of the University, including
Ms Fleming.
Pollock also gave evidence concerning the distinction between decisions made
concerning student conduct and academic progression.
She rejected the
suggestion put to her in cross-examination that she should have herself
interviewed Ms Fleming or intervened in
the investigation in circumstances where
she had appointed a complaints officer. Ms Pollock also rejected the suggestion
dealing with the incident as a student conduct incident, she should have
investigated further the academic progress of the
indicated that the matter she was addressing concerned Ms Fleming’s
conduct not her academic progress. I accept
Ms Pollock’s evidence.
reject Ms Fleming’s claim that University staff were acting recklessly or
‘in concert’ to ensure that Ms Fleming
was harmed and prevented from
completing the degree in which she was enrolled. I find that University staff
acted in compliance
with University policies and procedures to respond to Ms
Fleming’s behaviour and in particular to investigate the incident
2018 in the lecture theatre in accordance with the requirements of procedural
fairness. I also find that Ms Fleming’s
progress through the
LLAW7002 program was assessed in accordance with the course requirements.
Whilst investigation and consideration
of those matters had consequences for Ms
Fleming’s progress in her degree, I find those consequences were a result
of Ms Fleming’s
actions. I find that the removal of the fifth star as
part of the 5 Star Professional Assessment Scheme was a considered response
University staff undertaken consequent upon the application of course
requirements. I find that Ms Fleming has not established
that the removal of
stars, the according of a fail grade for LLAW7002, and Ms Fleming’s
failure to complete the degree in which
she enrolled were a result of University
staff acting inappropriately or in a manner which was reckless, or with an
intent to harm
Ms Fleming.
Legal Issues
Fleming claims firstly, in negligence, that the University owed her a duty of
Ms Fleming claims that
the University breached this duty by certain staff being reckless and acting in
concert against her to adduce
a result whereby Ms Fleming was prevented from
graduating from the course in which she had enrolled. Secondly, Ms Fleming
that the University breached the statutory duty of care that the
University owed to her.
Fleming identified that the relief she sought
returned to the position I was in as an undergraduate student prior to being
mistreated in 2018 with a granted extension for
meeting final requirements for
the award in Undergraduate Bachelor of Laws and Legal Practice Degree.
Fleming maintained that she did not seek damages and did not seek
compensation,
“a million dollars means
will not accept damages under any
circumstances.”
statement were made in the context of an explanation being provided that damages
were the usual remedy.
Ms Fleming also indicated that she did not seek judicial review of the
decisions of the University,
and that she did not assert that there had been any failure by the University or
its staff to follow their own policies and
procedures.
Fleming articulated her claim in
Huish, Clare Pollock, Mary Heath and Robert Houghton, individually, harmed me
and, in concert harmed me. Nothing to do with
the university per se, they were
actual teaching staff being of education who then pulled a deputy vice
chancellor who then pulled
in Robert Houghton. I can show a nexus between each
and every one of those four employees.
respondent contends that the applicant has not adequately articulated what
particular act or omission led to any relevant damage
as is required to
establish a cause of action in the tort of
negligence.
respondent submits that:
is no conduct of any individual which has been identified which can be found to
breach any identified duty of care owed to the
if such conduct and duty could be identified, the applicant has not and cannot
articulate any remedy which she now seeks which
would be appropriate as a remedy
in respect of such conduct;
applicant has not, in any event, articulated any remedy which the Court would or
could provide; and,
any event, on the actual evidence called, the actions apparently complained of
by the applicant (insofar as they can be identified)
legal issues in dispute between the parties
the applicant established a cause of action in the tort of negligence and
identified a particular acts or omission as being the
basis of the cause of
action and linked those acts or omissions to any identifiable loss or
the applicant established on the facts of this case a statutory duty arising
pursuant to
section 18A
Flinders University Act 1966
Flinders University Act
) or pursuant to University
statute 6.4 entitled “Student conduct” (“Statute 6.4”)
and a breach of that duty
giving rise to any identifiable loss or damage?
the applicant established the availability of the remedy that she seeks?
if such remedy is available, are there reasons to deny the relief sought
including because there was a failure on behalf of the
applicant to exhaust the
remedies available to her within the
University?
Consideration
establish her claim in negligence the applicant must show that the University
owed her a duty to take reasonable care, and that
the University breached that
duty by failing to take reasonable
Ms Fleming would also
need to establish that the University’s breach of duty caused the damage
which Ms Fleming says she suffered;
and that the damage suffered was not
too remote a consequence of the breach of
I address remedies
separately below.
assessing a cause of action in negligence consideration must be given not only
to the existence of a duty of care between the
parties, but also to the nature
of the duty on the facts of the
As Kirby J held in
is true that it is neither possible nor desirable to attempt to consider the
duty of care issue independently of the breach element
or, indeed, the other
elements relevant to a decision on liability for negligence. The questions that
the successive stages of negligence
doctrine pose are not entirely free
standing. They are interrelated. Negligence is a unified concept. Its
subdivision into issues
is adapted for convenience and to promote consistency of
approach and accurate analysis. The parts should not divert attention from
also needs to be had to the provisions of
Civil Liability
(SA) (“the Act”) and the statutory articulation of the
duty of care and the limits on that duty.
of the Act states that:
For determining whether a person (the
) was negligent, the standard of care required of the
defendant is that of a reasonable person in the defendant’s position who
was in possession of all information that the defendant either had, ore ought
reasonably to have had, at the time of the incident
out of which the harm
of the Act states that:
A person is not negligent in failing
to take precautions against a risk of harm unless—
(a) the risk was foreseeable (that is, it is a risk of which the person knew or
ought to have known); and
(b) the risk was not insignificant; and
(c) in the circumstances, a reasonable person in the person's position would
have taken those precautions.
of the Act states that:
In determining whether a reasonable
person would have taken precautions against a risk of harm, the court is to
consider the following
(amongst other relevant things):
(a) the probability that the harm would occur if precautions were not taken;
(b) the likely seriousness of the harm;
(c) the burden of taking precautions to avoid the risk of harm;
(d) the social utility of the activity that creates the risk of harm.
find that Ms Fleming’s claims in negligence encounters difficulty
consequent upon her version of events not being accepted
for the reasons
outlined above.
claim articulated by Ms Fleming in negligence is essentially a claim that
certain University staff, namely Ms Huish, Professor
Heath, Ms Pollock, and
Mr Houghton
caused harm to Ms Fleming, either individually or by
their collective action. Ms Fleming’s claim is that these staff
individually
and collectively harmed her by taking actions to ensure that Ms
Fleming did not complete the degree in which she was enrolled.
it is correct that it was consequent upon the actions taken by these University
staff that Ms Fleming was prevented from completing
the degree in which she had
enrolled, namely a Bachelor of Laws and Legal Practice degree, that in and of
itself does not establish
a breach of duty.
respondent states that the applicant made generalised claims and failed to
identify particular acts of individuals for which
Ms Fleming claims the
University is vicariously
Whilst, in some
respects, this was the case, Ms Fleming was self-represented at the
hearing, and I would not find that there was
a complete failure to identify
particular acts.
the breach of duty to the extent that it has been articulated by Ms Fleming
is said to arise because stars were said to have
been wrongfully removed from Ms
Fleming as part of the 5 Star Professional Assessment Scheme in LLAW7002
resulting in a fail grade,
based upon what Ms Fleming claimed was a falsified
version of events.
basis for a breach of duty to the extent that specific acts were identified is
said to arise from the investigation into
the incident in the lecture theatre on
4 May 2018 being conducted with a view to a particular outcome being
established.
the reasons articulated above, the factual findings that I have made do not
support the case advanced by Ms Fleming on either
basis. The factual basis upon
which stars were removed represented an accurate account of events and accords
with the factual findings
I have made above. There was no falsification of what
occurred, and the removal of stars was consistent with the application of
course requirements.
evidence does not demonstrate that the investigation into the incident in the
lecture theatre on 4 May 2018 was conducted with
a view to a particular outcome
being established. Rather, as I have found above, that investigation was
carried out carefully by
Mr Houghton, consistently with the University’s
policies and procedures and in a manner which afforded Ms Fleming procedural
have also considered the more generalised forms of complaints advanced by Ms
Fleming during the course of the hearing and upon
which Ms Fleming relies in
seeking to establish breach of a duty of care owed to her. I am unable to find
that any of the generalised
complaints advanced by Ms Fleming demonstrates a
breach of a duty of care owed by the University to Ms Fleming. I have also not
found on the facts established at trial any breach of duty by a member of
University staff for which the University is vicariously
liable which gave rise
to any damage to Ms Fleming.
find that the applicant has not established a cause of action in the tort of
negligence. The applicant has not on the evidence
established any particular
acts or omissions which could form the basis of such a cause of action and has
not linked any identified
acts or omissions to any identifiable loss or damage.
I find that Ms Fleming has not established her claim in
negligence.
Breach of statutory duty
establish a breach of statutory duty there are generally four elements that
Ms Fleming would need to establish:
that Parliament intended to protect a specified class of person and intended to
create a private right of action for breach
of duty imposed by the
that Ms Fleming was a person within the class of persons intended to be
protected, and the University conduct fell within
the scope of the statutory
that the obligation imposed by the statute was
that Ms Fleming suffered damage as a result of the
Windeyer J, explained in
To succeed in a claim for damages for breach of a statutory
duty causing him harm, a plaintiff must shew that the defendant was a
whom the statute cast the duty: that he, the plaintiff, was a person, or one of
a class of persons, for whose benefit the
duty was created: that the defendant
failed to perform the duty: that this failure gave rise to a civil right of
Fleming asserts that
Flinders University Act
relevant duty. Further, the applicant asserts that Statute 6.4, which is a
University Statute created under the
Flinders University Act
creates a statutory duty of care. Ms Fleming framed her case as
Flinders University owes a statutory duty of care to students as a class of
persons in 2018. The applicant, being a full-time
enrolled student in 2018, is
a member of the class contemplated for the duty to be owed to students by
employees and staff as defined
Flinders University Act 1966
and statute
6.4. Against the reasonable person test, the applicant will show the duty owed
to the applicant was breached by repetitive,
wrongful and reckless actions of
the ... respondent university employees named in the claim during the course of
their employment,
both individually and in concert, while having a close and
direct relationship with the applicant and resulting in loss and damage
kind reasonably foreseeable in the circumstances.
respondent claims that
Flinders University Act
establish any enforceable statutory duty which would be relevant to
Ms Fleming’s claim, and Ms Fleming does not belong
to a class of
persons that the
Flinders University Act
is intended to
Further, the
respondent claims no private right of action is
The respondent
denies that Statute 6.4 imposes a statutory
find as a matter of law that
Flinders University Act
establishes the
University.
The functions of
the University include amongst other things the provision of educational
facilities and the provision of courses
University Act
provides for the establishment of the Council as the
governing body of the
University.
The Council is
charged amongst other things with overseeing and reviewing the management of the
University.
Section 18A
Flinders University Act
imposes a duty upon a member of the Council
to at all times in the performance of his or her functions, exercise a
reasonable degree
of care and diligence, and to act in the best interest of the
University.
Flinders University Act 1996
provides in part that the Council
has the power to make, alter and repeal any statutes and regulations, in
relation to numerous matters,
including in relation to the discipline of the
University and other matters regarding the
University.
concerns the power to award degrees in accordance with the statutes and
regulations of the University.
6.4 is a University Statute which was in place at the relevant time concerning
student conduct. That statute provides amongst
other things that:
[t]he university is
required to exercise a duty of care towards staff and students, and those who
use its facilities and property,
and to provide a safe, secure and suitable
environment for the conduct of educational, scholarly and community
activities.
have some difficulty accepting the first limb of Ms Fleming’s claim,
namely that the requirements of s 18A of the
Flinders University Act
which concern the duty of members of Council to exercise care and diligence,
or the University Statute 6.4, was intended to give rise
to private right of
action in Ms Fleming as a student. Even putting that difficulty to one
side, it is clear that Ms Fleming’s
claim for breach of statutory duty
must fail as Ms Fleming has not on the evidence before this Court established
that there was any
breach of an obligation imposed by either s 18A of the
Flinders University Act
or the University Statute 6.4.
alleging a breach of these provisions, Ms Fleming relied upon the same
allegations against members of University staff as those
advanced in respect of
her claim in negligence. On the factual findings of this Court, Ms Huish,
Professor Heath, Ms Pollock and
Mr Houghton did not breach any duty of care owed
to Ms Fleming for which the University was vicariously liable. I have
each of these members of University staff acted appropriately in
accordance with University policies and procedures to respond to
Fleming’s behaviour and to implement course requirements. Further, and in
any event, s 18A concerns the members of the
Council, and Ms Fleming has not
raised any allegations against members of the Council.
find that the applicant has not established on the facts of this case a
statutory duty arising pursuant to s 18A of the
Flinders University Act
or pursuant to University Statute 6.4, and a breach of that duty giving rise
to any identifiable loss or damage.
applicant has not made out her claim for a breach of statutory
Relief sought
addition to not establishing either a claim in negligence or a breach of
statutory duty, the applicant has not established that
she would be entitled to
the relief that she seeks for the following reasons.
relief sought by Ms Fleming includes orders with regard to her reinstatement as
an undergraduate student and a retraction of
the Formal Warning Notice brought
under Statute 6.4, as well as a granted
Ms Fleming also
asks this Court to make orders to the effect that the University recognise
Ms Fleming’s prior learning for
LLAW7002, being a component of the
Practical Legal Training Course of which Ms Fleming was a student in 2018.
to the availability of that relief and to the extent that Ms Fleming seeks
declaratory relief, declarations are a broad and discretionary
However, ordinarily
a declaration would only be granted based upon a legal
To the extent to
which the relief sought by Ms Fleming amounts to a mandatory injunction, such
relief would also require the identification
of the legal or equitable right
upon which such an order is
Additionally,
there would be practical difficulties as Ms Fleming has not established how the
relief that she seeks could now be
granted. The evidence adduced by the
respondent in this matter from Ms Leiman indicated that a Bachelor of Laws and
Legal Practice
degree was no longer offered by the
University.
Although Ms
Fleming did not appear to accept that evidence, no cogent evidence to the
contrary was adduced by Ms
and I accept Ms
Leiman’s evidence on that topic. In any event, Ms Fleming has not
established that damages would not be an
adequate remedy. Ms Fleming did not
seek damages and did not lead any cogent evidence in respect of damages.
further difficulty that Ms Fleming would encounter given the form of the relief
that she seeks is that Ms Fleming seeks to have
this Court, in effect, interfere
with the decision of a University in respect of the awarding of a fail grade in
circumstances where
Ms Fleming did not exhaust her appeal mechanisms within the
University. Further, ordinarily, a court would not interfere with academic
decisions of a
University.
Fleming has not established a basis for the remedies that she
dismiss the applicant’s claim.
Amended Claim (FDN 25), Reply
Reply (FDN 53) at [4];
Amended Defence (FDN 51).
Amended Defence (FDN 51).
Respondent’s Written
Submissions dated 28 March 2025 (FDN 107) (“RWS”) at 2, [9].
Exhibit A63.
Exhibit A23.
Exhibit A23.
Exhibit A23.
Exhibit A15.
Exhibit A28.
Exhibit A31.
Exhibit A37.
Exhibit A34.
Exhibit A35.
Exhibit A38.
Exhibit A42.
Exhibit A43.
Exhibit A52.
Exhibit A53.
Exhibits A56 and A57.
Referred to as mentor group
Exhibits A56 and A57.
Exhibit R19 at 10-2,
Exhibit A56.
Exhibit A57.
Exhibit A59.
Exhibit A59.
Exhibit A58.
Exhibit A58.
Exhibit A61.
Exhibit A64.
Exhibit A63.
Exhibit A63.
Exhibit A65.
Exhibit A65.
Exhibit A65.
Exhibit A65.
Exhibit A67.
Exhibit A68 at 4.
Tender Book
(‘TB’) at tab 213.
TB at tab 213.
TB at tab 213.
Exhibit A77.
Exhibit A78.
Exhibit A68 at 2.
Exhibit A68 at 1.
Exhibit A68 at 1.
Exhibit A68 at 1.
Exhibit A96.
Exhibit R4.
Exhibit R19 at 10-2,
Exhibit A57.
Exhibit A71.
Exhibit A72.
Exhibit R24 at 85 (Annexure
Exhibit R24 at 88 (Annexure
Exhibit R24 at 85 (Annexure
Exhibit R24 at 85 (Annexure
Exhibit R24 at 85 (Annexure
Exhibit A72.
Exhibit A23.
Exhibit R7.
Exhibit R17.
Exhibits A73 and A94.
T304.27-33.
For example, no documents
were adduced by Ms Fleming to show that she appealed against the decision of 26
June 2018 upholding her
fail grade for LLAW7002.
See for example the
documents concerning Ms Fleming’s removal from the online learning portal:
Exhibits A75, A76, A77, A78,
A79, A80 and A81. See also, the documents
concerning the application for an extension of the 10-year rule, which documents
that Ms Fleming appealed this decision contrary to her initial assertion
that she did not: T221, cf T359.
T647.20-35; Exhibit R22 at
T649.32-50.9; Exhibit R22
at 4, [22].
T658.1-15 See also
T659.2-10, T660.2-34 and T661.1-6.
T248.34-9.11.
T254.15-20.
T136, T252-53.
Exhibit R27 at 4, [41].
Exhibit R27 at 4, [42].
Exhibit R27 at 4, [47].
Exhibit R19 at 13-5,
[77]-[91]. See also T477.5-12.
Exhibit R19 at 15,
T874.28-5.7.
Exhibit A25.
T73, although later in her
evidence Ms Fleming stated that the discussion concerning the mentor letter
occurred at the first mentor
meeting: see T78-80.
T284.12-20.
Exhibit R22 at 6, [41].
Exhibit A29.
Exhibit R22 at 5,
Exhibit R22 at 6,
T674.15-24. Although, Ms
Fleming gave differing accounts of when the issue with the introductory letter
T679.16-28.
T679.16-28.
Exhibit R19 at 21,
[151]. See also Exhibit A29.
Exhibit R19 at 21,
[152]. See also Exhibit A29.
Exhibit R19 at 22,
[156]. See also Exhibit A30.
Exhibit R19 at 24,
[169]. See also TB at tab 53.
T559.28-35. See also
T605.30-6.1.
T567.31-8.12. See also
Exhibit R19 at 25, [175]-[178].
Exhibit R19 at 24-6,
[173]-[182].
T730.17-1.19.
Exhibit A29.
Exhibit R19 at 49,
T578.19-35.
T579.21-38.
Exhibit R19 at 50,
Exhibit R19 at 51,
T584.18-32.
Exhibit R19 at 52,
Exhibit R19 at 52,
Exhibit R19 at 52,
Exhibit R19 at 52,
T586.24-30.
Exhibit R27 at 5,
Exhibit R27 at 13
(Annexure AD-2).
Exhibit R28 at 4,
Exhibit R28 at 4,
T884.11-5.11.
Exhibit R28 at 4,
T880.18-24.
Exhibit R30 at 3,
T220.17-31.
T222.5-9 and
See Exhibit R4.
T374.35-5.16 and
T377.36-8.13.
T416. Ms Fleming
responded no to the following question (at T416.17-22): ‘is it the case
that you haven’t produced any
documents which show a further appeal from
the decision of Ms Heath of 26 June 2018?’ Evidence was further given by
on this topic: see T417-30.
See e.g. T918.31-3.
Exhibit A63.
Exhibit A65.
Exhibit A66.
Exhibit A67.
Exhibit A67.
Exhibit A68 at 4.
Exhibit A68 at 2.
Exhibit A68 at 1-2.
Exhibit A68 at 1.
Exhibit A96.
Exhibit R4.
Exhibit R20.
Exhibit R20 at 6.8.
T170-3. See also
T264.27-31.
Exhibits A75, A76, A77,
A78, A79, A80 and A81.
T198.29-31.
RWS at 9, [44].
RWS at 9, [44]-[45].
See, for example,
Exhibit A63.
Exhibit R19 at 34,
Exhibit R19 at 35,
Exhibit R19 at 39,
Exhibit R19 at 40,
Exhibit A56.
Exhibit A56.
Exhibit A57.
Exhibit A63.
Exhibit R11 at 7,
T713.36-4.4.
Exhibit A67.
Exhibit A68 at 1, 4.
T826.10-22.
Exhibits A75, A76, A77,
A78, A79, A80 and A81.
See Exhibits A75, A76,
A77, A78, A79, A80 and A81.
Exhibit A77.
Exhibit A77 is the
primary record of this notification relied upon by the respondent together with
Exhibit A63 being the letter
to Ms Fleming from Mr Houghton dated 9 May
Exhibit A77.
Exhibit A63.
T792.27-8.17.
Amended Claim (FDN
Amended Claim (FDN
Amended Claim (FDN
T36.34-7.13.
T36.34-7.4.
RWS at 2, [9].
RWS at 3, [11].
Civil Liability Act
Wyong Shire Council v Shirt
[1980] HCA 12
Tame v New South Wales; Annetts & Anor v Australian
Stations Pty Ltd
[2002] HCA 35
(2002) 211 CLR 317.
Civil Liability Act
Cole v South Tweed
Heads Rugby League Football Club Ltd
[2004] HCA 29
(2004) 217 CLR 469
(Gleeson CJ); at 487, [56] (Gummow and Hayne JJ, citing McHugh J in
Graham Barclay Oysters Pty Ltd v Ryan
211 CLR 540
[2005] HCA 75
(2005) 80 ALJR 341
RWS at 5, [21].
T625.24-6.19;
T626.38-7.16.
T713.36-4.4.
Byrne v Australian
Airlines Ltd
[1995] HCA 24; (1995) 185 CLR 410 at 424 (Brennan CJ, Dawson
and Toohey JJ);
Darling Island Stevedoring & Lighterage Co Ltd v Long
[1957] HCA 26
(1957) 97 CLR 36
O’Connor v SP Bray Ltd
(1937) 56 CLR 464.
Darling Island
Stevedoring & Lighterage Co Ltd v Long
[1957] HCA 26
(1957) 97 CLR
Waugh v Kippen
[1986] HCA 12
(1986) 160 CLR 156.
X (Minors) v
Bedfordshire County Council
[1005] 2 AC 633.
Downs v Williams
[1971] HCA 45
(1971) 126 CLR 61
at 75 (Windeyer J).
RWS at 8, [37].
RWS at 8, [38];
Flinders University Act 1996
(SA) s 18E.
RWS at 8, [41].
Flinders University
Flinders University
Flinders University
Flinders University
(SA) s 5(2)(c).
Flinders University
(SA) s 20. See in particular
Flinders University Act 1996
(SA) ss 20(1)(b), 20(1)(n).
Exhibit R24 at 85
(Annexure CP-4).
Amended Claim (FDN
Amended Claim (FDN
CGU Insurance Limited
[2016] HCA 2
(2016) 259 CLR 339
(French CJ,
Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ).
Edwards v Santos Ltd
[2011] HCA 8
(2011) 242 CLR 421 (Heydon
J, French CJ, Gummow, Crennan,
Kiefel and Bell JJ agreeing, Hayne J dissenting).
Broadcasting Corporation v Lenah Game Meats Pty Ltd
[2001] HCA 63
208 CLR 199
(Gummow and Hayne JJ);
Jackson v Sterling
Industries Ltd
[1987] HCA 23
(1987) 162 CLR 612
at 638 (Gaudron J).
Exhibit R25 at 7, [62].
See further T802-3.
Griffith University v
[2005] HCA 7
(2005) 221 CLR 99
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (677 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter