URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACAT/2025/52.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:53:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lanser Developments No 1 Pty Ltd & Ors v Mount Barker District Council & Anor [2025] SACAT 52 (2 July 2025)
1. Lanser Developments No 1 Pty Ltd
2. MFY Pty Ltd
3. Fyfe Pty Ltd
4. Greenhill Engineers Pty Ltd
RESPONDENTS
1. Mount Barker District Council
NEUTRAL CITATION
Lanser Developments No 1 Pty Ltd & Ors v Mount Barker District
Council & Anor
[2025] SACAT 52
Senior Member D’Arcy
2 July 2025
HEARING DATES
On the papers
SACAT FILE NO.
2025/SA001450
ON REVIEW FROM
The applicants initially sought review of a decision of the Ombudsman on
review to reverse the determination of the first respondent
Council under
section 40(2)(c)
Freedom of Information Act 1991
(FOI Act). Prior
to the first listed directions hearing, the applicants requested that the
Tribunal make ‘consent orders’
Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(SACAT Act)
such that the Ombudsman’s determination was set aside.
The applicant submitted that the Tribunal is empowered by
section 52(2) of the SACAT Act
to make any determination or order
necessary to give effect to a settlement if the parties agree in writing to
settle a matter before
the Tribunal. The applicants submitted that the Tribunal
ought to enter orders to ‘quell the dispute’ when the parties
come to an agreement as to the orders they seek.
The respondents did not wish to be heard on the application but otherwise
agreed to the applicant’s proposal. The Ombudsman
was not a party to the
matter pursuant to section 40(6) of the FOI Act.
Section 34 of
the SACAT Act and s 40 of the FOI Act require the Tribunal to review the
decision which is the subject of the proceedings;
Tribunal’s view the Tribunal would not properly comply with s 34(5)
of the SACAT Act if it were to purport to carry out
a rehearing under s 34
without actually hearing from the parties in some form;
Section 52(3) of
the SACAT Act requires the Tribunal to consider whether a proposed settlement
may materially prejudice any person
who is not a party to the settlement but who
has a direct or material interest in the matter. The Tribunal cannot be
satisfied that
no material prejudice exists when there is a complete absence of
submissions from the parties on that point;
Tribunal’s view a request for consent orders in a review under
s 40(2)(c) of the FOI Act ought only to be exercised very
rarely, if ever,
because the decision-maker is not able to be heard on the review;
parties’ request for consent orders to be made is declined.
Administrative review –
Freedom of Information Act 1991
– Parties aggrieved by a determination of the ombudsman following internal
Administrative tribunals – Procedure – Consent orders
LEGISLATION CONSIDERED
Freedom of Information Act 1991
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
CASES CONSIDERED
AGL Loy Yang v Dept Head, Dept of Economic Development, Jobs, Transport
and Resources
[2016] VCAT 1249
John Barr Investments Pty Ltd v Mordialloc Sporting Club Inc
Moloney v 21-25 South Esplanade Pty Ltd
[2024] SASCA 58
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s decision pursuant to
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
. Some of the parties and participants of the proceedings have been
de-identified in accordance with the Tribunal’s anonymisation
Other facts and details that may lead to the identification of any person may
have also been anonymised or omitted. These
changes do not affect the
Tribunal’s decision or its reasons for decision.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Adjournment for further directions – request for consent
orders declined
Made under the
South Australian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Findings of the Tribunal
is an application made under
South Australian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(SACAT Act)
Freedom of Information Act 1991
(FOI Act) for review of a decision of
the Ombudsman made on 2 April 2025.
matter was scheduled for its first telephone directions hearing to take place on
13 June 2025.
to that directions hearing, the parties contacted the Tribunal and requested
that the directions hearing be vacated and that
the Tribunal make ‘consent
orders’ in a form provided to the Tribunal.
Tribunal declined to vacate the directions hearing and it proceeded as scheduled
on 13 June 2025. At that directions hearing the
parties reiterated their request
that the Tribunal make ‘consent orders’. The responding parties said
that they do not
wish to be heard in the matter. The applicant submitted that
the Tribunal is empowered by s 52(2) of the
to make any
determination or order necessary to give effect to a settlement if the parties
agree in writing to settle a matter before
the Tribunal. The applicant pressed
that the Tribunal make orders in the terms of paragraphs 2 and 3 of the
‘consent orders’
provided to the Tribunal, namely that:
decision of the Ombudsman dated 2 April 2025 is set aside.
decision of the Mount Barker District Council on internal review dated 6 August
2024 is affirmed.
Proceedings
under s 34 of the
and/or s 40 of the
are administrative review proceedings. They are not
inter partes
litigation of an adversarial nature.
52(3) of the
fetters the Tribunal’s power to make orders
settling proceedings. Section 52(3) reads:
A settlement under this section must not be inconsistent with a relevant Act and
the Tribunal may reject a settlement under subsection
(2) on the basis that the
settlement may materially prejudice any person who is not a party to the
settlement but who has a direct
or material interest in the matter or that the
terms of the settlement are inappropriate.
‘relevant Act’ is an Act which confers jurisdiction on the Tribunal:
s 3(1). In this matter there are two relevant Acts, namely
itself and the
and s 40 of the
require the
Tribunal to review the decision which is the subject of the proceedings. Those
sections do not empower the Tribunal to
enter consent orders on request by the
parties without conducting such a review. To do so would be inconsistent with
the relevant
Acts, and therefore contrary to s 52(3) of the
is well-established that a tribunal such as this Tribunal when exercising its
review jurisdiction ought not to ‘rubber stamp’
consent orders
provided to it:
AGL Loy Yang v Dept Head, Dept of Economic Development, Jobs,
Transport and Resources
[2016] VCAT 1249
Investments Pty Ltd v Mordialloc Sporting Club Inc
[2022] VSC 100
parties submit ‘consent orders’ to the Tribunal with a request that
the very first directions hearing in the matter
be vacated and the
‘consent orders’ entered in the absence of any other submissions by
the parties, it is difficult to
construe that request as anything other than a
request for the Tribunal to rubber stamp the orders provided to it. Such a
ought not to be granted and in this matter was in my view correctly
to proceedings of any nature in this Tribunal are at liberty to reach whatever
agreements between them that they wish. If
such an agreement is reached, it is
open to the applicant in the Tribunal to seek to withdraw its application and
for the parties
then to proceed on the basis of the agreement reached. If
parties wish to have orders made by the Tribunal, such orders can only
in accordance with the relevant Act/s.
mechanism for review by the Tribunal under s 40(2)(c) of the
has a particular feature which is not present in many of the Acts conferring
review jurisdiction on the Tribunal. That feature is
that the decision-maker
whose decision is under review, namely the Ombudsman, cannot be a party to the
Tribunal proceedings pursuant
to s 40(6) of the
. In my view
a request for consent orders in a review under s 40(2)(c) of the
ought only to be exercised very rarely, if ever, because the decision-maker
is not able to be heard on the review. This obstacle does
not exist in many
other Acts conferring review jurisdiction on the Tribunal, where the
decision-maker is a party to the Tribunal
proceedings.
consequence of this feature of s 40(6) of the
is that the
decision-maker is not present so as to be able to consent to the matter being
remitted for the decision-maker to reconsider
the decision pursuant to s 38
. Section 38 of the
can be a useful tool
for the Tribunal when the parties (including the decision-maker) have come to an
agreement about a different
decision being made. However it is not of assistance
when, as in this matter, the decision-maker is not a party.
rehearing by the Tribunal pursuant to s 34 of the
various forms. In many matters the Tribunal will conduct a rehearing by the
parties appearing in person before it and making
oral submissions, often in
furtherance of written submissions filed in advance. In other matters it may be
appropriate for the Tribunal
to conduct the rehearing ‘on the
papers’ without requiring oral submissions from the parties. Section 34(5)
generally requires the Tribunal on a rehearing to
examine the evidence or material before the decision-maker and to consider any
evidence or material that the Tribunal may decide, in the circumstances
of the particular case, to admit for the purposes of rehearing
the matter. In my
view the Tribunal would not properly comply with s 34(5) of the
if it were to purport to carry out a rehearing under s 34 without
actually hearing from the parties in some form, whether that be
orally or in
writing. How extensive that hearing must be may vary depending on the nature of
the matter. It must however in my view
be more than the parties providing the
Tribunal with a request for ‘consent orders’ to be made.
52(3) of the
requires the Tribunal to consider whether a
proposed settlement may materially prejudice any person who is not a party to
the settlement
but who has a direct or material interest in the matter. The
Tribunal cannot be satisfied that no material prejudice exists when
complete absence of submissions from the parties on that point. Where a party is
a public body of some kind, such as a
local council, the proceedings have a
public character. In my view a public decision-maker or body consenting to a
settlement ought
to demonstrate that the decision-maker or body, in giving its
consent, has had appropriate regard to all of the relevant matters
required to consider under the enabling enactment (including relevant matters of
a ‘public’ character) and that
the proposed consent position does
not materially prejudice any person who is not a party to the settlement but who
has a direct
or material interest in the matter.
this matter, Mount Barker District Council gave its consent to the proposed
consent orders but then sought not to have to participate
any further in the
matter, contrary to the requirements of
s 40(5) that it be a
party to the review. I am not satisfied that that is an appropriate course. The
Tribunal has no means of knowing
whose interests might be materially prejudiced
if it acceded to the parties’ request that the decision of the Mount
District Council dated 6 August 2024 (that four documents are exempt from
disclosure pursuant to
Schedule 1 clause 7(1)) be substituted for
the decision of the Ombudsman dated 2 April 2025 that those four documents are
from disclosure due to their age and the fact that the development to
which they relate has been completed.
of the parties has yet put any submission to the Tribunal, however brief, about
why they say the Ombudsman’s decision is
not the correct and preferable
decision and why the Tribunal ought to set aside that decision and substitute
the decision of the
Mount Barker District Council dated 6 August 2024 in
accordance with the consent orders provided. This includes the party which
sought review by the Ombudsman of the decision of the Mount Barker
District Council. Why that party is now (apparently) content with
the decision
of the Mount Barker District Council is unclear to the Tribunal. Like Mount
Barker District Council, that party too
sought not to have to participate any
further in the matter, despite the requirements of
I leave aside for the time being the point that the true identity is undisclosed
of the party which made the original application
to Mount Barker District
Council for disclosure of documents and then sought review by the Ombudsman of
the decision of the Council.
That party acted first through an employee of a law
firm and acts now through a partner of the same law firm who is individually
named as a respondent in these proceedings (his name having been substituted by
the Tribunal Registry for the law firm employee’s
name, without objection
from any party, on the grounds that the employee has left that firm). It may be
that the Tribunal does not
need to know on whose behalf the law firm was acting.
However, if it is to consider proposed settlement orders, it is clear that
Tribunal needs to satisfy itself that s 52(3) of the
not contravened by the proposed orders.
my view the Tribunal cannot satisfy itself that s 52(3) of the
is not contravened if the parties to the proceeding do not put any
submission to the Tribunal beyond unadorned consent to the proposed
orders. Nor can the Tribunal properly conduct a rehearing under s 34 of the
if all that the parties provide it with is such unadorned
consent to settlement orders. In this matter the Ombudsman has separately
provided the Tribunal with the material that was before it, but that does not
entitle the parties not to make any submissions at
all of their own and only to
provide the Tribunal with proposed consent orders.
applicant submitted that the SA Court of Appeal decision in
Moloney v 21-25
South Esplanade Pty Ltd
[2024] SASCA 58
has the effect that the Tribunal
ought to enter orders to ‘quell the dispute’ when the parties have
come to an agreement
as to the orders they seek. I do not accept that
stands for that principle, nor that it binds the Tribunal to enter consent
orders when requested by parties to do so in an administrative
review matter. In
such a matter, the Tribunal must consider, at a minimum, whether s 52(3) of
has been satisfied and whether the Tribunal has fulfilled
the requirements of the relevant Act within the meaning of s 52(3). This
will usually require the Tribunal to conduct some form of rehearing, after
having heard the parties to some extent on that rehearing.
It may require a full
rehearing with both written and oral submissions by the parties. The Tribunal
should also consider whether
it is appropriate to remit the matter to the
decision-maker pursuant to s 38 of the
applicant to withdraw its application and for the parties to proceed on the
basis of their agreement.
this matter I am not persuaded that s 52(3) of the
been satisfied. Further, I do not consider it appropriate to entertain
‘consent orders’ in a matter under s 40(2)(c)
before conducting at least some form of rehearing based on submissions from
the parties.
will decline the parties’ request for consent orders. I will relist the
matter for a further directions hearing to discuss
the future progress of the
matter. On that occasion all parties should be prepared to address the Tribunal
on (at least) the question
of why they say that the Ombudsman’s decision
was not the correct and preferable decision, and whether, if the
Ombudsman’s
decision were to be set aside, there might exist any material
prejudice to any person who is not a party but who has a direct or
interest in the matter. Such submissions should enable the Tribunal to consider
the nature and extent of rehearing required
for the Tribunal to be able to carry
out its task pursuant to s 34 of the
and s 40 of the
Orders of the Tribunal
parties’ request for consent orders to be made is declined.
Tribunal sets this matter down for a further telephone directions hearing on a
date to be determined and notified to the parties
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.21 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter