URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SADC/2025/111.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:55:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v KHY [2025] SADC 111 (3 September 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Criminal: Application)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
[2025] SADC 111
Reasons for Ruling of her Honour
Judge Matteo
3 September 2025
CRIMINAL LAW - EVIDENCE - MISCELLANEOUS MATTERS - STATUTORY PROVISIONS
RELATING TO EVIDENCE OF CHILDREN
The defendant is charged with the offence of sexual abuse of a child contrary
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA). The Director
of Public Prosecutions applies for orders pursuant to
Evidence Act 1929
(SA) that the evidence of the child complainant be
admitted at the defendant's trial in the form of two 'prescribed interviews'
on separate occasions. The defendant seeks exclusion of the prescribed
interviews on the grounds of asserted police non-compliance
Division 3 of the
Summary Offences Act 1953
(SA). The admission of the
second prescribed interview in time is effectively contingent upon the admission
of the first prescribed
The first prescribed interview was conducted at the complainant's school by a
police officer who had completed an 'Interagency Practice
in Child Protection'
course and was recorded on a portable video camera. The police officer engaged
in an amount of conversation
with the child prior to activating the camera,
the police officer engaged in further conversation with the child,
including on substantive topics which related to the investigation
At a time after the first prescribed interview, the police officer became
aware that the recording had inexplicably become broken
up into four electronic
files and, further, that the audio and video components of the recording were
not synchronised. The recording
was provided to a digital forensic expert who
aligned the audio and video components to produce a 'transcoded' version of the
The source files from which the expert produced the transcoded
version of the audio visual record of the interview have since lost
components. The prosecution seeks to admit the transcoded recording as the
complainant's evidence at trial.
transcoded version of the first prescribed interview is not an audio visual
record of the evidence of the complainant and is
therefore not admissible under
Evidence Act 1929
the transcoded version of the first prescribed interview is an audio visual
record of the evidence of the complainant:
(a) The interview was conducted in accordance with the
Summary Offences
Regulations 2016
recording requirements to include details of breaks;
(b) The interview was conducted by a prescribed interviewer;
(c) The interview was conducted in accordance with the
Summary Offences
Regulations 2016
prescribed requirements so far as the statement for the
most part not being elicited by use of leading questions;
(d) The interview is inadmissible as the prescribed interviewer failed to
comply with
Division 3 of the
Summary Offences Act 1953
recording all conversations which formed part of the complainant's interview as
a potential witness in the investigation of
a serious offence against the
person, as required by
The interests of justice do not require the
admission of the evidence despite this non-compliance.
Director of Public Prosecutions' application for an order admitting the first
prescribed interview is refused.
Criminal Law Consolidation Act
Evidence Act 1929
Summary Offences Act 1953
Police Act 1998
Summary Offences Regulations 2016
(SA) regs 20(1), 20(1)(c)(i), 21,
23(1), 23(1)(a)(i), 23(1)(a)(ii), 23(1)(a)(iii), 23(7), 23(7)(a),
Legislation Interpretation Act 2021
Statutes Amendment
(Vulnerable Witnesses) Act 2015
(SA), referred to.
(2018) 131 SASR 111
Question of Law Reserved (No 1 of
[2021] SASCA 148
Brown (A Pseudonym) v The King
[2025] SASCA
Steen v The Queen
SASCFC [2020] 60;
Lindsay v The King; Rankine v
The King; Woods v The King
[2022] SASCA 138
[2022] SADC
R v King & Pitson (No 2)
(1998) 199 LSJS 112
[2017] SASCFC 108
Sears v The Queen
(2020) 137 SASR 219
State of South Australia
[2024] SASC 97
, considered.
[2025] SADC 111
Introduction
defendant is charged with the offence of sexual abuse of a child contrary to
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA). The defendant has
elected to be tried by judge alone.
particulars of the offence are that between 2019 and 2022 at certain places the
defendant maintained an unlawful sexual relationship
with the complainant, JY, a
person under the age of 17 years, by engaging in two or more unlawful sexual
acts with or towards her,
namely, touching her breasts, thighs and genital area
on more than one occasion and watching pornography in her presence.
was born on 5 October 2011 and is now 13 years old.
Director of Public Prosecutions applies for orders pursuant to
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence Act
’) that the evidence of
JY be admitted at the defendant’s trial in the form of audio visual
records of interviews conducted
with JY on 20 October 2023 and 2 May 2024
(‘the prescribed
interviews’).
suffices for the purposes of this ruling to summarise that in the course of the
first prescribed interview with JY conducted on
20 October 2023 (‘the
first prescribed interview’), JY provided an account of alleged sexual
touching by the defendant
in situations at her grandfather’s house and at
the defendant’s house, and of disclosures which she made to family members
on 2 May 2024 (‘the second prescribed interview’)
entirely referable to the first interview and involved JY elaborating upon
aspects of her earlier account, including by
drawing diagrams of relevant
locations. The prosecution’s application for orders for admission of the
prescribed interviews
is to facilitate JY’s evidence being admitted at the
defendant’s trial in that form.
Evidence Act
relevantly provides that, subject to the section, in
the trial of a charge of an offence, the court may order that the evidence of
witness be admitted in the form of an audio visual record.
Section 13BA(3)
the conditions under which an audio visual record of the evidence of a witness
may be admitted, which include if the recording
has been made pursuant to
Division 3 of the
Summary Offences Act 1953
Act’) and the court is satisfied of further enumerated matters relating to
the capacity of the witness to give
sworn or unsworn evidence at the time the
recording was made, the defendant having been given a reasonable opportunity to
recording and the availability of the witness to give further evidence
if required.
17 Division 3 of the SO Act is concerned with the recording of interviews with
certain vulnerable witnesses, which include potential
witnesses of or under the
age of 14 years and alleged victims of child sexual
An interview with a
vulnerable witness who is to be interviewed as a potential witness in relation
to the investigation of a serious
offence against the person must be conducted
according to the following requirements which are set in s 74EB of the SO
(a) an audio visual recording of the interview must be made in accordance with
the regulations;
(b) the interview must be conducted by a prescribed interviewer;
(c) the manner in which the interview is conducted must meet the prescribed
requirements to the prescribed extent.
applicable regulations are contained in Part 4 of the
Summary Offences
Regulations 2016
(‘SO Regulations’).
will be necessary to return to the relevant provisions of the
Evidence Act
the SO Act, and to the details of the SO Regulations.
relation to the first prescribed interview, the prosecution seeks to have
admitted an adjusted version of the original recording
which was produced by a
digital forensic expert aligning the audio and video components which were
discovered to have become desynchronised
on the original recording. Later in
this ruling, the recording sought to be admitted by the prosecution is referred
to as the ‘transcoded’
version of the interview.
defendant seeks orders that the prescribed interviews be excluded from evidence
on the grounds that they were not made pursuant
to, or in compliance with, Part
17 Division 3 of the SO Act and are therefore
inadmissible.
In relation to the
first prescribed interview, the defendant argues preliminarily that the
recording sought to be admitted by the
prosecution, which has been subject to
post-recording electronic intervention, does not constitute an audio visual
record of the
evidence of the witness, and is therefore not recorded evidence
subject to admission under
Evidence Act
parties proceeded in effective agreement that the admissibility of the second
prescribed interview is contingent upon the admission
of the first. The second
prescribed interview is inextricably linked to the first prescribed interview
and, as I understand the position,
is not sought to be admitted standing
voir dire hearing was conducted at which the audio visual recordings sought to
be admitted by the prosecution were tendered and
evidence was led about the
circumstances in which the prescribed interviews with JY were conducted. The
police officer who conducted
the prescribed interviews with JY (‘the
prescribed interviewer’) gave evidence and was cross-examined. The
prosecution
also tendered a report of the digital forensic expert who produced
the adjusted version of the first prescribed interview and an
affidavit of the
Commissioner of Police speaking to the prescribed interviewer’s status as
the reasons that follow, I refuse the Director’s application for an order
admitting the evidence of JY in the form of an
audio visual record of interview
conducted on 20 October 2023. I am not satisfied that the adjusted audio visual
record which the
Director seeks to have admitted constitutes an audio visual
record of the evidence of a witness which may be admitted pursuant to
Evidence Act
. If I am incorrect in arriving at that conclusion, I would
nevertheless decline to admit the audio visual record of the evidence
of the prescribed interviewer’s non-compliance with the obligation to
record all conversations with the witness
in relation to the investigation the
subject of the interview.
Evidence on the voir dire
Brevet Sergeant Kristy Whyatt
prescribed interviews of JY were conducted by a police officer, Brevet Sergeant
Kristy Whyatt (‘BS Whyatt’), who
I gather is also the investigating
officer in this matter. The prosecution placed evidence of BS Whyatt’s
conduct of the prescribed
interviews with JY before the court in the form of
affidavits of BS Whyatt,
examination in chief and the recordings
themselves.
BS Whyatt was
cross-examined by Senior Counsel for the defendant.
Sergeant Whyatt’s training and experience
Whyatt is currently stationed at the Southern District Child and Family
Investigation Section, where she has worked for the past
eight to nine months.
Prior to this posting, she worked at the Western District Child and Family
Investigation Section. As part of
her duties, she undertakes interviews of
vulnerable witnesses.
2012, BS Whyatt undertook and completed a two-week ‘interagency child
protection course’
by SAPOL and TAFE, the curriculum for which is set out in documents appended to
her affidavit made on 9 April 2025.
Having completed that course, BS Whyatt conducted interviews with vulnerable
interpolate here that the records attached to BS Whyatt’s affidavit
describe the course as ‘Interagency Practice in
Protection’.
cross-examination, BS Whyatt was unable to say whether her training had included
details of the requirements of the SO Act
or Regulations. Since 2021, she has
undertaken a non-compulsory refresher course relating to the conduct of
‘the interview
which did not
deal with obligations under the applicable legislation. BS Whyatt understands
that there is an obligation to announce
everyone in the interview because the
entire interview room is not visible on camera. She understands that an
interviewer is not
supposed to ask leading questions, because children are more
easily led and so, she explained, the idea is to ask open questions
them to provide the answer rather than the interviewer guiding them in a
both prescribed interviews, BS Whyatt adopted a questioning technique which
consisted of summarising and putting back JY’s
previous answers which, she
said, was intended to give JY an opportunity to correct her if she had the
account wrong. BS Whyatt said
that she did not consider such questions to be
leading questions, however, she conceded the possibility of a child agreeing
what was put back irrespective of accuracy due to the environment of the
First prescribed interview with JY on 20 October
20 October 2023, BS Whyatt attended at Cowandilla Primary School in response to
a written CARL
notification made
by the school concerning an allegation of sexual abuse and received by her on 18
October 2023. This was BS Whyatt’s
reason for conducting the first
prescribed interview with JY. Implicit in BS Whyatt’s evidence, JY had
made a disclosure to
the wellbeing officer at her school.
cross-examination, BS Whyatt agreed that there was no urgency in having a
conversation with JY insofar as the information which
she had suggested that
there had not been any alleged offending in that year, however, she said that
there was urgency on account
of the information suggesting that JY was still
being exposed to the alleged offender and she was unsure how protective
parents were as the information suggested that they were aware of the
alleged offending and had not taken steps to report it. It
was BS Whyatt’s
understanding that JY’s parents had not been informed of JY’s
disclosure to the school.
Whyatt said that she wished to speak to JY to establish how protective her
parents were and if there were offences requiring further
investigation. She
held a concern that JY’s parents might not let JY speak to her and made a
decision to conduct a prescribed
interview with the child without informing the
child’s parents of her intention to do so. She made this decision in the
that the prescribed interview would be available as JY’s
evidence in a prosecution.
Whyatt conducted an interview with JY in a room at the school, which she video
recorded. The recorded interview commenced at 9.43am
and concluded at 10.25am.
The only persons visible in the recording are BS Whyatt and JY. BS Whyatt
gave evidence that only she and
JY were in the room at the time of the
Conversation prior to recording
Whyatt was cross-examined extensively as to whether she had any conversation
with JY prior to the commencement of the recorded
interview. She initially
stated that there was no conversation with JY about the offending. She said that
JY was brought into the
room and they met each other, but there was ‘no
conversation about the offending until the
interview’.
BS Whyatt arrived at the school, JY was in her class. JY was brought into the
room where BS Whyatt was (where the recorded interview
was conducted) by a
BS Whyatt first saw JY
when JY was brought into the room. In what I took to be a reference to her
handwritten notes, BS Whyatt stated,
‘9.30 prescribed interview and 9.43
interview commenced.’
inference from BS Whyatt’s evidence is that there was a period of
13 minutes before the recording commenced in which there
was opportunity
for conversation with JY which is unrecorded.
Whyatt said that, prior to the recorded portion of the interview, she explained
that they would do an interview that would be
recorded and they would talk about
the things that JY had already spoken to the school about. BS Whyatt was unsure
whether she told
JY why they were doing an interview as she could not remember
the conversation. BS Whyatt had no note and no record of what was discussed
prior to the recording.
Whyatt was unable to recall the conversation which she had with JY prior to the
commencement of the recording about what the interview
was to be about, and she
had no note of it. BS Whyatt gave evidence of the gist of this part of the
conversation to the effect that
she said it was in relation to ‘stuff [JY]
had previously told the
She said that she
just explained to JY that she was there because of the things (she was unable to
recall whether she said ‘things’
or ‘stuff’) JY had
reported to the school, that she needed to find out a bit more detail and if JY
was willing to do
an interview with her about that to discuss it. She doubted
that she would have used the expression ‘allegations of sexual
abuse’ to a child, but did not recall the exact words used.
Whyatt was asked whether she gave JY the opportunity to have a support person
present, and said that she did so. She said that
the conversation was simply,
“You could have someone sit in with you if you felt more
comfortable”
, and that this was ‘just [her] initial conversation
with JY before they started the official
interview’.
note and no record of this part of the conversation and therefore could not
recount the exact words used. The effect of
the words, she said, was,
“We’d like to do an interview that would be recorded.
You’re welcome to have someone sit in with you if you feel
comfortable, but if you’re comfortable just with me, then we can just do
it, the two of us in the
Whyatt went on to say that she said that JY could have her wellbeing officer or
someone like her wellbeing officer sit in with
her if she felt more comfortable,
but she could not recall her exact words. She may have said counsellor or
someone else in the school.
BS Whyatt said that she has done ‘a few
interviews’ and ‘generally’ she would say the interviewee was
to have someone sit in with them and would suggest the wellbeing officer
or ‘someone like that’ if they wanted to have
She did not explain to JY
‘as such’ the purpose of someone sitting
Whyatt believed, based on her practice, that the school staff member remained in
the room until JY said that she was happy to
do the interview with just her, but
could not specifically recall whether that was the
Whyatt was cross-examined about whether she gave consideration to the matter of
whether JY required a prescribed
while being
interviewed. Her assessment was that she did not consider that JY required a
companion because JY was able to communicate
quite well, appeared reasonably
confident, agreed that she was happy to speak with BS Whyatt on her own and did
not request to have
anyone sit in with her. BS Whyatt did not record or note her
conversations with JY leading her to make this
assessment.
Conversation post-recording
Whyatt was cross-examined about conversations which she had with JY after the
video recorder was deactivated.
the course of the first prescribed interview, one of the persons to whom JY
claims to have made a disclosure about the alleged
offending was a cousin, K.
BS Whyatt initially stated in answer to a question in cross-examination
that she did not have another
conversation with JY about K. After being taken to
a handwritten note about K being a possible victim and possibly the
defendant’s
niece, BS Whyatt agreed that was something JY spoke to her
after the interview to do some
follow-up’.
Whyatt was taken to a further note apparently relating to JY’s
parents’ work schedules and movements, in relation
to which she said
‘that conversation’ occurred immediately after the interview after
she had switched off the
Whyatt was taken to yet another note relating to the defendant not working and
his wife’s employment.
Whyatt explained, in what I took to be a reference to all of those
post-interview notes, that she was explaining that she needed
follow-up with JY’s parents and when would be a suitable time to go and
see them, and in relation to the possibility
of having to follow up details with
the defendant and K. She said that JY gave her those details ‘which was
only those lines’.
Whyatt was unable to recall the questions she asked JY to obtain that
information.
the course of the first prescribed interview, in the context of talking about a
disclosure to her parents in 2022, JY stated that
they told her to keep her
distance from the defendant and they stopped attending her grandfather’s
house as frequently.
cross-examination BS Whyatt was asked whether she had any conversation with JY
‘not specifically’
other than what JY had said in the interview that ‘her plan with mum and
dad was not to be in
the room with [the defendant] on her
BS Whyatt said that
there was no further conversation on this topic from the interview with JY.
Whyatt was then taken to an affidavit which she made on 7 January 2024, in which
she deposed as
interview concluded I spoke to the protected person who advised that she is in
fear of the defendant. She states she avoids
the defendant when at family
functions and makes sure never to be in a room on her own with him. She also
makes sure one of her parents
are now in the room with her whenever he is around
for fear of what he may do.
Whyatt did not conduct a prescribed interview of JY in relation to those matters
and agreed that they were not matters which she
noted in her notebook.
Consequently she agreed that she was unable to say what questions she asked, and
what answers JY made, on
this topic. BS Whyatt agreed that in conversing with JY
on this topic of her fear and relationship with the defendant, she was asking
questions in relation to her investigation.
The audio visual
recording of the interview
prosecution tendered a USB containing the audio visual recordings of the
prescribed interviews
course of BS Whyatt’s evidence in chief. When the USB was inserted into
the courtroom equipment to be played, the first
interview presented in two
and the other titled
‘Transcoded’
. The prosecutor informed the court that the
transcoded file was to be
The prosecutor had
earlier informed the court that the first interview consisted of ‘four
separate video clips that comprise
interview’.
three clips (or files) were played in sequence and without difficulty. No
objection was taken to this course, nor was the
court initially alerted to any
issue concerning the nature, provenance or quality of the recording.
the playing of the fourth file in the course of BS Whyatt’s evidence in
chief, I remarked to counsel about what I observed
to be a disconnect between
the audio and visual components of the recording, in relation to which I was
informed by the prosecutor
The recording
was the subject of some intervention and amelioration and that is why
there’s the transcoded file on the USB.
The original file had the two
audio and video not running together. This is the best quality that was able to
be achieved with professional
intervention.
recording was played through to completion.
evidence in chief, BS Whyatt said that she video recorded the
20 October 2023 interview with JY and agreed in answer to a leading
question that at a later time she had copied the recording onto a CD or
different media.
recording being in four parts, she said that there were no breaks during the
course of the interview and that it flowed
from beginning to end without any
cross-examination on this topic, BS Whyatt said that the ‘original’
had four separate files.
said that the camera she used ‘just broke up the full length of the audio
and video into four segments for some reason’,
but she was unsure
Although the video has
breaks, she disagreed that they represented ‘four separate videos’
that had been adjusted to make
a continuous
respect to her checking of the recording equipment which she used to conduct the
first prescribed interview, BS Whyatt said
that when she got the recording
device (camera), she made sure the battery was charged ‘and that sort of
thing’, but
that was all she
However, she did not
conduct any check or trial to see if it recorded correctly before she commenced
recording the interview with
JY. BS Whyatt agreed that there are dedicated
recording facilities for prescribed interviews at the SAPOL Victim Management
which she could have made a booking to use as there was no urgency in
conducting the interview with JY when she did.
‘transcoded’ version of the audio visual recording
cross-examination, BS Whyatt said in answer to specific questioning on the topic
that the original recording ‘had an issue
with the words or the mouths
going slightly separate to the audio so they had to get that sent off to a
professional who was able
to adjust and fix
At the time of
recording, she was unaware of the issue; she only became aware of it on viewing.
BS Whyatt said that her understanding
was that the only thing that was altered
was the issue with the words and mouthing not being in sync. BS Whyatt agreed
that the lack
of synchronisation in the original recording was quite
voir dire proceeded on the basis of the original recording and the adjusted
(‘transcoded’) version both appearing
on the USB exhibit,
As will be seen, an issue
later arose in relation to what the original/source and transcoded versions of
the interview on VDP5 actually
represented.
Second prescribed
interview with JY on 2 May 2024
2 May 2024, BS Whyatt conducted a further interview with JY, this time in an
interview room at the Port Adelaide police station.
This interview came about as
a result of a request from the prosecution to clarify certain points from the
previous interview. BS
Whyatt said that she made arrangements with JY’s
father for JY to be brought in to see her.
Whyatt said that it was just she and JY present during this interview, and that
the interview was video recorded on a hand-held
video camera because, although
there was video equipment set up in the interview room, she thinks that
something was wrong with the
Whyatt said that prior to commencing this prescribed interview, she only had an
introductory ‘hello-type’ conversation
She stated that all
discussions with JY regarding ‘what she wanted to speak to her
BS Whyatt said that there
were no breaks in the course of the interview.
Accompanying JY
at proofings with the prosecution
Whyatt was cross-examined about accompanying JY to the offices of the Director
of Public Prosecutions (‘DPP’) for
meetings and proofings on
29 July 2024 and 24 March 2025. The first such meeting was described
as a ‘meet and
24 March 2025, BS Whyatt was present for a meeting between JY, both of her
parents, a prosecutor and a witness assistance officer
from the office of the
DPP. She said that the meeting related to the reticence of JY’s parents to
give evidence and was ‘an
opportunity for them to explain the importance
of them coming to court as
witnesses’.
The meeting
lasted about one hour and comprised of a conversation of all persons present
together, followed by JY being spoken to
on her own to confirm that she still
wished to go ahead. The contents of JY’s prescribed interviews were not
discussed. BS
Whyatt had no notes about the parents’ reticence or what was
discussed with JY.
Statement taken from JY
Whyatt gave evidence about a further conversation which she had with JY on 18
February 2025 which was not the subject of an audio
visually recorded interview
which involved taking a witness statement from JY on the topic of a text message
which JY had sent to
her mother in connection with the alleged offending, which
had been mentioned by JY in the first prescribed interview. BS Whyatt
that she was endeavouring to obtain any messages that might reflect what JY had
said about that.
Whyatt said that this conversation and statement-taking came about through
arrangements made via email with JY’s father.
Whyatt took the statement from JY at her family home on a mobile rugged tablet,
and had JY sign it electronically on that device.
There was no impediment to her
taking a recording device and no reason for her not to have done so.
the same occasion, BS Whyatt took a statement from JY’s mother, I gather
on the same topic, while JY was present in the
same room. JY’s mother had
been present in the same room when BS Whyatt took the statement from JY.
day after BS Whyatt had given the evidence on this topic in
cross‑examination, she was asked whether she had discussed
her evidence
with anyone. She said that she spoke with a colleague who works in the same
section, who she described as ‘experienced-ish’,
counsel had asked her in
cross-examination.
In speaking
to this colleague, BS Whyatt said that she identified a number of errors which
she had made, being that she had taken
a statement from JY on 18 February 2025
when she should have undertaken a further prescribed interview, and that she had
JY’s father as an interpreter in taking the statement from
JY’s mother on the same occasion, which was a ‘conflict
interest’ as he was a potential
Whyatt also acknowledged that she had sent a text message to the prosecutor that
morning seeking to have a chat, which message
was not responded to. BS Whyatt
stated that she did not realise that she was not permitted to discuss her
evidence with anybody while
under cross-examination. She said that the
‘penny dropped’ when the prosecutor told her that morning that she
talk to her. With respect to speaking to her colleague, BS Whyatt said
that she did not realise that the prohibition on discussing
her evidence in
cross-examination extended to ‘someone not involved in the
Matthew Sorell
prosecution tendered a report of Dr Matthew
to whom the original
recording of the first prescribed interview was sent for adjustment. He was not
called to give evidence. Dr
Sorell is the principal consultant and chief
technology officer at Digital Forensic Sciences Pty Ltd. He is also a senior
at the University of Adelaide's School of Electrical and Electronic
Engineering. Dr Sorell has experience in multimedia and video
engineering. On 16 April 2024, Dr Sorell met with a police officer and
received four
video files, which
are described as
Today at 10:20 AM
20 Oct 2023 at 2.11 PM
MPEG-4 movie
20 Oct 2023 at 2.17 PM
MPEG-4 movie
20 Oct 2023 at 2.34 PM
MPEG-4 movie
24 Oct 2023 at 11:41 AM
MPEG-4 movie
police enquiry which preceded the provision of the video files to Dr Sorell
related to a prescribed interview video ‘for
which the visual and audio
components appeared to lose
synchronisation’.
Sorell ‘transcoded’ the video files in what I understand to have
been an effort to resynchronise the visual and audio
components by means which
he explains as
hoc analysis suggested that both the video and audio streams were intact and ran
linearly (that is, there are no gaps or
variable speeds).
There are multiple techniques that could be applied to resynchronise the
video and audio. I tested the most straightforward process
at my disposal,
involving minimal intervention, by transcoding the video using the software tool
HandBrake. I found that this process
correctly aligned the audio and video
across all files.
I therefore transcoded the supplied video files using HandBrake, which has
aligned the video and audio streams. These were subsequently
supplied on a USB
memory labelled “[Y] DFSA 16/4/24”, and contains also the supplied
source video files. These were delivered
to BIRD at 11:00 on 16 April 2024.
Commissioner Grantley Stevens and SAPOL general orders
prosecution also tendered an affidavit of Grantley Stevens, the Commissioner of
South Australia Police (‘Commissioner Stevens’),
concerning the
status of the interagency child protection course undertaken by BS Whyatt by way
of a training course in conducting
interviews with vulnerable
In summary,
Commissioner Stevens deposes that the Interagency Practice in Child Protection
training course undertaken by BS Whyatt
in 2012 is a training course in
conducting interviews with vulnerable witnesses approved by him for the purpose
of reg 20(1)(c)(i)
of the SO Regulations. It will be necessary to return to the
detail of the affidavit of Commissioner Stevens.
versions of the SAPOL General Order relating to interviewing suspects and
vulnerable witnesses (issued on 21 September 2022)
were admitted into evidence,
which differed as to the extent of redacted
issue arises in relation to the original recording and ‘transcoded’
versions of the first prescribed interview
prosecution’s application for an order pursuant to
Evidence Act
that the evidence of JY be admitted at the defendant’s trial
in the form of an audio visual record of an interview conducted
on 20 October
2023 relates to the transcoded version of the original interview produced by Dr
Sorell. The prosecution does not seek
to have the original recording admitted as
the evidence of JY. This was made clear on the hearing of the application.
the conclusion of the parties’ submissions on the voir dire (conducted
between 25 May 2025 and 30 May 2025), there existed
a threshold issue for
determination, namely, whether the transcoded version is an audio visual record
of the evidence of JY such
that it is amenable to admission under
Evidence Act
defence submits that the intervention by Dr Sorell to produce the transcoded
version of the first prescribed interview has resulted
in the creation of
something which is not an audio visual recording of the interview between
BS Whyatt and JY. At essence, the argument
is that the intervention has
altered the fundamental character of that which constituted the original audio
visual recording made
by BS Whyatt such that the transcoded version does not
meet the description of an audio visual record of the interview with JY (made
the time of that interview). In other words, by its very nature, the transcoded
version of the interview is a conversion of the
original recording, not a
faithful reproduction or copy of it. The defence argues that, as an intervention
has occurred to produce
the transcoded version which is sought to be admitted as
the witness’s evidence, the court’s ability to properly assess
demeanour of the witness is compromised because the final product is not the
actual simultaneous recording of the witness’s
verbal and physical
responses to being asked questions.
further, interconnected facet of the defence submission is that the resultant
recording of the interview being in four electronic
parts, which formed the
foundational ‘source’ material for Dr Sorell’s corrective
intervention, means that the
record which the prosecution seeks to have admitted
as the evidence of JY cannot meet the description of an audio visual record of
her interview because the electronic breaks which have resulted in the four
parts constitute multiple separate recordings. A vice
of this result is that the
court is reliant upon the interviewing police officer’s evidence in order
to be satisfied that there
were no breaks in the recording within the context of
a scheme which requires the details of any breaks to be included in the
and thereby
objectively demonstrated.
defence also argues that the legislative scheme governing the recording of
interviews with vulnerable witnesses for admission
into evidence in criminal
proceedings does not allow for electronic intervention to ameliorate a
compromised recording, which underscores
the essentiality of a compliant audio
visual recording being made at the time of interview. Underpinning the defence
submission is
the notion that high obligations of compliance by police exist
because of the exceptional course of taking a witness’s evidence
of a court room.
prosecution contends that a viewing of the four files which constitute the
transcoded version of the first interview demonstrates
that the files
collectively represent a single, sequential interview without breaks of time or
activity which is unaccounted for,
and that this conclusion is consistent with
BS Whyatt’s evidence that an interview without breaks was conducted.
prosecution emphasises that the admissibility provision,
, provides for the admission of an audio visual record, but does not
stipulate a requirement for an original recording; likewise,
s 74EC of the SO
Act is concerned with the admissibility of a recording of an interview without
reference to an original.
prosecution submits that a viewing of the transcoded interview reveals that it
is an audio visual record of the first prescribed
interview, for it contains
both the audio and visual components of that event. The prosecution relies upon
Dr Sorell’s assertion
that the audio and video streams on the source
files which he received were intact and ran linearly to establish that the
version which he produced is a faithful derivation from the camera
recording of the interview. There is no evidence of anything being
added to, or
removed from, the original recording by the transcoding process.
was invited by the prosecution to view the entire contents of Exhibit VDP5, the
USB containing copies of the original (‘source’)
and transcoded
versions of the first prescribed interview, with a view to determining that the
transcoded version was in effect a
faithful record of the original interview. It
should be noted that the four electronic parts of the original version of the
do not have date/time stamps embedded within the footage.
reserved my ruling, I viewed Exhibit VDP5, in particular the
‘source’ file, with a view to evaluating how it compared
transcoded version of the interview.
file structure upon opening the USB consisted of two folders, one titled
‘source’ and the other titled ‘transcoded’,
which contained MP4 video files.
viewing the source file contents in my chambers, I was unable to discern any
fault with the recording, and advised the parties
accordingly. The matter was
called back on, and the prosecution was unable to explain the discrepancy
between the faultless source
material on Exhibit VDP5 and BS Whyatt’s
evidence, apparently supported by the report of Dr Sorell, that the original
of the interview (said to be contained in the source file) was quite
dramatically unsynchronised. I permitted the prosecution an
opportunity to
investigate this issue and to place further evidence before the court with a
view to addressing the evidentiary discrepancy.
prosecution subsequently tendered the following further materials: an affidavit
of BS Whyatt made on 10 June
an affidavit of police
officer Sarah Vanessa Bird made on 10 June
a statement of agreed
and a USB which contains
the source and transcoded files (the subject of VDP5) as provided to SAPOL by Dr
further affidavit materials establish the following:
Whyatt recorded the interview conducted with JY on 20 October 2023 on a handheld
video camera which contained an SD (Secure Digital)
order to make a copy of the recording on the SD card, upon returning to the Port
Adelaide police station, BS Whyatt removed the
SD card from the camera and
placed it into a multi card reader, which was in turn plugged into her work
Whyatt located four files on the SD card which related to the interview
(‘that were relevant to [the] interview’) and
transferred those
files to her work computer desktop. BS Whyatt then copied the data onto two
blank DVDs; two discs were required
to accommodate the size of the files. BS
Whyatt marked the resultant copies as
, and booked
them into SAPOL exhibit property storage under property item number PE0001
(‘the original
Whyatt made another copy of the discs which she marked as
(‘the working
BS Whyatt worked
off of the working copy, for example to produce a
transcript.
or about 9 April 2024, while reviewing the working copy, BS Whyatt
‘identified an issue with [the] audio/visual recordings,
whereby the audio
starts pulling away from the visual after playing for a short amount of
At about the same
time, BS Whyatt became aware of a colleague, Brevet Sergeant Sarah Bird
(‘BS Bird’), experiencing a
similar issue in an unrelated matter. BS
Bird made contact with Dr Sorell regarding the
16 April 2024 BS Bird delivered what BS Whyatt assumed to be the/a working copy
of the interview conducted with JY on 20 October
2023 to Dr Sorell. Dr
Sorell provided ‘another copy of the interview without any errors’,
which I take to be the transcoded
SD card from the handheld video camera which BS Whyatt used to record the
interview conducted with JY on 20 October 2023 and the
four files from the SD
card which were transferred to BS Whyatt’s work computer desktop are no
longer available.
appears that BS Whyatt became aware of a problem with the recording of the first
prescribed interview with JY when she reviewed
the working copy on about 9 April
2024, which she describes as ‘the audio starts pulling away from the
visual after playing
for a short amount of
As I read BS
Whyatt’s most recent affidavit, this awareness led to the engagement of Dr
Sorell. Forward in time, on 6 June
2025 (after the issue relating to VDP5 was
brought to the attention of the parties), BS Whyatt retrieved the original discs
property storage and reviewed them. She describes the outcome of her review
of the original discs as
watching the first video (recording 1) I became aware that the video crashes at
recording. I was not aware of
this problem prior to booking the disc onto the police property system.
I did note however that the other recordings (2, 3 & 4) do contain the
original errors identified (audio and video not in sync).
However, I also noted
that the video needs to be played continuously without any stopping or pausing
for the original error to present
itself. If the recording is stopped, paused or
skipped forward/backward the error doesn’t always occur.
I also became aware upon reviewing the recordings that the 4
video was created on the 24
October 2024 (sic), while the other
three videos were created on the 20
October 2024
Whyatt goes on to proffer an explanation for the different creation dates for
the four files related to time
Whyatt also removed from property storage the USB which contains the source and
transcoded files as provided to SAPOL by Dr Sorell,
which became exhibit VDP15
on the voir dire. She confirms that it contains her working copy of the
interview, being the ‘source’
file component, and the transcoded
file produced by Dr Sorell.
Whyatt deposes that upon her viewing of the source file, it still exhibited the
‘pulling away’ feature which she
had previously observed.
upon the evidence, the contents of the USB exhibit VDP15, specifically the
source file which was provided to Dr Sorell for
rectification, should equate to
BS Whyatt’s working copy of the interview conducted with JY on 20 October
2023. If Dr Sorell’s
statement is accepted, that file should contain
intact video and audio streams with no gaps.
source file component of exhibit VDP15 was played in court. What was visualised
and audible is documented in the transcript of
proceedings.
Two matters are
noteworthy. The first is that the audio and video components presented
differently depending upon whether the individual
files were played through
continuously or whether they were paused, forwarded or reversed. Pausing,
forwarding or reversing the recording
appeared capable of rectifying the lack of
synchronisation between the audio and video components, which was otherwise
discernible.
There is no evidence before me explaining why this is so. The
second noteworthy matter is that, when played through continuously,
each of the
first three files which are contained in the source folder reached a point at
which the audio became initially patchy
before the sounds dropped out entirely.
The fourth file did not lose sound, however, the visual component was of
inferior quality
to that in the first three files; prosecuting counsel described
‘blurriness’.
my viewing of VDP15, there is an aggregate of about three and a half minutes of
sound missing and about six minutes of missing
or patchy/compromised sound
across 42 minutes of interview.
Admissibility of the first
prescribed interview with JY
Is the transcoded version of the original recording an audio visual
record of the evidence of JY?
threshold question for determination is whether the transcoded version of the
first prescribed interview is an audio visual record
of the evidence of JY such
that it is amenable to admission under
Evidence Act
. As noted,
provides that the court may order that the evidence of a witness
be admitted
in the form of an audio visual record.
Section 13BA(3)
provides that an audio visual record may be admitted if
the recording
been made pursuant to
Division 3 of the SO Act and the court is
satisfied of the further enumerated matters.
terms ‘audio visual record’ and ‘recording’ are not
defined in the
Evidence Act
question of what constitutes an audio visual record for the purpose of
Evidence Act
was considered by the Court of Criminal Appeal
(2018) 131 SASR 111
’). The appellant in that case had been convicted of
child sexual offences on the basis of the contents of the recording of
prescribed interview with a child complainant which was admitted in his trial
pursuant to
Although the interview had been conducted in circumstances
where it was expected that an audio visual record would be produced, almost
immediately after the questioning commenced, the camera slipped, leaving only
the top of the child’s head and an expanse of
wall visible. The audio
quality was nevertheless good.
Court held that the recording did not constitute an audio visual record of the
interview and was, therefore,
inadmissible.
CJ approached the issue of what constitutes an audio visual record of an
interview with a witness by emphasising the requirement
for both audio and video
components, not one or the
audio‑visual record of an interview of a potential witness, in
anticipation of its use as a substitute for the in-court testimony
witness, must include both the ‘audio’ record of the spoken words
and the ‘video’ record of the witness
speaking those words. The
‘video’ without the spoken word would not be admissible. Nor would
a purely audio record
be admissible. There can be no distinction between
records which are only video or only audio, and those records in which there
both a ‘video’ and an ‘audio’ record, but only one of
them is a record of the interview.
J, with whom Nicholson J agreed,
determined the question of what constitutes an ‘audio visual record of the
evidence of a witness’
(s 13BA(3))
by reference to the words themselves
and the statutory context in which they appear, concluding that the requirement
for simultaneity
between the audio and video components of a recording is
significant:
order to understand the meaning which Parliament intended the expression audio
visual record to carry, it is necessary to
examine the text itself and the
context in which the expression is used. The expression used in the
Offences Act
in relation to recorded interviews with potential witnesses is
“an audio visual recording of the interview”:
Section 13BA
Evidence Act
refers to “the evidence of a witness [being] admitted
in the form of an audio visual record”.
[21] It is plainly envisaged that the recording will largely take the place
of viva voce evidence by the witness. As counsel for the
appellant put it, it
the evidence of the witness. In those circumstances the
visual component contemplated by Parliament must surely be vision of the
witness, rather than of a wall. If the tribunal is not to have the benefit of
the witness giving evidence in the court room, then
it would be expected that
what is seen in the recording has some of the important features of evidence
given in person.
[22] Even without this context, the import of the expression is clear. The
Macquarie Dictionary
(Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, 1982) gives the
following meaning to the words:
audiovisual adj.
involving or directed simultaneously at the faculties
of seeing and hearing.
The inclusion in this definition of the concept of simultaneity is
significant. What is heard must also be seen.
defence makes the point that BS Whyatt’s working copy of the interview
which she conducted with JY on 20 October 2023,
being the ‘source’
material provided to Dr Sorell, is the third copy of the recording of the
interview, it having been
removed from the SD card, and then from BS
Whyatt’s desktop, all the while attended by an unexplained break-up in the
which has resulted in four electronic files. The point, as I
understand it, is not that a true copy cannot be admitted as a record
interview under
Evidence Act
, but rather that what is sought to be
admitted here in the form of the transcoded interview is based upon source
material which is
demonstrably corrupted and lacking in strict provenance due to
an inability to interrogate or evaluate the true original. The creation
four files was unintended and unexpected, and it is unexplained. The SD card and
the desktop copy are no longer available.
The original copy
‘crashes’ at the one minute and 36 second mark and did not continue
recording. And ultimately the working
copy, which is said to form the basis of
the transcoded version of the interview which is sought to be admitted into
evidence, is
completely missing sound in parts.
is a curiosity to say the least that Dr Sorell has produced a corrected version
of the first prescribed interview from source
material which, in the form in
which it is before me, was either not requiring of rectification (exhibit VDP5)
or which lacks portions
of audio (exhibit VDP15). Whether the phenomenon of
pausing, forwarding or reversing the files concerned apparently rectifying the
lack of synchronisation is or may be explicable of these discrepancies is not
the subject of any evidence before me. As I have already
noted, on BS
Whyatt’s initial review of the recording, the audio and video were
dramatically out of sync, and that is certainly
discernible when one views the
source folder material when the files are played continuously. It stands to
reason that Dr Sorell
was presented with material which was not synchronised in
order for it to require, and be amenable to, resynchronisation.
accept the evidence of BS Whyatt that the transcoded version of the interview is
faithful to what occurred in her interview with
JY, and I accept that Dr
Sorell’s intervention involved no removal, addition or substantive
changing of material comprising
the audio and video components of the recording.
The transcoded interview also appears to me to represent a true depiction of
which was being said and done in a real-time situation. These are
compelling factors in favour of determining that the transcoded
version of the
interview is a record of the interview conducted with JY and amenable to
admission under
Evidence Act
. However, it is not the original
record, it is not a duplicate of the original record, and it is the product of
electronic intervention
which involves something different to mere
enhancement.
fact is that because the source material based upon the working copy of the
interview lacks a complete sound component and there
is no date/time stamp
information embedded in the footage, I am unable to undertake in a fulsome way
the exercise urged upon me by
the prosecution, that is, to review it alongside
the transcoded version to satisfy myself that the transcoded version is in
a faithful reproduction of the original interview in which the audio and
video components are properly aligned. On a review of all
of the evidence before
me, I am simply unable to ascertain what the source file which Dr Sorell
transcoded consisted of. It is true
that the ‘chain’ from the SD
card in the camera to the source file in exhibit VDP15 is established on paper,
the electronic exhibit lacks sound on one type of viewing or
resynchronises on another type of viewing – both are inconsistent
what Dr Sorell had to have worked with. In short, the prosecution has not proven
the base material which the expert used to
produce the record which the
prosecution seeks to have admitted as the evidence of the witness. My evaluation
of the transcoded version
of the interview as likely a faithful reproduction of
that which took place between BS Whyatt and JY does not cure this defect which
regard as fundamental to establishing that the transcoded version is a record of
the interview.
fourth file of the transcoded interview still suffers from a lack of audio and
video synchronisation which was apparent from
my first viewing of it and which
BS Whyatt confirms was not
Dr Sorell’s
report does not say that he only resynchronised some or part of the files
provided to him, or that there was any
impediment to him resynchronising the
entirety, so it is unclear to me why this is so. At all events, even that which
the prosecution
seeks to have admitted includes desynchronised audio and visual
components. A portion of the transcoded interview therefore lacks
simultaneity
between the audio and video components which, albeit in the different factual
, Vanstone J said is significant. The lack of
synchronisation of video and audio in the fourth file does compromise that which
presented in the recording; while an evaluation of the overall situation is
possible in that one can attempt to mentally align the
audio and video
components, which are only out of sync by a matter of between about one and two
seconds, that is not an exercise
which correlates with the evaluation of a
witness giving evidence in the traditional manner. I am inclined to think that
evidence given by a witness via a closed-circuit television facility
exhibited a disconnect between the audio and visual such as
is present in the
fourth file of JY’s interview in its transcoded form, that the facility
would need to be rectified before
the witness continued their evidence. The
issue with the fourth file is really a compounding one; it does not resolve the
of whether the first three files which have been transcoded from the
thrice-removed original recording constitutes an audio visual
record of the
evidence of the witness, however, it does add an unsatisfactory element to a
record which is already technically compromised.
therefore conclude that the transcoded version of the first prescribed interview
with JY does not constitute an audio visual record
of the evidence of a witness
which may be admitted under
Evidence Act
relating to the admissibility of the transcoded version if it is an audio visual
record of the evidence of JY
I am wrong about the transcoded version of the first prescribed interview not
constituting an audio visual record of the evidence
of JY, I would nevertheless
decline to admit it into evidence for the reason that I consider that the
departure from the police obligation
to record all conversations which formed
part of JY’s interview as a potential witness in the investigation of a
serious offence
against the person and which it was known may constitute her
evidence at a trial involved non-compliance which has resulted in an
record of the interview and I am not satisfied that the interests of justice
require the admission of the evidence despite
that non-compliance.
the manner in which the defendant’s application for exclusion of the first
prescribed interview was argued, particularly
before the emphasis of the hearing
shifted to the issue relating to the form of the audio visual recording, and
further, in the event
that I am mistaken about the transcoded version not
constituting an audio visual record, it is necessary for me to record my
and conclusions regarding BS Whyatt’s conduct of the first
prescribed interview, in particular her failure to audio visually
record certain
conversations which she had with JY.
I have already noted, pursuant to
Evidence Act
trial of a charge of an offence, the Court may order that the evidence of a
witness be admitted in the form of an audio visual
record. One of the
pre-conditions of admission is that the recording has been made pursuant to
Division 3 of the SO
The further enumerated
requirements for the admissibility of such a
are not in issue in
defence argues that BS Whyatt’s first prescribed interview conducted with
JY on 20 October 2023 was not made in compliance
with the obligations
for interviewing a child of or under the age of 14 years as a potential witness
and is, therefore, inadmissible.
defence contends that the first prescribed interview which BS Whyatt conducted
with JY was non-compliant with the SO Act and
Regulations in the following
details of any breaks in the interview were not included in the audio visual
recording, as required by reg 23(1)(a)(iii).
is not demonstrated to be a prescribed interviewer as required by s 74EB(c)
of the SO Act.
interview was not conducted wholly in accordance with reg 23(7)(a) as
certain statements made by JY were elicited by the use
recording of the interview was not made pursuant to Part 17 Division 3 of the SO
Act insofar as BS Whyatt failed to record parts
of her conversation with JY
which formed part of an interview with the witness in relation to the
investigation of a serious offence
against the person.
defence contends that the last asserted failure of compliance renders the
interview inadmissible and that this constitutes non-compliance
of a magnitude
that the interests of justice cannot be served by the admission of the
Applicable provisions of SO Act and
Regulations
is convenient to set out Part 17 Division 3 of the SO Act in its
Division 3—Recording interviews with certain
vulnerable witnesses
74EA—Application and interpretation
(1) This Division applies to a person being interviewed as a potential
witness who is—
(a) a child of or under the age of 14 years; or
(b) a person with a disability that adversely affects the person's capacity to
give a coherent account of the person's experiences
or to respond rationally to
(1a) This Division also applies to a person (not being a person described in
subsection (1)) who is being interviewed as the victim
of an alleged child
sexual offence.
(2) In this Division—
child sexual offence
means a sexual offence committed in
relation to a person under the age of 18 years;
serious offence
against the person means—
(a) murder or attempted murder; or
(b) manslaughter or attempted manslaughter; or
(c) a sexual offence; or
(ai) an offence of criminal neglect under
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
(i) an offence of stalking and harassment under
section 19AA
Law Consolidation Act 1935
(ii) an offence of causing serious harm under
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
(iia) an offence of causing harm under
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
(iii) an offence involving an unlawful threat to kill or endanger life; or
(iv) an offence involving abduction; or
(v) an offence involving blackmail; or
(vi) an attempt to commit, or assault with intent to commit, any of the
offences in the preceding subparagraphs; or
(e) an offence of contravening or failing to comply with an intervention order
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
(f) an offence of contravening or failing to comply with a restraining order
Summary Procedure Act 1921
sexual offence
(a) rape; or
(b) compelled sexual manipulation; or
(c) indecent assault; or
(d) any offence involving unlawful sexual intercourse or an act of gross
indecency; or
(e) incest; or
(f) any offence involving sexual exploitation or abuse of a child, or
exploitation of a child as an object of prurient interest;
(g) an offence of sexual exploitation of a person with a cognitive impairment
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(h) any attempt to commit, or assault with intent to commit, any of the
foregoing offences.
74EB—Obligation to record interviews with certain vulnerable
If a person to whom this Division applies is to be interviewed as a potential
witness in relation to the investigation of a serious
offence against the
person, the interview must be conducted as follows:
(a) an audio visual recording of the interview must be made in accordance with
the regulations;
(b) the interview must be conducted by a prescribed interviewer;
(c) the manner in which the interview is conducted must meet the prescribed
requirements to the prescribed extent.
74EC—Admissibility of evidence of interview
(1) In proceedings for a charge of a serious offence against the person,
evidence of an interview between a prescribed interviewer
and a person to whom
this Division applies is inadmissible unless—
(a) the prescribed interviewer complied with this Division in relation to the
conduct and recording of the interview; or
(b) the court is satisfied that the interests of justice require the admission
of the evidence despite the prescribed interviewer's
non-compliance.
(1a) If a person to whom this Division applies is to be interviewed as a
potential witness in relation to the investigation of any
other offence,
evidence of the interview may be admissible under
section 13BA
(a) an audio visual recording of the interview is made in accordance with the
regulations; and
(b) the interview is conducted by a prescribed interviewer; and
(c) the manner in which the interview is conducted meets the prescribed
requirements to the prescribed extent.
(1b) If a prescribed interviewer's conduct and recording of an interview
does not meet the requirements of subsection (1a)(c), the
court may nevertheless
admit evidence of the interview if satisfied that the interests of justice
require the admission of the evidence
despite the prescribed interviewer's
non-compliance.
(2) If, in the course of a trial by jury, the court admits evidence of an
interview under subsection (1)(b) or (1b), the court must—
(a) draw the jury's attention to the non-compliance by the prescribed
interviewer; and
(b) give an appropriate warning in view of the non-compliance,
unless the court is of the opinion that the non-compliance was trivial.
74C of the SO Act relevantly provides that ‘interview’
(a) a conversation; or
(b) part of a conversation; or
(c) a series of conversations.
‘Investigating
Officer’ means, inter alia, a police officer.
Preliminarily,
it is the case that s 74EB of the SO Act imposes the following three
obligations in relation to the conduct of the
interview in order for it to be
admissible in proceedings against a defendant:
an audio visual recording of the interview be made in accordance with the
regulations (‘the recording
requirements’).
interview be conducted by a prescribed interviewer (‘the prescribed
interviewer
requirement’).
interview be conducted in a manner that meets the prescribed requirements to the
prescribed extent (‘the prescribed
requirements’).
recording requirements for the purposes of s 74EB(a) of the SO Act are set
out in reg 23(1) of the SO Regulations, which provides
23—Interviewing vulnerable witnesses
(1) For the purposes of section 74EB(a) of the Act—
(a) the following information must be included in an audio visual recording of
an interview with a vulnerable witness:
(i) the date on which the recording was made;
(ii) the identity of all persons who were present at any time during the
(iii) details of any breaks in the interview, including the time the break
commenced and concluded and (so far as is practicable)
the reason for the break;
(b) if the vulnerable witness is accompanied during the interview by—
(i) a prescribed companion; or
(ii) a prescribed communication assistant, the witness, the companion and the
communication assistant (as the case may be) must
be visible at all times in the
recording; and
(c) if the vulnerable witness is provided with a prescribed communication
device for the purpose of providing communication assistance
interview, the witness and the communication device must be visible at all times
in the recording.
Sub-regulations
(2)-(6) are concerned with requirements relating to the interviewing of
vulnerable witnesses with complex communication
needs or who require emotional
or other support during an interview. It is not necessary to dwell upon those
requirements at this
prescribed interviewer requirement for the purposes of s 74EB(b) of the SO
Act are set out in reg 20(1) of the SO Regulations,
which provides as
20—Prescribed interviewers
(1) For the purposes of section 74EB(b) of the Act, a prescribed interviewer
(a) a police officer or public sector employee, or a police officer or public
sector employee of a class, authorised by the Commissioner
or the Minister by
written notice to conduct interviews with vulnerable witnesses; or
(b) a person, or a person of a class, authorised under a law of the
Commonwealth or of another State or a Territory to conduct interviews
vulnerable witnesses; or
(c) a person who has successfully completed a training course in conducting
interviews with vulnerable witnesses—
(i) approved by the Commissioner; or
(ii) approved by the Minister.
(2) In this regulation—
means the Minister for Health;
public sector employee
has the same meaning as in the
Sector Act 2009
prescribed requirements for the purposes of s 74EB(c) of the SO Act are set
out in reg 23(7) of the SO Regulations, which provides
that the manner in which
an interview with a vulnerable witness is conducted will meet the prescribed
requirements if:
(a) so far as is practicable, any statement made by the vulnerable witness is
not elicited by the use of leading questions; and
(b) the vulnerable witness appears to understand that he or she must tell the
(c) the interview is conducted in accordance with this regulation.
turn to deal with the defendant’s assertions of non-compliance with the SO
Act and Regulations in the first prescribed interview.
to include details of breaks
I have summarised in the part of this ruling which is concerned with the
question of the status of the transcoded version of the
recording of the first
prescribed interview, the defendant contends that the four electronic parts
which constitute the recording
are tantamount to breaks in the interview which
SO Regulation 23(1)(a) requires be detailed, amounting to non-compliance in this
respect. In essence, the prosecution submits that the electronic parts of four
files do not constitute breaks in fact.
with the recording requirements, I am satisfied that the first prescribed
interview with JY was conducted in accordance
with reg 23(1)(a)(i) and (ii) of
the SO Regulations in that the audio visual recording includes audible
statements by BS Whyatt of
the date on which the recording was made, and the
identity of all persons present. Further, I am satisfied that the interview was
conducted in accordance with sub-reg (iii) in that it includes information about
details of any breaks in the interview.
term ‘break’ is not defined in the SO Act or SO Regulations. In
ascribing a meaning to the word, I am guided by the
following principles of
statutory interpretation, as summarised by Lovell JA in
Question of Law
Reserved (No 1 of 2021)
[2020] SASCA 148;
(2021) 140 SASR 135
In assigning legal meaning to the words of a provision, the
court starts with consideration of the ordinary and grammatical sense
statutory words to be interpreted having regard to their context and legislative
purpose. That is, the process begins with
the text but, as the meaning of words
can never be acontextual, the process must also begin by examining the context.
The meaning
of the text may require consideration of the context, which includes
the general purpose and policy of a provision, in particular
the mischief it is
seeking to remedy. Context, in its widest sense, and the purpose of the statute,
inform the interpretative task
throughout. Historical considerations and
extrinsic materials cannot be relied on to displace the clear meaning of the
language which has actually been employed in the text of legislation
is the surest guide to legislative intention.
(Citations omitted)
Macquarie Dictionary attributes the following meaning to the word
‘break’ as a noun: ‘a forcible disruption
or separation of
parts; a breaking; a fracture, rupture, or shattering’; and further,
‘an interruption of continuity;
suspension,
Brown (A Pseudonym) v The King
[2025] SASCA 40
, Livesey P noted that
Evidence Act
is part of a suite of provisions ‘designed to
facilitate obtaining evidence from complainants or witnesses before trial
and then admitting it at the
His Honour noted
that the effect of provisions including
Evidence Act
74EA-74EC of the SO Act ‘is to render pre-trial statements and evidence
from complainants or witnesses in child sexual
cases admissible at the
23(1)(a)(iii) is enacted in the context of a legislative scheme which purports
to regulate the manner in which out of
court statements of vulnerable witnesses
intended for use at the trial are taken and recorded. In view of the
significance of the
potential ultimate use of such material, it is critical that
the manner in which a witness’s statement is taken and recorded
regulated for accuracy and transparency. Regulation 23(1)(a)(iii) recognises the
potential for relevant statements to be made
by a witness (or interviewer) or
for a witness to be subject to influence in the course of such an interview; the
requirement for
an interview to include details about the timing of, and reason
for, any breaks is indicative of an intention that any interruption
witness’s account should be scrutable.
the context of reg 23(1)(a)(iii), I consider that the term ‘break’
is intended to refer to the pausing or suspension
of an interview in real time,
or as pertaining to the occurrence of the interview itself which is the subject
of audio visual recording.
I am prepared to take notice of the fact that audio
visual recordings can present across multiple files which sequentially represent
an uninterrupted actual event. I do not consider that the term
‘break’ in the phrase ‘any breaks in the interview’
relates or extends to electronic breaks in the sense of the way in which the
electronic data which comprises an audio visual recording
is collected.
this case, I accept BS Whyatt’s evidence that the four files which
comprise Exhibit VDP5 represent the ‘one solid
with JY, and
that there were no breaks in that interview. Putting the matter of lack of
synchronisation to one side, I am satisfied
from my own viewing of Exhibit VDP5
that the four files run on in sequence to represent a single, unbroken interview
as an event
in real time and I discern no indication whatsoever of any break or
non-recording of any part of the interview during the times when
the camera was
I am satisfied that there were no breaks in the interview, for the reasons which
I have outlined in the previous section
of this ruling, the audio visual
recording of the interview with JY which has ultimately been produced is
deficient as a record of
that which took place in the course of the interview
for the original recording is unavailable, the available copy of the original
recording appears to have become corrupted so as to lose audio components and
the transcoded/ameliorated version still contains at
least a portion which is
out of sync thereby interfering with the ability to fully assess reaction and
demeanour on the part of the
witness. There is no evidence before me which
explains how the electronic breaks (as I have described them) manifested, or
links them to the desynchronisation which occurred in respect of the
recording. On the evidence before me, BS Whyatt did not check
that her recording
equipment was functioning properly before she commenced the interview with JY
other than to check that the device
had battery. It is reasonable to conclude,
in the absence of any other explanation, that the functioning of the recording
caused the division of the recording of the interview into four files and
possibly the desynchronisation. Its efficacy was never
checked. The general
order required that the audio visual and sound equipment be tested prior to
conducting an interview.
cannot have been onerous to check that the recording equipment was working
properly in advance of the interview when there was,
on BS Whyatt’s
evidence, no particular urgency about conducting the interview, and basic
prudence dictated that it should have
been checked where the interview was to be
undertaken at a remote location (that is, not at a police station with fixed,
recording equipment). In this regard, the potential legal consequence
of the recording coming to stand in the place of the alleged
evidence at a criminal trial, a matter about which BS Whyatt was aware, is
significant for it gives the failure to
check the equipment something of a
reckless flavour. And so while I am satisfied that there were no real time
breaks in the interview,
the failure to check the recording equipment, which
might have averted the production of a deficient recording, is a matter which
would take into account in determining whether it is in the interests of justice
to admit the recording in the face of non-compliance
with Part 17 Division 3 of
the SO Act, a matter to which it shall be necessary to
Prescribed interviewer
prosecution contends that BS Whyatt is a prescribed interviewer for the purposes
of s 74EB(b) of the SO Act as she is a person
who has successfully completed a
training course in conducting interviews with vulnerable witnesses approved by
the Commissioner
noted above, in 2012 BS Whyatt undertook the ‘Interagency Child Protection
Course’. The affidavit of Commissioner
Stevens provides that SAPOL records
document BS Whyatt successfully completing a joint SAPOL and TAFE training
course titled ‘Interagency
Practice in Child Protection’ between
3 and 13 September 2012. I have taken the course referred to by
Commissioner Stevens
to be the ‘interagency child protection course’
described by BS Whyatt, and there was no suggestion to the contrary in
Commissioner
Stevens notes in his affidavit that the requirement for interviews with
vulnerable witnesses to be conducted by prescribed
interviewers contained in s
74EB of the SO Act was introduced by the
Statutes Amendment (Vulnerable
Witnesses) Act 2015
(SA), which was assented to on 6 August 2015.
Commissioner Stevens further notes reg 20(1)(c)(i) of the SO Regulations
whereby, for
the purposes of s 74EB(b) of the SO Act, a prescribed interviewer
is a person who has successfully completed a training course in
interviews with vulnerable witnesses approved by the Commissioner of
Essentially,
Commissioner Stevens purported to approve the Interagency Practice in Child
Protection training course as a training
course in conducting interviews with
vulnerable witnesses for the purposes of s 74EB(b) of the SO Act and reg
20(1)(c)(i) of the
SO Regulations. He purported to do so, as he explains in his
affidavit, by amending the SAPOL General Order for interviewing suspects
vulnerable witnesses.
Commissioner of Police is empowered pursuant to
(SA) to make general orders for the control and management of members
of SA Police. Commissioner Stevens provides that general orders
‘to explain the law and detail administrative arrangements approved by
[him] for all members and employees of
By amendments made
to the General Order for interviewing suspects and vulnerable witnesses on 6
July 2016 (‘the General Order’),
the following was
Prescribed Interviewer (Regulation 20 SOR)
For the purpose of section 74EB(b) of the SOA means a police officer who has
successfully completed one or more of the following courses:
Certificate IV
in Child Abuse Investigations Course (obtained prior to 2006)
Interagency
Practice in Child Protection training course.
Investigative Interviewing provided by Deakin University. This provides
knowledge and skills in investigative interviewing
of vulnerable
This only applies to prescribed interviewers interviewing
vulnerable witnesses. There is no requirement for a prescribed interviewer
interviewing suspects. Prescribed interviewer only applies to vulnerable
Commissioner
Stevens describes this part of the General Order as constituting a
‘statement regarding the training courses approved
by [him] pursuant to
reg 20(1)(c)(i) of the SOR in [his] capacity as Commissioner of
Commissioner
Stevens provides that the Interagency Practice in Child Protection course
completed by BS Whyatt in 2012 thereafter
remained a training course in
conducting interviews with vulnerable witnesses approved by
defence submission, said to find support in
Cosenza v State of South
[2024] SASC 97
’), is that the General
Order is incapable of providing the necessary approval for the purpose of a
regulation. In
, McDonald J was concerned with the question of
whether an admitted breach of a general order by a police officer failing to
a pro forma document invalidated an otherwise lawful arrest. Her Honour
found that it did not, applying a line of Supreme Court authorities
provide that a general order is not subordinate
legislation.
do not consider that the Commissioner in this case is in any way seeking to
invoke, or point to, the General Order as a legislative
instrument or law-making
edict. Reg 20(1)(c)(i) of the SO Regulations is the legislative instrument by
which the Commissioner is
authorised to approve a training course in conducting
interviews with vulnerable witnesses which would make a person who has completed
such a course a prescribed interviewer for the purposes of s 74EB(b) of the SO
Act. On my interpretation of the evidence of Commissioner
Stevens, the General
Order effectively lists the courses which he has approved for the purpose of Reg
20(1)(c)(i). That is something
different to purporting that the General Order
stands as, or in place of, approval by the Commissioner.
consider that by approving the General Order for interviewing suspects and
vulnerable witnesses on 1 July 2017 (issued on 6 July
2017), Commissioner
Stevens unequivocally indicated that he had approved the Interagency Practice in
Child Protection training course
as a course the successful completion of which
would designate a police officer as a prescriber interviewer for the purpose of
74EB(b) of the SO Act. It is clear from the language employed in the General
Order (‘has successfully completed’) that
it was intended to
identify courses which an officer may have already completed, such as in the
case of BS Whyatt.
completeness, I note that at the time of the first prescribed interview with JY,
the operative General Order continued to nominate
the Interagency Practice in
Child Protection training course as a course the successful completion of which
would qualify a police
officer as prescribed interviewer for the purpose of
am satisfied that at the time of conducting the prescribed interview with JY on
20 October 2023, BS Whyatt was a prescribed
interviewer.
Leading questions
the most part I do not consider that the statement made by JY in the first
prescribed interview was elicited by the use of leading
leading question is one which suggests an answer or assumes the existence of
disputed facts to which the witness has not yet
prescribed requirement contained in reg 23(7)(a) allows for a degree of leading
which is indicated by the introductory words,
‘so far as is
practicable’. This suggests to me that a degree of leading is tolerable,
for example, to introduce a topic.
Whyatt introduced the subject matter in a non-leading way by asking JY what she
had come to talk to her about, and followed up
with ‘tell me more’
– type questions.
from a point corresponding with question 766, BS Whyatt employed a questioning
technique of putting JY’s account to
that point back to her with an
invitation for JY to correct her if she summarised
incorrectly.
do not consider that this involved the use of impermissible leading questions;
specifically, it cannot be said, in view of the
questions representing a summary
of the account already given by JY, that constituted a statement elicited by the
use of leading
considered JY’s interview on 20 October 2023 in its entirety, I consider
that it meets the prescribed requirements in
this regard.
the extent that it is possible to identify particular aspects of JY’s
account which appear to have been elicited or confirmed
by the use of leading
questions (which contained information or suggested an answer), such as, for
example, Q.761 and Q.817, and
this represents some departure from the prescribed
requirements, if this were the only departure, I would nevertheless admit the
interview in the interests of justice despite the interviewer’s non
compliance pursuant to s 74EC(1)(b) of the SO Act.
record all conversations
74EB of the SO Act imposes an obligation upon police officers as investigators
to audio visually record, in accordance with
the regulations, interviews with
children of or under the age of 14 years as potential witnesses in relation to
the investigation
of serious offences against the person (which include child
sexual offences). The word ‘must’ indicates that a police
required to conduct an interview of this kind in the manner described in the
74EC(1) renders evidence of an interview between a prescribed interviewer and a
child of or under the age of 14 years who
is interviewed as a potential witness
inadmissible in proceedings for a charge of a serious offence against the person
prescribed interviewer complied with Part 17 Division 3 in relation
to the conduct and recording of the
or the court is
satisfied that the interests of justice require the admission of the evidence
despite the prescribed interview’s
non-compliance.
plainly emerges from the evidence of BS Whyatt that she had certain
conversations with JY, both before and after the formally
recorded prescribed
interview on 20 October 2023, which were not recorded.
issues which arise for determination are whether those conversations attracted
the recording obligation contained in s 74EB and,
if so, whether the interests
of justice require the admission of the first prescribed interview despite BS
Whyatt’s non-compliance.
defence submits that the text of s 74EB of the SO Act makes it clear that a
police officer must make an audio visual recording
of an interview where a
person to whom Division 3 applies (relevantly, a child of or under the age of 14
years) is to be interviewed
as a potential witness in relation to the
investigation of a serious offence against the person. An interview in that
context includes
a conversation or part of a conversation. The defence points to
the expansive meaning which has been attributed to the term
‘interview’
in the context of police obligations under s 74D to
record interviews with suspects in the cases of
Steen v The Queen
Lindsay v The King; Rankine v The King; Woods v The King
[2022] SASCA 138
in support of its submission that the first prescribed
interview was not conducted in accordance with s 74EB on account of the failure
of BS Whyatt to record parts of her conversation with JY which related to her
investigation of the allegations which were self-evidently
intended to be the
subject of the interview. The defence submission is not that all conversation is
required to be recorded, for
example, it is not suggested that the police would
be obliged to record conversation about the witness’s state of comfort or
matters unconnected to the investigation. The defence submits that once the
threshold is crossed whereby a police officer intends
to interview, as in this
case, a child as a potential witness in relation to the investigation of a child
sexual offence, any conversation
which constitutes part of that interview must
be recorded. As the nett result of a recorded interview may be the production of
which is admitted as the witness’s evidence in a criminal trial
with some restriction upon cross‑examination (in the
sense that there is a
requirement for permission), the court must insist upon absolute adherence to
the recording requirements set
in Division 3 to ‘remove from the equation
anything that depends on the credibility and reliability of the police officer
to what was said and what was
defence submits that the requirement for fulsome recording in this case was
heightened as JY was to be interviewed in the absence
of her parents and without
their consent or knowledge, and in a potentially coercive environment of a
school room to which the child
was brought by a member of school staff. Based
upon the evidence of BS Whyatt, the defence submits, there is a lack of
into what transpired in the lead-up to the recorded portion of the
interview in which JY’s incriminating allegations were advanced,
lack of visibility is inconsistent with the statutory regime which seeks to
ensure that objective evidence of an interview
is produced.
prosecution submits that there was no obligation upon BS Whyatt to record all
interactions with the witness, particularly those
of a ‘peripheral
prosecution submission, as I understand it, is that s 74EC of the SO Act is
concerned with the admissibility of that much of
an interview which the
prosecution seeks to lead (in this case, being the recorded portion) and
‘says nothing of the exclusion
of a prescribed interview if there has been
a conversation with a vulnerable witness that was not the subject of an audio
recording either before or after that
conversation.’
will be seen from my summary of BS Whyatt’s evidence on the voir dire, the
unrecorded conversations which she engaged in
with JY fell into the following
categories:
(1) Conversation prior to recording between 9:30am and 9:43am.
(2) Conversation post-recording.
(3) Statement taken on 18 February 2025.
BS Whyatt was cross-examined about proofings conducted on 29 July 2024
and 24 March 2025, I did not understand it to be
submitted on behalf
of the defendant that the s 74EB obligation existed in those settings, or that
what transpired on those occasions
was in any way relevant to the issues to be
determined on the voir dire. I will therefore not mention the proofing meetings
summary, I consider that the conversations which BS Whyatt engaged in with JY
either side of the recorded prescribed interview
conducted on
20 October 2023 constituted part of the one interview and required
compliance with s 74EB. The topics covered, particularly
in the post recording
phase, were substantive, which makes BS Whyatt’s non-compliance with the
recording requirement significant
as the defendant and the court have been
deprived of the best evidence, and of fulsome, objective evidence, of what was
by the complainant on the occasion of making her first statement to the
authorities about the alleged conduct of the defendant. In
circumstances where
that statement (or at least the recorded part) is proposed to effectively take
the place of the key prosecution
witness’s evidence in chief at the
defendant’s trial and where, in my assessment, the failure of compliance
has not been
satisfactorily explained, I am not satisfied that the interests of
justice require the admission of the evidence.
with the conversation prior to recording, at a general level I accept the
evidence of BS Whyatt that prior to the commencement
of the recording, she had
no conversation with JY about the alleged offending, and that the conversation
related to what might be
described as preliminary matters, such as JY’s
willingness to participate in a recorded interview and whether JY wished to
a support person present. As to that last matter, I do not discern from the SO
Act or Regulations that there is any specific
requirement upon a prescribed
interviewer to audio visually record details of any enquiries made, or beliefs
formed, about whether
the vulnerable witness should be accompanied during the
interview by a prescribed companion or communication assistant. Regulation
is concerned with the visibility of such persons in a recording and with the
obligations upon a prescribed interviewer to make
appropriate arrangements where
they believe that the vulnerable witness may have complex communication needs or
should be provided
with emotional or other support during the interview. That is
not to say that a conversation between a prescribed interviewer and
a vulnerable
witness on the topic of a possible companion need never be recorded. It will
depend upon the circumstances which appertain.
Steen v The Queen
[2020] SASCFC 60
, Doyle J (as he was), dissenting on the question of whether
an unrecorded preliminary verbal exchange between a police officer and
trafficking suspect on the topic of the suspect’s employment status
constituted an interview for the purposes of s 74D
of the SO Act, allowed for a
the evaluation would be
informed by the nature and content of the
s 74EB of the SO Act, the obligation to record relates to the interviewing of a
vulnerable witness as a potential witness in
relation to the investigation of a
serious offence, which includes a conversation or part of a conversation.
may be situations in which a police officer converses with a vulnerable witness
on topics which are entirely preliminary and
introductory in nature, which might
be directed at evaluating the witness’s capacity and vulnerability and any
concomitant
need for support or communication assistance, and which do not
involve or traverse into interviewing the witness in relation to an
investigation. In other situations, a witness’s requirement for support or
communication assistance might be explained or become
evident once an interview
proper has been embarked upon. Whether the obligation to record exists in a
given situation must be determined
by reference to whether the witness is to be
interviewed as a potential witness in relation to the investigation of a serious
against the person.
was a degree of common ground between the prosecution and defence that not all
conversations between police and vulnerable
witnesses need to be audio visually
recorded. The defence position was explicitly to the contrary of a suggestion
that police would
have to record a conversation about offering a drink of water,
for example. It stands to reason and reflects the practicalities of
interviewing children on video that there should be some introductory
explanation of the situation which is presented to a
child sometimes without
forewarning of what is proposed to occur.
this case it is noteworthy that there was a window of 13 minutes between JY
being brought into the room and the recorded interview
commencing. That is a not
insignificant period of time as a prelude to a recorded interview which lasted
42 minutes.
BS Whyatt’s evidence, the pre-recording conversation touched on the reason
why an interview was to be conducted and what
it was to be about. The extent of
the evidence which BS Whyatt was able to give about what was said on this topic
was that it related
to ‘stuff’ or ‘things’ that JY had
previously disclosed at school. There is no evidence before me on the
as to what any such disclosure involved.
the recorded interview, BS Whyatt opened the topic (after some familiarisation
questions) by saying to JY, “So let’s
talk about why we are here
today, what have you come in to talk to me about?” JY’s response
was, “um sexual abuse”,
and the interview proceeded from
BS Whyatt could not recall the pre-recording conversation and made no note about
it, there is no reliable record of what was or
was not discussed at the
sensitive and critical time of the child witness preparing to embark upon a
process of describing alleged
sexual offending for the first time in a form
which was intended in the event of a prosecution to stand as the child’s
is impossible for me to be satisfied that in the 13 minutes before the recording
was activated, any discussion between BS Whyatt
and JY was limited to basic
preliminaries and did not touch on the subject matter of her allegations against
the accused, which was
the very matter under investigation by BS Whyatt. Whilst
BS Whyatt may not have considered that talking to JY about the reason for
interview involved conversation about the alleged offending, it is obvious to me
that to some degree it had to have involved
conversation about that matter. The
consistency or inconsistency of the witness’ account cannot be evaluated
by reference to
what was actually said, and how, nor can it be seen whether
there was any opportunity for the witness to have been encouraged or
influenced,
for example by well-intentioned statements of support by the interviewer. There
is no indication in the recorded interview
itself that the pre-recording
conversation did not concern the allegations or was in any way limited to benign
topics. For example,
there was no recap of pre-recording events to confirm what
had transpired. The safeguards which are plainly intended by the prescribed
interviewer regime were not applied to a potentially significant 13 minute
episode of conversation with JY before the recording was
commenced, and no real
explanation was given by BS Whyatt as to why that portion of conversation was
not audio visually recorded.
post-recording conversations between BS Whyatt and JY are attended by the same
concerning lack of safeguards and lack of explanation
for non‑compliance
with the requirement to record. In the case of the post-recording conversations,
the subject matter is known
– that is, that K was a possible victim, the
defendant’s employment status and the complainant’s fear of the
Each of these topics, particularly the last, related directly and
unequivocally to BS Whyatt’s investigation and clearly brought
responses which were capable of informing JY’s account of relevant events.
BS Whyatt’s initial evidence denying
that any further conversation took
place following the recorded interview, which was demonstrated and conceded to
be wrong in light
of her notes and affidavit, illustrates in a powerful way how
the lack of recording can mask an honest interviewer’s memory
of important
events and conversation with a witness.
record that I did find BS Whyatt to be an honest witness. I am unable to make
any firm finding as to the reason for her failure
to record the pre – and
post –recording conversations with JY. I gained the impression from
BS Whyatt’s evidence
that she considered herself to be conducting the
interview in a way that was consistent with her training as a prescribed
interviewer.
BS Whyatt demonstrated in evidence that she had an understanding of
the basic requirements for conducting a prescribed interview
with a vulnerable
witness insofar as the SO Regulations prescribe requirements for that which must
be included in an audio visual
recording of such an interview and for the
conduct of the interview itself. However, she did not exhibit a deep
understanding of
extent of the obligation to record interviews with vulnerable
witnesses set in s 74EB of the SO Act. BS Whyatt was not asked any
questions regarding her understanding of the obligation under s 74EB to audio
visually record an interview with a potential witness
in relation to the
investigation of a serious offence, what constitutes an interview or what is
contained in the General Order, and
so I make allowance for her perhaps not
being given a fulsome opportunity to demonstrate the extent of her knowledge and
understanding
in this regard.
further illustration of the limitation on BS Whyatt’s understanding of the
extent of her obligation to record interviews
with vulnerable witnesses is the
taking of the statement from JY in the form of an affidavit on 18 February 2025.
BS Whyatt’s
own assessment of that matter, after speaking to a
colleague during cross-examination, was that she should have undertaken a
prescribed interview. It is not necessary for me to determine on this
application whether BS Whyatt should or should not have done
so, for s 74EC
of the SO Act only applies to render inadmissible evidence of an interview
between a prescribed interviewer and a
vulnerable witness. I am not concerned
with the admissibility of the statement taken from JY on 18 February 2025 on
this application.
Whyatt was not re-examined with respect to the different approach she had taken
to obtaining this statement from JY or to explain
her evidence in
cross-examination that she should have instead conducted a further prescribed
Ultimately,
that BS Whyatt should take statements from JY by a combination of recorded
interviews, unrecorded conversations and in
the form of an affidavit over a
period of about 14 months, all while JY was under 14 years of age, underscores a
lack of certainty
on her part about the obligations upon her in respect of
interviewing a vulnerable witness as a potential witness whose evidence
admitted in a criminal trial at least in part in the form of an audio visual
record made outside of court and before trial.
prosecution has referred me to a ruling of his Honour Judge Stretton in a matter
[2022] SADC 93
as being persuasive on the matter of Part 17
Division 3 of the SO Act not constituting a code for the admission of the
evidence of
a vulnerable witness who is a child of or under the age of 14 years
in the form of an audio visual record. In
, Judge Stretton was
concerned with a different question to that which arises on this application,
namely, whether provisions of the
SO Act operate to preclude the prosecution
from eliciting evidence from a vulnerable witness at trial other than in the
prescribed interview. Judge Stretton held that they do not. Nothing in
detracts from, or purports to limit, the obligation contained
in s 74EB which is for police to make an audio visual recording of an
with a potential witness in relation to the investigation of a serious offence
against the person. The ruling does not
assist me in identifying the bounds of
the pre and post-recording conversations with JY which formed part of the
interview and therefore
fell to be recorded, and I would not interpret the
ruling as generally limiting the recording requirement when an interview is to
be embarked upon.
find that by failing to record those parts of her conversation with JY which
constituted the pre-recording and post-recording conversations
either side of
the recorded portion of the prescribed interview conducted on 20 October 2023,
BS Whyatt failed to comply with the
requirement set in s 74EB of the SO Act to
make an audio visual recording of the interview. It follows that, if the
transcoded version
of the interview constitutes an audio visual record of the
interview, it is inadmissible in the defendant’s trial unless I
satisfied that the interests of justice require the admission of the evidence
despite the
non-compliance.
R v King & Pitson (No 2)
(1998) 199 LSJS 112
, in the context of
determining whether a non-compliant police interview with a suspect under s 74D
of the SO Act ought to be the
subject of a ‘dispensing order’ as his
Honour Cox J described it under s 74E(1), which is in substantially the same
as s 74EC(1), his Honour said that under the section, exclusion is to be
the norm and admission of the evidence
exceptional.
[2017] SASCFC 108
, also in the context of non-compliance with
s 74D rendering evidence of a police interview of a suspect inadmissible, in
circumstances
where the officer attempted to comply and believed that she had
done so but there was a recording malfunction, Vanstone J (with whom
Doyle JJ agreed) held that the admission of evidence of a recalled summary of
the interview subverted the purpose of the
legislation, and
implicit in the legislation that the obligation upon the investigating officer
extends to presenting the recorded evidence of
the interview to the Court.
Section 74E contemplates only two situations: compliance and non-compliance with
the legislation. Compliance
must be taken to include presentation of a viable
recording to the court. In some circumstances non-compliance may be overlooked
if the “interests of justice require the admission of the evidence”:
s 74E(1)(b), but it is unlikely that would be so
unless the available evidence
was seen to be an accurate record of the entire conversation.
J’s remarks are apposite to this case as the importance of police
compliance with the requirements for recording and
the production of an accurate
record of an interview with a child witness who is the alleged victim of a
sexual offence must be of
at least equivalent importance to police compliance
with the provisions which relate to a proposed interview with a suspect. The
suspect interview recording provisions and the vulnerable witness interview
recording provisions share a common rationale related
to the elimination of
disputes about what was said in the course of police questioning which is
capable of bringing forth evidence
which may be admissible in a criminal trial
and, generally, against a defendant’s interests. In this case, the police
not produced an accurate record of the entire conversation with JY and the
record which does exist is compromised.
Lindsay v The King; Rankine v The King; Woods v The King
[2022] SASCA
, also concerned with s 74D, Kourakis CJ said of the inadmissibility of an
interview unless the interests of justice requires its
must first be observed that the evidence is inadmissible unless the discretion
is exercised favourably to the prosecution. The
prosecution carries the burden
of satisfying the judge that the interests of justice
admission of the evidence. A significant determinant of the interests of justice
will be the extent to which the mischief, to
which Pt 17 of the SO Act is
directed, is ameliorated in all of the circumstances of the case.
Undoubtedly
the offence with which the defendant is charged is serious and the transcoded
interview supplies apparently cogent evidence
of the commission of the offence
in the form of audible statements by JY describing the defendant’s conduct
in response to
mostly non-leading questions. It is in the interests of justice
for the evidence of a vulnerable witness who is a child and the alleged
of a sexual offence to be placed before the court in the form of a pre-recorded
out of court statement which minimises, and
may eliminate, the need for the
child to further recount events of a sexual, intimate, embarrassing or
distressing nature. In order
for the interests of justice to be so served, any
such pre-recorded out of court statement must be taken with the utmost adherence
to the law which provides for the admission of evidence in this form. The
evidence in chief of a complainant witness taking the form
of a pre-recorded
interview involves ‘a most radical change to the traditional rights of an
accused person. What safeguards
there are need to be stringently adhered
regard the non-compliance with Division 3 by BS Whyatt by not recording all
conversations forming part of the first prescribed
interview as a serious one in
the sense that it involved an unjustified and unexplained departure from the
requirement to audio visually
record all such conversations with the result that
potentially important lead-in questions and answers on the topic of what was to
be the subject of the interview (“sexual abuse”, as it was first
articulated in the recorded portion of the interview)
are not the subject of an
objective, scrutable record. The situation is compounded by a lack of
contemporaneous notes which might
have gone some way to informing the court
obligation to
record and may have misunderstood or mistakenly assumed that she
had a discretion not to record part(s) of an interview relating
investigation (and it is not clear whether this was the case) does not detract
from the significance of the outcome of her
non-recording which is that it
creates this evidentiary void which can only be resolved by resorting to her
asserted memory that
the allegations were not discussed and statements about her
usual practice. As has been demonstrated, BS Whyatt was wrong in her
assertion in evidence that nothing additional to what was in the recording was
discussed. As the recording of BS Whyatt’s
interview with JY is
essentially incomplete, if the transcoded version is an audio visual record, I
would not be satisfied that the
interests of justice require its admission in
the face of non‑compliance by not recording all of the interview.
there is a compounding adverse effect upon the quality of the transcoded
interview wrought by the incomplete correction
of the problem with lack of
synchronisation (referred to above) and the physical circumstances of the
recording itself. By physical
circumstances, I am referring to the features of
the recording which include that JY is quite softly-spoken and the recording is
made in an environment in which what I suspect are airplanes can be heard flying
overhead from time to time and some indistinct sounds
occasionally permeate from
outside the room (possibly from an adjacent room). Another physical circumstance
of the recording is that
JY is positioned in profile to the camera; I do not
suggest that this is a defect of a kind which was considered in
deprive the recording of a visual component, however, in the context of the rest
of the recording, which includes JY’s soft
manner of speaking and the
intruding sounds, her side-on positioning to the camera has the result that the
recording does not include
a full-frontal view of her face and facial
expressions as she is answering questions. This diminishes in a small way
ability to evaluate her presentation and demeanour throughout the
recorded portion of the interview. In this sense, the recording
slightly lacking in ‘some of the important features of evidence given in
is true that BS Whyatt conceded that there was no urgency in conducting the
interview and no impediment to her conducting it in
a purpose-fitted recording
suite at the Victim Management Section, however, I do not criticise her for not
doing so. I accept BS
Whyatt’s evidence to the effect that the exigencies
and practicalities of the situation as she evaluated them meant that it
suitable to conduct an interview at the school. But having committed to doing
so, her failure to check the equipment and, it
would seem, to give attention to
the matter of ensuring the clearest depiction of the witness in the proposed
recording, contributed
to the overall production of a recording which, in my
assessment, was not of optimal quality to stand as the evidence in chief of
is much about BS Whyatt’s conduct of the first prescribed interview, and
her presentation in it, which is consistent
with her being authentically
committed to producing a compliant recording. As I have said, I accept that she
had a basic understanding
of the requirements of the SO Regulations concerning
the matters to be attended to within and as part of the recorded interview.
However, it is unfortunate that her understanding of the nature and extent of
her obligation to record all conversation which formed
part of the interview of
the witness in relation to the investigation was limited. I am unable to make
any finding as to whether
that reflects a systemic lack of or mis-understanding
within SAPOL or whether it is idiosyncratic. I am satisfied that BS Whyatt
to conduct the interview in a way which she genuinely thought or assumed to be
compliant. In no sense did I gain the impression
that the failure to record
conversations was strategic or intended to circumvent her obligations under the
SO Act; rather, I think
it was the product of an imperfect understanding of
those obligations. On the other hand, I found BS Whyatt’s non-explanation
for not checking the recording equipment in advance of the interview to reveal
an unacceptably casual attitude to the importance
of ensuring the production and
integrity of a proper audio visual record.
all of those matters into account, I would not have been satisfied that the
interests of justice require the admission of
the evidence of the recorded
Admissibility of the second prescribed interview with
view of my ruling in relation to the first prescribed interview it is not
necessary to rule on the Director of Public Prosecutions’
application to
admit the second prescribed interview as I infer it would not be sought to be
led by the prosecution.
application by the Director of Public Prosecutions for the evidence of the
witness JY to be admitted in the form of an audio
visual record made on
20 October 2023 (FDN 11) is
Interlocutory application for
admission of audiovisual record filed 3 October 2024 (FDN 11).
Evidence Act
13BA(3)(b)(i)
SO Act, s 74EA(1)-(1a).
Amended interlocutory
application filed 30 April 2025 (FDN 51).
Exhibits VDP1 (affidavit dated
1 February 2024), VPD2 (affidavit dated 6 May 2024) and VDP3 (affidavit dated 9
April 2025).
Exhibit VDP5 (USB).
Exhibit VDP3.
Exhibit VDP3, Annexures B and
Child Abuse Report
Described later in BS
Whyatt’s evidence as the wellbeing officer: T67.
SO Regulations, reg 21.
Exhibit P5A (transcript)
Exhibit VDP5.
Referred to in the hearing
as ‘files’: T36.
T33-34, 39.
Exhibit VDP8 (expert report
of Dr Matthew Sorell dated 16 April 2024).
Dr Sorell’s report
states that he received five video files (VDP8, [1.4]), which I assume to be a
typographical error as there
are four files listed.
Exhibit VDP8 (expert report
of Dr Matthew Sorell dated 16 April 2024), [1.4].
Exhibit VDP8 (expert report
of Dr Matthew Sorell dated 16 April 2024), [1.3].
Exhibit VDP8 (expert report
of Dr Matthew Sorell dated 16 April 2024), [1.5]-[1.7].
Exhibit VDP11 (affidavit of
Grantley John Stevens made on 30 May 2025).
Exhibits VDP4, VDD7 and
SO Regulations, reg
23(1)(a)(iii).
Sears v The Queen
(2020) 137 SASR 219
at [28]-[32] (Peek J), and the cases referred to
Exhibit VDP12.
Exhibit VDP13.
Exhibit VDP14.
Exhibit VDP15.
Exhibit VDP12, [2].
Exhibit VDP12, [3].
Exhibit VDP12, [4]-[5].
Exhibit VDP12, [5].
Exhibit VDP12, [6].
Exhibit VDP12, [7].
Exhibit VDP12, [8]-[9].
Exhibit VDP12, [9]-[10];
exhibit VDP13 [8]-[9].
Exhibit VDP14 [1]-[2].
Exhibit VDP12 [7].
Exhibit VDP12
I assume 2024 is a
typographical error and that the correct year is 2023.
Exhibit VDP12
Exhibit VDP12 [15]; exhibit
131 SASR 111
, [2] (Kourakis CJ), [23] (Vanstone J), [40] (Nicholson J).
131 SASR 111
, [3] (Kourakis CJ).
Nicholson J also agreed
with the observations of Kourakis CJ: [40].
131 SASR 111
, [20]-[22] (Vanstone J).
Evidence Act
s 13BA(3)(b).
Evidence Act
13BA(3)(b)(i)
SO Act, s 74EB(a).
SO Act, s 74EB(b).
SO Act, s 74EB(c).
Macquarie Dictionary
(online at 3 September 2025) ‘break’ (def 59, 63).
Exhibit VDP4 (SAPOL General
Order for interviewing suspects and vulnerable witnesses), p.18.
SO Regulations, reg
20(1)(c)(i).
Which replaced the previous
General Order for electronic recording of interviews: VDP11 (Affidavit of
Grantley John Stevens 30 May
2025) [7]; exhibit GJS-1.
VDP11 (Affidavit of
Grantley John Stevens 30 May 2025).
Affidavit Stevens [8].
Affidavit Stevens [9].
Cosenza v State of South
[2024] SASC 97
Approved by Deputy
Commissioner Linda Willians on 12 September 2022 (VDP11: Affidavit of Grantley
Stevens 30 May 2025, exhibit GJS-2);
VDP10 Instrument of Delegation.
(LexisNexis Australia, 14
ed, 2023) [17150].
Exhibit VDP5A p.5.
Exhibit VDP5A p.16.
Legislation
Interpretation Act 2021
7AEC(1)(a).
74EC(1)(b).
Written Submissions of
the Prosecution (FDN 69) [11].
Written Submissions of
the Prosecution (FDN 69) [43].
Steen v The Queen
[2020] SASCFC 60
[166]-[168].
SO Act, s 74EC(1)(b).
R v King & Pitson
(1998) 199 LSJS 112
Sears v The Queen
[2020] SASCFC 107
[40] per Peek J.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (625 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter