URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWLRP/2010/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Adciv v WorkCover [2010] SAWLRP 6 (3 August 2010)
[2010] SAWLRP 6
WORKCOVER LEVY REVIEW PANEL
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
ADCIV PTY LTD
(Employer No. E19863502 -- File Reference 200102979)
(Applicant)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION
OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
REASONS FOR RULING
MADE ON 3 AUGUST
Application for review -- assessment of levies on basis of disputed claims
history -- secondary disabilities alleged -- application
apparently out of time
-- the WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002 requiring reconsideration
without regard to extension of time
issues -- whether "proper reasons" exist for
departing from usual practice -- unreasonable diversion or personnel and
administrative
resources -- factors to be taken into account -- whether certain
claims referred to by applicant impacting on levy --
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Appearances:
Ms J. Simes, injury management consultant, for the applicant
Mr J.K. O’Loughlin of counsel for the respondent
REASONS FOR RULING
The applicant
employer has lodged an application, dated 20 June 2010, seeking a review
pursuant to
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
") of unspecified decisions made by the WorkCover Corporation
of South Australia ("WorkCover") in relation to the assessment of the
employer’s levies. The assessments have taken into account a claims
history that includes certain claims the status
of which is disputed by the
provides as
72 -- Review
(1) Where an employer considers that a decision of the Corporation as
the estimate of remuneration that is to be used for the
calculation of a levy; or
the fixing or assessment of a levy; or
the imposition of penalty interest or a fine; or
the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead
to the imposition of a supplementary levy,
is unreasonable, the Board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a levy,
penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined
by the Board, by the Board itself, or by a committee or
person to whom the Board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the Board has an
absolute discretion as to whether
it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the Board may--
alter an estimate;
alter a levy or an assessment;
quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
quash or vary a condition imposed by the Corporation.
(5) An application under this section for review of a decision of the
Corporation--
must, if the decision relates to a class of employer, be made
within four months after notice of the decision was given; or
must, if the decision relates to an individual employer, be made
within two months after the employer was given notice of the decision,
the Board (or its delegate) allows an extension of time for making the
application.
This Panel is the Board’s delegate
under the section:
WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002
, as amended
South Australian Government Gazette
, 29 October 2009 at p.4977 for
the current version).
The claims referred to
in the application for review arose on 12 April 2000, 16 October 2000, 22 March
2005, 19 August 2005 and 1
September 2008. All were made by the same worker. The
first three related to his lower back; the other two related to his right knee.
The parties were agreed that the status of these claims did not affect the
employer’s levy for 2010-2011; therefore, the latest
levy that could have
been affected (and even this was not clear) was that for 2009-2010, notices for
which were issued in May or
June 2009. These notices represent the notices of
decision in relation to those assessments, which are the reviewable decisions
section 72.
section 72(5)
, therefore, even for that
year’s levy to be reviewed, an application needed to be made by July or
August 2009. The application
is therefore out of time by approximately nine or
ten months in relation to a review of the employer’s 2009-2010 levy; and
by an additional year for each year further back sought to be reviewed by the
application.
Section 72(5)
, of course,
allows an extension of time to be granted. In support of an extension of time,
Ms Simes says that in relation to each
of these claims, the employer stated its
view on the face of the employer report form at the time each claim was made
that it was
a secondary disability, being either a recurrence or an aggravation
of a previous disability. If correct, this means the relevant
claim(s) should
not be taken into account in the employer’s claims history. She also says
that the same point was repeatedly
agitated with WorkCover’s various
claims agents over the years without success, although the employer was not
informed or aware
procedure in relation to such matters until
more recently. However, it could not be said WorkCover was unaware of the
position before the application for review was lodged. That
could be a significant matter in considering whether an extension of
time should
be granted.
We are not yet at that stage,
WorkCover Levy Review
Determination 2002
, the Board has determined that certain pre-hearing
processes should be followed for the promotion of consensual resolution of
section 72.
These largely reflect the provisions of
applying to disputes in the Workers Compensation Tribunal and are to be
found in clause 7 of the Determination. It is appropriate
to set them clause 7
7. Conciliation as condition precedent to
(1) Upon receipt of any application lodged under
the registry of the Panel will forward a copy to the Corporation, which will
reconsider the decision (disregarding any question
of whether the application is
out of time) and must inform the Panel and the applicant within 14 days of the
result of the reconsideration
(and its attitude to any question of an extension
(1AA) Where--
the applicant has sought an extension of time for the making of
the application or, in the opinion of the Corporation, the application
review is out of time, and
the Corporation intends to oppose an extension of time, and
the Corporation considers proper reason exists for considering the
extension of time before undertaking reconsideration,
the Corporation may request the application to be referred to the President
of the Panel to consider the extension of time.
(1AB) If an application is referred to the President under sub-clause (1AA),
the President may grant a provisional extension of time
and make such other
procedural directions as the President thinks appropriate, but only if the
President agrees that proper reason
exists for departing from the usual practice
under sub-clause (1). A provisional extension of time does not prevent the Panel
refusing an extension of time, if appropriate, when dealing with the
application for review on the merits.
(1AC) If the President refuses to make a provisional extension of time, the
applicant may request that the extension of time be referred
to the Panel for
final determination. A finding by the President that proper reason does not
exist for departing from the usual practice
under sub-clause (1) is not a
(1AD) In this clause, consideration of an extension of time includes
consideration of the question whether an application is in fact
out of time.
(1A) Where the Corporation considers it impracticable to complete
reconsideration within 14 days (and gives the registry of the Panel
appropriate
reasons for so considering), the registry may grant an extension of time for the
reconsideration.
(1B) Before granting an extension of time for reconsideration that exceeds
seven days, the registry must invite the employer to indicate
whether it has any
objections to the proposed extension of time for reconsideration and the reasons
for any objection. If there is
any such objection, the registry must refer the
question to the President of the Panel to determine.
the Corporation, on reconsideration of a disputed decision,
confirms the decision; or
the Corporation, on reconsideration of a disputed decision, varies
the decision and the applicant expresses dissatisfaction with the
the registry of the Panel must refer the dispute for conciliation by a
conciliator who will use his or her best endeavours to bring
the applicant and
the Corporation to an agreed resolution of the matters referred to in the
application, and the Panel may not hear
and determine any application unless it
is satisfied that conciliation has been attempted and failed or it is satisfied
attempts have no realistic prospects of success.
(3) If, during the hearing of any matter, it appears to the Panel that there
is a realistic prospect of a negotiated outcome being
achieved, it may refer the
matter back for further conciliation or the Panel may make such other attempts
to promote conciliation
as it thinks appropriate.
(4) In this clause ‘conciliation’ includes:
counselling;
neutral evaluation;
case appraisal;
conciliation; and
any combination of the above,
and the format of conciliation in any particular case shall be at the
discretion of the conciliator in consultation with the parties,
with the proviso
that any confidential information provided during conciliation may be withheld
from the Panel if the provider of
that information so requests;
and ‘the Corporation’ includes:
the operating unit of the Corporation that made the reviewable
decision to which an application for review relates, and
General Counsel, Senior Lawyer, or other legal practitioner employed by the
Corporation.
Sub-clauses (1AA), (1AB), (1AC) and (1AD)
were introduced into the Determination in 2009. Before that, it was mandatory
for the Corporation
to reconsider a reviewable decision, disregarding any
question of whether the application was out of time, before, if necessary,
proceeding to conciliation and, if still in dispute, to the Panel for hearing
and determination.
In this case, WorkCover
has invoked sub-clause (1AA), and the matter has been referred to me to consider
whether proper reasons exist
for departing from the usual practice of
reconsideration and dealing with the extension of time issue at the outset. Mr
says that WorkCover intends to oppose an extension of time and
is of the view that proper reasons exist for considering the extension
before undertaking reconsideration:
length of the delay is significant;
acceptable explanation of the delay has been
Secondary coding of the
worker’s various disabilities was not raised with Employers Mutual or its
predecessors until 29 March
WorkCover’s response to and
reconsideration of the employer’s application necessitate an unreasonable
diversion of personnel
and administrative resources contrary to the objects of
, which include,
, provision of the efficient and
effective administration of the scheme;
claims costs associated with claim #/7 do not impact on the Adciv Pty
Ltd’s levy;
The disability to which
claim number #/8 relates has already been coded as a secondary disability and
the claims costs associated
with this claim have not impacted on Adciv Pty
Ltd’s levy;
The claims costs
associated with claim number #/9 associated with a compensable disability
sustained on 1 September 2008 do not impact
on Adciv Pty Ltd’s
I agree that the first four grounds are
appropriate and relevant ones to be put forward in connection with a request
under clause
7(1AA). However, I do not, with respect, agree that they are made
out in this case.
I think I may be
permitted to know that the new sub-clauses were introduced in the context of
applications by a small number of employers
with the flavour of "fishing
expeditions", where very large numbers of past claims, in some cases extending
of the scheme (in 1987) were cited without any
indication of why it was suddenly thought some or any were secondary. In one
it appeared that every claim made by any worker of the employer was cited,
comprising several hundred.
That, in my
respectful opinion, is a good example of a reconsideration that would
necessitate an unreasonable diversion of personnel
and administrative
The present application, by
contrast, involves only five claims, all made by one worker, and apparently
involving only two parts of
that worker’s body. Additionally, the
application has specified grounds and referred to evidence that suggest
reconsideration
of the original coding decisions could be appropriate. I put it
no higher than that; until the files are examined and (if the final
decision is
to be made by the members of the Panel) a book of documents perused, no real
factual findings are possible.
amendments to the reconsideration process explicitly preserve the default
position that reconsideration should be undertaken
without regard to the
extension of time issue in the ordinary case. That default position is described
as "the usual practice". For
"proper reasons" to exist as to why that process
should be reversed, it seems to me that circumstances should be shown to exist
take the matter outside the ordinary range of cases. The present
application strikes me as being fairly typical of a large number
of secondary
disability cases the Panel has dealt with in its ten years of operation, and not
at all outside the ordinary.
I note that it
is said by WorkCover that the #/7 claim does not impact on the employer’s
levy. I am not quite sure why that
is so, but if it is so, then it cannot be in
dispute -- unless the dispute is over whether it
impacted on the
levy. This Panel has no jurisdiction to review the status of the coding of
claims in the abstract; it only does so
as part of a review of a levy assessment
or one of the other kinds of reviewable decision specified in
section 72(1).
seems to me that a reconsideration asserting that this claim does not impact on
the levy would be sufficient in relation to that
claim, and if there are any
further complications they can be sorted out (hopefully) at
conciliation.
I note that it is also said
that the #/8 claim has already been coded as secondary. The application for
review also acknowledged this.
If I understood Ms Simes correctly at
today’s hearing, the employer thinks it was nevertheless taken into
account in the claims
history. If a clerical error or misunderstanding has
occurred, this also ought to be sorted out in either the reconsideration or
conciliation phase.
The #/9 claim
apparently would not have impacted on the employer’s levy until 1 July
2010 under the "bonus/penalty scheme" as
it existed until then. In view of the
"sunset clauses" contained in the Board’s latest Determination on the Levy
, 20 August 2009, p.3712), this will not occur,
and by now the employer should have its 2010-2011 levy notice confirming this.
that case, far from being out of time, any reference in the application for
review to that claim is premature, and should only be
lodged if that claim does
impact on the employer’s levy at some point in the
I am not persuaded that proper reason
exists for departing from the usual practice in this matter. As a result,
reconsideration should
now occur, at least in relation to the status of the
claims that do impact or have impacted on the employer’s levy assessments.
If that does not resolve the dispute, the matter will be referred to a
conciliator. If a dispute remains between the parties after
conciliation, it
will be referred back to the Panel to adjudicate on the extension of time issue
and, if necessary, the merits of
the employer’s
application.
I should mention that, in
dealing with this limited issue, I have not taken a view on the extensions of
time required in this matter,
and no assumption should be made either way as to
the final decision the full Panel will make, should this become
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (147 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter