URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SADC/2025/120.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:55:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MABARRACK v BEECROFT [2025] SADC 120 (15 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
MABARRACK & Anor v BEECROFT
[2025] SADC 120
Judgment of his Honour Judge
15 October 2025
PROCEDURE - CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS - DETENTION,
INSPECTION AND PRESERVATION - FREEZING ORDERS
The applicants seek a freezing order in the sum of $449,580.85 against both
respondents and ancillary orders against the second respondent
that he disclose
further information about expenses that he incurred when travelling to the
United States on holiday. A previous
freezing order that was obtained at an ex
parte hearing against the respondents was discharged when the respondents paid
the amount of that freezing order, namely $342,224.00.
The first respondent opposed the granting of the freezing order against her
on the basis that the applicants had not established with
precision the amount
of the freezing order. The first respondent also contended that the balance of
convenience did not favour the
granting of the order. The second respondent
opposed the freezing order on the basis that the applicants had not established
arguable case against him and that the ancillary orders should not be
made as the second respondent had provided the requested information.
Held: (1) An applicant for a freezing order must establish with precision
the amount of a freezing order, although sometimes that
might require a
reasonable estimate of the liability: Cardile v Led Builders Pty Ltd
, Zhen v Mo
[2008] VSC 300
(2) The first respondent referred to various instances of alleged
misappropriations which she contended could not be sustained. That
raises the question of whether the applicants have established a good arguable
case in relation to the disputed items.
The amount claimed in the freezing order
should be adjusted by the amount paid into Court and by some of the disputed
that a freezing order should be granted against the first respondent
in the sum of $78,896.10.
(3) The first respondent’s contention that the applicants had failed to
make full and frank disclosure on the previous ex parte
application for the
freezing order, and that provided a reason for refusing to make this order, is
rejected. That principle does
not apply to an inter parties application.
Further, the usual order for a failure to make full and frank disclosure is the
of the order that was granted ex parte. The applicant for the
injunction can then apply for a fresh order: Brink’s Mat Ltd
[1988] 1 WLR 1350
, Behbehani v Saleem
[1989] 1 WLR 723
applied. In any event,
there was no material failure to make full and frank disclosure by the
applicants in the previous application.
(4) There was a good arguable cause against the second respondent for a claim
of $50,000 for the knowing receipt of monies that were
obtained through the
breach of a fiduciary duty of the first respondent or knowing assistance in the
breach of fiduciary duty of
the first respondent: Farah Constructions Pty Ltd v
Say-Dee Pty Ltd
(2007) 230 CLR 89
applied. A freezing order s granted against
the second respondent in the sum of $50,000.
(5) No order should be made that the second respondent provide a further
affidavit as to the payment of the expenses that he incurred
on his US holiday.
An ancillary order may be made where an affidavit that has been provided
requires better explanation to ensure
that all relevant assets have been
identified: Hathway (liquidator), in the matter of Tightrope Retail Pty Ltd (in
liq) v Tripolitis
[2015] FCA 1003
applied. The second respondent has provided
details of the expenditure and the provision of the ancillary information could
be for the purpose of incriminating him. Such a purpose goes beyond the
Co Ltd v Bilton
[1981] EWCA Civ 8
[1981] QB 923
(6) Exceptions to the freezing order are made having regard to the principle
that a freezing order is not designed to operate as a
form of de facto security
for a judgment that the applicant may ultimately recover and that its sole
purpose is to ensure that the
processes of the court are not frustrated by the
removal or dissipation of assets that will, in the ordinary course, be available
to answer the judgment: Westpac Banking Corporation v McArthur
[2007] NSWSC
, Refuse to Lost Pty Ltd v Kostakis
[2025] VSC 438
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
rr. 112.14, 112.15, 182.3, 112.17, and sch 3,
pt 3, r 5., referred to.
AJ Bekhor & Co Ltd v Bilton
[1981] EWCA Civ 8
[1981] QB 923
Behbehani v
[1989] 1 WLR 723
Biscen Pty Ltd v Temsign Pty Ltd
Brink’s Mat Ltd v Elcombe
[1988] 1 WLR 1350
Cardile v Led
Builders Pty Ltd
(1999) 198 CLR 380
Cobra Golf Inc v Rata
Farah Constructions Pty Limited v Say-Dee Pty Ltd
Firmtech Aluminium Pty Ltd v Xie (No 2)
[2022] NSWSC 1142
Graincorp Operations Limited v Duncan Ross Munro
[2015] NSWSC 227
Hathway (liquidator), in the matter of Tightrope Retail Pty Ltd (in liq) v
[2015] FCA 1003
House of Spring Gardens Limited v Waite
[1985] FSR 173
Jackson v Sterling Industries
[1987] HCA 23
McEntee v SJ Berry Pty Ltd
[2024] SADC 8
Microsoft Corp v Goodview
Electronics Pty Ltd
[1999] FCA 754
Patterson v BTR Engineering (Aust)
(1989) 18 NSWLR 319
Planet International Limited v Garcia (No.2)
[1991] 1 Qd R 426
RAC Limited v Allsop
[1998] Ch 109
Lose Pty Ltd v Kostakis
[2025] VSC 438
Seeley International Pty Ltd v
Millennium Electronics Pty Ltd
[2020] SASC 205
Severstal Export GmbH v
Bhushan Steel Ltd
[2013] NSWCA 102
(2013) 84 NSWLR 141
Summer Hicks v Daniel Mark Harris
[2023] SADC 94
Thomas A Edison v Bullock
[1912] HCA 72
(1912) 15 CLR 679
Universal Music Australia Pty Ltd v Sharman License Holdings Ltd
[2005] FCA 1587
228 ALR 174
Westpac Banking Corporation v McArthur
[2007] NSWSC 1347
Yadlamalka Land Pty Ltd v Ragless & Anor
[2018] SASC 131
[2008] VSC 300
MABARRACK v BEECROFT
[2025] SADC 120
Introduction
interlocutory applications dated 29 January 2025 and 19 June 2025, the
applicants seek a freezing order in the sum of $449,580.85
against both
respondents and ancillary orders against the second respondent that he disclose
further information about expenses that
he incurred when travelling to the
United States on a holiday.
first respondent opposes the orders sought against her. The first respondent
accepts that there is a good arguable case against
her but contends that the
order should be refused because: (1) the applicant has not established with
precision the amount that should
be the subject of the order; and (2) the
balance of convenience favours the application being rejected.
second respondent opposes the orders sought against him. The second respondent
contends: (1) there is not a good arguable case
against him or if there is, it
is limited to a claim for $50,000; and (2) the ancillary orders should not be
made as all necessary
information has been provided.
findings made in this judgment are made for the purposes of the interlocutory
applications and do not represent concluded views
on any issue and were made on
the affidavit evidence tendered in the hearing of those applications, the
deponents of which were not
the subject of cross-examination.
first and second respondents are married. The first respondent was the daughter
of Moussi Mabarrack (now deceased)(Mr Mabarrack).
His executors are the first
applicants. Prior to his death, Mr Mabarrack states that he was reliant on the
first respondent to assist
him with his banking. The first respondent was also,
with her brother, Michael Mabarrack, a director of the second respondent, Moussi
Nominees Pty Ltd (Nominees). Nominees was a nominee company which had been
established by Mr Mabarrack and acted as the trustee of
the Moussi Nominees
Trust (the Trust). Mr Mabarrack was advised of various discrepancies by Michael
Mabarrack concerning the accounts
of Nominees. An investigation was carried out
into those accounts and also the personal accounts of Mr Mabarrack. That
investigation
showed that the first respondent had allegedly misappropriated
money (without the knowledge or consent of Mr Mabarrack or
Mabarrack): (1) from Nominees; (2) by using a credit card in the
name of Mr Mabarrack for her own purposes; and (3) by withdrawing
transferring money from a savings account in the name of Mr Mabarrack. When
proceedings were instituted and a previous freezing
order was made, the sum of
$342,224 had been identified by the applicants as the amount that had been
allegedly misappropriated.
Since that time, further sums have been identified.
The applicants now claim that the following sums have been misappropriated by
the first respondent:
$339,118.59 (which includes interest of $63,985.84) from the account of
$59,667.83 (which includes interest of $13,264.14) from the credit card of Mr
Mabarrack; and
$50,794.13 (which includes interest of $11,920.05) from the bank account of Mr
respect of each of the items that make up the amounts claimed, the applicants,
through banking records, have identified the account
from which the funds came
and the person or entity to whom payment was made. There are hundreds of
individual items that make up
the amounts claimed.
are two items in the journal of Nominees which record payments to “CJI
Beecroft”. These items record a transfer
of $25,000 from Nominees to
Mr Beecroft on 16 August 2021 and a further payment of $25,000 from
Mabarrack Nominees to Mr Beecroft
on 6 September 2021. The bank statements of
Nominees for each of these transactions record “ANZ Internet Banking
to “CJI Beecroft”.
applicants rely on two communications from the first respondent which they claim
constitute admissions by the first respondent.
The first of these is a text
message from the first respondent to Michael Mabarrack made on 27 November 2023.
In that text message,
the first respondent states “
the issue is between
me and Dad and Craig
[her husband, the second respondent]
has nothing to
do with it, if he wants to recover the money it will be me and me alone he can
take to court.
” Further on, in the text message, the first respondent
I’m truly sorry for what I have caused, you and Joe are
now the sole people and beneficiaries in Moussi Nominees, You and Joe
everything from now on.”
applicants also claim that the first respondent made admissions in a letter that
she sent to her brothers, Michael and Joe, and
copied to the applicants’
lawyers, Websters Lawyers. On 25 June 2024, Websters Lawyers sent a letter to
the first respondent
in which they demanded the return of $342,224 from the
first respondent which they claimed had been misappropriated from the
applicants.
The first respondent sent an email to Websters Lawyers on 18 August
2024 in which she attached her response to Michael and Joe. In
that response,
“I am truly sorry for all the pain I have caused our
family.” “What I did and the pain I caused everyone will live
me for the rest of my life” “just so you know I am fully aware of
the consequences of this letter and that it could
be used by you both, hence it
is also being sent to Websters Lawyers”.
court orders and affidavits
an originating application made on 1 July 2024, the applicants sought, pursuant
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
(UCR) 112.14, a freezing order over the
assets of the respondents up to the unencumbered value of $342,224.00.
10 July 2024, the Court granted an ex parte freezing order. The freezing order
included an order that the respondents inform the
applicants in writing of their
assets, giving their value, location and details (including any mortgages,
charges or other encumbrances
to which they were subject) and further ordered
that the respondents provide an affidavit setting out that information.
was no application by the respondents, once they were served, to discharge the
freezing order. The respondents paid the full
amount of the freezing order, that
is the sum of $342,224.00, into Court on 3 March 2025. Clause 12(a) of the
freezing order provides
that the order ceases to have effect upon that
17 July 2024, the first respondent provided an affidavit setting out her assets.
On 30 July 2024, the second respondent provided
an affidavit setting out his
assets. In that affidavit, the second respondent also stated he was not involved
in any misappropriation
and that the $50,000 was received into a joint bank
account that he held with the first respondent, that he did not deal with the
money and was unaware of the exact date upon which it was transferred into that
bank account. The second respondent filed a further
affidavit on 4 August 2025
in which he stated that he travelled to the United States of America in about
January 2025 and that his
son, Samel Beecroft, paid for that trip. Mr Beecroft
further said that he paid for incidentals on his credit
Legal principles relating to freezing orders
112.14 provides:
(1) The Court may make an order (a freezing order),
with or without notice to a respondent, for the purpose of preventing the
frustration
or inhibition of the Court’s process by seeking to meet a
danger that a judgment or prospective judgment of the Court will
be wholly or
partly unsatisfied.
(2) A freezing order may be an order restraining a respondent from removing
any assets located in or outside Australia or from disposing
of, dealing with,
or diminishing the value of, those assets.
112.15 provides:
The Court may make an order (an ancillary order)
ancillary to a freezing order or prospective freezing order as the Court
appropriate.
Without limiting the generality of subrule (1), an ancillary order may be
made for either or both of the following purposes—
(a) eliciting information relating to assets relevant to the freezing order
or prospective freezing order;
(b) determining whether the freezing order should be made.
doctrinal basis of the freezing order, as set out in UCR 112.14 and also
established in a long line of authority, is to prevent
the frustration of the
Court’s process (namely the recovery of a judgment) and is designed to
protect a prospective enforcement
The order is not designed
to provide security for the applicant’s
The applicant for a freezing
order must establish that there is a real danger that the assets of the
prospective judgment will be
wholly or partly unsatisfied because the assets of
the prospective judgment debtor are disposed of or dealt with or otherwise
Yadlamalka Land Pty Ltd v Ragless &
Hinton J observed that
the freezing order is a drastic remedy, is not lightly granted and that its
purpose is to preserve the status
quo. The order is
discretionary.
general principles relating to freezing orders are relevant to the applications
before the Court and are not the subject
of controversy. This Court has on many
occasions applied these principles.
These principles are:
(1) The threshold requirement for obtaining a freezing order in the case of an
accrued or prospective cause of action is a good arguable
(2) The Courts have consistently recognised that a freezing order is an
exceptional remedy and should not be granted
(3) The application must be supported by evidence and not speculation.
(4) The applicant for the order bears the onus of satisfying the Court as to the
amount which is to be the subject of the order.
The applicant for the freezing
order must establish with some precision the value of the prospective judgment.
The order should not
unnecessarily tie up a party’s assets and
(5) The balance of convenience must favour the granting of the freezing
(6) Evidence of dishonesty which may be relevant in establishing whether an
applicant for a freezing order has a good arguable case
may also be relevant to
the issue of the risk of dealing with
(7) It is not necessary for the applicants to show an actual intention on the
part of the respondents to deal with their assets and
defeat the recovery of the
judgment sum.
Have the applicants established with precision the value of the
prospective judgment?
recognition that a freezing order is a drastic remedy that curtails the right of
a person to use their assets as they see fit
underlies the requirement that the
applicants must establish with precision the amount of their potential judgment.
Any freezing
of assets beyond that sum provides an unjustifiable interference
with the rights of a respondent. Kirby J in
Cardile v Led Builders Pty
recognised that it might
not always be possible to precisely identify the amount of a potential judgment.
Kirby J held:
The ultimate measure of the property and other assets
of the appellants which could properly be made the subject of an asset
preservation
order is that part of such property and assets which, on a
reasonable estimate, would be needed to meet a judgment of the Federal
favour of LED in the copyright proceedings. No more. There was no warrant for
freezing the assets of the appellants beyond
LED's potential judgment. True, it
would have been difficult for the primary judge to estimate, with precision, the
ultimate recovery
of LED, given that the claim for any account of profits had
been heard by another judge and reserved. However, it was necessary,
in terms of
principle, to limit the disturbance of the property and other assets of the
Cardiles and Ultra Modern to the potential
recovery of LED and nothing more.
applicants have established with precision the amount that they contend is the
value of their prospective judgment. They have
analysed the transactions
recorded in the accounts of Nominees and Mr Mabarrack (which they say were
controlled by the first respondent)
and ascertained those transactions which
they say were not authorised and were for the benefit of the respondents.
However, that
sum only provides the starting point for the analysis of the value
of the prospective judgment. The first respondent has raised a
number of matters
which she contends demonstrate that the value of the prospective judgment is not
the amount contended for by the
applicants. In my view, this contention raises
not so much an issue as to whether the applicants have established with
the amount of the prospective judgment but whether the applicants have
established a good arguable case in relation to the disputed
items. In other
words, if the applicants have not established a good arguable case in respect of
the disputed items, it would follow
that they have not established a good
arguable case in respect of the claimed judgment sum but only in respect of some
lesser sum.
Adjustments
first adjustment that is required to be made is to take into account the amount
of the monies that have been paid into Court,
namely the sum of $342,224.00.
Clearly, after taking into account this payment, the freezing order cannot not
exceed the sum of $107,356,
such sum being sufficient to meet a prospective
the first respondent in her written and oral submissions has claimed that the
amounts comprised in the transactions referred
to below should be deducted from
the amount claimed by the applicants:
(1) Transactions identified as being for the benefit of Michael Mabarrack and
Alex Mabarrack in the sum of $18,307.20;
(2) Transactions described as being for the deceased’s benefit in the sum
of $20,500.00;
(3) Transactions for the deceased’s benefit in the sum of $2003.03;
(4) Transactions for the deceased’s household and usual expenses
constituting payments to:
(a) AGL in the sum of $0 (amounts payable to AGL were excluded from the
applicants’ final calculations of their claim);
(b) SA Water in the sum $1009.72;
(c) City of Mitcham transactions-$0 (amounts payable to the City of Mitcham were
excluded from the applicants’ final calculations
of their claim);
(d) Revenue SA-$0 (amounts payable to Revenue SA were excluded from the
applicants’ final calculations of their claim);
(e) Foodland in the sum of $53,704.10;
(f) BUPA in the sum of $0 (amounts payable to BUPA were excluded from the
applicants’ final calculations of their claim);
(g) Cash withdrawals in the sum of $65,528;
(5) Double counting of transactions from the account of Nominees to the
deceased’s credit account in the sum of $18,000;
(6) Double counting of transactions and errors in the sum of $17,450.18.
first transactions to be considered are those which are recorded as being for
the benefit of Michael or Alex Mabarrack. The first
respondent submits that the
journal records of Nominees record those transactions as being under the name of
Michael or Alex. The
applicants submit that there should be no adjustment in
respect of these items as the first respondent was in control of the accounts
and any misdescription in the journal was made by her. It is the evidence of
Michael Mabarrack that he did not authorise the payment
of those sums. Further,
as the applicants contend, there is evidence that it was the first respondent
and not Alex Mabarrack who
received goods from Trelise Cooper, one of the
payees referred to in the journal. Alex Mabarrack is the name in the journal as
person who received the benefit of these items. That is evidence that the
recording of names by the first respondent in the beneficiary
accounts may not
always be accurate. Given the evidence of dishonesty on the part of the first
respondent, it is arguable that these
transactions were not properly allocated
to Michael and Alex Mabarrack. Therefore, for the purposes of this
argument, I consider
that there is a good arguable case that the applicants are
entitled to these amounts. I therefore do not propose any reduction or
adjustments for these transactions.
second group of transactions in respect of which the first respondent claims
there should be an adjustment are three internet
banking payments to
Mr Mabarrack. Those payments were:
$5,000 on 30
$17,500 on 23
February 2021; and
$3,000 on 9
September 2021.
their revised calculation of their claim, the applicants conceded that the
payment of the $5,000 was not part of their claim.
This amount does not form
part of the amount claimed in the freezing order. The applicants undertook
further investigations in relation
to the two other payments and there was
evidence tendered from the ANZ Bank which was to the effect that the account
details to which
these payments were made did not match the details of the payee
that was recorded in the journal. In other words, it was not Mr
Mabarrack’s
accounts into which the monies were deposited. In those
circumstances, given the evidence relating to the dishonesty of the first
respondent and the evidence about the unauthorised transactions, I am satisfied
that there is a good arguable case in relation to
these payments. I therefore do
not propose any reduction for these transactions.
third group of transactions involve the sum of $2,003.03 which the first
respondent claims was for the benefit of Mr Mabarrack.
The sum of $2,003.03
comprised some 10 items. The applicants have made an adjustment in respect of
three of these items in their
revised claim and submit no further adjustment is
required in relation to the remaining items. The first respondent relies on
that she made in her affidavit where she records details of those
payments. This is counter to the evidence of the applicants which
effect that these items were part of the unauthorised items. It is not possible
to resolve such a matter on an interlocutory
hearing given that there are no
financial records that are definitive. It follows that the evidence put forward
by the applicants
is sufficient to establish a good arguable case. I therefore
do not propose any reduction for these transactions.
fourth group of transactions involve the sum of $1,009.72 which the applicants
claim were payments to SA Water which were to
the benefit of the first
respondent. The two amounts in question were in the sum of $446.65 and $563.07
which were paid by credit
card while the other payments (which were to the
benefit of Mr Mabarrack) were generally made by BPAY. I do not consider this to
be a sufficient basis to say that the applicants have established a good
arguable case that these payments were not to the benefit
of Mr Mabarrack when
there is no evidence of Mr Mabarrack’s account with SA Water and whether
these two amounts were credited
to those accounts. I therefore will allow an
adjustment to the amount claimed in the sum of $1,009.72.
fifth group of transactions involve the sum of $53,704.10 which was paid to
Foodland. In the revised schedule, the items that
are claimed in respect of
Foodland comprise $147.78 in relation to Marion Foodland and $23,079.77 in
respect of Pasadena Foodland.
The amounts claimed in respect of the Pasadena
Foodland came in large part from the account of Nominees ($11,907.20) and the
account of Mr Mabarrack ($10,801.15). The first respondent has given
evidence that these payments were for the benefit of the deceased
groceries. From about January 2021, Mr Mabarrack was unable to go grocery
shopping and the first respondent would take his
wife with her and they would do
the grocery shopping on his behalf and therefore the payments were on his
behalf. The revised schedule
makes an adjustment for the amounts claimed in
respect of Foodland. There is evidence from the applicants that Michael
and Mr Mabarrack did not authorise payments from Nominees. There is
also the evidence about the dishonesty of the first respondent.
On the other
hand there is evidence from the first respondent that the payments were for the
groceries of the deceased. It is not
possible to resolve such a matter on an
interlocutory hearing given that there are no financial records that are
definitive. It follows
that the evidence put forward by the applicants,
including evidence concerning the dishonesty of the first respondent, is
to establish a good arguable case in relation to this aspect of the
claim. I therefore do not propose any reduction for these transactions.
sixth group of transactions concern cash withdrawals in the sum of $65,528. The
first respondent gave evidence that she observed
that Mr Mabarrack’s
wife would sometimes use his debit card and make withdrawals from his debit card
when they went grocery
shopping together. This does not explain debits to the
account of Nominees or the amount of those debits, $48,000. Again, it is not
possible to resolve such a matter on an interlocutory hearing given that there
are no financial records that are definitive. It follows
that the evidence put
forward by the applicants, including about the dishonesty of the first
respondent, is sufficient to establish
a good arguable case in relation to this
aspect of the claim. I therefore do not propose any reduction for these
transactions.
seventh group of transactions concern what the first respondent submits is
double counting in the sum of $18,000 which represents
payments that were
transferred from the account of Nominees to the credit card of Mr Mabarrack and
were therefore paid twice. The
applicants provided further evidence of the
adjustments that they made to the amount of their claim by reducing the amount
by Nominees in respect of this double counting. That adjustment is
reflected in the following entries. The applicants initially claimed:
BPAY in the sum of $21,775.78; (2) ANZ Internet Banking in the sum of $17,500;
and (3) Moususi Mabarrack in the sum of $25,500.
Following the information
provided by the first respondent in her affidavit in relation to the three
internet payment totalling $25,500
(referred to above), the applicants: (1)
reduced Moussi Mabarrack to zero; (2) reduced ANZ BPAY to zero and (3) increased
ANZ Internet
Banking from $17,500 to $38,000 to take into account the sum of
$20,500 which represented the two internet payments of $17,500 and
consider these adjustments address the alleged double counting such that no
further adjustment is required at this stage.
I therefore do not propose any
reduction for these transactions.
eighth group of transactions involve a further double counting of transactions
and errors. The applicants’ concede there
is double counting of
transactions and errors and the amount claimed should be reduced in the sum of
$17,450.18. I propose to make
a reduction in the claim for that sum.
setting out the quantum of their claim, the applicants have claimed interest in
the sum of $89,170. Interest was calculated pursuant
to UCR 182.3 at the rate of
7%. The first respondent makes two complaints about the interest calculation.
The first complaint is
that the sum upon which interest is calculated has been
reduced and therefore the amount of interest should be reduced. The second
complaint is that the interest calculation has been made on a yearly basis but
has been made as if all payments that were incurred
at the start of particular
year, rather than through the course of the year. This has the consequence that
the interest calculation
is overstated.
consider that there is substance in each of these complaints. The sum upon which
the interest calculation should be made has been
reduced by $18,459. Further,
the calculation, by treating the whole amount that has been allegedly
misappropriated for the year as
having been misappropriated at the start of the
year, overstates the true quantum of the interest. Taking a broad brush
I consider that the interest calculation should be reduced by $10,000.
Balance of convenience
first respondent submitted that the balance of convenience did not favour
granting the application. In making this contention,
the first respondent did
not rely on any particular prejudice that would be caused to the first
respondent by reason of the freezing
order but relied upon what she contends was
a failure on the part of the applicants to make full and frank disclosure to the
of all material facts. The first respondent referred to UCR, Schedule 3,
Part 3, rule 5 and the well-known passage in
Thomas A Edison v
in support of
that allegation. Those authorities both deal with ex parte applications.
first respondent contends that the applicants:
(1) failed to provide the Deed of Trust for the Trust;
(2) failed to dispose to the Court the beneficiary transaction account until FDN
(3) sought to include in the amount of the prospective freezing order
transactions which are readily apparent as being for the benefit
applicants and their families.
matters raised by the first respondent go more to discretionary considerations
which militate against the granting of a freezing
order. However, the present
application is an inter partes application. I am not persuaded that any failure
to disclose this information
is a relevant discretionary matter. As to the Deed
of Trust, the first respondent was a director of Nominees and in that capacity
would know that the company acted as trustee of the Trust. Further, the
existence of the Trust is not relevant as the applicants
have framed their claim
by alleging that the money was misappropriated by the first respondent by her
actions in making payments
that were unauthorised and made without the knowledge
or consent of her co-director, Michael Mabarrack. That is, she did not have
authority to make the payments. The existence of the Trust and the terms of the
Trust do not affect the applicants’ characterisation
of the conduct of the
first respondent.
failure to disclose the beneficiaries’ account falls into the same
category. Further, as the first respondent accepts,
these documents have in fact
been disclosed prior to the substantive hearing of the application. In both of
these circumstances,
the failure to disclose the beneficiaries’
transaction account is not of any weight.
third matter complained of by the first respondent is that the applicants have
included amounts in the prospective freezing order
that are for the benefit of
the applicants and their families. That is a matter of contest. There is no
suggestion that the applicants
have included amounts that they do not properly
consider form part of their claim There may be a dispute about these matters and
whether they properly are included but that does not amount to material
non-disclosure by the applicants. In any event, it is within
respondent’s ability to respond to those matters.
first respondent also contends that there was a failure to make full and frank
disclosure on the
application and that is a discretionary matter
that the Court can take into account when considering this application for a
order. I reject this contention for a number of reasons.
First, the usual order for a failure to make full
and frank disclosure is the discharge of the order that was granted ex parte.
applicant for the injunction can then apply for a fresh
injunction.
Ralph Gibson LJ in
Brink’s Mat Ltd v
number of principles upon which the assessment of non-disclosure and its
consequences is made. His Honour noted that notwithstanding
non-disclosure, the
Court retained a discretion as to whether or not to continue the order, to make
a new order or require the immediate
discharge of the order. The purpose of the
discharge of an ex parte injunction obtained without full disclosure is to
deprive the
wrongdoer of the advantage improperly
However, the rule
cannot become an instrument of injustice and there the court retains a
discretion to continue the injunction or
grant a fresh injunction in its place
even if there has been material
non-disclosure.
Secondly, for
the reasons that have already been expressed, I do not consider that there was a
material failure to make full and
frank disclosure. Thirdly, there was no
application to discharge the initial freezing order. Instead, the respondents
paid into Court
the amount of the freezing order and it was then discharged
automatically. In these circumstances, it is not appropriate for the
conduct a hypothetical inquiry as to the circumstances of making the previous
freezing order.
first respondent also submitted that a relevant discretionary matter was the
failure of the applicants to comply with some of
the timetabling orders. There
was no evidence of any prejudice suffered by the respondents as a result of any
failures and I do not
consider that they provide a basis to refuse to grant a
freezing order as part of the Court’s discretion. There was no relevant
delay in making the fresh application for a freezing order, given the complexity
of identifying the quantum of the alleged misappropriation.
Conclusion concerning the application for a freezing order
against the first respondent
am satisfied that a freezing order should be ordered against the first
respondent in the sum of $78,896.10.
Good arguable case against
the second respondent
second respondent contends that the applicants have not established that they
have a good arguable case against him. The extent
of the freezing order against
the second respondent cannot be any greater than $50,000 as there is no evidence
that the second respondent
received any other monies or was involved in any
other transactions beyond the two transactions referred to below. This amount
monies transferred in two tranches of $25,000 each. The two sums were
transferred on 16 August 2021 and 6 September 2021. The ANZ
Bank statement
records for each of those dates record a transfer to “CJI
I note that the
second respondent in his affidavit of assets sworn on 29 July 2024 states that
the money was received into a joint
bank account with his wife and that he never
dealt with the money. Other than this assertion, there is no evidence that the
was paid into a joint account. Strictly, this affidavit was not tendered
in the application, although I am prepared to accept it
as the second
respondent’s evidence as to these transfers as it was referred to, without
objection, during the course of the
am satisfied that the applicants have established a good arguable case against
the second respondent. The applicants’ case
against the second respondent
on knowing receipt of monies that were
obtained through the breach of a fiduciary duty of the first respondent or
knowing assistance
in the breach of fiduciary duty of the first respondent. The
principles and requirements of those two causes of action are explained
Farah Constructions Pty Limited v Say-Dee Pty Ltd
Constructions).
entry completed by the bank statement by the first respondent which nominates
the second respondent as the beneficiary of the
funds is evidence that the
transfer was to the benefit of the second respondent. If that is the case, it is
reasonable to infer that
the second respondent had sufficient knowledge of the
transfer to come within the categories of knowledge set out in
Constructions
sufficient to establish a good arguable case of
knowing receipt or knowing assistance. The two sums of $25,000 are large amounts
are received into that account of which the second respondent is a joint
freezing order against the second respondent should therefore be limited to
$50,000 plus interest on that sum. As a broadbrush
estimate, I would allow
interest in the sum of $3,000. I therefore will limit the quantum of the
freezing order against the second
respondent to $53,000.
second respondent did not advance any reasons beyond those advanced by the first
respondent as to why the balance of convenience
did not favour the granting of
the freezing order or why the Court, might, in the exercise of its discretion,
decline to make such
an order. It follows that, for the reasons previously
expressed, I do not consider that either of these matters provide a
justification
for refusing to make the order.
the power to make an ancillary order is expressed in wide terms and UCR 112.15
does not limit the circumstances in which
an order might be made, “
order made must be framed to as to come within the limits set by the purpose
which the order can properly be intended to serve,
that is, to ensure the
effective exercise of the jurisdiction
discretion that the Court has to make an ancillary order must be exercised by
reference to the purposes of the freezing order.
Therefore, the ancillary order
must assist the freezing order to ensure assets of the prospective judgment
debtor are not disposed
of or dealt with or otherwise diminished in value so as
to frustrate any prospective judgment. This Court had occasion to consider
principles in
Summer Hicks v Daniel Mark
I will repeat
those principles, insofar as they are relevant to the present application.
Bekhor & Co Ltd v Bilton
Court of Appeal held that the court had the power to make all such ancillary
orders as appeared to be just and convenient to ensure
that the exercise of the
achieve its purpose. Accordingly,
the Court in that case ordered the respondent
to provide information about his assets.
the Court emphasised that the ancillary order must not go too far. The Court
held that an order which was sought for the
purpose of ascertaining whether a
previous disclosure order had been breached (and therefore for the purpose of
incriminating and
ultimately punishing the defendant for contempt) goes beyond
the jurisdictional basis of such an order and will not be
Ackner LJ held that the
purpose of the mareva injunction (or freezing order) was not to improve the
position of the applicant in
an insolvency but to prevent the disposal of assets
which would otherwise be available to satisfy a judgment. He went on to
must be vigilant to ensure that the Mareva defendant is not treated like a
judgment debtor. It was no doubt with this general
principle in mind that Robert
Goff J in A v C (Note). Post 956 [A v C
[1981] 1 QB 956]
was at pains to point
out that it would not be right to make general use of the power to enable the
plaintiff to discover whether
the defendant has any assets here. However, having
established the existence of assets, it may in a particular case, be necessary
for the proper exercise of the jurisdiction that the defendant should provide
information about a particular asset.
LJ held that insofar as the ancillary order sought information that related to
the respondent’s past assets, as
distinct from the present whereabouts of
its assets, its purpose was not to assist the court or the applicant to locate
particular assets but to open the way to punishing the respondent for
contempt. That purpose goes beyond the legitimate purpose of
an ancillary order
and is not necessary for the proper and effective exercise of the freezing
have been a number of cases that have considered the principles set out in
and that provide some guidance as to the width of the ancillary
Biscen Pty Ltd v Temsign Pty Ltd
Carr J refused to
make an order concerning assets and liabilities and any past dispositions of
assets for the reasons set out in
More recent decisions have
taken a broader approach than that taken in
Firmtech Aluminium Pty Ltd v Xie (No
Robb J analysed the
concluded that an ancillary order requiring
disclosure by the respondent did not
need to be limited to information relating to the assets and liabilities of the
respondent but
could include information in respect of payments and other
transactional arrangements, citing Bergin CJ in Eq in
Graincorp Operations
Limited v Duncan Ross Munro
a payment of $750,000 was made to the respondent in
exchange for the delivery of barley. In the context of an application for a
order, the applicant sought the disclosure of the assets and
liabilities of the respondent together with the identification of the
account or other destination of those payments. The Court granted that order and
found that the applicant had a concern where
the money went and given the
silence of the respondent in relation to that issue, it was appropriate that the
ancillary order require
the provision of that information.
Hathway (liquidator), in the matter of Tightrope Retail Pty Ltd (in liq)
v Tripolitis,
an order, ancillary to a prospective freezing order, requiring the respondent to
be cross examined on his affidavit as to
assets and liabilities. Markovic J
quoted from the decision of Thomas J in
Planet International Limited v
Garcia (No.2 )
who in turn
quoted from the judgment of Cumming-Bruce LCJ in
House of Spring Gardens
court has the power (and, I would add, the duty) to take such steps as are
practicable upon an application of the plaintiff to
procure that where an order
has been made that the defendants identify their assets and disclose their
whereabouts, such steps are
taken as will enable the order to have effect as
completely and successfully as the powers of the court can procure.
The purpose of the cross-examination would be to elicit with greater
particularity the extent and the whereabouts of the defendants’
The background of applications for
injunctions is often
a situation in which it is urgently necessary for the court to intervene in
order to assist the plaintiff to
prevent the defendant from frustrating the
object of the proceedings. In such a situation an order to cross-examine upon an
unsatisfactory
affidavit already filed is one of the courses that the court has
is entirely a
matter for the judge presiding on cross-examination properly to control it.
J went on to hold:
Mr Lyons Q.C. on behalf of the respondent Mr
Garcia submitted that courts are slow to make such orders. I am not sure that
correct, although I acknowledge that the defendants need protection from
being treated as “debtors in advance” as Lord
Ackner acknowledged
in A.J. Bekhor and Company Limited v. Bilton
[1981] EWCA Civ 8
, 942; [1981] 1 Lloyds’ Rep 491, 500. Also fishing expeditions must be
prevented if that seems to be the object of the exercise.
However it seems to me
that the matter is at large and that it will depend upon the facts and
circumstances of each particular case
whether the exercise is unduly oppressive,
unnecessary, insufficiently relevant, or whether the affidavit plainly requires
exposition that the deponent is prepared to give without the stimulus of
cross-examination.
J also referred to the decision in
Universal Music Australia Pty Ltd v
Sharman License Holdings
where Moore J held that
where there might be doubt as to whether the disclosure of assets and
liabilities had been complete, cross-examination
on the affidavit would be
appropriate to test whether the disclosure affidavits fully revealed the assets
over which the freezing
order operated and which might be available to satisfy a
deciding that it was appropriate to make an ancillary order requiring the
respondent to be cross-examined on his affidavit, Markovic
J relied, amongst
other matters, upon the fact that funds had moved from the applicant companies
to a bank account of the respondents
and the funds could not now be located. Her
Honour concluded that the order for cross examination was within the bounds of
permitted and was a just and convenient way of ensuring that all
relevant assets were identified before any opportunity arises for
dissipation of assets.
involving the making of ancillary orders in the context of Anton Piller orders,
or as they are now called, search orders, also
provide some assistance in
determining the scope of such orders. In
RAC Limited v
Court examined the rationale for the making of ancillary orders in the context
Anton Piller
orders and made the following statement
which was cited with approval in
Cobra Golf Inc v
With necessary
modifications, the same principles apply to an ancillary order in aid of a
freezing order. In
RAC v Allsop,
Peter Gibson J
assumption that the court has the power to order cross-examination, the question
remains whether it is appropriate in the particular
circumstances of each
defendant to make an order for cross-examination. It is clear that on the
assumption the court has a discretion,
it is of proper concern of court that its
order should be fully complied with. It cannot be right that a person who is
swear an affidavit giving certain information should be able to
disclose to whatever he pleases without any fear that the evidence
challenged effectively. Further, a principal object of the order for disclosure
Anton Piller
relief is granted is to give to the
plaintiff knowledge of the sources and whereabouts of illicit goods so that the
plaintiff can
take further proceedings against such sources and seize such
supplies. As I see it the court should be ready to further that purpose.
this area the court should proceed with caution. The object of the application
must, I apprehend, truly be to obtain the further
information which it believed
is in the possession of the person the subject of the order but which the person
has failed to disclose
notwithstanding the earlier order. The object of the
application must not be to enable contempt proceedings to be brought so as to
punish the person served with the order. Further, it must not be to obtain
information which is to be used for the purpose of the
action when the action
comes to trial. Inevitably if cross-examination is ordered and information is
elicited there is likely to
be some information which will go to questions of
contempt and to the subject matter of the litigation. The court, must, I think,
be alive to the dangers that an order for cross-examination brings. Mr
Platts-Mills [Counsel] accepted that the court should not
make an order for
cross-examination unless satisfied that there was a reasonable likelihood that
the person sought to be cross-examined
had information which should have been
disclosed pursuant to the order for disclosure and which would lead to the
fulfilment of the
purpose of the order, that is to say disclosure of sources and
ascertaining the whereabouts of illicit goods. In my judgment Mr Platts-Mills
[counsel] was plainly right to accept that there was a proper limitation in the
court’s power to order cross-examination. It
cannot be right to allow a
plaintiff the opportunity of a roving cross-examination merely because the
plaintiffs harbour suspicion
that the person sought to be made the subject of
the order has not been entirely open in his disclosure.
ancillary order must not be used as a mere investigatory tool.
Microsoft Corp v Goodview Electronics Pty
The Court, must in my view, be careful to avoid the
extraordinary jurisdiction of the Court to make an Anton Piller order from being
subverted to a mere investigatory tool for the applicants, or indeed, from being
used for any purpose other than the preservation
of vital evidence pending the
hearing and determination of a proceeding.
the facts and circumstances of this case must be considered to determine the
following matters: first, whether the information
sought is for a legitimate
purpose; secondly, whether the affidavit that has been provided by the
respondent requires further explanation;
and thirdly, whether the information
being sought goes beyond the legitimate purpose and is, in substance, for one of
the extraneous
purposes referred to above. A legitimate purpose in making an
ancillary order is to ensure that all relevant assets have been identified.
the present case, the second respondent has provided an affidavit in which he
confirms that he travelled to the United States,
but that his son, Sameul
Beecroft, paid for that trip and that incidentals such as accommodation were
paid by the second respondent
on his credit card which he subsequently paid off.
If that information is false, contempt proceedings could be taken against the
second respondent. However, it is not the case that an ancillary order should be
made requiring the provision of further information
as the information sought
has already been provided. It is not the case that the ancillary order will
identify further assets or
provide greater particularity about the
respondents’ assets. The purpose of seeking the provision of any further
information
would be for the purpose of incriminating the second respondent.
That is, to show that his affidavit as to assets was false. The
applicant is
using the ancillary order as an investigatory tool.
therefore decline to make the ancillary order that is sought against the second
respondent.
Exceptions to the freezing order
respondents have sought the usual exceptions to the freezing order relating to
the payment of normal living expenses, reasonable
legal costs and reasonable
medical expenses. The applicants do not oppose these exceptions but did oppose
their quantum.
In framing an order for exceptions to
the freezing order, it is important to observe that the freezing order is not
designed to operate
as a form of de facto security for a judgment that the
applicant may ultimately recover and that the sole purpose is to ensure that
processes of the court are not frustrated by the removal or dissipation of
assets that will in the ordinary course be available
to answer the
the prior freezing order was made on 1 July 2024, the exclusions were that the
orders did not prohibit the respondents from
paying $500 per week in ordinary
living expenses and $5,000 in reasonable legal expenses. There was subsequently
an agreement to
increase these amounts to permit the following expenses to be
paid: (1) $2,000 per week for ordinary living expenses; (2) reasonable
expenses of $12,000 for each of the respondents; and (3) reasonable medical
first respondent now seeks to increase her weekly expenses to $3,000 per week
and her separate legal costs to $50,000. The justification
for that increased
amount is that the first respondent is on a payment plan with her solicitors for
fees incurred to date.
do not consider that there is proper justification to increase the weekly
expenses to $3,000 per week. I have come to the conclusion
for two reasons.
First, the affidavit material is vague as to the amount to be paid off and why
and for what period the additional
amount is required and why it cannot be
repaid from the increased amount that I propose to allow in relation to legal
fees. Secondly,
expenses of $3,000 per week are significant in view of the
income of the respondents. I therefore propose to allow the respondents
expenses of $2,000 per week for ordinary living expenses.
will allow the increase in legal costs for each of the respondents to $50,000 as
the nature of these proceedings means it is likely
that such costs will be
incurred. I also permit reasonable medical expenses to be
the reasons that I have expressed, I will make the following orders:
(1) a freezing order is granted against the first respondent in the sum of
(2) a freezing order is granted against the second respondent in the sum of
(3) the ancillary order that is sought against the second respondent to disclose
details of the source of funding for his US trip
is refused on the basis that
this information has already been provided; and
(4) there are exception to the freezing order to permit the respondents to pay
living expenses of $2,000 per week, for each respondent
to pay legal costs of
$50,000 and to pay reasonable medical expenses.
The applicants are to bring in minutes of order that reflect these
Yadlamalka Land Pty Ltd v
Ragless & Anor
[2018] SASC 131
and the cases referred to
Jackson v Sterling
[1987] HCA 23
(1987) 162 CLR 612
at 621, 625.
Seeley International v
Millennium Electronics
[2020] SASC 205
Yadlamalka Land Pty Ltd v
Ragless & Anor
[2018] SASC 131
Ibid at [40].
Refuse to Lose Pty Ltd v
[2025] VSC 438
McEntee v SJ Berry Pty
[2024] SADC 8
UCR 112.17(1) and (2). See
Livesey J (as he then was) in
Seeley International Pty Ltd v Millennium
Electronics Pty Ltd
[2020] SASC 205
as to what constitutes a good
arguable case.
Yadlamalka Land Pty Ltd v
[2018] SASC 131
Severstal Export GmbH v Bhushan
[2013] NSWCA 102
(2013) 84 NSWLR 141
[2013] NSWCA 102
Cardile v Led Builders Pty Ltd
(1999) 198 CLR 380
Refuse to Lose Pty Ltd v Kostakis
[2025] VSC 438
Consolidated Constructions Pty Ltd v Bellenville Pty Ltd
[2002] FCA 1513.
Patterson v BTR
Engineering (Aust) Ltd
(1989) 18 NSWLR 319
(1999) 198 CLR 380
[1999] HCA 18.
[1912] HCA 72
(1912) 15 CLR 679
Ibid, [44].
[1988] 1 WLR 1350
1356-7. Approved by the Court of Appeal in
Behbehani v Salem
[1989] 1 WLR
Ibid, 1358.
pp 242 and 245 of the
affidavit of Andrew Geoffrey Carpenter made on 29 July 2005 (FND 29).
(2009) 230 CLR 89
[111]-[122].
Yadlamalka Land Pty Ltd v
Ragless & Anor
[2018] SASC 131
[2023] SADC 94
[1981] EWCA 8
[1981] 2 QB
[1981] EWCA Civ 8
[1981] 2 All ER 565
[1981] QB 923
Ibid at 945.
Ibid at 942.
[1995] FCA 1587.
[2022] NSWSC 1142
[2015] NSWSC 227
[2015] FCA 1003.
[1991] 1 Qd R 426
[1985] FSR 173
[2005] FCA 1587
(2005) 228 ALR 174
Unreported 3 October 1984
but reproduced in
[1998] Ch 109
[1997] 2 All ER 150
Unreported 3 October 1984
but reproduced in
[1998] Ch 109
[1999] FCA 754
Westpac Banking
Corporation v McArthur
[2007] NSWSC 1347
, [51]-[54];
Refuse to Lose Pty
Ltd v Kostakis
[2025] VSC 438
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (456 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter