URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAEOT/2014/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:56:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ASC PTY LTD, ASC SHIPBUILDING PTY LTD & ASC AWD SHIPBUILDER PTY LTD [2014] SAEOT 2 (4 July 2014)
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
(District Court Administrative and
Disciplinary Division)
comply with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting publication
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person using material
in the judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach
any such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry
of the Court in which it was generated.
In the Matter of AN APPLICATION
FOR EXEMPTION UNDER THE
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY ACT 1984
ASC PTY LTD, ASC SHIPBUILDING
PTY LTD & ASC AWD SHIPBUILDER PTY LTD
[2014] SAEOT 2
Reasons for Decision of His
Honour Judge Costello, Member Ms A Bachmann and Member Mr R Altman
4 July 2014
HUMAN RIGHTS -
DISCRIMINATION
Application for renewal of exemption from the operation of
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
(SA) - Exemption originally granted in
2011 to permit discrimination on grounds of nationality or country of origin of
prospective employees and contract workers - applicants require
access to sensitive technology controlled by government of United
America - in order to access this technology applicants must discriminate
against persons on the basis of their nationality
or country or origin -
consideration of public and private interests in determining whether there is a
proper basis for discrimination
- Application for renewal granted subject to
conditions.
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
ASC PTY LTD, ASC
SHIPBUILDING PTY LTD & ASC AWD SHIPBUILDER PTY
[2014] SAEOT
Introduction
22 July 2011 the Equal Opportunity Tribunal made orders granting an exemption to
the applicants (ASC Pty Ltd, ASC Shipbuilding
Pty Ltd & ASC AWD
Shipbuilder Pty Ltd) from compliance with the provisions of
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
The exemption
enabled the applicants and each of them to discriminate with respect to
particular employment practices they wished
to adopt on the grounds of race
which, relevantly for these purposes, related to nationality or country of
of the Act relevantly provides as
52—Discrimination against applicants and employees
(1) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against a person on the
ground of race—
(a) in determining, or in the course of determining, who should be offered
employment; or
(b) in the terms or conditions on which employment is offered.
(2) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against an employee on the
ground of race—
(a) in the terms or conditions of employment; or
(b) by denying or limiting access to opportunities for promotion, transfer or
training, or to other benefits connected with employment;
(c) by dismissing the employee; or
(d) by segregating the employee from persons of other races; or
(e) by subjecting the employee to other detriment.
54—Discrimination against contract workers
(1) This section applies to a principal for whom work is done by persons
contract workers
) under a contract between the principal and another
where the contract workers are employed or engaged by a person other than the
(2) It is unlawful for a principal to enter into a contract or arrangement with
another for work to be performed by contract workers
under which a person is to
discriminate against a contract worker on the ground of race.
(3) It is unlawful for the principal to discriminate against a contract worker
on the ground of race—
(a) in the terms or conditions on which the contract worker is allowed to work;
(b) by not allowing the contract worker to work; or
(c) by denying or limiting access to a benefit connected with the employment or
position concerned; or
(d) by subjecting the contract worker to other detriment.
103—Discriminatory advertisements
(1) A person must not publish or cause to be published an advertisement that
indicates an intention to do an act that is unlawful
by virtue of this Act.
Maximum penalty: $2 500.
(2) In proceedings for an offence against subsection (1), it is a defence to
prove that the defendant believed on reasonable grounds
that the publication of
the advertisement would not contravene that
subsection.
the exemption these employment practices would constitute breaches of the Act.
The Tribunal’s powers to grant such an
exemption may be found in
the Act which relevantly provides:
92—The Tribunal may grant exemptions
(1) The Tribunal may, on application under this section, grant exemptions from a
provision of this Act in relation to—
(a) a person, or class of persons; or
(b) an activity, or class of activity; or
(c) circumstances of a specified nature.
(2) An exemption under this section—
(a) may be granted unconditionally or on conditions; and
(b) may be revoked by the Tribunal on breach of a condition; and
(c) subject to revocation, remains in force for a period, not exceeding three
years, determined by the Tribunal, but may be renewed
from time to time for a
further period, not exceeding three years, determined by the Tribunal.
(3) An application for the grant, renewal or revocation of an exemption may be
made to the Tribunal by the Commissioner or any other
(4) The following persons are entitled to appear and be heard by the Tribunal
on an application under this section:
(a) the applicant;
(b) if the Commissioner is not the applicant—the Commissioner;
(c) a person in whose favour the exemption in question is sought, or has been
(5) A person referred to in subsection (4) may call or give evidence in support
of, or against, the application.
(6) In determining an application under this section, the Tribunal
(a) have regard (where relevant) to the desirability of certain discriminatory
actions being permitted for the purpose of redressing
the effect of past
discrimination; and
(b) have regard to other factors that the Tribunal considers relevant.
(7) Notice of the grant, renewal or revocation of an exemption under this
section must be published in the Gazette.
(8) Notice of the grant or renewal of an exemption under this section must
(a) the period for which the exemption has been granted or renewed; and
(b) the conditions (if any) to which the exemption is
is apparent from the above an exemption remains in force for a period of three
years but may be renewed from time to time for a
further period not exceeding
three years. The exemption granted on 22 July 2011 expires on
21 July 2014. The Applicants now seek
a renewal of the exemption upon
the same conditions until 21 July 2017.
its previous decision the Tribunal made the following
observations:
ASC Pty Ltd (the first applicant) is a Proprietary Limited Company limited by
shares, registered under the
Corporations Act 2001
and is operated as a
government business enterprise under the
Commonwealth Authorities and
Companies Act 1997
All shares issued in the capital of ASC are owned by the Commonwealth.
ASC Shipbuilding Pty Ltd (the second applicant) is wholly owned by the first
applicant and was incorporated on 1 May 1991.
ASC AWD Shipbuilding Pty Ltd (the third applicant) is wholly owned by the second
applicant and was incorporated on 13 December 2004.
The first and third applicants have current and future contractual arrangements
with the Commonwealth, through the Department of
Defence, to maintain Collins
Class Submarines, known as ‘Through Life Support’ or
‘TLS’ (Submarine TLS) and
to build Hobart Class Air Warfare
Destroyers (AWD Project) for use by the Royal Australian Navy.
The first and second applicants supply personnel to the third applicant for the
purpose of the AWD project. The second applicant
also supplies personnel to the
first applicant for the purpose of the submarine TLS.
Personnel employed by the first applicant are also directly engaged in the
submarine TLS.
The contracts referred to above (in aggregate) amount to several billions of
dollars. They involve the performance of highly sophisticated
technological
work of considerable value to the South Australian economy. They serve the
national interest in providing for the maintenance
of submarines and the supply
of surface vessels to the Royal Australian Navy for the defence of
In the course of carrying out these contracts, the applicants employ over 1,782
people in South Australia.
In order to meet their contractual obligations, the first and third applicants
have entered into various sub-contracts that include
the supply of defence
technology, principally sourced from the United States of America (US Defence
Technology).
Suppliers of this US Defence Technology (US contractors) are required to satisfy
US export controls before they can transfer the
US defence technology to the
first and third applicants.
Compliance with the US export controls is also passed on to the first and third
applicants through their contractual arrangements
with the US contractors.
The Commonwealth has also entered into a number of contracts with other US
companies for the delivery of goods and services in relation
to the submarine
TLS and the AWD projects.
Pursuant to these contracts, it is often necessary for these US companies to
provide specialist defence technology for the first
and/or third applicants.
The export controls imposed by the US have a significant impact on the business
operations of the applicants. The Commonwealth has
elected to contract with a
number of US companies to provide critical goods and services in relation to the
submarines and the AWDs.
These US companies provide US defence technology to the
first and/or third applicant.
To obtain access to the US defence technology which is required for them to be
able to perform their contractual obligations, the
applicants have entered into
agreements that require compliance with certain legislation enacted in the US,
and in particular, the
Arms Control Export Act
and the associated
International Traffic in Arms Regulations
These agreements are generally in the form of export licences or technical
assistance agreements that operate as the export authorisation
by which a US
contractor is able to transfer, or provide access to, controlled defence
articles and services including technical
data (Controlled Defence Articles) to
the applicants.
The ITAR stipulates that US defence technology that falls within the definition
of controlled defence articles cannot be transferred
to a person from a third
country or to a national of a third country except as specifically authorised by
the US Department of State.
In addition, the ITAR denies access to controlled defence articles by certain
proscribed countries and their nationals, whether directly
or indirectly by US
based suppliers or foreign based third parties.
Under the ITAR, US contractors that manufacture and/or export controlled defence
articles are required to apply for a US export authorisation
- usually an export
licence or technical assistance agreement - before exporting controlled defence
In granting export approval, the US Department of State will require conditions
in licenses and agreements (US Export Authorisations)
(1) The identification of the nationality
of all employees who will have access to Controlled Defence Articles;
(2) Disclosure to the US contractor of the nationality of all employees who
will have access to the Controlled Defence Articles; and
(3) Restrictions or prohibitions on persons of particular nationalities
having access to the Controlled Defence Articles.
In addition, the applicants are also required to disclose information to the
Commonwealth regarding those employees who require access
to relevant Controlled
Defence Articles that have been supplied to the Commonwealth under a Foreign
Military Sales (FMS) agreement
with the United States government.
In order to comply with its obligations pursuant to US export authorisations and
to satisfy the compliance procedures imposed by
the Commonwealth in relation to
FMS agreements, the applicants must establish security systems and procedures
which are sufficiently
rigorous to satisfy the US Department of State and the
Commonwealth that ITAR conditions are being satisfied.
In particular, the applicants must ensure that unauthorised re-export or
re-transfer of Controlled Defence Articles does not occur,
for example by
disclosure to a person of a nationality not identified and authorised in the
relevant licence or agreement or to a
person of a proscribed nationality.
It is submitted on behalf of the applicants that:
(1) In order for the first applicant to obtain the
required information in compliance with its contractual obligation with US
contractors
and to comply with its obligations to the Commonwealth, it may be
obliged to engage in conduct in respect of certain persons which
may contravene
sections of the
Equal Opportunity
(2) In order for the second applicant to comply with its contractual
obligations to the third applicant (the third applicant must
comply with its
contractual obligations with US contractors and with the Commonwealth) it may be
obliged to engage in conduct in
respect of certain persons which may contravene
sections of the Act.
(3) In order for the third applicant to comply with the terms of US export
authorisation (as required pursuant to its contractual
obligations with US
contractors and the Commonwealth) it may be obliged to engage in conduct in
respect of certain persons which
may contravene sections of the Act.
The applicants also contend that if they are unable to obtain exemptions from
the provisions of
(1) They may suffer significant financial
penalties for breaches of their contractual and security obligations;
(2) They may be debarred from future arrangements with
US contractors;
(3) It will be difficult to obtain future Commonwealth contracts through the
Australian Department of Defence;
(4) They may suffer substantial financial and employment loss.
As a result, the applicants seek a series of orders which (generally speaking)
will enable them to:
nationality and country of origin information from potential employees and
contractors;
persons’ nationality and/or country of origin into account in determining
who should be offered employment where
that work involves access to Controlled
Defence Articles;
Maintain records
of nationality and country of origin of employees who have access to Controlled
Defence Articles;
Disclose to
Commonwealth or US contractors’ nationality and country of origin of all
employees and contractors having access
to Controlled Defence
are satisfied that the circumstances which gave rise to these observations
continue to apply.
the hearing of this application we have received and taken into account the
contents of an affidavit from Susan Kerr, the Export
Controls Manager from ASC
Pty Ltd (ASC). In that capacity she is responsible for ensuring ASC’s
compliance with import and
export controls enacted by Australian and overseas
regulations, including the specific protection requirements contained in all
export/import
licences issued to ASC and imposed by the United States of America
in relation to the supply of US defence technology.
have similarly read and taken into account the contents of an affidavit of Wendy
Hoad, General Counsel and Company Secretary for
the ASC, detailing
the corporate structure for the applicants, the contracts they have in place
with the Commonwealth and the US together with the measures
put in place by the
applicants, to ensure, as far as possible, that any adverse effects of the
exemption on existing and future employees
and contract workers are addressed
and minimised.
our opinion, public and private interests in the renewal of the exemption
outweigh any detriment flowing from the discriminatory
Accordingly,
upon the applicants undertaking to update their employment practices generally
and their Equal Opportunity Exemption
Order Policy and Procedure Manual in
particular, to reflect the terms of the renewal of the exemption, we make the
following Orders:
to s 92(1)(b) of the Act, the applicants are exempted from compliance with the
provisions of ss 52, 54 and 103(1) of the
Act, insofar as those sections relate
to ‘nationality’ and ‘country of origin’ to the extent
that they may:
1.1. request
nationality and country of origin information from existing and potential
employees and contractors;
1.2. take a
person’s nationality and country of origin into account in determining who
should be offered employment or contract
work in areas requiring access to
Controlled Defence Articles and when making decisions as to the participation of
employees or contractors
in such work;
1.3. maintain
records of the nationality and country of origin of all employees and
contractors who have or may have access to Controlled
Defence Articles in the
performance of their work;
1.4. ensure
that Controlled Defence Articles are disclosed only to persons who are
authorised by the US Department of State to receive
that disclosure;
1.5. to the
extent necessary to comply with its legal obligations, impose limitations or
prohibitions on persons of particular nationality
and/or country of origin
having access to Controlled Defence Articles in the performance of their
1.6. to the
extent necessary to comply with its legal obligations to the Commonwealth,
disclose to the Commonwealth the nationality
and country of origin of all
employees and contractors who require access to Controlled Defence Articles in
the performance of their
1.7. disclose
to US Contractors with whom the applicants are party to a US Export
Authorisation and to the US Department of State,
the nationality and country of
origin of all employees and contractors who will have access to Controlled
Defence Articles in the
performance of their work; and
1.8. establish
security systems which will prevent the unauthorised re-export or re-transfer of
Controlled Defence Articles.
exemption will be renewed for a further period of three years from the date of
this Order, but will be subject to the following
conditions:
2.1 That the
exemption apply only to conduct by the applicants where:
2.1.1. that
conduct is necessary to enable them to enter into and/or perform contractual
undertakings requiring access to Controlled
Defence Articles; and
2.1.2. they
have taken all steps that are reasonably available (including steps that might
be taken in negotiating and performing
the terms of their agreements with
US Contractors) to avoid the necessity for engaging in conduct that would
otherwise be in breach
of ss 52, 54 and 103(1) of the Act.
2.2 Where, in
the exercise of this exemption, an employee or contract worker is moved from a
project involving the use of Controlled
Defence Articles to any other work
controlled by the applicants or any of its related entities, the applicants
must, through a duly
authorised officer, explain to the person why he or she is
being transferred and must otherwise take all reasonable steps to avoid
harm or loss to that person.
2.3 Where the
applicants use a system of security passes to reflect the fact of access to
Controlled Defence Articles or levels of
access to any security-sensitive
material by employees and contract workers, the passes may be coded but not in
such a way as to
identify the nationality and country of origin of the person or
the reasons for that person’s level of access.
information relating to nationality and country of origin and access to
Controlled Defence Articles shall be restricted to
Facility Security Officers,
Technology Control Manager, Technology Control Officers, legal officers and
human resources officers
of the applicants or their properly appointed nominees
on a ‘need to know’ basis.
applicants’ employment policies shall be amended as soon as reasonably
possible so as to refer to the terms of this exemption,
including all conditions
attaching to it, and to make it clear that the purpose of the request for
information regarding nationality
and country of origin is made solely for the
purposes of compliance with United States laws.
ANNEXURE A1
Annexed to this decision and
marked A1 is a true copy of these Orders together with Undertakings proffered,
by the Applicants at
that time, to the Tribunal.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (164 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter