URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCT/2016/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
� Patterson v WorkCover Corporation (Pfeiffer Investments Pty Ltd) [2016] SAWCT 6 (19 February 2016)
Patterson v WorkCover Corporation (Pfeiffer Investments Pty Ltd)
[2016] SAWCT 6
WORKERS COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
PATTERSON, Darren
WORKCOVER CORPORATION
(Pfeiffer Investments Pty Ltd)
5760 of 2015
HEARING DATE:
December 2015
JUDGMENT OF:
His Honour Acting President Judge JP
His Honour Deputy President Judge PD Hannon
President M Calligeros
DELIVERED ON:
19 February
CATCHWORDS:
Appeal - Deputy President refused to
set aside order of Conciliation Officer dismissing the worker’s
application for Expedited
Decision - Claim for s 43 assessment of digestive
system condition - Conciliation Officer dismissed application because there was
no undue delay - Reasons for decision of Deputy President refusing to set aside
Conciliation Officer’s decision inadequate
- Nature and purpose of
Expedited Decision jurisdiction - No twostep approach - Implicit assertions in
all compensation claims -
Examination of case for setting aside an order in the
interests of justice - Costs order of Conciliation Officer - Appeal dismissed
Ss 52, 88H, 97, 97B Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986, Reg 29
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Regulations
WorkCover (Adelaide Community Health Care Alliance Inc) v
[2015] SAWCT 51
Hungry Jacks Pty Ltd v Ktisti
[2015] SAWCT
Savage v WorkCover Corporation/Employers Mutual Ltd and Julie’s
Café Pty Ltd
[2009] SAWCT 24
The Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Corporation v Lieschke
[1992] SASC 3698
Pashalis v WorkCover Corporation
[1994] SASC 5143
(1994) 63 SASR 71
WorkCover/Employers Mutual Ltd (Australia Motors SA Pty Ltd)
[2010] SAWCT
Robbins v Harbord and Another
[1994] SASC 4571
(1994) 62 SASR 229
Office Equipment Pty Ltd v State of Tasmania
[1998] TASSC 6
Thompson v WorkCover Corporation (Australian Meats Pty Ltd)
Kosmala v WorkCover Corporation (Adelaide General Practice)
[2014] SAWCT 4
On appeal from decision of Deputy President Judge
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: Mr
Respondent: Mr I Colgrave
Solicitors:
Appellant: Palios
Meegan & Nicholson
Respondent: Sparke Helmore Lawyers
is an appeal by the worker from the dismissal by a Deputy President of his
application pursuant to s 88H(1)(c) of the
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1986
(“the Act”). That application sought the
setting aside of the order of a Conciliation Officer made 14 July 2015. The
Conciliation
Officer had dismissed the worker’s application for Expedited
Decision made under Part 6B of the Act.
The factual context
worker injured his back at work on 28 January 2014. His claim for compensation
was accepted. Then on 12 May 2015 the Corporation
determined the worker’s
lump sum entitlement regarding that injury at 12% whole person
impairment.
Accordingly he was
awarded a lump sum amounting to $24,668.00.
1 June 2015 Dr R D’Onise assessed the worker’s permanent impairment
of upper and lower digestive system and anal disease
at 9%. The worker claimed
this condition was secondary to the accepted back
The worker’s
solicitors thereupon requested by email dated 13 June 2015 a determination
pursuant to s 43 of the Act. The request
enclosed the medical report of
Dr D’Onise and his account for
The email added the
are aware, our client has accepted claims for compensation arising out of an
injury to his lower back.
On our instructions, as a result of our client’s back injury and the
need for our client to take substantial medication to treat
his compensable
injuries, which have had significant side effects, he has suffered from a
digestive system condition in the nature
of gastro-oesophageal disease and
constipation.
Our client makes a claim for a lump sum pursuant to Part 4, Division 5 of the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
for the whole person
impairment she (sic) now suffers as a result of the digestive system
condition.”
was some stated urgency in the matter said to arise due to impending legislative
change. So the worker’s solicitors
are aware, our client has already had a determination of his entitlement to
non-economic loss pursuant to Part 4, Division
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986.
It is therefore vital that a determination of these claims be made
Please note that your failure to take action to determine the claims within
fourteen (14) days will result in our client forming the
view there has been
undue delay in a matter affecting her (sic) and we will file an Application for
Expedited Decision without further
24 June 2015, the worker’s solicitors received an email from the
respondent advising it was unable to determine the s 43
entitlement as the
compensability of the digestive condition, “has not yet been
determined”.
undertook to make a determination within fourteen days of receipt of independent
medical advice. On the same day it wrote
advising the worker of an appointment
for a medical examination with a Dr Stevenson on 30 July 2015.
29 June 2015 the worker’s solicitors issued an Application for Expedited
Decision pursuant to s 97 of the Act. It sought
a Conciliation Officer determine
the matter. On 30 June 2015 the Conciliation Officer assigned to the matter
referred the Application
to the attention of the compensating authority and
requested a statement in writing in
On 13 July 2015 the
Application was heard. The compensating authority did not attend but sent its
response in writing.
Put shortly,
the compensating authority said it was making its best endeavour to
appropriately deal with the matter but it had to
be satisfied that the digestive
system problem was compensable. It had arranged a medical examination to resolve
this issue.
the hearing the worker’s solicitors submitted that sufficient time had
been provided to the compensating authority for a
decision to be made. Dr
D’Onise’s report of 1 June 2015 gave it adequate material in this
regard particularly given the
urgency created by the legislative changes to be
effected on 1 July 2015.
Conciliation Officer determined the Application in the following
compensating authority is entitled to make its own investigations into a claim
for compensation. I am satisfied that the
appointment made is appropriate for
the compensation being sought and as such, I do not accept that the worker would
have had a reasonable
perception that undue delay existed after being provided
with details of an appointment with Dr Stevenson on 30 July 2015.
To that end, I note that the relevant correspondence was received by the
worker’s representative on 24 June 2015, 8 working
days after the
request for a determination was made and prior to the lodgement of the
application.
I find that there is no undue delay in the making of the
determination.”
worker challenged this determination. He did so by Application for Directions
asking a Presidential Member to set aside the Conciliation
orders pursuant to s 88H of the Act. That Application was dated 21 July
It is from the dismissal
of that Application that this appeal is
record that a determination was finally made by the compensating authority on 7
September 2015 regarding the subject s 43 digestive
system claim. The claim was
rejected on the grounds that medical evidence indicated the condition was not
This determination
was made pursuant to s 58 of the
submitted this determination did not foreclose the jurisdiction of the Tribunal
provided in s 97.
proposition was accepted by the
respondent.
It not being in
issue we make no further comment.
matter of the s 88H application was heard by the learned Deputy President and
judgment was reserved. A decision, the subject of
this appeal, was thereafter
The judgment
reasons for decision succinctly set out the factual context. The learned Deputy
President noted that the worker’s contention
that the order of the
Conciliation Officer should be set aside because the interests of justice
required it.
Honour’s decision rejecting the application included short reasons. We set
“8 In exercising the discretion pursuant to s
88H(1)(c) of the Act I am not satisfied that any matter that has been put before
me by the worker warrants the setting aside of the decision made by the
Conciliation Officer on the basis of the interests of justice.
can only have regard to the circumstances of the matter before me, I cannot have
regard to the fact that a worker may be deprived
of a benefit because of a
change to legislation such as occurred on 1 July 2015.
can see no reason to interfere with the Conciliating Officer’s decision to
dismiss the claim. The compensating authority
was entitled to make its own
investigation into a claim for compensation in circumstances where the worker
submitted his claim on
Saturday 13 June 2015 and on 24 June 2015 it wrote to the
worker’s solicitors advising of an appointment to see Dr Stevenson
30 July 2015.”
learned Deputy President added the following, and we understand this was a
consideration apart from the reasoning contained in
paragraphs 8, 9 and 10.
Her Honour said:
“11 The worker’s argument with respect
to this matter was premised on the fact that the claim made was one in which the
only issue that the compensating authority should have regard to was the fixing
of the whole person impairment figure pursuant to
s 43 of the Act. That premise
is wrong. The compensating authority was entitled to have regard to the issue of
causation and compensability
by seeking an opinion on those matters as part of
its decision making process with respect to Mr Patterson’s
entitlement pursuant
to s 43 of the Act.”
The worker’s grounds of this appeal
worker appealed by Notice filed 4 November
The appeal was pursuant to
s 86. That limits the appeal to a question of law. The grounds put forward
alleged the following errors
(a) Inadequacy
of reasoning in respect to the conclusion that the interests of justice did not
require the Conciliation Officer’s
decision be set aside.
(b) Failure to
address the Conciliation Officer’s error in deciding a two-step approach
was required, first satisfying himself
of the compensability of the digestive
system disability and only then proceeding to assessment.
(c) Failure to
address the fact that the compensating authority arranged a medical examination
by a non-accredited doctor regarding
permanent impairment assessments for a s 43
(d) Failure to
address the consequence of the misapprehension of the Conciliation Officer that
the medical appointment was with an
accredited doctor.
(e) Failure to
address the Conciliation Officer’s error in his approach to the
worker’s subjective belief of undue
(f) Failure to
address the Conciliation Officer’s error in not proceeding to make a
determination of s 43 entitlement for the
digestive system disability once the
conditions of subjective belief and fourteen days were satisfied.
(g) Consequential
costs error.
appeal also raised issue with paragraph 11 of the learned Deputy
President’s reasons for decision. It was contended that
the reasoning in
that paragraph indicated the learned Deputy President had misunderstood the
submissions made by the worker.
Inadequacy of reasons
principles have been specified by the Full Tribunal on a number of occasions and
Suffice to say we are
persuaded the reasoning is inadequate. The learned Deputy President states a
conclusion, namely not being satisfied
of any matter warranting the setting
aside of the decision made by the Conciliation Officer on the basis of the
interests of justice.
Her Honour does not deal with how that conclusion is
reached in terms of judicial reasoning. An example of the exercise required
these circumstances is provided in the decision of
Savage v WorkCover
Corporation
in which the
parties’ respective cases were described and each contention analysed in
the context of what would be required
in the given circumstances by the
interests of justice.
did not occur in the present case, and the inadequacy of the reasoning was such
as to give rise to an error of law involving
a miscarriage of justice, being the
ultimate test as indicated in
As a result, it is
appropriate that this Full Tribunal again consider the arguments raised by the
appellant at first instance. It
does not mean that the ultimate outcome will
The special jurisdiction to expedite decisions
terms of this jurisdiction appeared in s 102 of the Act as originally
Its current form was
inserted in 1995.
that amendment, it was the subject of examination by the Supreme Court on a
number of occasions.
issue was whether the provision of s 102 was confined to claims concerning
the establishment of compensable injury or whether
it applied to undue delay in
the determination of any claim by the worker under the Act. The case concerned a
worker who sought compensation
under s 43 of the Act. The argument that the
remedy provided by s 102 was restricted to initiating claims was rejected by
described the provision as providing a useful function of
enabling a worker to get an answer to a claim where for some reason or
Corporation was not providing one. The jurisdiction was complementary to the
general review provisions then in s 95 of
provision was again examined in
The purpose of the
provision was described in the same terms as in
The particular
conclusion in that case was superseded by the amendment to the Act in
Now s 97B(3) states the
decision of the Tribunal made in substitution was to be treated as a decision of
the relevant compensating
authority and a reviewable decision for the purposes
That cleared up a
division of opinion over the matter.
nature of the process contemplated by the determination of a claim for workers
compensation is indicated by the dicta of King
Robbins v Harbord and
This decision
provides guidance on an Application for Expedited hearing. King CJ described
what was involved in terms of a transparent
process that enables the worker to
make an informed decision as to what other steps he or she may take and to
provide sufficient
particularity for that
On the other hand it is
not seen as involving undue complexity. The statutory intent is for there to be
a considered, timely and
fair decision upon the material available or capable of
being made available upon inquiry. That will depend upon the circumstances
any particular case.
97 reads as follows:
“(1) A worker or employer who believes
there has been undue delay in deciding a claim or other matter affecting the
employer may apply to the Tribunal, in the manner and form prescribed
by regulation, for expedited determination of the matter.
(2) However, an application cannot be made for expedited determination
(a) a question about the redemption of a liability; and
(b) a matter of a class excluded by regulation from the ambit of this
(3) An application for expedited determination of a matter cannot be made
until at least 14 days after the day the matter was placed
decision-maker whose decision is required.”
97B reads as follows:
“(1) On an application for expedited
determination of a matter, the Tribunal may—
(a) give directions the Tribunal considers necessary to expedite the
determination of the matter; or
(b) decide the matter itself.
(2) A person to whom a direction is given by the Tribunal under subsection
(1) must comply with the direction.”
to its provisions there are three requisites for the jurisdiction under s 97 to
be enlivened. These are, the subjective
belief, by the worker or the employer,
that there has been an undue delay in deciding a claim, the expiry of at least
fourteen days
after the matter has been placed before the decision maker and, by
necessary inference, the absence of a
appellant contends the subjective belief once stated must be accepted by the
Conciliation Officer.
respect that is not the correct way to view the provision. While a subjective
belief is one of the requirements for jurisdiction
the Tribunal is not bound to
accept the mere assertion of subjective belief. There is still a question of
credibility involved. The
Tribunal might reject the existence of a subjective
belief of undue delay because the other facts known to the Tribunal make such
belief wholly improbable.
in any event there is a distinction between the qualifying requirement of a
subjective belief in undue delay and whether there
was indeed undue delay. The
latter is the key consideration for the Tribunal in a s 97 application. This is
made clear by s 97B(1)(a)
which charges the Tribunal with the task of either
expediting the determination of the matter or deciding the matter itself. It is
significant that the legislature has employed the adjective “undue”
in the jurisdictional provision in s 97(1). Mere
delay is not enough. The
use of the word “undue” imports unacceptable delay warranting the
Tribunal’s intervention.
That necessarily implies that the Tribunal is
vested with an adjudicable function of deciding whether it ought to intervene
of those jurisdictional prerequisites being met.
appellant further contends that once the three requisites are established, the
Tribunal is required to determine the matter. That
is submitted despite the
appellant conceding the section contains a
discretion.
We disagree with the
contention a decision on the s 43 assessment must be made. The
Tribunal’s only obligation is to exercise
the discretion in accordance
with the purpose described by Cox J in
case, namely to
overcome undue delay. Moreover it should be recognised that if a Member of the
Tribunal acting under s 97B(1) were
to proceed without allowing for adequate
investigation, including the obtaining of a required expert opinion, it may
reduce the chances
of an informed determination being made at an early stage,
and increase the prospect of later litigation and associated delay. In
respect there will be cases in which fourteen days may not be enough to properly
investigate.
agree with the appellant’s submission that a two-step approach is not
contemplated. That is, first determining the issue
of whether the disability is
compensable and then making a separate determination upon the assessment claim.
That is not to say questions
of compensability may not be in issue. In this
respect we adopt the approach taken in
A claim for a
lump sum assessment may be rejected because the disability is not compensable.
As the Tribunal said in
claim for compensation necessarily comprises of an assertion by the worker that
all of the elements necessary to establish
the right to the particular species
of compensation being sought exist. ...”
Power in s 88H to set aside judgments or orders
appellant contends the interests of justice required the order of the
Conciliation Officer be set
As has been recognised in
previous decision the provisions of s 88H cannot operate as if a right of
appeal. In this respect we adopt
what was said by the Tribunal in
The outcome is
premised upon the applicant showing that justice requires the order be set
this case, to the extent that the Conciliation Officer approached the matter by
a two-step process, there was error. However it
is not by any means clear that
was in effect what the Conciliation Officer did. Essentially he recognised that
the Corporation was
entitled to investigate the elements necessary to establish
the right to the particular species of compensation being claimed. That
accordance with
case. The fact that the Conciliation
Officer wrongly thought Dr Stevenson an accredited assessor did not affect
his reasoning and
the result he reached.
order under s 88H(1)(c) will not be granted except on a firm basis. The
applicant must clearly demonstrate that the interests of
“require” the outcome sought. It cannot be said in this case the
interests of justice were denied in refusing
the application to set aside. There
had been no undue delay demonstrated and therefore no demonstrated error on the
part of the Conciliation
Officer. As to the matter of the inadequate reasons,
such injustice as resulted from inadequate reasons has been cured by the full
examination of the matter by this Bench. We would therefore not allow the appeal
in the circumstances.
essence of the Conciliation Officer’s decision was that there was no undue
delay. The worker had been pre-emptory in taking
the action. Therefore there is
a basis why he should carry costs. That is a matter of the Conciliation
Officer’s discretion
and one an appellate bench would be reluctant to
interfere with.
PUBLICATION OF
THESE REASONS
It is the practice of this Tribunal to publish its
reasons for decision in full on the Internet. If any party or person contends
these reasons for decision should not be published in full the party or
person must make an application within seven days of the
delivery of these
reasons. The application shall be by an Application for Directions with a
supporting affidavit and should be addressed
to the presiding member(s). If no
such application is lodged within the time specified these reasons will be
published in accordance
with the Tribunal’s usual practice.
AB p 115, Appeal tr p 1.
Appeal tr p 2.
Appeal tr p 24.
Judgment paras [6], [7].
Appellant’s Summary of
Argument t paras [4.2], [4.5], [4.6].
Concern about the loss of
rights by legislative change raised by the worker in his original claim was
resolved by the
Regulations 2015,
WorkCover (Adelaide
Community Health Care Alliance Inc) v Tivey
[2015] SAWCT 51
Hungry Jacks Pty Ltd v Ktisti
[2015] SAWCT 20
Savage v WorkCover
Corporation/Employers Mutual Ltd and Julie’s Café Pty Ltd
[2009] SAWCT 24.
Act No 124 of 1986.
Act No 75 of 1995 s 13.
The Workers
Rehabilitation and Compensation Corporation v Lieschke
[1992] SASC 3698
Pashalis v WorkCover
Corporation
[1994] SASC 5143
(1994) 63 SASR 71.
Act No 75 of 1995 s 13.
WorkCover/Employers Mutual Ltd (Australia Motors SA Pty Ltd)
[2010] SAWCT
[1994] SASC 4571
(1994) 62 SASR 229.
Appellant’s Summary of
Argument para [4.5].
Appeal tr p 8.
Ian Rumney Office
Equipment Pty Ltd v State of Tasmania
[1998] TASSC 6.
Appeal tr p 9.
Thompson v WorkCover
Corporation (Australian Meats Pty Ltd)
[2015] SAWCT 26
At para [23].
Section 88H.
Kosmala v WorkCover
Corporation (Adelaide General Practice)
[2014] SAWCT 4
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (171 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter