URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SALC/2025/60.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:00:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Local Cellars Parafield Gardens [2025] SALC 60 (10 July 2025)
Local Cellars Parafield Gardens
[2025] SALC
LICENSING COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
LOCAL CELLARS
PARAFIELD GARDENS
Application for Review of a decision of the
Commissioner
LC-25-00007
HEARING DATE:
28 and 29 April 2025
JUDGMENT OF:
His Honour Judge BP Gilchrist
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Application for review – A
delegate of the Liquor and Gambling Commissioner refused an application for a
packaged liquor sales
licence to permit the applicant to sell liquor for off
premises consumption, out of premises adjacent to a Foodland Supermarket (the
Supermarket) in the Martins Plaza Shopping Centre – The applicant is the
owner of the Supermarket – The delegate found
that the locality extended
beyond the suggested two kilometre radius and included the area in the
vicinity of the much larger shopping
centre, known as Hollywood Plaza, about
2.7 kilometres to the north – The delegate rejected the
applicant’s submission
that the Supermarket was a full‑line
supermarket and that the addition of the bottle shop would result in Martins
Plaza meeting
the contemporary expectation of consumers and shoppers to complete
a “one stop shop” for their food and alcoholic beverage
– The delegate also rejected the submission that there would be a
contemporary community expectation that within the
retail offerings contained
within Martins Plaza there would be a take away liquor facility – The
delegate relied upon these
findings in concluding that the grant of the
application was not in the community interest – The delegate went on to
the grant of the application was not in the public interest – On
review the applicant contended that the delegate erred in
extending the locality
to include Hollywood Plaza and that her rationale for the extension, being the
fact that Hollywood Plaza was
a large size shopping centre and the fact it
clearly “offers one stop shopping and would have significant pulling
was not evidence capable of supporting that conclusion – The
applicant then submitted that the delegate erred in her findings
characterisation of Martins Plaza and her view that it was a relatively small
shopping centre that drew analogies to cases
where packaged liquor sales
licences had been refused – The applicant submitted that the Court should
find that the proposed
premises are to be located in a substantial suburban
shopping centre configured around a substantial car park that is considerably
larger than the common suburban or local centres, and that the proposal would
result in a welcome addition to a shopping centre located
in an area with no
identifiable risk of alcohol related harm such that it was in the community
interest and the public interest for
the licence to be granted –
that although the delegate erred in finding that the locality
included the area around Hollywood Plaza, the error was of no consequence
delegate was right to give considerable weight to the facilities on offer at
Hollywood Plaza as part of her evaluation as
to whether the grant of the
application is in the community interest –
significant that the applicant failed to adduce evidence of the trading data
pertaining to the performance of the Supermarket
without that evidence the inference cannot be drawn that the Supermarket is
especially busy. Absent that evidence the inference
is that for many of those
living in the vicinity of Martins Plaza, Hollywood Plaza is contentedly
providing them with the opportunity
to combine their take away liquor purchases
as part of a one stop shopping experience and that it will continue to be
so if the application
is granted –
that the delegate was right
to conclude that the grant of the application was not in the community interest
or the public interest
that the application for review is
dismissed –
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
Community Titles Act 1996
* As amended – see Local Cellars Parafield Gardens (No. 2)
[2025] SALC 69
Heysen Hotel (SA) Pty Ltd v Fassina Investments
[2025] SALC 3
Wooli Mart Pty Ltd t/as Together Mart v
Australian Hotels Association (SA Branch)
[2025] SALC 59
Plaza Supermarket
[2023] SALC 73
Martins Plaza Liquor Store
Hotel Angaston Pty Ltd t/as Angaston Hotel & Ors v Scarlett
Zetland Pty Ltd t/as Local Cellars Angaston
[2024] SALC 108
[2023] SALC 31
Cellarbrations Walkley Heights
[2023] SALC
Hove Sip n Save
[2021] SALC 7
Liquorland (Australia) Pty Ltd
(Park Holme)
[2020] SALC 37
Woolworths Ltd v Fassina Investments Pty
Ltd and Ors
[2015] SASCFC 72
Liquorland McLaren Vale (No. 3)
[2023] SALC 2
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr C Jacobi
KC and Mr I Rice
Other Parties: Mr J Roder and Mr B
Solicitors:
Applicant: Griffins Lawyers
Parties: Wallmans Lawyers
Ryan & Co Solicitors
is an application seeking a review of a decision by a delegate of the Liquor and
Gambling Commissioner refusing an application
for a packaged liquor sales
licence to permit the applicant to sell liquor for off premises consumption, out
of premises adjacent
to a Foodland Supermarket (the Foodland Supermarket) in the
Martins Plaza Shopping Centre (Martins Plaza), Parafield Gardens.
applicant, Antonio Romeo Siciliano, has an interest in Martins Plaza Shopping
Centre Pty Ltd which is the owner of Martins
application for a packaged liquor sales licence is a designated
application
Licensing Act 1997
(the Act). Such an application can only be granted if the
relevant licensing authority determines that it is in the community interest
Court has set out the requirements of that test in the recent decisions of
Heysen Hotel (SA) Pty Ltd v Fassina Investments Pty
Wooli Mart Pty
Ltd t/as Together Mart v Australian Hotels Association (SA
and I will not
repeat them here. It is sufficient to refer to those decisions and to note that
the applicant must comply with the
Community Impact Assessment Guidelines (the
Guidelines) in establishing that the grant of the application is in the
community interest
and that in evaluating the application the licensing
authority must:
have regard to
that nature of the business conducted or to be conducted under the licence;
identify the
relevant locality
, as this informs what is the relevant
consider the
harm that the grant of the application might cause to the community as a whole
or a group within the community due to
excessive or inappropriate consumption of
have regard to
the cultural, recreational, employment or tourist impacts that the grant of the
application might have;
reflect upon the
social impact that the grant of the application might have in the locality and
the impact that it might have on the
amenity of the locality; and
have regard to
the objects of the Act.
Guidelines provide that the following must be considered in identifying the
relevant locality:
the area around
the applicant’s premises/proposed premises which is most likely to be
affected by the grant of the application,
the area from
where the applicant draws or expects to draw their customers, having regard to
the nature of the premises/proposed premises.
Guidelines then go on to provide that when considering the area from where the
premises/proposed premises draws or expects to
draw their customers, applicants
should consider:
customer groups or identifiable customer base and the areas they reside in;
anything that
may attract customers to the premises/proposed premises and the areas from which
these customers may be based, for example
– where a premises/proposed
premises is located/to be located on a main road, applicants may need to
consider any areas which
are serviced by that main road and include those areas
in their locality, or – where a premises/proposed premises is located/to
be located in or near to a shopping complex, applicants may need to consider the
customer base of the shopping complex and where
those customers reside and
include those areas in the locality of their premises/proposed
Guidelines then state that as a guide that the locality of a premises in the
Adelaide Metropolitan Area would generally be considered
to be the area within a
two kilometre radius of the site of the relevant premises.
licensing authority must also be satisfied that the pre‑requisites of
the Act have been met.
concerns matters such as the suitability
of the premises; the potential for them to cause undue offence, annoyance and
the like to
nearby workers, residents and worshippers in their vicinity;
prejudice to the safety or welfare of children attending nearby kindergartens
and schools; and whether the appropriate approvals, consents and the like,
pertaining to the proposed premises have been granted.
It was not contended in
this case that these were issues that the Court needed to be concerned
the applicant needs to satisfy the licensing authority that the grant of the
application is in the public interest.
applicant’s proposed business is a convenience style stand‑alone
bottle shop trading under the Local Cellars badge,
with a trading area of about
178 square metres in a store of about 218 square metres. It is
proposed that an area in the Foodland
Supermarket will be hived off to create
the space to be occupied by the proposed premises. It will stock a broad range
of beer, cider,
wine, pre‑mix, spirits, liqueurs and non‑alcoholic
beverages and be open from 9:00 am to 8:00 pm, seven days a week.
is asserted that premises trading under the Local Cellars badge offer a
significant point of difference to other national managed
branded liquor stores
because of a local and South Australian focus.
Plaza abuts Martins Road, Parafield Gardens and can be accessed from Martins
Road and to the south‑west, from Shepherdson
Road. It is a moderately
sized shopping centre, about 20 kilometres north of the Adelaide CBD. It
has just under 20 tenancies and
a Foodland Supermarket which the applicant described as a full‑line
supermarket. The
other tenancies include an Asian‑style supermarket, a
bakery, an Indian grocer, a takeaway food shop, a pizza bar, and restaurant,
well as professional and other services, such as doctor, a dentist, a barber, a
pharmacy, financial services, a tattooist, a local
MP and a gym. Adjacent to it
is an OTR petrol station.
Immediately
to the rear of Martins Plaza on Shepherdson Road is the Holy Family Catholic
School, Parafield Gardens Primary School,
Good Start Early Learning, and Eden
Road is a moderately sized road with single lanes in both directions. It
commences at the junction of Port Wakefield Road,
just south of Globe Derby
Park. Whereas Port Wakefield Road runs essentially from south to north, Martins
Road travels in a north‑easterly
direction, to the north of, and parallel
to Salisbury Highway. As it continues in a north‑easterly direction it
bisects Kings
Road before passing in the vicinity of the Hollywood Plaza
Shopping Centre, about 2.7 kilometres away from Martins Plaza.
Plaza Shopping Centre is a large shopping centre that has amongst its tenancies
a large Coles supermarket, a large Woolworths
supermarket and a Target store. It
also contains a bottle shop trading under the BWS badge.
Immediately
to the south‑east of the intersection of Martins Road and Kings Road, on
the opposite side of the road from Martins
Plaza, about 1.1 kilometres
away, is the Slug ‘N’ Lettuce Tavern. Amongst its offerings is a
stand‑alone bottle
shop trading under the BWS badge.
1.9 kilometres to the south east of Martins Plaza on Salisbury Highway, is the
Parafield Plaza Centre, which was the subject
of a decision of this Court in
Parafield Plaza Supermarket
and which contains a bottle shop trading under the Liquorland badge.
two kilometres to the north‑west of Martins Plaza, on Port Wakefield
Road, Bolivar, is the Whitehorse Inn Hotel. Amongst
its offerings is a
two‑lane drive through bottle shop trading under the Cellarbrations badge,
that has an express lane and
a browse lane. Because of the configuration of
roads it is about 4.7 kilometres by car from Martins Plaza.
4.5 kilometres to the south‑east of Martins Plaza, on Kings Road is the
Parafield Airport Liquor Store (PALS). In this
Court, in earlier proceedings
concerning Martins Plaza, it was described as one of the biggest liquor outlets
in this State that
has a very large range catering for patrons who are prepared
to travel considerable distance to use
There is no reason to doubt
that this remains so.
couple of kilometres further to the south‑east of Martins Plaza on Bridge
Road is a bottle shop trading under the Fassina
Guidelines speak of the locality as referring “to the area surrounding the
licensed premises/proposed licensed premises
and is the area most likely to be
affected by the granting of the application.” They provide that as part of
the accompanying
submission an applicant is “required to identify the
geographic area from which they expect to draw customers.” The guidelines
suggest as a guide that the locality of licensed premises in the Adelaide
Metropolitan Area is the area within a two kilometre radius
of the site of
the relevant premises.
applicant filed in support of its application a comprehensive submission that
was prepared by Mr Paul Tisato (the Submission).
As was observed by this Court
Hotel Angaston Pty Ltd t/as Angaston Hotel & Ors v Scarlett Zetland
Pty Ltd t/as Local Cellars Angaston
, “Mr Tisato is a
self‑employed management consultant with extensive experience as a
retailer and supplier of goods and
services to retailers. He did not purport to
be an expert planner. He has been involved in the liquor industry for
20 years and helped
to develop the Local Cellars
Submission contended that in this case the locality was the area within a
two kilometre radius of the site of the relevant premises.
It submitted
that its primary target customer group were the adult patrons of Martins Plaza.
It submitted that its secondary target
customer group were those customers
living within the locality and its surrounds who do not currently using the
facilities at Martins
Plaza because of their inability to complete a “one
stop shop” due to the absence of a take away liquor facility there.
Submission contended that the characteristics of the Parafield Gardens suburb
comprised the most relevant portion of the locality,
however defined, and that
it is likely to be “the area most likely to be affected by the grant of
the application”, as
described in the guidelines.
Submission identified the Slug ‘N’ Lettuce Tavern, the Whitehorse
Inn Hotel and the Liquorland Parafield Plaza as
being the only relevant licensed
premises in the locality.
Submission included the results of a customer petition in support of the
application which has been signed by over 100 people
and a letter of support
signed by 12 traders who operate businesses in Martins Plaza Shopping
Submission submitted by reference to the SA Health website (Drug & Alcohol
Services), SA Community website (community service
organisations and support
groups) and Health Info Net website (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
community health support services)
that the demographic profile of the locality
did not indicate any at‑risk groups or subcommunities existed within the
with the exception of the age demographic of persons under 18 years of
age. In relation to this cohort it submitted that its management
plan contained
policies and procedures to ensure that the risk to minors is eliminated.
Submission contained an analysis and commentary as regards the various community
buildings, facilities, and areas of interest
in the locality, and contended that
these did not indicate any particular matters of concern.
Submission contended that the applicant’s security measures and commitment
to implement robust harm minimisation strategies
and responsible service of take
away packaged liquor sales would negate any perceived harm to the community. It
noted that the applicant
is an experienced business owner and a highly respected
member of the community with a vested interest in ensuring that the proposed
premises is a responsibly run liquor store.
Submission acknowledged that the demographic and community profile of the
locality Socio-Economic Indexes for Areas (SEIFA) was
lower than the State
averages, but submitted that in fact the locality was not disadvantaged, but
rather, it was ethnically diverse
and working class. The Submission added that
the usefulness of SEIFA data was questionable.
Submission then pointed to what it contended were positive features of the
locality profile and contended that the community was
young, healthy and working
class, with lower tertiary education attainment level, expectedly where English
is a second language of
a higher number of its residents. It submitted that the
lower weekly household income was balanced by lower monthly mortgage repayments,
such that disposable household income was relatively in line with all of South
Submission acknowledged that this Court had refused an application for a retail
liquor merchant’s licence in
This refusal was under
the now redundant “needs test”. The Submission contended that in any
event, there had been significant
population growth in the locality over the
last 20 years.
applicant provided a summary as to why the grant of the application was in the
community interest that included the following:
There are no
“at risk groups” or sub-communities have been identified within the
The locality is
not “awash” with packaged liquor outlets and the density of licences
to population does not go close to
the densities that currently exist elsewhere
in South Australia.
The site for the
proposed premises is not visible from any recreational areas, places of worship
or community facilities.
There is no
identifiable detrimental effect that the grant of the application would have on
the community.
The proposed
premises would meet the contemporary expectation of consumers and shoppers to
complete a “one stop shop”
for their food and alcoholic beverage
needs as it is directly next to the Foodland Supermarket, which it described as
a full‑line
supermarket.
The relevant
community would benefit economically, socially and culturally with the addition
of a contemporary, well ranged and well
stocked liquor store with a hyperlocal
focus in Martins Plaza. It would lead to increased competition to the locality
and add diversity
for the community because the range on offer would be
considerably different to the existing packaged liquor outlets and would focus
on supporting small, craft, boutique producers based locally in South
application drew objections from GM Hotels Whitehorse Pty Ltd, the licensee of
the Whitehorse Inn Hotel; Fassina Investments Pty
Ltd, the licensee of Fassina
Liquor Merchants, Para Hills; and Fun Trading Pty Ltd trading as Parafield
Airport Liquor Store. I shall
refer to these collectively as “the
objectors”.
also drew an objection from a local resident, Ms Rita Reichbart. She and her
husband reside within a very short walking distance
to Martins Plaza which she
visits nearly every day of the week for grocery shopping, exercising at the gym,
filling petrol, or attending
appointments at the medical centre. She expressed
concern that opening a liquor store at Martins Plaza would draw persons
negative behaviours to what she described as a very friendly shopping
plaza. She also expressed concern for the safety of children
attending Holy
Family Catholic School, Parafield Gardens Primary School, Good Start Early
Learning and Eden Academy, as many families
stop by Martins Plaza after picking
up their children from school and daycare. She added that when she is inclined
to purchase alcohol,
she has never found it difficult to travel
three minutes more to the BWS at the Slug ‘N’ Lettuce Tavern on
Martins Road.
delegate rejected submissions put by the objectors that the relevant locality
was much larger and that considerations needed to
be given to the take away
liquor available at stores such as PALS and Fassina, Para Hills. She did,
however, find that the BWS facility
at Hollywood Plaza needed to be considered.
She did so, having found that it is a major shopping centre that has significant
power and offers a “one stop shopping” experience and that
it is only around 2.7 kilometres and a six minute drive on
and easy road from the proposed premises. She found that the locality included
Hollywood Plaza.
delegate found that there was no reason why the application should be refused on
the basis of the matters outlined in
of the Act. She expressed no
concerns about approving the applicant as the licensee in the event the
application was to be granted.
delegate accepted that the application enjoys some community support. She noted
that the only objections to the application were
commercial competitors and a
local resident.
delegate expressed doubt about the applicant’s contention that the
Foodland Supermarket at Martins Plaza was a full‑line
supermarket. She
noted that it had no separate butcher or baker on offer, and that it was
noticeably smaller relative to the Woolworths
and Coles supermarkets located at
Hollywood Plaza.
delegate accepted the objectors’ submission that Martins Plaza was not a
thriving centre providing a full range of services
required for residents’
major weekly or fortnightly shopping needs. She found that the grant of the
application would not provide
true one-stop shopping at Martins Plaza, or that
if it does, it would only be for a very limited number of people. She found that
most people in the locality are still likely to need (or choose) to attend
Hollywood Plaza on a fairly regular basis. She did not
consider that there would
be a contemporary community expectation that within the limited retail offerings
contained within Martins
Plaza there would be a take away liquor facility.
delegate accepted that the grant of the application would result in some
enhanced employment that included some short‑term
employment opportunities
during the construction and fit out of the proposed premises.
delegate rejected the objectors’ submission that this was a disadvantaged
community at risk of alcohol related harms. Having
acknowledged that based on
the SEIFA index, those residing in the locality were somewhat disadvantaged, and
that there was higher
than average unemployment and lower median household
income, she expressed no concerns about disproportionate or concerning levels
alcohol related harm.
delegate accepted that the grant of the licence would not result in an
undesirable level of licence density or a locality “awash”
takeaway outlets. She found that licence density in the locality was
significantly lower than the State average and that this
would remain so in the
event the application was granted. She noted that no take away liquor outlets
had been approved in the locality
for around two decades. She accepted the
applicant’s submission that the population in the locality has increased
during that
delegate found that the proposed premises would comprise of a modern, safe and
clean store with a comprehensive range of quality
liquor and associated products
and services for those consumers. She found that the proposed premises would
create additional employment,
some of which was likely to go to those residing
in the locality and that it may also provide an additional point of distribution
for some South Australian owned liquor producers.
delegate accepted that those who shop at Martins Plaza who wish to purchase
alcohol would find it very convenient to do so from
the proposed premises. But
she accepted Ms Reichbart’s observation that she has never found it
difficult to travel three minutes
along Martins Road to purchase liquor
from the BWS store at the Slug ‘N’ Lettuce Tavern. She stated that
in terms of
inconvenience this “barely touches the scale”. She
stated that as such, the added convenience did not weigh that heavily
of granting the application, noting that convenience does not equate to the
elimination of all inconvenience.
delegate noted the observation made by this Court observed in
that “it is in
the community interest for there to be some brake on the number of premises at
which the public may purchase
liquor for consumption off the premises”.
delegate then noted that this application had some similarities to the
application that this Court refused in
Cellarbrations Walkley
She noted that in
that case the Court drew the inference that in contrast to the Walkley Heights
Shopping Centre, the nearby and
much larger Ingle Farm Shopping Centre was very
popular and that for the majority of people living in the locality this is where
they would undertake their shopping for fresh food and groceries. The delegate
thought that in connection with the residents of this
locality the same
inference could be drawn in respect of Hollywood Plaza.
delegate then referred to the observation made by this Court in
Cellarbrations Walkley Heights
where it said:
It cannot be doubted that the addition of a take away liquor facility in any
locality has the potential to cause harm. Sometimes,
because of the limited
number or nature of the take away liquor facilities already existing within the
locality, or the extra convenience
and choice that the addition of a further
take away liquor facility would achieve, the evaluative judgment that the
community interest
test entails might lead to the conclusion that this is a
price worth paying. But in my opinion, this is not that case. Having regard
the number and nature of the take away liquor facilities already existing within
the locality and the range and choice that they
provide, and the relatively
small number of people who would benefit from the extra convenience and choice
that the grant of this
application would achieve, in my opinion the addition of
another take away liquor facility in this locality is not in the community
delegate then concluded:
Weighing up the positives and negatives that will flow from the grant of the
application, the size of Martins Plaza Shopping Centre,
and the range of
existing liquor options in relatively close proximity and easy driving distance
to the proposed Store, I am not
satisfied that granting the application is in
the community interest.
the delegate turned to consider whether the grant of the application was in the
public interest.
noted that this Court had expressed the view that: notwithstanding the changes
to the Act abolishing the “needs test”,
it is not in the public
interest for there to be a proliferation of bottle shops selling essentially the
same range of liquor within
short compass of another; Parliament has not gone
down the path of legislating to allow a packaged liquor store to be
with every (modest size) supermarket in South Australia; and
consideration needs to be given as to whether in the event that an application
is granted, it could create a precedent that might result in something along the
lines of the “wholesale alignment” of
liquor stores with
supermarkets throughout the State, contrary to the will of Parliament.
these matters in mind, the delegate found that if this application succeeded, it
would create an undesirable precedent that could
lead to an oversupply of
take-away liquor facilities and that it would not be in the public interest to
allow that to occur.
Submissions on Review
applicant contended that the delegate erred in extending the locality to include
Hollywood Plaza. It submitted that the relevant
locality is defined by reference
to members of the community that might be expected to purchase liquor from the
proposed premises,
and the persons their consumption of alcohol might in turn
impact. It submitted that if an extension or reduction of the two kilometre
radius suggested in the Guidelines was considered necessary, there needed to
evidence that there is in fact a different primary catchment
for the proposed
premises. It submitted that the delegate’s rationale for the extension,
being the fact that Hollywood Plaza
was a large shopping centre and the fact it
clearly “offers one stop shopping and would have significant pulling
was not evidence capable of supporting that conclusion.
submitted that this error was significant in two ways.
because the locality was incorrectly determined to a significant degree, it
meant that the delegate’s evaluation as to
whether the grant of the
application was in the community interest was conducted on a false premise.
the inclusion of Hollywood Plaza suggests that the delegate thought it necessary
to consider another licensed outlet as part
of the locality in order to apply
the Act, which was an error given the abolition of the “needs
it was contended that the delegate erred in her findings about, and
characterisation of Martins Plaza and her view that it was
a relatively small
shopping centre that drew analogies to cases where packaged liquor sales
licences had been refused in respect
of proposed premises such as
Cellarbrations Walkley Heights
noted that the delegate made no positive finding as to the total size of Martins
Plaza. It submitted that there was evidence before
the delegate that established
that Martins Plaza has a total lettable space of 6,100 square metres and that
the largest tenancy was
1,200 square metres.
submitted by reference to a comparative table of Neighbourhood Centres involved
in recent licence applications that Martins Plaza
was not a small shopping
centre. It added that if the delegate was doing no more than observing that
Martins Plaza was not as large
as Hollywood Plaza Shopping Centre, she was
correct, but this did not resolve the issue. It submitted that convenience or
expectation is not met by the co‑location to a very large
shopping centre of the size of Hollywood Plaza. It submitted that
other factors,
such as distance to such a centre; accessibility and parking; the type of
offering at the centre, and the products
and brands available; and the existence
of a sufficient range of goods and services at other centres were relevant.
submitted that there could be a community expectation of a liquor store being
amongst the offerings at a shopping centre despite
there being a much larger
shopping complex some further 2.7 kilometres away. It submitted that there
were many examples of this,
such as Brighton to Marion Shopping Centre; St
Peters to Norwood, and Christies Beach to Colonnades.
submitted that the delegate erred in finding that the Foodland Supermarket was
not a “full line” supermarket and that
in making this finding she
appears to have adopted the untenable submission made by the objectors that the
Foodland Supermarket was
akin to a “convenience store”. It submitted
that the delegate’s basis for the finding appears to be a conclusion
a “full line supermarket” must have an in‑store baker and
butcher. It submitted that this involves a misunderstanding
of what is a full
line supermarket. It submitted that “full line” means no more than
the store containing the range of
products (and choices within product lines)
that are customarily available to allow a customer to complete a more
comprehensive or
weekly shop and that the absence of in‑store bakeries and
butchers was not determinative. It submitted that in any event, Martins
otherwise meets those needs as meat, poultry and fish are available in the
nearby Asian‑style store which is equivalent
at least to a conventional
butcher and bakery products are available in the bakery immediately adjacent to
the supermarket.
submitted that the delegate erred in failing to address the significance of the
combined grocery offerings at the centre, and in
particular the large
Asian‑style grocery store. It submitted that she ignored the other
significant features of Martins Plaza
being the variety of takeaway food, pizza
and the OTR petrol station. It submitted that this led the delegate to err in
finding that
Martins Plaza does not provide for “one stop shopping”
and that it was “not a thriving Centre providing a full
range of services
required for residents’ major weekly or fortnightly shopping needs.”
It added that there is a contradiction
for the delegate to proceed on the basis
that within Martins Plaza there is “no separate butcher and baker on offer
Foodland supermarket” but not to observe that there is a bakery
next door, and butcher’s counters within the Asian grocer.
submitted that the delegate erred in drawing comparisons with shopping centres
at Walkley Heights and Hove. It noted that in
Cellarbrations Walkley
, the premises were to be located in a centre constituted of a Drakes
mini supermarket of 400 square metres and six other tenancies.
that it was also significant in that case that the much larger Ingle Farm
Shopping Centre was only 1.5 kilometres away and
it contained a “big
box” First Choice Liquor retailer. It noted that in
premises were to be located in a centre constituted of a Foodland of
800 square metres and other tenancies comprised of a Vietnamese
coffee shop, post office, pharmacy, tax agent and hairdresser. It added that it
was also significant that the very large
Marion Shopping Centre was only
2.9 kilometres away and that the substantial Brighton Central Shopping
Centre was only 1.9 kilometres
away and it contained a much larger Foodland
and a Cellarbrations branded liquor outlet as one of the 19 speciality
shops in that
submitted that if analogies are to be drawn, the facts here are much closer to
those that this Court dealt with in
Liquorland (Australia) Pty Ltd (Park
which concerned a
smaller shopping centre with fewer speciality stores but with a slightly larger
car park and a larger supermarket.
submitted that the delegate’s erroneous findings also infected her
consideration of public interest grounds.
applicant submitted that in light of the delegate’s errors it was
incumbent upon this Court to consider the application.
It submitted that the
grant of the application is in the community interest and it is not contrary to
the public interest.
submitted that the Court should find that the proposed premises are to be
located in a substantial suburban shopping centre configured
substantial car park that is considerably larger than the common suburban or
local centres, but ranking in size beneath
the major suburban shopping centres.
submitted that the Court should find that the locality was the area within a
radius of two kilometres from the proposed premises.
noted that within that locality, there has been a long standing population
growth, associated with the change of land use from
horticultural to residential
development over the last two decades that that this growth will continue in the
noted that despite that history of growth, no unrestricted packaged liquor
licences have been granted in the locality which has
resulted in a licence
density which is very significantly lower than the State average, and would
remain so even if the licence was
submitted that Martins Plaza is well patronised and used widely by those in the
locality to undertake shopping and meets their
ordinary daily needs at a
chemist, doctor or gym. It pointed to evidence adduced in the hearing before me
that demonstrated a consistent
pattern of total vehicle numbers of between
13,000 to 14,000 a week which in turn reflects that the car park turns over
between seven
and nine times a day with substantial patronage even on days when
the supermarket is closed. It added that these figures do not take
patronage of those that would walk or use public transport to visit Martins
Plaza, noting that nearby is a retirement
village. It pointed out that the sole
individual objector explained that she walked to Martins Plaza and it met all
her shopping
submitted that the grant of the application will enhance convenience to a
significant portion of the community living in the southern
and western portions
of Parafield Gardens who are presently required to drive north‑east and
past Martins Plaza in order to
purchase liquor.
submitted that it would enhance choice by offering an alternative to the BWS
stores at Hollywood Plaza and the Slug ‘N’
Lettuce Tavern and the
Liquorland at Parafield Plaza. It submitted that the proposed premises can be
expected to offer a range of
products that are differentiated from the products
available in those stores because Local Cellars purchases its products from
wholesalers
of liquor, beer or wine, or purchases directly from producers.
respondents to this application for review, submitted that the applicant has
erroneously elevated the suggested two kilometre
radius in the Guidelines
as akin to a default rule of law. They make the point that it is no more than a
guide and it is for the
licensing authority to decide for itself what the
relevant locality is. They submitted that the delegate was entitled to rely upon
her accumulated experience and she plainly formed the view that those residing
in the vicinity of Hollywood Plaza would find it an
easy drive to Martins
respondents then submitted that even if the delegate erred, in considering that
the fact of the BWS store in Hollywood Plaza was
a factor to be taken into
account in determining the locality, it made no difference to the outcome,
because in undertaking the evaluative
exercise that the community interest
entails, it was appropriate for the delegate to consider licensed facilities on
the outskirts
of the locality.
respondents took issue with the submission that the delegate erred in drawing
comparisons with shopping centres at Walkley Heights
and Hove. They submitted
that the only relevant facilities in Martins Plaza are the Foodland Supermarket,
the Asian‑style grocery
store and the small Indian‑style grocery
store and that the delegate rightly concluded that the retail offerings at
Plaza were relatively sparse. They submitted that Martins Plaza was not
the type of shopping centre where persons living in the locality
expected to undertake their weekly or fortnightly shop and that the comparison
with Walkley Heights was appropriate as was
the comparison between Hollywood
Plaza and the Ingle Farm Shopping Centre. It contended that the relative size of
Martins Plaza by
comparison to Hollywood Plaza not only informed the likely
movement of persons in the locality, but it enabled the finding that Martins
Plaza was not a shopping centre that would evoke a community expectation of
having amongst its offerings a bottle shop.
respondents invited the Court to note that none of the trading data pertaining
to the performance of the Foodland Supermarket,
such as gross sales, turnover,
or basket size , was placed before the delegate or the Court. It submitted that
an adverse inference
could be drawn from this and that the Court could be
fortified in forming the view that the supermarket was not that successful,
given its preparedness to cede 200 square metres of trading area to
accommodate the proposed premises.
respondents submitted that the evidence of car visitations to Martins Plaza was
of marginal assistance, because it did not isolate
those under the age of 18 and
it did not identify what facilities at Martins Plaza the drivers and passengers
of those cars were
respondents took issue with the complaint about the delegate’s finding
that the Foodland Supermarket was not a full-line
supermarket. They contended
that the expression “a full-line supermarket” is not a term of art
and that the delegate’s
use of the expression reflected her view that the
status of the Foodland Supermarket was somewhere between the positions adopted
by the parties: the applicant contending that it was comparable to a larger
Coles or Woolworths and the objectors contending that
it was no more than a
small convenience mart.
respondents submitted that the applicant’s contention that the proposed
premises enhance choice by offering an alternative
to the BWS stores at
Hollywood Plaza and the Slug ‘N’ Lettuce Tavern and the Liquorland
at Parafield Plaza was overstated.
They submitted that the indicative stock list
was in large measure the list that reflects the reality that most customers
take away liquor from a core range. They added that if members of the
relevant community might be looking to buy more unique products,
they already
have ample opportunity to do so at the large PALS nearby.
respondents also raised some technical matters. They noted that under the lease
arrangement that Mr Siciliano has with Martins
Plaza Pty Ltd, that company is
entitled to a share of the gross sales. They made the point that if the same
arrangement applies to
liquor sales, this would be a breach of
Act which makes it an offence “if a licensee enters into any agreement or
arrangement under which an unlicensed person
may participate in the proceeds of
the business carried on under the
applicant submitted that that there would be a separate lease for the proposed
premises that would not involve any agreement or
arrangement under which an
unlicensed person may participate in the proceeds of the proposed premises.
respondents then noted that pursuant to
s 57(2)(9b)
of the Act, an
application for proposed premises “must not be granted unless the
licensing authority is satisfied that any
approvals, consents or exemptions that
are required by law for the carrying out of building work before the licence
takes effect
have been obtained”.
I understand the argument, it is contended that the
Community Titles Act
applies to the proposed premises and that absent proof of an agreement
to permit the construction of the proposed premises, the requisite
consents or exemptions that are required by law for the carrying out of building
work have not been obtained.
applicant submitted that the
Community Titles Act
is not properly
interpreted as being a planning law as set out under
such that its relevance only potentially relates to
s 57(2)(c).
It then submitted that the
Community Titles Act
is something akin to a landlord consent for the undertaking of building work and
it is not a matter that
is concerned with. It added that in any
event, if this was a matter of concern for the Court it could be dealt with by
granting the
application subject to the requisite consent being
Consideration
commence with the technical arguments put forward by the respondents.
submission put by the applicant’s counsel that that there would be a
separate lease for the proposed premises was doubtless
made on instructions.
There is no evidence to the contrary and noting that under
Act that I am not bound by the rules of evidence and may inform myself as I see
fit, I am prepared to act upon that submission
in finding that issues around
of the Act do not arise.
Community Titles Act
point, I do not find it necessary to resolve
the relevant status of a consent under that Act
because if the
application otherwise succeeds, this can be dealt with by making the grant of
the application subject to obtaining
the necessary consent. If it comes to it, I
propose imposing such a condition.
now turn to the merits.
respect, in my opinion the delegate erred in finding that the locality included
the area around Hollywood Plaza.
can be seen that in respect of proposed premises the Guidelines invite focus
upon the area from where the applicant expects to
draw their customers, having
regard to the nature of the proposed premises. With this in mind, it is not
likely that many of those
who reside in the vicinity of Hollywood Plaza, being
persons who are already well catered for in terms of retail offerings including
a bottle shop would travel over two kilometres to purchase liquor from the
proposed premises. In my opinion the delegate should have
found that the
northern limit of the relevant locality ended in the vicinity of Kings
said, I agree with the submission put by the respondents that nothing turns on
the error. As this Court observed in
Hotel Angaston Pty Ltd t/as Angaston
Hotel & Ors v Scarlett Zetland Pty Ltd t/as Local Cellars
If members of the relevant community are contentedly purchasing take away liquor
from premises outside of the locality and can reasonably
be expected to do so in
the future, this must be taken into account in assessing whether the grant of
the application for a new packaged
liquor sales licence is in the community
delegate was therefore right to give considerable weight to the facilities on
offer at Hollywood Plaza as part of her evaluation
as to whether the grant of
the application is in the community interest.
reject the submission that something can be drawn from the fact that there are
bottle shops in shopping centres in Brighton, St
Peters and Christies Beach that
are near much larger shopping complexes.
the first place, the notion a significant factor in support of an application
for a bottle shop licence was a contemporary community
expectation that the
shopping centre in which it was to be situated was one that might be expected to
have amongst its offerings
a bottle shop was first propounded by the Full Court
of the Supreme Court in 2015 in
Woolworths Ltd v Fassina Investments Pty Ltd
It therefore did
not feature in the grants that resulted in bottle shops in Brighton, St Peters
and Christies Beach.
it should not be overlooked that that actual finding that the Full Court made in
that case was that there was “the
contemporary community expectation was
that a very large regional centre
such as Arndale would include a retail
liquor store.”
is not to say that community expectations are irrelevant. As noted earlier, a
licensing authority must have regard to the objects
in determining an
application. Those objects include: “to ensure as far as practicable that
the sale and supply of liquor is
consistent with the expectations and
aspirations of the public”. I simply make the point that what happened in
those other
grants has no bearing on this case.
submission put by the respondents regarding the applicant’s failure to
adduce evidence of the trading data pertaining to
the performance of the
Foodland Supermarket particularly resonates in this case, given
Mr Tisato’s involvement in preparing
the Submission.
Hotel Angaston Pty Ltd t/as Angaston Hotel & Ors v Scarlett Zetland Pty
Ltd t/as Local Cellars
this Court noted
that Mr Tisato included in the submission that he prepared in support of
applications for packaged liquor sales
licences for proposed premises trading
under the Local Cellars badge in Tanunda and Angaston, the trading figures for
supermarkets
adjacent to both proposed premises.
connection with the supermarket adjacent to the proposed premises at Angaston,
this Court noted as follows:
His evidence of a $160,000 of average weekly sales, 5,400 average weekly
transactions, and a $30 average transaction basket, does
not indicate a
particularly busy supermarket that conducts frequent large scale purchases.
Based on other cases heard in this Court,
this average basket size suggests that
many who shop there, are using it to “top up” rather than using it
for a large
weekly shop.
Court then went on to observe:
But it is apparent from the small basket size and overall turnover of the
Angaston Foodland Supermarket, that their use of the supermarket
appears to be
very much in the nature of passing trade. That is hardly surprising, given the
much larger supermarkets that are available
to them in Nuriootpa and Tanunda.
There is no reason to suppose that this cohort would treat the proposed premises
any differently,
given the ample take away liquor options near supermarkets in
their own towns. In other words, contrary to the submission advanced
Plush Group, it is likely that their use of the proposed premises will be in the
nature of passing trade.
significance of this finding becomes apparent later in the judgment where it was
The Tanunda Foodland Supermarket is quite large and its transactional history
suggests that it is a busy supermarket. The Barossa
Co‑op is part of a
formidable shopping complex in Nuriootpa. Both are near take away liquor
facilities, which in the case of
Tanunda is about to be enhanced by the recent
grant of a packaged liquor sales licence there. These facts permit the drawing
inference that all are meeting the aspiration that many contemporary
Australians share of wanting to combine their take away liquor
purchases as part
of a one stop shopping experience. The relatively short driving distances
from Angaston to Tanunda, and from Angaston
to Nuriootpa, enables the drawing of
the inference that many of the residents of Angaston and the surrounding areas
will be regularly
and contentedly using these shops and take away liquor
facilities to fulfil that
aspiration.
(Footnote omitted)
this case, the size of Hollywood Plaza permits the drawing of the inference that
for many of those living in the vicinity of Martins
Plaza, it is meeting the
aspiration that many contemporary Australians share of wanting to combine their
take away liquor purchases
as part of a one stop shopping experience.
the applicant was to contend that notwithstanding this, the grant of this
application would meet that aspiration, it might have
been expected that it
would have produced the trading data for the Foodland Supermarket to demonstrate
that it is a busy supermarket.
Afterall, given the findings by this Court in
Hotel Angaston Pty Ltd t/as Angaston Hotel & Ors v Scarlett Zetland Pty
Ltd t/as Local Cellars Angaston
, Mr Tisato must have been aware of the
importance of producing the trading data of a supermarket in connection with an
application
for a packaged liquor sales licence that in part is based upon the
proximity of the proposed premises to a supermarket. I think it
is significant
that no such evidence was adduced.
accept that the evidence of car visitations to Martins Plaza of the order of
between 13,000 to 14,000 a week indicates that the
shopping centre is visited by
many. But these numbers include those who visit there to attend the take away
food facilities, the
doctor, the pharmacy, the financial services adviser, the
local MP and the gym. This cohort might not necessarily also attend the
Supermarket, the Asian‑style supermarket or the Indian grocer, and if the
application succeeds, may not necessarily
be expected to visit the proposed
the evidence presented, the inference cannot be drawn that the Foodland
Supermarket is especially busy. In my opinion, the evidence
does not displace
the inference that for many of those living in the vicinity of Martins Plaza,
Hollywood Plaza is contentedly providing
them with the opportunity to combine
their take away liquor purchases as part of a one stop shopping experience
and that it will
continue to be so if the application is granted.
therefore respectfully agree with the delegate’s findings that Martins
Plaza does not provide for “one stop shopping”
and that it was
“not a thriving centre providing a full range of services required for
residents’ major weekly or fortnightly
shopping needs.”
this case, it must be acknowledged that the evidence does not indicate that
there are a disproportionate number of problem drinkers
in and about the
locality or that, despite the low SEIFA ranking, that the grant of this
application will have an adverse impact
upon the community.
accept that there are not any other features of the locality that are especially
concerning in the context of this application.
It must also be accepted that the
grant of this application will create some small employment opportunities.
for the reasons outlined above, this is not a case where the grant of this
application will for many living in the locality enable
them to combine their
take away liquor purchases as part of a one stop shopping experience.
relevant community currently has easy access to the BWS store attached to the
nearby Slug ‘N’ Lettuce Tavern and,
like Ms Reichbart, many are
contentedly using it. It can be expected that many of this community are
contentedly using Hollywood
Plaza to combine their take away liquor purchases as
part of a one stop shopping experience. For those wanting a range of products
beyond what might be expected of a BWS or Liquorland store, PALS, albeit some
distance away, already provides them with that opportunity.
are matters of some significance. I repeat the observation made by this Court in
Liquorland McLaren Vale (No.
Parliament has elected not to go down the path taken in other jurisdictions of
permitting the wholesale alignment of bottle shops
with supermarkets and this
can be taken to reflect the public’s expectations in this State. The
public clearly supports the
alignment of bottle shops with some shopping centres
that contain supermarkets. If it were otherwise, there would not be so many
bottle shops aligned with supermarkets in shopping centres. But through the
Parliament,
the public can be taken to not aspire to an alignment of a bottle
shop with every shopping centre
that contains a supermarket. The public can
be taken to consider that sometimes, because of the proximity of other take away
facilities, it would be better for a shopping centre not to have a bottle
my opinion, this is such a case. I therefore respectfully agree with the
delegate that the grant of this application is not in
the community interest.
And, for essentially the same reason, I find that it is not in the public
interest to grant this application.
application for review is therefore
Corrected for the reasons
explained in
Local Cellars Parafield Gardens (No. 2)
[2025] SALC 69.
An application for a packaged
liquor sales licence is deemed to be a “designated application” by
of the Act.
[2025] SALC 3.
[2025] SALC 59.
[2023] SALC 73.
Martins Plaza Liquor
[2005] SALC 2.
[2024] SALC 108
[2005] SALC 2.
[2023] SALC 31.
[2023] SALC 49.
Ibid at [61].
[2021] SALC 7
[2020] SALC 37.
Section 99(1)(c)
[2024] SALC 108
[2015] SASCFC 72.
Ibid at [56].
Ibid at [100].
Ibid at [103].
Ibid at [110].
[2023] SALC 2.
Ibid at [80].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (323 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter