URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAHPT/2019/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Burki v Dental Board of Australia [2019] SAHPT 8 (14 March 2019)
Burki v Dental Board of Australia
[2019] SAHPT
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL OF SOUTH
BURKI, Sheraz
DENTAL BOARD OF
Health Practitioners
1805 of 2018
HEARING DATE:
19 December
DECISION OF SA HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL:
Constituted
by: Deputy President G.R.A. Clark
Dr G Pitcher
Ms K Plastow
DELIVERED ON:
19 December 2018
REASONS FOR
DECISION PUBLISHED ON:
14 March 2019
CATCHWORDS:
against decision of the Dental Board of Australia - s 199 of the Health
Practitioner Regulation National Law South Australia
Act 2010 - Application for
specialist registration of Orthodontics refused – Appeal heard de novo
Appeal allowed - Appellant’s qualifications are
substantially equivalent or based on similar competencies to qualification
the specialty of Orthodontics – s 58(b) Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law South Australia Act 2010 - Appellant
required to undertake
assessment and/ or examination to demonstrate clinical competency and to assess
his ability for specialist
registration - s 80(1)(d) Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law South Australia Act 2010 - Assessment or examination
that Appellant
is required to undertake RACDS fellowship examinations for
Orthodontics – Assessment or examination, including case studies,
undertaken within reasonable timeframe.
Section 199, 18(9), 202(i),
58(b), 80(1)(d)
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law South Australia
Liddell v Medical Board of Australia
(2012) WASAT
Ongee v Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia
[2011] SAHPT
I v Medical Board of Australia
[2011] SAHPT 18
[2003] HCA 22
(2003) 77 ALJR 989
Ansett Transport Industries (Operations) Pty
Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1977] HCA 71
(1977) 139 CLR 54
Walton Stores (Interstate)
Ltd and Maher
(1988) 164 CLR
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: In
Respondent: Ms G
Solicitors:
Appellant: N/A
Respondent: Minter Ellison
the conclusion of submissions on 19 December 2018 the Tribunal allowed this
Tribunal now publishes its reasons for this decision.
Appellant lodged an appeal against the decision of the Dental Board of Australia
(the Board) pursuant to s 199 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National
Law South Australia Act 2010
(National Law) to refuse his application for
specialist registration in Orthodontics.
Appellant stated in Form 2 and we quote:
This appeal is being lodged against the arbitrary and
whimsical decision passed by AHPRA (Registration Board of Victoria) dated
of March 2018, whereby the application lodged by the
appellant for specialist registration as a dental practitioner in the field
orthodontics has been refused.
orders sought were as follows and we quote from Form 2:
This Honourable Tribunal may be pleased to quash the
order passed by the respondent dated 29
of March 2018 refusing the
application lodged by the appellant for specialist registration as a dental
practitioner in the field
of orthodontics and direct the respondents to declare
the qualifications of the appellant including Master of Science (MSc) in
Orthodontics
awarded by the University of Marmara in Turkey in 1996, and
fellowship with the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Pakistan awarded
2003 and the relevant experience acquired by the appellant in the field of
Orthodontics since 1996 are equivalent or based on
similar competencies, to an
approved qualification for the specialty of Orthodontics, in accordance with
section 58(b) of the National
Also direct the respondents to grant the specialist registration to the
appellant as a dental practitioner in the field of orthodontics
being fully
qualified for the same in accordance with different provisions of Health
Practitioner Regulation National Law (Victoria)
Act 2009 (National Law) after an
appropriate supervised practice, training or
Appellant has the onus of proof and is discharged on the balance of
probabilities.
The Hearing
were no witnesses. Dr Burki spoke to the documents in three volumes tendered as
Exhibit A1. He provided information about the
procedures before the Board, the
history of each application, and his overseas and Australian qualifications and
his dental work
including in the specialty of Orthodontics. In support he has
supplied written details of his professional work (See Volume 1, 2
Exhibit A1). Ms Walker addressed procedures followed by the Board, its decisions
and the law. As all proper procedures were
followed by the Board, Ms Walker
stated that the appeal should be dismissed.
the material provided by Dr Burki (in Tab B of book 1 of 3) in support of his
appeal he has detailed:
and postgraduate studies and qualification in Turkey and Pakistan and
and procedural skills;
experience;
Registration
of professional bodies;
Participation
in professional bodies including published articles and presentations;
professional development programs in Australia and overseas;
projects undertaken.
appeal is heard in
. That is settled law and we refer to
Medical Board of Australia
There is no contrary argument and the Tribunal considers
it is settled law that the appeal is one to be heard
the hearing of this appeal
the Tribunal therefore stands in
“the shoes of the Board” and decides afresh on the material before
the Board and any
additional material and makes its decision on the merits of
this appeal. The Tribunal is not concerned as to whether there are any
made by the Board as the Tribunal makes its decision on the material before it.
Liddell v Medical Board of
The hearing is not confined to matters that were before
the original decision maker, in this case the Board, but may involve
consideration
of new material... The hearing of the review may, therefore, as it
has in this case, involve a more thorough consideration of evidence
the parties than occurred before the
We also refer to
Ongee v Nursing and Midwifery Board of
Tribunal has set out, in this part of our reasons, the Tribunal’s powers
to review Board determinations as this was not
part of either Dr Burki or Ms
Walker’s written or oral submissions.
Tribunal is by virtue of s 18(9) and we quote:
(a)... not bound by the rules of evidence and may form
itself on any matter as it thinks fit; and
(b) must act according to equity, good conscience and the substantial merits of
the case without regard to technicalities and legal
repeat that the Tribunal accepts that its function is not limited to determining
whether the Board was right to make its decisions
upon the material before it as
the appeal is to be determine on its merits. The Tribunal is required to assess
all the material before
it as if it were in the position of the Board. Section
202(I) of the National Law confers power on the Tribunal to:
(a) confirm the
appellable decision; or
(b) amend the
appellable decision; or
(c) substitute
another decision for the appellable decision.
Burki seek an order to quash the decision made by the Board on 29 March
2018. The Tribunal is of the considered opinion that for
determination of the Appeal the outcome of the earlier application by
Dr Burki dated 3 October 2012 must be part of the
consideration.
is explicit in the submissions by the parties that the Board’s earlier
discussion with Dr Burki that:
overseas qualifications were recognised pursuant to s 58(b) of the National
assessment examination, that is the RACDS fellowship examination in
Orthodontics, was the pathway forward.
estimated timeframe or completion of an examination or assessment pursuant to s
80(1)(d) of the National Law was fixed as 31 December
disregard Dr Burki’s first application and its outcome would deny the
Appellant a fair hearing and the determination of this
appeal on ‘the
substantial merits of the
The Pleadings
is conceded that the Appellant made two separate applications for registration
in the specialty of Orthodontics. The first application
is dated 3 October
2012. There was a protracted period of negotiations between the parties
culminating in a formal letter dated 11
February 2015 informing the Appellant
that the application would be refused.
Board stated at paragraph 2 of that letter and we quote:
... the Committee considered that the combination of
your qualifications are substantially equivalent, or based on similar
competencies,
to an approved qualification for the specialty, in accordance with
section 58 (b) of the National Law...
an earlier letter dated 18 November 2014 the Board, at paragraph 4 and 5
The Committee has considered your postgraduate
qualifications, the advice of the Australian Dental Council, and your written
submissions in relation to your postgraduate qualifications, and
determined that the combination of your postgraduate qualifications,
Science (MSc) in Orthodontics (2 years) awarded by the University of Marmara in
Turkey in 1996, and Fellowship with the
College of Physicians and Surgeons of
Pakistan (3 years) awarded in 2003, are substantially equivalent or based on
similar competencies
to an approved qualification for the specialty, in
accordance with section 58 (b) of the National Law.
A further assessment of your postgraduate qualifications should not be
required...
Board also conceded, in the letter dated 18 November 2014 (Tab H, Book 1 of 3)
that Dr Burki had completed RACDS Graduate Board
of Studies Assessment of
Eligibility to sit the Fellowship examination but at paragraphs 8 of the AHPRA
letter dated 11 February
2015 (Tab 21), Dr Burki could not sit the
examination without five case studies completed and filed with RACDS. See also p
transcript.
Appellant made a second application, dated 15 February 2017, for specialist
registration in the field of Orthodontics. In the
period between the first
application and the second application, the criteria and assessment process
changed as the Board did now
not accept the Appellant’s overseas
qualifications as substantially equivalent or based on similar competencies to
an approved
qualification within the meaning of s 58(b) the National Law. As a
consequence the Appellant’s second application was determined
accordance with the new criteria and refused by letter dated 29 March 2018.
Walker conceded that for the second application by Dr Burki some 37 case
summaries and logs were submitted for consideration by
the Board. (See Tab 3 of
Book 1/3, Tab 1 of Book 1/2 and Tab 6 of Book 2/2).
The Findings
Appellant, in support of the first application the Tribunal finds engaged in
extensive written and oral representations to the
Board concerning his
qualifications, lack of supporting case material and inability to comply with
the timeframe for registration.
We refer to Tab B, Book 1/3 for Dr Burki’s
detailed qualifications, training and experience.
but not all of the Appellant’s concerns about timeframes for compliance
are reflected in the written correspondence from
the Respondent.
the Board letter dated 11 February 2015 at paragraph 10 (See Tab J Book 1 of 3)
and we quote:
The Committee considered your submission of 30 November
2014, in which you stated that you believe the timeframe for provision of
cases to RACDS for assessment at the November examination was
unrealistic.
The subsequent two paragraphs of that letter acknowledge the difficulties Dr
Burki did have complying with the time frame but no recognition
that he (Dr
Burki) would require an additional time of at least two to five years to provide
the required five cases to RACDS for
assessment (See paragraphs 8 of the letter
dated 11 December 2015). However in an earlier Board letter dated 18 November
Tab H of Book 1 of 3) and paragraphs V. the Committee stated and we
The Committee has agreed to keep your current
application open for an extended time frame (over two years) to enable you to
seek further
information from Turkey and Pakistan in relation to your
postgraduate qualifications and requirements in relation to log books and
The subsequent paragraph VI. then states and we quote:
The Committee... to propose to refuse your current
application...
the Tribunal’s consideration of these two paragraphs it is a fair
inference that Dr Burki’s first application was ongoing
to at least 18
November 2016 and would encourage Dr Burki to incur expenses to seek case
studies from Pakistan and/or Turkey.
Appellant has acted in good faith at all times. The Tribunal was impressed by
his candour in these proceedings.
Appellant tried to comply with the Board’s directions but the time frames
for RACDS assessment and examination were not
realistic. It is the considered
opinion of the Tribunal that at least five years was required to submit five
completed case studies.
Respondent Board in the Tribunal’s opinion has failed to understand or
appreciate the significance of realistic time frames
to undertake RACDS
fellowship examinations and an assessment for registration in the specialty of
Orthodontics.
two dental members of the Tribunal (Dr G Pitcher and Ms K Plastow) expressed the
joint opinion that at least two but close to
five years is required to provide
five completed case studies to comply with the RACDS requirement to then sit the
examinations as
requested by the Board of Dr Burki. It was impossible to expect
Dr Burki to comply with the RACDS requirement in the limited time
stipulated in the Board letters to Dr Burki.
Burki also made this statement about the extended time in his address and the
Tribunal is satisfied that Dr Burki is correct in
his assessment of the required
time frame. See p 6, 21 and 42 of the Transcript.
Tribunal concurs with Dr Burki’s assessment of the required time line as
expressed at lines 36-44 of page 6 of the transcript.
Board’s reasoning and decision on the second application cannot, in the
Tribunal’s assessment, be considered in isolation
from Dr Burki’s
first application.
time frames for RACDS fellowship examinations or assessment, we repeat, were
unrealistic and unable to be complied with by the
Appellant. The Board needed to
consider the huge effort by the Appellant to provide a substantial body of
professional material (see
vols 1, 2 and 3 of Exhibit A) about his earlier
clinical practice in the specialty of Orthodontics as requested by the Board and
mindful that the Board extend the time frame by 2 years for this information and
also the Board letter dated 11 February 2015.
Tribunal is also mindful that the Appellant has incurred expense to secure, for
the Board and this appeal, a large amount of detailed
information about his
clinical practice in the specialty of Orthodontics. See Tab 6, Book 2 of 2 and
email dated 14 May 2017.) We
refer to the Board’s letter dated
11 February 2015 paragraphs 6, 7, 8, 11 and 12.
Tribunal finds that the Appellant has at all times tried to comply with
Board’s directions to achieve registration. It must
be remembered that
Dr Burki does not have the resources available to the Board and that it
would have taken Dr Burki some time to
assemble all information about his
clinical practice in Pakistan and elsewhere.
Burki did also provide 3 Statutory Declarations (see Tab 7 of Book 2) to explain
the absence of clinical material in support of
his Masters of Science
Orthodontic program and case studies and his efforts to obtain evidence of his
training and work in the specialty.
The Tribunal accept that Dr Burki has
faithfully completed all the study and clinical work submitted to the
stated in s 3(3) the guiding principles of the National Registration and
Accreditation Scheme (NRAS) are and we quote:
(a) the scheme is to operate in a transparent,
accountable, efficient, effective and fair way;
further quote:
How Functions to be exercised
An entity that has functions under this law is to exercise its functions having
regard to the objectives and guiding principles of
the national registration
accreditation scheme set out in section 3.
a detailed letter dated 31 October 2017 to Dr Burki the Board set out its
reasons for refusing Dr Burki (see Tab 9 of Book 2 of
2) under the new
Walker stated that the guiding principles of the National Registration and
Accreditation Scheme (NRAS) had been applied by the
Board in its deliberation on
Dr Burki’s second application. We repeat that the Tribunal has resolved
that the representation
made by the Board to Dr Burki on his first application
must also be considered as part of this Appeal.
Tribunal finds that the first application may have progressed further if the
then Board had given a realistic time frame for completing
the five case
studies. Dr Burki has tried to complete the first application but was challenged
by the unrealistic time for RACDS
compliance.
Dr Burki has, we find, acted at all times in complete good faith and from no
fault on his part he was faced with the need to
make a second application under
the new criteria and assessment and refused registration.
outcome for Dr Burki cannot be described as the scheme operating in a
transparent, accountable, efficient and effective or fair
Tribunal is required, we repeat, by s 18(9)(b) to “act according to
equity, good conscience and the substantial merits of
the case without regard to
technicalities and legal forms” and to arrive at a just
Promissory Estoppel
the Appellant had (at Tab A Book 1) in his written submissions to the Tribunal
pleaded “promissory estoppel” the Tribunal
asked Ms Walker for
assistance to locate any relevant authorities.
Walker agreed to provide the relevant High Court authorities and the Tribunal
granted an adjournment to assist Ms Walker to source
these authorities.
Walker spoke to the two High Court judgements of
Ansett Transport Industries
(Operations) Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
Walton Stores
(Interstate) Ltd and Maher
on the issue of
hearing Ms Walker and reviewing these authorities, the Tribunal is satisfied
that the Board’s powers are not fettered
by the equitable principles of
The Decision
Tribunal has determined after its consideration of all the written material and
submissions to allow the appeal and order that:
appeal against the decision of the Dental Board of Australia dated 29 March 2018
is allowed.
Appellant’s combination of qualifications are substantially equivalent or
based on similar competencies to an approved qualification
for the specialty of
Orthodontics in accordance with s 58(b) of the National Law and letter dated 11
February 2015.
to s 80(1)(d) of the National Law, the Appellant is required to undertake an
assessment and/or examination to demonstrate
clinical competency and to assess
his ability for specialist registration.
assessment or examination that the Appellant is required to undertake is the
RACDS fellowship examinations for Orthodontics.
assessment or examination, including case studies, to be undertaken within a
reasonable time frame as agreed between the parties.
are at liberty to apply.
order as to costs.
Tribunal will reconvene at a date and time mutually agreeable to the parties to
review aspects on the implementation of its orders.
Any written application to
be served on the other party.
Burki on 18 January 2019 made a written application and provided a copy of his
application to the Respondent. However as an Appeal
has been lodged, the
Tribunal will defer further considerations of Dr Burki’s application to
abide the outcome of the Appeal
and in accordance with s 205 (1) of the
National Law.
or statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registrar of the Health Practitioners
[2011] SAHPT 18.
(2012) WASAT 120.
Liddell v Medical Board of
(2012) WASAT 120
[2011] SAHPT 17.
[2003] HCA 22
(2003) 77 ALJR 989.
Section 18(9)(b) see quote of
This subsection in paragraph 12 of these reasons.
[1977] HCA 71
139 CLR 54.
164 CLR 387.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (205 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter