URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACorC/2025/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:54:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
PHAM, Duy Ngoc ([2025] SACC 14) [2025] SACorC 14 (20 May 2025)
CORONERS COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
DUY NGOC PHAM
[2025] SACC 14
Inquest Findings of her Honour
Coroner Giles
20 May 2025
CORONIAL INQUEST
Examination of the cause and circumstances of the
death of a 35-year-old male who experienced a cardiac arrest in the custody of
Australia Police. The inquest examined the medical treatment received in
custody as well as the actions of the custody Sergeant
after identifying a need
for medical treatment at hospital.
Ngoc Pham, aged 35 years of Pooraka, died at the Lyell McEwin Hospital on 27
April 2019 as a result of multiple organ failure
due to out-of-hospital
circulatory arrest due to perforated duodenum (operated).
Circumstances
of death as set out in these findings.
Recommendations made.
INQUEST INTO THE
[2025] SACC 14
Introduction and
reason for inquest
Ngoc Pham was born on 19 June 1983 and died on 27 April 2019 at the age of
Australia Police (SAPOL) located Mr Pham on Thursday 18 April 2019 in a
semi-conscious state in a vehicle at the Caltex Service
Station on Main North
Road, Pooraka. Drugs and associated paraphernalia were located near him in the
Ambulance Service (SAAS) transported Mr Pham to the Lyell McEwin Hospital
(LMH) where he was diagnosed as suffering from opioid
toxicity and experiencing
drug withdrawal.
a period of observation, Mr Pham was assessed as being medically fit for
police custody. At approximately 3pm on that same
day, Mr Pham was
arrested and conveyed to the Elizabeth Police Station Cell Complex (ECC). He
was charged with trafficking in a
controlled drug and dangerous driving to
escape police pursuit regarding a previous offence he allegedly committed on 15
April 2019.
Mr Pham was refused police bail, which meant that he would
potentially remain in police custody until Tuesday 23 April 2019, a period
to six days, due to the Easter public holiday break.
risk assessment was conducted at the time of charging, wherein Mr Pham was
assessed as presenting a high level of risk due to his
diagnosed drug
withdrawal, and was therefore classified as a 'high need' detainee. As a result
of this assessment, he was placed
in an observation cell within the ECC, and a
care plan was implemented.
following day Mr Pham was examined by a locum and, due to concerns
regarding his health, he was transferred back to LMH for further
assessment.
Following this evaluation, he was deemed fit for discharge and returned to the
cells, where he was placed in the same
observation cell as before.
the early hours of 21 April 2019 Mr Pham’s condition deteriorated,
and he was observed to fall twice in his cell. The officer
in charge (OIC)
determined that Mr Pham should be returned to hospital for reassessment as
he appeared to have entered a new phase
of withdrawal. The OIC arranged for a
police escort and called for an ambulance. Upon the arrival of ambulance
personnel Mr Pham
was found to be in cardiac arrest, having ceased
breathing. He was transported to LMH where he was placed on life support but
to regain consciousness. He remained on life support for several days
before being declared deceased.
death was a death in custody within the meaning of the
Coroners Act 2003
Therefore, an inquest into his death was mandatory in accordance with
of that Act.
Cause of death
autopsy was performed by Dr Neil Langlois, consultant forensic pathologist, on
3 May 2019 at Forensic Science South Australia.
cause of death was determined to be ‘multiple organ failure due to
out-of-hospital circulatory arrest due to perforated
(operated)’.
I find that to
be the cause of Mr Pham’s death.
post-mortem examination report details that the medical records indicated there
was a 0.5cm by 0.5cm ulcer of the duodenum. Duodenal
ulcer is a condition in
which there is loss of the protective layer of mucus, and stomach acid damages
the lining cells in the first
part of the duodenum allowing gastric acid to
further erode the mucosa and muscle layer of the intestine. A duodenal ulcer
complicated by bleeding (as there is a large artery under this site),
perforation (where the ulcer erodes right through the wall
of the duodenum
releasing gastric contents into the abdominal cavity causing peritonitis) and
occasionally obstruction (as a result
of inflammatory swelling and fibrosis).
The death rate for perforated duodenal ulcer has been estimated at between 5%
and 25%, depending
on other patient
Whilst perforation is
usually a dramatic event with sudden onset of severe abdominal and epigastric
pain, in Mr Pham’s circumstances
the pain may have been masked by his drug
withdrawal symptoms.
Langlois also noted that from the post-mortem examination findings it is not
possible to determine how long Mr Pham’s ulcer
had been present and how
long before his collapse the ulcer had perforated. This is due to the interval
of six days between his
collapse and his death, with intervening surgery having
occurred. Furthermore, the cause of the perforation was not established by
post-mortem examination.
Langlois further noted that although the operation had identified and dealt with
the perforation of the duodenum, damage to Mr
Pham’s organs would
have occurred from the period of failure of circulation before reaching
Evidence at inquest
the Inquest I heard evidence from only one witness, Sergeant Darren James.
Sergeant James was the OIC at the ECC on 21 April 2019
at the time of
Mr Pham’s final deterioration leading to his death. Sergeant James
provided two affidavits which were tendered
at the inquest, one dated 21 April
2019 (the date of Mr Pham’s collapse in custody), and one dated 16 January
Sergeant James was also
interviewed by SAPOL Major Crime officers the day following Mr Pham’s
collapse in the cells. That
record of interview was tendered into
addition to hearing evidence from Sergeant James, the Court received into
evidence records from various agencies including SAPOL,
the Northern Adelaide
Local Health Network (NALHN), and the Department for Correctional Services
(DCS), as well as affidavits from
a number of witnesses who were not called to
give evidence. I will not list them all here due to the sheer number. Due
consideration
was given to each of those affidavits and records in writing this
Expert reports
expert reports were received into evidence from the following suitably qualified
medical professionals:
Professor Jason
White - Professor White is an Adjunct Professor in the School of
Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, University of South
Australia. He qualified from
the University of Adelaide with a BSc (Hons) and a PhD, received post-doctoral
training in pharmacology
at Emory University and subsequently held academic
positions at Monash University, the University of Adelaide and at the
of South Australia from 2010 to 2018 as Professor of Pharmacology and
Head of the School of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences. Professor
published extensively in the pharmacology of addictive drugs and in the
treatment of drug and alcohol dependence.
Joyner OAM - Dr Joyner is a general practitioner with over 50 years of
experience. He practised from 1974 to 2024 in rural
general practice, primarily
in Mannum, South Australia.
Dr Richard Sarre
- Dr Sarre graduated MBBS in 1974 from the University of Adelaide. He is a
specialist in general and colorectal
surgery. He achieved fellowship of the
Royal Australasian College of Surgeons in 1981 and the Royal College of Surgeons
in 1984. He undertook advanced training in general and colorectal
surgery in York, UK and at the Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland Ohio,
USA. He was
appointed senior visiting specialist in colorectal surgery at the Flinders
Medical Centre in 1984 and continued in that
role until 2020. During that time,
he also conducted a private practice in surgery from 1984 to 2020. He has
recently retired from
active surgical practice in the specialty of colorectal
and general surgery and continues to conduct medico­legal assessments
within his area of expertise.
Anne-Maree Kelly - Professor Kelly is an internationally recognised researcher
and teacher in the field of emergency medicine.
She is senior emergency
physician and academic at Western Health in Melbourne, Professorial Fellow at
the University of Melbourne
and Adjunct Professor at Queensland University of
Technology. Her clinical and research interests are broad with a focus on
clinical research, improving quality of care in emergency departments,
and legal medicine. She has more than 200 publications in
refereed journals and
is a member of a number of international editorial boards. Professor Kelly also
has experience providing medicolegal
opinions for cases in jurisdictions
including AHPRA, Coroners' Courts and civil litigation matters.
this finding I shall not summarise all the evidence tendered or heard at the
inquest but refer to it only in such detail as appears
warranted by its forensic
significance and the interests of narrative clarity. It should not be inferred
from the absence of reference
to any aspect of the evidence that it has not been
considered.
standard of proof to be applied in making coronial findings is the civil
standard, the balance of probabilities. In considering
making findings which
imply or express criticism of individuals, I am guided by the principles
enunciated in Briginshaw v
and I shall not make
such a finding unless the evidence leads me to a comfortable level of
satisfaction that the finding should be
Mr Pham’s background
parents, father Ngoc Than Pham, and mother Thi Ngoc Nguyen, came to Australia
after the Vietnam War. They had three
children (including Mr Pham), all
born in Australia.
attended Pooraka Primary School and Ross Smith Secondary School, then
transferred to Blackfriars Priory School. Mr Pham finished
Blackfriars and was in the first term of year 12 when he got in with a 'bad
and started missing school, committing petty crimes, and using
illicit substances.
2014 Mr Pham married Dang Thi Kim Lein Hoang. They lived together until
they separated in late 2018.
2002 and 2018 Mr Pham spent approximately 80 months incarcerated. Offences
Mr Pham was reported or arrested for included
armed robbery, larceny,
receiving, attempted false pretences, unlawful possession, carrying an offensive
weapon, trafficking in a
controlled drug, possessing a controlled drug,
possessing prescribed medication, possessing equipment to use with controlled
failing to stop, driving contrary to defect, failing to exchange personal
details, and breach of bail.
had become somewhat estranged from his parents in the years preceding his death.
However, his family attended the entirety
of the inquest, and it was clear to me
the profound impact that the loss of Mr Pham had on them.
Circumstances leading to incarceration on 18 April 2019
Caltex on Main North Road at Pooraka where she worked.
She noticed that there
was a car nearby which was parked in an unusual manner. There was a person in
the driver’s seat.
At about 7:30am, having noticed that the car had not
moved for the last hour and a half, Ms Jordan asked someone who worked in the
same complex if they could check on the driver. That person reported back to Ms
Jordan that the occupant was slouched over in the
driver’s seat with drugs
on his lap. Ms Jordan called police.
Probationary
Constable Travis Black and Constable Matthew Stepcich arrived approximately 15
minutes later and located Mr Pham in the
vehicle. Mr Pham had a glass
‘ice’ pipe on his lap and an aluminium container with eight bags of
methylamphetamine,
heroin and other
substances.
Mr Pham was
falling in and out of sleep. His speech was ‘very slow, soft and a bit
He said he was
Police called for an
told paramedics that he had taken methylamphetamine and that he had not slept
for five days.
He said he had
also taken heroin in previous days. He was able to walk to the barouche
and was transported
to the LMH where he arrived at approximately 8:18am.
at the LMH on 18 April 2019
approximately 8:30am Mr Pham was assessed by Dr Mohamed Musawir, an
Emergency Department doctor at the LMH.
tests were performed, all of which returned normal results, except for a
slightly raised carbon dioxide level. Dr Musawir stated
this was in keeping
with Mr Pham having been found in a slumped position in his car which may have
caused a period of non-effective
breathing. Blood levels of ethanol and
paracetamol were negative. Vital signs and observations were all within normal
There were no signs of infection, his chest was clear, and his abdomen
was soft and non-tender.
informed Dr Musawir that he had taken methylamphetamine on the previous night
and that he inhaled the drug heroin on a daily
basis. Dr Musawir reviewed
Mr Pham’s previous presentations to the LMH and noted that
Mr Pham had previously presented for
drug related
Musawir diagnosed Mr Pham with ‘sedative hypnotic or opioid
toxicity’, since he was more sedated than highly aroused.
His plan was to
monitor Mr Pham’s recovery from whatever drug he had taken, however,
no intervention as such was required.
3:20pm, after having had a period of observation of some hours, Dr Musawir noted
that Mr Pham’s levels were within normal
There were no signs of
sepsis. Mr Pham said that he was comfortable but wanted to sleep. Dr
Musawir considered that Mr Pham was
stable enough to be discharged and
accordingly signed a ‘fit for custody’ form at 3:23pm.
to Dr Sarre, the treatment provided to Mr Pham during his assessment at the
LMH on this date was reasonable, and there was
no indication of a duodenal ulcer
at the time of presentation. Dr Sarre’s only concern was that a blood or
urine screen for
opiates and other potential drugs of abuse was not conducted,
which would have been prudent in the circumstances. Dr Musawir explained
affidavit that as Mr Pham had admitted to him that took heroin on a daily
basis and had used methylamphetamine recently, there
was no need to request a
blood or urine screen for drugs of abuse as the results were unlikely to change
his care plan.
Sarre opined that the decision to discharge him into police custody was
reasonable under the circumstances and the diagnosis of
a drug overdose was
likely correct. Whilst Dr Sarre has opined that it is plausible that
Mr Pham may have had an undiagnosed duodenal
ulcer at this time, the ulcer
may have subsequently been exacerbated by narcotic withdrawal, as he struggled
with oral intake and
was physically stressed and dehydrated. The normal blood
tests on 18 April 2019 do not support the presence of a perforated ulcer.
Accordingly, I find that the assessment of Mr Pham at the LMH and the
decision to release him into police custody were appropriate
at that time.
Sarah Gavini had been present at LMH with Mr Pham from approximately 2:30pm
in the afternoon (having taken over from officers
who had earlier remained at
the hospital in anticipation of him being fit for custody). Constable Gavini
arrested Mr Pham and advised
him that he was charged with trafficking in a
controlled drug. This charge related to the quantity of drugs that were located
his vehicle earlier that day. Constable Gavini stated that Mr Pham was
very drowsy but was able to put his shoes on and ‘shuffle
his way through
the hospital’ slowly.
Constable Gavini placed Mr Pham in the police vehicle and transported him
to the ECC.
Elizabeth Cells Complex
I turn to the events in custody, I need to make some general observations about
the ECC and the management of detainees.
ECC is within the Elizabeth Police Station, 17-19 Frobisher Road, Elizabeth,
South Australia.
OIC Cells Complex (OICCC) of the ECC and their staff operate from an office area
within the cell complex referred to as 'The Bridge'.
need detainees can be monitored by custody staff from within The Bridge. Not
all cells are under direct observation, however
Mr Pham’s, Cell E2,
in which he remained for the entirety of his time while in custody at ECC,
E2 is approximately 2.5m x 2.5m in dimension. At the furthest point (back wall
- north) it is approximately 5m from The Bridge.
At its closest point (cell
door/wall - south) it is approximately 2m from The Bridge.
well as being able to observe activity in Cell E2 from The Bridge by simply
looking across and into Cell E2, staff can also observe
a detainee in Cell E2
via CCTV. Monitors within The Bridge provide custody staff with real-time
images of the movement and behaviour
of detainees. A control panel allows for
switching between cameras. All CCTV imagery is recorded.
cells are fitted with an intercom that allows detainees to contact custody staff
within The Bridge. The intercom for Cell E2
is located in the northwest corner
above the sink. On 21 April 2019, following the deterioration of Mr Pham in
custody and subsequent
transfer to the LMH, the intercom was tested and found to
be in working
General Order, Custody Management (GOCM)
Orders provide an employee of SAPOL with instructions to ensure to effectively
perform their duties and ensure that organisational
standards are maintained
consistent with SAPOL’s vision.
is responsible for safely and securely managing all detainees in police custody
from the time of their arrest until they are
released or transferred to an
external agency. The GOCM is the overarching guideline for the management of
detainees in police custody.
accordance with the GOCM, all detainees taken into police custody must be
subject to an initial risk assessment and, if remaining
in custody, be subject
to ongoing assessment. The GOCM provides a risk analysis process that assists
the OICCC in developing and
implementing a suitable care plan strategy. Both
the assessment and care plan are managed in
Categories of risk
include medical and health concerns, risk to self and risk to others. The level
of risk associated with each
of the categories is either no risk identified, or
low, medium or high risk identified.
GOCM dictates that the high-risk rating must be used when there are risks that
are imminent or if there is significant recent
or historical evidence suggesting
that such a rating is required. Detainees who are seriously affected by drugs
and/or alcohol that
do not require medical attention must be rated at this
GOCM also defines ‘high need detainees’ which is a risk rating given
to a detainee who poses a high risk to themselves,
others, or who requires a
higher level of care and management due to risk of self-harm (or attempt), or
other known medical or health
reason. It provides that high need detainees
require more frequent checks and closer monitoring compared to a detainee who
assessed at a lower risk. Further, it provides that a continuous risk
assessment must be conducted on each detainee to identify
and determine
treatment options to mitigate identifiable risks.
GOCM provides that detainees and their cells must be physically checked at
intervals of not greater than 15 minutes during the
first two hours of the
initial care plan developed by the OICCC. At the completion of the first two
hours, the OICCC must conduct
a care plan review to determine the suitability of
placing the detainee on minimum hourly or more frequent physical checks.
guard duties with regard to detainee checks are described in the GOCM as
‘When a cell guard is responsible for undertaking
detainee checks and observations they must:
be appropriately
briefed about the detainee’s situation, risk assessment, care plan and
particular needs
conduct detainee
checks as directed by the O/C cells and displayed in the ‘Obs’
column of the cell white board
record detainee
checks in the detention log of the Shield Custody record as soon as reasonable
(sic) practical after the check was
Where a detainee check is
overdue a reason must be recorded in the detention log.’
GOCM contains directions in relation to the carrying out of ‘physical
detainee checks’. Under this heading it is
stipulated that 'when detainee
checks are being conducted, a member must ensure they adhere to the following
procedures for awake
or sleeping detainees'. There are then set out certain
requirements in relation to both awake and sleeping prisoners. In respect
the sleeping patient, it is stipulated as follows:
'When a detainee
is asleep, a physical check requires a member to be close enough to be able to
see that the detainee has a regular
breathing pattern, is lying in a safe
position and is otherwise not at risk. Where there are concerns for a
detainee’s mental
or physical wellbeing they must be woken up and further
note, at the time Mr Pham was in custody, a specific definition for what
amounted to a ‘physical’ check
did not exist within the GOCM.
It follows that, whilst the custody record for Mr Pham records the
‘physical’ checks that
occurred at the requisite intervals, it is
not indicative of occasions that staff physically presented at
Mr Pham’s cell.
In fact, the evidence suggested that the
overwhelming majority of detainee checks recorded for Mr Pham were
conducted via observations
from The Bridge or the CCTV monitor.
ECC has an independent supervisor, that is, a supervisor not attached to the
ECC, to conduct an audit on the ECC on each day,
afternoon, and night shift.
The role of the independent supervisor is to ensure the OICCC is complying with
the GOCM and to review
the custody record of detainees. Any non­compliance
is then to be corrected through the OICCC.
ECC also has a local Standing
to guide certain
practices, in addition to the GOCM.
Admission into custody at
ECC on 18 April 2019
his discharge from the LMH and his arrest, Mr Pham was presented to the
charge counter at the ECC by Constable
The ‘fit for
custody’ form signed by Dr Musawir was provided to Senior Constable
Masters, OICCC at this time.
The form instructed SAPOL to ‘monitor for deep sedation/unconsciousness
and seek appropriate help’.
Constable Masters authorised the detention of Mr Pham. Mr Pham was
refused bail for reasons including his criminal history,
warrant history and
history of breaching bail.
to the Easter weekend approaching (18 April 2019 was the Thursday before Good
Friday), the next available court date was 23 April
2019, which meant
Mr Pham would be in custody for six days.
5:01 pm Senior Constable Masters made an entry in Mr Pham’s custody
record, rating him as ‘high’ risk in relating
to medical and health
concerns, and noting that the hospital ‘fit for custody’ form stated
to keep him under observation
and note any change in behaviour and monitor for
deep sedation/unconsciousness.
5:11pm Senior Constable Masters completed the risk assessment for Mr Pham,
recording the following information in Mr Pham’s
custody record:
In response to
the question ‘Is the detainee apparently suffering from any physical or
mental condition?’ answer ‘Yes’
and commented ‘Located
drug affected and unconscious from drug use (methylamphetamine/heroin).
Treatment at LMH until fit
for release’.
In response to
the question ‘Does the detainee appear to be under the influence of
alcohol or drugs?’ answer ‘Yes’,
and comment ‘Alert and
conscious after being released fit for custody LMH after located unconscious
In relation to
the question ‘Does the detainee appear to be suffering alcohol or drug
withdrawal?’ answer ‘Yes’
with the comment ‘Nil at
present but addicted to meth and heroin and likely to show signs of withdrawal
over next 6 days in
In relation to
the question ‘Based on the responses above, does the detainee need
immediate medical treatment?’ answer
‘Yes’ and comment
‘Released fit for custody and to be kept under observation and note any
change in behaviour and
monitor for deep sedation
unconsciousness’.
the risk assessment process, Mr Pham told Senior Constable Masters he was
addicted to methylamphetamine and heroin and that
he gets withdrawals which
include aches and pains.
Mr Pham was determined to be a ‘high need detainee’ he was
placed into Cell E2 to allow for direct observation from
The Bridge.
show that Mr Pham was then checked every 15 minutes for his first four
hours in custody. On each occasion he was noted to
be asleep but regularly
breathing. The majority of these checks were conducted via CCTV or from The
Bridge, as opposed to being
checks where an officer attended upon
Mr Pham’s cell.
was then moved to hourly checks while remaining classified as high need. At
9:57pm and 11pm, he was sleeping but noted breathing
change of ECC staff occurs at 11pm. Important details about Mr Pham, his
condition, and his potential to deteriorate were handed
over to the oncoming
night shift staff. Sergeant Elise Twiggs, the incoming OICCC nightshift, stated
that following the handover,
she made a note on the ‘cells
whiteboard’ in Shield, which read ‘*** TO BE MONITORED FOR
WITHDRAWALS ***’.
Sergeant Jessie McCallum, who was the second in charge during the night shift
commencing at 11pm, stated that during handover
the night shift were told that
medical advice had been given that Mr Pham would begin experiencing
withdrawal symptoms
and officers
anticipated that he would likely need to return to hospital when that occurred.
The events of 19 April 2019
the night shift (from 11pm on Thursday 18 April 2019 to 7:30am on Friday
19 April 2019), custody records indicated that a detainee
conducted on ten occasions.
examined during the night shift period captured Mr Pham drinking on three
occasions and vomiting twice. For the majority of
this shift, he remained on
the bed. No staff were observed to have had physical interaction with Mr Pham
during the shift which
suggests that the ten recorded checks were conducted via
The Bridge or CCTV rather than physically attending at Mr Pham’s cell.
to day shift occurred at 7am. At handover Sergeant Twiggs advised the oncoming
OICCC Sergeant Courtney Jaensch that Mr Pham
would likely progress to
withdrawal symptoms during the day and need to be taken to
Jaensch spoke to Mr Pham shortly after
and observed that he
‘...appeared to be in pain; he was restless and writhing, however he was
attempting to sleep’.
At shortly after 8:30am, Sergeant Jaensch contacted
a locum and requested that they attend the ECC to examine
Probationary
Constable Black attended the cells at about 9am to enquire about interviewing Mr
Pham but was advised that he was not
in an adequate physical state to be
interviewed in relation to the
approximately 9:40am, Senior Constable Keir entered Mr Pham’s cell to
bring him a meal. Mr Pham acknowledged his presence
by slightly nodding
his head and grunting. Senior Constable Keir left the meal at the end of the
bed. Senior Constable Keir recalls
an unpleasant smell in the cell, in the
nature of vomit, although he did not see any
He formally checked on
Mr Pham again at 10:38am. He stated that Mr Pham could be easily
checked without entering his cell, as due
to his restlessness, it was simple to
establish that he was alive because of his constant
Spiro Doukakis is a general practitioner who was at the time working with the
13SICK National Home Doctor Service. At the time
of consulting with
Mr Pham he had been with the service for approximately 27 years and had
been a general practitioner for over 30
phone call was received by 13SICK from the ECC at 8:37am on 19 April 2019
to book a call for Mr Pham who was complaining of nausea
Dr Doukakis received the booking and attended that day at approximately
his affidavit
Dr Doukakis
described that, according to his notes and his recollection, Mr Pham was
lying down in his cell, he looked more or less
passed out and looked quite pale.
He looked underweight and unkempt. He was very drowsy and difficult to rouse.
Dr Doukakis described
that when he tried to speak to Mr Pham his response
was soft and almost incomprehensible. Complaints of abdominal pain and vomiting
came from Mr Pham as well as police reporting those complaints of
Mr Pham to Dr Doukakis.
Doukakis examined Mr Pham and became concerned due to his appearance that
he may have septicaemia and delirium. His advice to
the OICCC was to refer him
straight to the ED via ambulance. I concur with the opinion of Dr Sarre that Dr
Doukakis’ assessment
in the circumstances was appropriate, as he
recognised that Mr Pham was quite unwell and arranged for the transfer to
occur. That was the most appropriate course of action at that point
Durbidge called an ambulance
11:38am, and paramedics Heidi Bradtke and Brenton Fennell arrived at 11:46am.
The paramedics were told that Mr Pham had been
witnessed vomiting multiple
times that day. The paramedics were able to rouse Mr Pham. Dr Doukakis
was still present and observed
Mr Pham sitting up talking with the
paramedics.
Mr Pham’s observations were in the normal range. He reported nausea
and abdominal pain. He was offered an antiemetic medication,
and he refused it.
While en route to hospital, Mr Pham told paramedics ‘I am withdrawing
from drugs because I haven’t
used for over 24 hours. This is how I am
withdrawing’.
approximately 12:06pm Mr Pham was transported to LMH, and his care was
transferred from ambulance staff to hospital staff at
Evelyn Timpani was on duty in the ED as a resident medical officer (RMO), having
completed her internship at the end of January
2019. Dr Timpani first examined
Mr Pham at approximately 3:15pm. She described in her
that when she first
saw Mr Pham he was sleeping but was easily rousable. On questioning he
said he had abdominal cramps, nausea,
vomiting and diarrhoea which the doctor
understood had been present for one to two days. Dr Timpani had noted when
checking his
records shortly prior to consulting with him, that he had presented
to the ED the day before with an altered conscious state but
discharged. He indicated that he was a regular user of heroin and amphetamine
but had recently stopped them as he had
been in custody for a few days. On
questioning he claimed that his current symptoms were quite similar to his
previous opioid withdrawals.
Dr Timpani stated that Mr Pham did not have
any significant past medical history that he told her, or that was obvious from
medical records available to her.
examination Mr Pham’s observations were all within normal limits. Dr
Timpani indicated that Mr Pham showed signs of opioid
withdrawal including
lacrimation and piloerection of the skin (goose bumps) and he was also yawning.
His chest was clear, his abdomen
was generally tender, but was not rigid, and
there was no pain on coughing or moving around in the bed. These findings
to Dr Timpani that he did not have an acute surgical
tests were ordered including electrolyte levels, a blood picture including white
cell count, and C-reactive protein (both indicating
an active infective or
inflammatory process if they are elevated). Both these levels were normal.
Timpani read the letter from the referring locum, but with normal observations
and normal blood tests did not feel there was any
sign of possible septicaemia,
and did not feel there were any grounds to admit Mr Pham. She expressed
that if Mr Pham had been unable
to tolerate food and water he would have
had to remain in the hospital, however he was able to tolerate both food and
provided him with a drink and a sandwich) and did not have any
further vomiting or diarrhoea during his stay in ED.
his time in the ED, Mr Pham was administered paracetamol and ibuprofen for
pain relief, ondansetron for nausea and Buscopan
for abdominal pains.
Timpani discussed the case with the ED consultant on duty who also agreed that
Mr Pham’s symptoms were in keeping with opioid
withdrawal. Dr
Timpani then contacted the registrar from the Drug and Alcohol Service to
discuss his ongoing management.
to discharge back into police custody Mr Pham was alert, orientated and
cooperative. He was lying down but when asked to sit
up, he cooperated.
White detailed in his report that opioid withdrawal has typical symptoms of
nausea, vomiting, irritability, depressed mood,
insomnia, pain, diarrhoea,
stomach cramps, fever and
Professor White noted
that on 19 April 2019 Mr Pham was found unsettled, restless and writhing in
pain, and he opined that these
are likely symptoms of opioid withdrawal
following his cessation of heroin use. Professor White stated that his pain
been due to stomach cramps that are characteristic of opioid
withdrawal. This is consistent with the diagnosis at the hospital.
to Dr Sarre, the assessment and treatment provided by Dr Timpani appeared
reasonable. Her final diagnosis of opiate withdrawal
seemed correct in Dr
Sarre’s opinion.
Sarre expressed that, in retrospect, it would have been wise to admit
Mr Pham to hospital to better manage his developing withdrawal
symptoms in
the event he became progressively more dehydrated and physiologically
compromised at the police cells. He noted there
were no trained nursing staff
at ECC, though he did express that returning him to the cells in the
circumstances was not an inappropriate
decision. Put at its highest, this was
perhaps a missed opportunity to have provided better supervision of Mr
Pham’s drug
withdrawal, which was fairly severe, regardless of the
impending duodenal perforation. According to Dr Sarre, perforation had not
occurred at this time.
in mind Dr Sarre’s qualification of that comment as being made in
retrospect, and combined with the assessment of Dr
Joyner that having had two
separate medical assessments at the LMH and on both of those occasions there
were no signs of any other
clinical condition other than the effects of drug
withdrawal, and that the medical assessment, treatment and advice all seemed
reasonable,
I find that the decision to discharge Mr Pham back to the ECC
following this ED presentation was reasonable. Of note, Dr Sarre opined
Timpani’s instructions to Mr Pham's custodians were clear.
Sarah Price took over guard duties for Mr Pham from Probationary Constable
Black and Constable Stepcich (who had acted as
escorts for the ambulance to the
hospital) at the LMH from 3:20
Constable Price said that
Dr Timpani approached her at 5:17pm and advised that she considered Mr Pham
was fit for police custody
and signed a form to that
In the discharge note
on the form, Dr Timpani recommended paracetamol and ibuprofen as needed,
Buscopan for abdominal cramps, metoclopramide
for nausea, and loperamide for
diarrhoea. Dr Timpani wrote a prescription for SAPOL to obtain these
required medications and emphasised
that the police officers should ensure Mr
Pham maintained good oral intake and to return if he was unable to tolerate oral
Constable Price advised Dr Timpani that some of the medications
prescribed could not be sourced until the pharmacy opened the following
and Dr Timpani said that it would be acceptable to obtain them at that time. A
supply of metoclopramide had been provided
by the hospital. Dr Timpani was
unable to provide supplies of any of the other medications, as they are
over-the-counter medications
not kept by the hospital.
observe that, although Dr Timpani prescribed ibuprofen, it was not administered
at any time in the police cells. I simply mention
that because, as I have
detailed above, chronic use of ibuprofen can cause a duodenal ulcer. However, it
would require more than
a few tablets to induce a duodenal
Price stated that Mr Pham was easily roused and walked independently to the
police vehicle.
She observed
that he appeared to be tired and was yawning constantly. His skin appeared
yellow. Mr Pham said he was tired and
wanted to sleep during the drive.
5:48pm Mr Pham was returned to the ECC.
OICCC at the time was Senior Constable Christopher Masters. He was presented
with the ‘fit for custody’ form signed
by Dr Timpani who recorded a
diagnosis of ‘acute opioid withdrawal’.
Constable Masters stated that the form instructed that the ongoing medical care
included ensuring oral intake, including sips
of water frequently if vomiting,
to avoid dehydration. He stated that the doctor also prescribed medications to
be taken on an ‘as
needed’ basis, namely paracetamol 1gm up to four
doses per day maximum for pain as needed, ibuprofen 400mg up to three times
day for pain as need, Buscopan 10-20mg up to three to four times a day as needed
for abdominal cramps and metoclopramide 10mg up
to three times a day as needed
for nausea. Senior Constable Masters stated that the doctor directed that all
medications were to
be given on an as needed basis and if not available they are
not urgent, but useful for symptomatic relief. The hospital had supplied
metoclopramide 10mg tablets and a script to be filled for further anti-nausea
medication.
5:50pm Senior Constable Masters updated Mr Pham’s care plan and
recorded that the other prescriptions were to be filled when
the pharmacy opened
on 20 April 2019. Mr Pham was assessed as still being a ‘high need
detainee’. He was again placed
in Cell E2 and quarterly checks were
were recorded at 6:07pm, 6:22pm, 6:30pm, 6:43pm,6:58pm, 7:27pm, 7:40pm, 8:07pm
and 8:21pm. On all of those occasions Mr Pham
noted to be was asleep, but
regularly breathing.
then moved back to hourly checks. At 9:26pm and 10:22pm he was noted to be
sleeping but breathing
11pm Senior Constable Masters finished his shift as OICCC. The incoming night
shift OICCC was Sergeant James. Sergeant James was
aware that Mr Pham had
been in custody since Thursday 18 April 2019. He knew he was a high need
detainee and in an observation cell.
He was aware that Mr Pham had been to
hospital on his arrest and since that time had been examined by a locum doctor
and returned
to hospital. Sergeant James also knew that Mr Pham had
medication for dispensing on a ‘needs’
basis and that was
because Mr Pham was in ‘withdrawals’.
in charge for this shift was Acting Brevet Sergeant Shone. He had had previous
had been in custody.
He stated that on previous occasions in custody Mr Pham had also been to
hospital for withdrawal and similar
during the night shift period captured Mr Pham drinking on four occasions
and using the toilet three times. He appeared to vomit
on three occasions.
custody record indicates that Mr Pham’s checks were conducted on ten
occasions. CCTV records that only two of those occasions
were checks where a
staff member was physically present at Mr Pham’s
20 April 2019
Constable Stepcich attended the cells, and they
were permitted to interview
Mr Pham in relation to the drug trafficking
The interview lasted
for less than two minutes as Mr Pham declined to comment on the
allegations. He yawned and his eyes were closed
for the majority of the
A second interview
was then conducted in relation to a different matter. Probationary Constable
Black recalls Mr Pham’s cell
having a ‘very strong pungent
smell’ and that he saw black faeces splattered on the rear of the toilet
The officers were in the
cell speaking to Mr Pham for approximately six minutes.
completing the interviews, Probationary Constable Black and Constable Stepcich
then attended at a pharmacy to fill the prescriptions
for Mr Pham,
returning the medication to the
At 9:51 am Mr Pham
was given two Gastro-Soothe tablets at the charge
At 10:50am Mr Pham
was asked if he wanted to take more Gastro-Soothe, but he
He was then given
another dose at 11:55am.
Constable Keir recalled that sometime during this shift, he observed
Mr Pham leaning over his bed and vomiting on the floor
of his cell. Senior
Constable Keir stated this was in the middle of the day, either late morning or
early afternoon. He observed
Mr Pham use a cup of water in an attempt to
wash the vomit down the drain of the
prisoner who was in Cell E1 and provided an affidavit for the purposes of the
inquest, stated that at some time during the afternoon
of 20 April 2019, he
heard the person in E2 vomiting and say, ‘Help, I need help’ in a
panicked way.
It is unclear
whether that was the same instance of vomiting described by Senior Constable
Keir. CCTV captured Mr Pham vomit four
times during this shift.
this day shift period (7am to 3:30pm) the custody record indicated that a check
was conducted on Mr Pham on 16 occasions. Staff
physically attended the
cell seven times. CCTV during this day shift period captured Mr Pham
drinking on five occasions and using
the toilet four times. He was not seen to
eat any food.
3pm Constable Masters started his next shift as OICCC.
was checked (via The Bridge windows or the CCTV monitor) by Senior Constable
Sims at 4:09pm, 4:58pm, 5:57pm and 6:53pm.
Constable Richard Elksinits gave Mr Pham dinner at about 7pm when he was
lying on the bed. He asked Mr Pham if he wanted food
and Mr Pham did
not respond. He asked Mr Pham if he wanted the food left and Mr Pham
said yes, and a pie and sausage roll were left
was given 10mg of metoclopramide and 10mg of Gastro-Soothe at 7:48
was checked again at 8:43pm, 9:31pm and 10:20pm. At each of these checks he was
recorded to be asleep but breathing
footage indicates Mr Pham was clearly experiencing pain during this shift, as he
can be seen holding his stomach area, grimacing
in pain, and experiencing
several instances of diarrhoea and vomiting (including some that appear to be
self-induced). Dr Joyner
has opined that the symptoms of abdominal
cramping pains, vomiting and diarrhoea are well recognised as being typical of
withdrawal,
and it is not possible to say whether any particular pains suffered
by Mr Pham were due to drug withdrawal or an acute duodenal
Whilst it should have
been obvious to anyone monitoring Mr Pham during this shift that he was
experiencing pain, his symptoms were
consistent with the diagnosis at the
hospital the previous day of opioid withdrawal, and Mr Pham had at this time
been assessed by
three doctors in the past two days. Dr Sarre expressed in his
report that in the absence of any formal medical or first aid experience,
understandable that those observing Mr Pham assumed he was undergoing narcotic
withdrawal, as they would not necessarily recognise
the risks of progressive
dehydration and electrolyte disturbance leading to collapse and cardiac arrest,
or to recognise a perforated
custody records indicate that Mr Pham was checked 11 times during this
shift. Three of those checks were checks where a staff
member presented at
Mr Pham’s cell – once for observation, once to deliver
medication, and once to deliver a meal.
Probationary
Constable Weepers stated she spoke to Mr Pham over the intercom system near
the end of her shift (which was ending at
She said that
Mr Pham asked to speak to someone about his charges and she told him that
would occur on Tuesday when his matter was
shift from 11pm on 20 April 2019
Darren James came on shift again as the OICCC at 11pm on 20 April 2019. Other
officers on duty were Acting Brevet Sergeant
Graham Shone as second in charge,
Senior Constable Russell Carter, and Constable Ben Riddle.
records indicate that for the night shift period (11pm-7:30am) the ECC
fluctuated between having 14-16 detainees, with three
high need detainees
(including Mr Pham) for the duration of this shift.
James stated that at the start of his shift at about 11pm, Mr Pham was
howling and guarding his
He said that while the
howling stopped over time, Mr Pham remained guarding his stomach and was
using the toilet a lot. He said
that his condition appeared to be getting
worse. Sergeant James stated that:
‘...at no time did he
knock on the, on the glass and say, “I need my medication”, or, or
use the intercom and say
“can I have my meds
‘...had he done it I would’ve, I would’ve given it to
James stated that during this shift Mr Pham was up and down using the
toilet quite a lot overnight, as he had
He said that his
understanding was that part of the withdrawal symptoms was to have ‘black
and hard’ stools.
Brevet Sergeant Shone said that he recalls being informed, at shift handover,
that Mr Pham had been moaning and groaning for
Acting Brevet Sergeant
Shone then conducted a walkthrough inspection with Inspector Kevin Brown at
He said that he
observed Mr Pham rolling around on his bed quite a lot and moaning and
groaning a little.
Sando attended for the purposes of the cells audit at approximately 1:10am on
Sunday, 21 April 2019. Sergeant Sando said
that his practice is not to wake up
detainees who are sleeping, as his visits are always at night, but that he does
check for signs
of breathing and/or moving. He said that this may require entry
into the cell and may actually require waking the detainee. Sergeant
checked Cell E2 at 1:20am and saw that it was Mr Pham whom he had also seen
on 20 April 2019 during his routine checks. Mr
Pham was lying on his bed
and was breathing. He stated he had no concerns about his welfare at this time.
Sergeant Sando then sat
in The Bridge and had a coffee with cell staff. During
this time he saw Mr Pham get up to use the toilet in the cell before
from this night shift indicates that staff physically attended the cell four
times for observation (albeit brief observation,
in the order of seconds) prior
to Mr Pham being observed by Sergeant James to fall backwards at about
Musolino, the detainee in Cell E1 which adjoined Mr Pham’s, was in
that cell during this shift, along with a Mr Herbert.
Mr Musolino provided an
affidavit in which he stated he recalls the person in the cell next to him
saying at some point, ‘I’m
having a heart attack, I need help, I
need help, I need help’ and gasping for
Mr Musolino does not know
what time he heard this. At no time did Mr Musolino contact cell staff to
report what he allegedly heard,
nor did he attempt to gain assistance for
Mr Pham after allegedly hearing this.
Herbert stated that during this shift he heard sounds coming from the cell next
door which sounded like vomiting. He heard someone
sound like they were gasping
for air. He then heard someone say, ‘he had fallen over’. Mr
Herbert stated he discussed
with Mr Musolino what was happening, and Mr Musolino
stated, ‘the bloke next door said he is having a heart
Mr Herbert said
he went back to sleep and when he woke up there were two ambulance officers and
two police officers standing by
Mr Pham’s cell. Mr Herbert does not
mention in his affidavit hearing Mr Pham call out ‘help’ or
that he is having
a heart attack at any time. Sergeant James’ evidence
was that Mr Pham did not mention chest pains, which, in his mind, would
have necessitated him contacting an ambulance
immediately.
I am satisfied
that, if Mr Pham did call out that he was having a heart attack at some
point, that was not heard by Sergeant James.
Sergeant James conveyed in his
evidence that he appreciated the urgency of ambulance attendance in cases of
reported chest pain.
None of the other officers in the cell present that night
report hearing Mr Pham complain of chest pain or having a heart attack,
does Mr Herbert.
footage captures the events leading up to Mr Pham’s collapse. The
footage depicts that in the hours leading up to his
collapse, Mr Pham was
very unsettled. He was observed to move to the toilet frequently (at 2:31am,
3:53am, 4:09am, 4:12am and 4:15am).
4:19am Mr Pham sat on the edge of the bed before standing up. He walked to
the sink and grabbed his cup. He was unsteady on his
feet and then leant his
head on the wall in front of him. He then put his arm up and stumbled backward.
He fell backwards and appeared
to hit his back on the corner of the bed and put
his arms out to stop himself from falling further. He then sat upright on the
and leant his back against the bed. He did not appear to lose
consciousness. About 17 seconds later, Sergeant James opened the
door of the
cell. Acting Brevet Sergeant Shone appeared shortly after, placing gloves on as
he approached. Sergeant James appeared
to talk to Mr Pham for several
seconds before Mr Pham helped himself up and back onto the bed. He then
lay down facing away from
Officers James and Shone. The cell door was closed,
and the officers left the area. Sergeant James’ evidence was that during
this conversation Mr Pham reported to him that he felt
Sergeant James’
evidence was that this fall:
‘... did concern me because I
legitimately thought that he'd fallen and hit his head, that was my biggest
worry. When I went
and had a look there was no blood on the floor, there was no
blood on the back of his head and he just said he felt dizzy. So, I'm
when he fell he didn't fall on his head.’
James’ evidence was that, after seeing Mr Pham fall at this time, he
had a discussion with Acting Brevet Sergeant Shone
where they agreed
Mr Pham needed to return to hospital. Sergeant James was concerned that
Mr Pham was more than likely in withdrawal
from heroin. Acting Brevet
Sergeant Shone was also concerned that Mr Pham was withdrawing.
4:21am Mr Pham can be seen on the cell bed, facing towards the cell wall
with the blanket pulled up between his legs. His breathing
appears rapid, and
he appears uncomfortable.
4:23am Mr Pham can be seen getting up from the bed and moving to the
toilet. He initially steadied himself while on the toilet
with a hand on the
adjacent wall and by holding the sides of the bowl. At approximately 4:25am
Mr Pham fell forward, off of the
toilet, landing on the floor.
Mr Pham then rocked back and forward for about ten seconds. He then pulled
up his pants, lifted himself
onto his hands and knees and crawled onto the bed.
He struggled, but climbed back on to the bed, partially at first and then all
the way. He lay back down.
James observed this second fall. He stated, ‘when he fell off the toilet
it wasn't that far to fall and I didn't really
have any concerns when he fell
off the toilet the second - or the second
4:27am Mr Pham is on the bed facing the cell wall. He is clutching the
blanket, moving around appearing to try and get comfortable.
His eyes and mouth
are open with his legs half curled, tucked up towards his torso. His breathing
appears to remain rapid and shallow.
4:31am Mr Pham appears noticeably uncomfortable, constantly shifting
positions on the bed from left to right and onto his back.
He continually
clutches the blanket and at times places his hands on his head. His breathing
remains rapid and shallow.
4:37am Mr Pham lies on his back with his arms across his chest, hands
meeting in the middle. His hands and fingers are curled/contorted.
faces towards the ceiling. He does not blink. He appears to be swallowing
heavily. His legs are curled up.
4:38am Sergeant James calls for an ambulance for
He reported the
following information to the call taker during this call:
prisoner who is in withdrawals from heroin;
He has fallen
over twice, is dizzy, doubling over in pain, moaning, ‘that kind of
He is conscious,
His breathing is
completely normal;
He is completely
He is grey in
He is under
observation.
4:40am Mr Pham remains on his back with his left leg outstretched. His
right leg is drawn up and begins to shake for about a minute
4:41am paramedics Lauren Grigg and Georgie Mittiga were tasked to attend at the
Northern Cells for a priority 2
at 4:41am, Mr Pham commences a series of swallowing actions. His breathing
appears to become even more laboured.
4:50am Mr Pham appears to swallow twice.
records Sergeant James going into the sally port area to greet and brief the
SAAS paramedics at 4:52am.
4:56am paramedics and Sergeant James are seen to enter the ECC charge area with
a barouche.
paramedics then return to the sally port area, before returning to the ECC
charge area at 4:58am.
5am four police and two paramedics enter Mr Pham’s cell. Constable
Riddle opened the door and spoke to Mr Pham, who did
James said that when the paramedics arrived at the cell he was in The Bridge,
and he saw that Mr Pham was lying on his back
on the bed and that he was
entry to the cell, Ms Mittiga approached Mr Pham, held his right hand and looked
at his face, getting no apparent response.
She checked Mr Pham’s pulse
and advised Ms Grigg that she could not find a pulse and that
Mr Pham’s pupils were fixed.
commenced CPR at approximately 5:01am. A shockable rhythm was detected, and a
shock was delivered. Mr Pham was moved
to an open area and Ms Mittiga and
Ms Grigg called for backup.
officers took over compressions while an endotracheal tube and intravenous line
were inserted by the paramedics.
5:06am Intensive Care Paramedic Simon Walter was dispatched to attend.
Mr Walter stated in an affidavit provided to the Court
that paramedics
Mittiga and Grigg had instigated care within the SA Ambulance Clinical Practice
Guidelines for Cardiac Arrest.
He then assumed the clinical lead in Mr Pham’s resuscitation. He
stated that at that time Mr Pham was showing no signs of
life, had no
respiratory effort and no signs of circulation. An ECG showed some signs of
organised activity with no corresponding
cardiac output or pulse.
5:30am, after approximately 26 minutes of CPR, there was a return of spontaneous
circulation.
Mr Pham had a
respiratory rate of three breaths per minute, oxygen saturation of 63%, no
measurable blood pressure and a heart rate
of 160 beats per minute. He was kept
on intermittent positive pressure ventilation because he had no respiratory
was taken to the LMH.
The events between the first fall at
4:19am and CPR commencing at 5:01am
James’ evidence was that the decision to call an ambulance was made
shortly after Mr Pham’s first observed fall
at 4:19am. He and Acting
Brevet Sergeant Shone both agreed an ambulance should be called. Despite that,
the call to SAAS was not
made until 4:39am, and the paramedics did not present
to Mr Pham’s cell until 5am when it was immediately apparent that
Pham required CPR. This raises the question of what occurred during
that 41 minute timeframe.
is not clear what was occurring between 4:19am and 4:38am. Sergeant
James’ evidence was that at approximately 4:30am he
Police Station to arrange an escort to the hospital. This was consistent with
the evidence of Sergeant Sando.
As for what else Sergeant James was doing in
the time period between 4:19am and 4:38am other than arranging for the escort,
is no evidence. Sergeant James was unable to recall his actions or
movements during this time
He posited that there
could have been other people who asked his opinion about a matter, there could
have been something else that
he needed to do, though he agreed with the
proposition that if there had been some other major incident that had diverted
his attention
from calling an ambulance within this time period, he would have
mentioned that in the statement he provided to police in the hours
that followed
Mr Pham’s demise and transport to
James was questioned in Court about why he called to arrange a police escort
before calling for an ambulance. His evidence
was that he was of the
understanding that the GOCM required police escorts to be used when a SAPOL
detainee with medical issues is
being moved elsewhere. He was also mindful
that, because Mr Pham was being held in custody on serious drug charges,
sufficient police
officers would be required to effectively guard him once
transferred to the hospital. He considered that there were 12 other
in the cells, including two pending newly arrested detainees.
Sergeant James stated in his affidavit that he did not want to put
cells’ staff in the ambulance with Mr Pham because if he did that, he
would exceed the prisoner to cell guard ratio
for the remaining prisoners. The
Standard Operating Procedure: Custody Management dictated that the cell guard
ratio of 7:1 should
not be exceeded. He stated that he was also alert to the
fact that cell guards do not have the operational equipment that a patrol
officer carries when out in public.
were two documents that offered direction to Sergeant James about what should
occur when a detainee needed to be transferred
to hospital: the GOCM, and the
ECC Standing Order.
the issue of detainees requiring medical attention, the ECC Standing Order
‘If the Officer in Charge of the cells has a prisoner
that requires urgent medical treatment (life threatening etc.) then they
call for an ambulance as per normal protocols for transport to the Lyell McEwin
In addition:
‘If a prisoner is presented or is in custody and requires treatment for
other non-emergency medical issues (e.g. drug withdrawal,
cuts and abrasions and
headaches, prisoner care plans) the locum service can be utilised.’
relation to his interpretation of this document and his obligations in the
situation, Sergeant James’ evidence was:
“life-threatening”. At the time I did not believe that his injuries
were life-threatening. If he had
suffered a heart attack or something
measurable or observable, or obvious that it was life-threatening, then yes, it
would have definitely
guided how I did it. But at the time all I was aware,
that he was potentially drug withdrawal, he was dizzy and had stomach cramps.
The training that I had, the first-aid certificate that I had didn't allude to
those symptoms being life-threatening, but I do now.’
GOCM at the relevant time stated that the OIC cells or cell guard must ensure a
person in custody, including a person detained
Public Intoxication
, is treated as a medical emergency and an ambulance is called
immediately
when that person has been rated as a high need detainee and
requires medical assessment.
Assisting cross-examined Sergeant James about this portion of the GOCM. It was
suggested to Sergeant James that this portion
of the GOCM required him to call
an ambulance immediately upon making the decision with Acting Brevet Sergeant
Shone that that should
occur, as Mr Pham classified as a high need
Sergeant James conceded that this portion of the orders was potentially
applicable, and that he did not call an ambulance
‘immediately’,
of some relevance that Sergeant James was aware that Mr Pham had recently
been medically assessed on at least two occasions,
diagnosed with drug
withdrawal and been assessed as being ‘fit for custody’. He
believed (on what Dr Sarre opined as
being a reasonable basis) that
Mr Pham’s symptoms were a continuation of his already medically
diagnosed drug withdrawal.
The Commissioner of Police submitted that it was
reasonable for Sergeant James to consider that this portion of the GOCM was not
applicable in the circumstances.
my view, the wording of this particular portion of the GOCM is quite clear when
read in isolation. It requires two preconditions
to be satisfied. That is;
that a detainee is rated as high need, and that they require a medical
assessment. Both of those preconditions
were satisfied here.
accept that, when read in the context of the GOCM as a whole, there does appear
to be some potential for confusion, given the mention
of an escort being
required for transfers on the page preceding this instruction, yet no explicit
instruction about whether an escort
should be disregarded in the case of a high
need detainee requiring medical assessment. Of course, ambulance attendance at
does not of itself necessitate the attendance of an escort - an escort
would only be required if and when a patient is to be transported
from the ECC.
Accordingly, it is appropriate that in the case of a high need detainee that
requires medical assessment, the ambulance
should be contacted first to avoid
any delays in medical attention being provided to the detainee.
find that SAAS should have been contacted earlier than 4:38am; SAAS should have
been contacted shortly after 4:19am when Sergeant
James and Acting Brevet
Sergeant Shone agreed that Mr Pham required medical attention. I accept
the lack of immediacy on Sergeant
James’ part was influenced by the
knowledge that Mr Pham had received medical attention on multiple prior
occasions, and that
he viewed this to be a continuation of the medical complaint
for which he had previously received that medical attention. Yet this
instruction of GOCM does not distinguish between medical assessment for a new
condition or medical assessment for a continuing condition,
nor does it look
beyond the immediate issue of arranging for ambulance attendance (for example,
to arrangements for transport to
4:38am Sergeant James completed a medical examination of detainee entry on
Mr Pham’s custody record. The GOCM dictated that
on each occasion a
detainee in custody is to be medically or psychiatrically examined by a health
care practitioner, a medical examination
of detainee form must be completed by
the OICCC. Sergeant James recorded on the report that ‘this detainee has
already been
to hospital twice and appears to now be in drug withdrawal’.
It also recorded that:
‘Police have seen this detainee is
unable to stand and has fallen over twice. He appears to have stomach cramps
and is doubled
over when laying down and guarding his stomach area. He has been
constantly on the toilet and his stools are black. He has been
taking fluids
occasionally; Last medication given was on the 20
of April at 1948
hours. This patient WILL be in custody until Tuesday and may not last that long
without further medical treatment
that only a hospital can give, as opposed to a
Police custodial facility.’
I note that the GOCM dictated that report should be provided to the senior
escorting member when a detainee is conveyed to a medical
facility for
treatment, clearly contemplating both that an escort will be arranged, and that
the medical examination of detainee
form will be ready for the escort when it is
time to depart the cells.
James made the call to SAAS at 4:39am. He called what he referred to as the
‘non-urgent’ line. His rationale
for contacting this number (rather
than 000) was as follows:
‘Based on what I could see and what
I knew, I spoke to him in the cell and he told me that he felt dizzy. I knew
that he had
stomach cramps and he did not - he looked off color. So there was
no indication to me at that point in time that it was a life and
emergency. I knew that 000 is for emergencies only, so I rang the medical -
ambulance attendance line so that I wouldn't tie
up the 000 number. It, as I
said, did not appear to me to be urgent at that time, based on what I knew. If
I had the ability to
have 20/20 vision hindsight about this whole incident and
how serious it was, then, yes, I would have rang 000 at the beginning of
shift. But it did not warrant ringing 000 for a person that felt
do observe that between 4:19am after Sergeant James and Acting Brevet Sergeant
Shone closed the door, to 5am when paramedics enter
- a period of some 41
minutes - no person entered the cell to conduct a physical check on Mr Pham.
The officers relied on CCTV observations
and their observations from The Bridge
to monitor Mr Pham’s
No person was tasked
to remain with Mr Pham after his first fall to provide closer monitoring
while awaiting the arrival of the
also observe that the GOCM was somewhat unclear as to whether it was a
requirement that Sergeant James arranged for an officer to
be physically present
awaiting ambulance arrival. Although it stated, ‘The O/C cells must also
ensure a member is physically
present with the detainee where possible while
waiting for the ambulance and where practicable, the incident is monitored by
it is unclear whether this related to all detainees for whom an
ambulance is called, or only semiconscious or unconscious persons
(noting the
bold text preceding this which stated, ‘Where possible never leave a
semiconscious or unconscious person alone
and always place them in the recover
position’). There is potentially some ambiguity around the term
‘physically present’,
which that may be interpreted to mean
physically observing, but not from the inside of the cell, given that appeared
to be how the
term ‘physical check’ was interpreted.
decision to monitor via The Bridge and CCTV was not adequate in the situation.
However, I accept that that the ECC staff at the
time did not appreciate the
gravity of Mr Pham’s condition and the level of urgency required.
This decision was made in the
context of a clear lack of appreciation of how
critically unwell Mr Pham was, due to a lack of medical expertise. On that
Sergeant James gave the following evidence:
medical training I have received is for my first aid certificate. I had no idea
of the relevance of Mr Pham’s
black excrement in his cell, and I was
unaware that his internal organs were already in the process of shutting down.
All I could
see after Mr Pham’s two falls on the morning of Sunday 21
April 2019 was that he was conscious and breathing.’
accept that, viewing Mr Pham from The Bridge and/or the CCTV monitor, it
likely appeared to officers that he was breathing for the
duration of this
period of time between the first fall and the arrival of the ambulance.
the failure to have an officer physically present in the cell with Mr Pham
immediately following the decision that an ambulance
should be called, and until
the ambulance arrived, was a lost opportunity for Mr Pham’s
deterioration to have been recognised
sooner. Closer monitoring of Mr Pham
after the first fall, or even the second, may have led to a recognition of the
urgency of the
situation, potentially resulting in earlier medical intervention.
I do observe that the ambulance call taker did specifically query
if Sergeant
James was ‘with him now’ and Sergeant James responded ‘yeah,
we’ve got him under observations’
and advised that his breathing was
completely normal. Had Sergeant James advised that the observations were taking
place from outside
of Mr Pham’s cell, that is from The Bridge and/or
CCTV as they were, the call taker may have advised Sergeant James of the
importance of the physical presence of an officer.
absence of recognised urgency significantly delayed the commencement of CPR. As
demonstrated by the timeline I have detailed
above, paramedics were on-site for
approximately eight minutes before entering Mr Pham’s cell. Critical
time was lost while
the SAAS crew remained in the sally port and donned PPE.
The apparent failure to prioritise immediate access to Mr Pham to provide
urgent intervention reflected the underestimation of the urgency on the part of
the ECC staff.
Footage of Mr Pham between 4:19am and 5:01am
footage of Mr Pham in Cell E2 during this critical 41 minute time period
was of assistance in ascertaining how his condition deteriorated
during this
time. The footage was sent to Professor Anne-Maree Kelly for an assessment on
the progression of his situation during
Kelly expressed that it can be very difficult to tell from video footage
(especially when it is taken from a distance) exactly
when all respiratory
effort ceases. Often breathing does not stop abruptly but becomes increasingly
shallow and/or slow (and potentially
ineffective) before ceasing. Professor
Kelly also pointed out that it should be noted that she was able to pause and
video footage. This possibility was not available to the ECC staff
viewing the footage in real time. I accept that and bear that
Kelly expressed her view that Mr Pham, more likely than not, had a
significant period of hypotension preceding his cardiac
arrest and that the
cardiac arrest was due to compromise in heart function, due to low blood flow to
the heart muscle, hypoxia and
potentially electrolyte abnormalities. Her
rationale of this conclusion was that when Mr Pham stood, he became
unsteady and fell
backwards. Mr Pham also fell while trying to stand up after
using the toilet. After the fall, he was unable to stand and had to
to bed. This is consistent with low blood pressure.
Kelly expressed her opinion that all respiratory effort ceased shortly after the
paramedics had entered the cell. This
is the point at which mouth movements
suggestive of attempts to breathe ceased. However, Professor Kelly explained
that there is
a difference between effective breathing, ineffective breathing
and agonal breathing. Agonal breathing is when a person takes short,
breaths that are not normal. These breaths are shallow and often irregular.
Agonal breathing is common among cardiac arrest
patients. It can be observed in
breathing can last
seconds to many minutes.
Professor Kelly’s opinion, Mr Pham’s breathing became
increasingly ineffective over the time of the video footage.
In her opinion he
was clearly breathing, albeit shallowly, until about 4:55am. For about the next
two minutes there are probably
some very small breaths which she would expect to
be ineffective. Her rationale is that she cannot see Mr Pham’s chest
at all. In her opinion, thereafter, which is from about 4:57am,
breathing is agonal and ineffective.
accept that, viewing from The Bridge and the CCTV monitors, officers observing
Mr Pham would not have been in a position to make
a proper assessment of
the effectiveness of any breathing. That is why the absence of a staff member,
either continuously present
in Mr Pham’s cell or conducting regular
physical checks while awaiting the ambulance, may have contributed to the
recognise his deterioration. Whilst an officer might not have
identified the clinical significance of a change in his breathing,
physical presence could have increased the likelihood of noticing signs of
decline. The failure to recognise Mr Pham’s
deterioration during
this critical 41 minute period clearly contributed to the delay in Mr Pham
receiving timely medical attention.
Admission to LMH on 21 April
was admitted to the LMH at 6am on 21 April 2019.
the time of his arrival in the ED he was found posture in keeping with hypoxic
brain injury. His pupils were dilated but not fixed.
On admission to the ICU
an ECG, troponin, blood and liver and kidney function tests were performed. At
that time, Mr Pham’s
blood results were in keeping with ischaemic
hepatitis and kidney impairment, findings consistent with a patient who suffered
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest.
CT or MRI was performed on Mr Pham’s brain, but the results were
inconclusive.
At the time there
was concern that Mr Pham would not recover from the cerebral compromise
during the cardiac arrest episode, but
the medical opinion was to treat all
other causes of Mr Pham’s condition first to see whether he would
CT scan of the abdomen showed free gas within the peritoneal cavity which
suggested a gastrointestinal
perforation.
surgical plan was to perform a laparotomy, which is an incision over the
abdominal wall, to gain access to the peritoneal cavity,
allowing for
identification of the site of perforation and subsequent repair.
was taken to surgery at 9:09 am on 22 April 2019. The surgeon, Dr Rebecca
Thomas, found a 0.5cm by 0.5cm perforated ulcer
at the junction between
Mr Pham’s stomach and
The surgical team
reported that Mr Pham’s liver, spleen and bowel were displaying
significant changes consistent with oxygen
deprivation. These findings were
attributed to Mr Pham’s out-of-hospital cardiac
surgery Mr Pham’s surgical incision was not closed. This allowed for
further inspection of the organs after noradrenaline,
a vasoconstrictor used
during surgery, had been ceased. A review surgery was planned for 24 to 48
hours later. Mr Pham was prescribed
pantoprazole.
24 April 2019 Mr Pham underwent a brain MRI. The scan was reported as
compatible with severe oxygen deprivation of the brain and
the injury was
considered not compatible with life. Dr Sarre opined that the management of
Mr Pham at the LMH following his cardiac
arrest was appropriate but that
‘... the damage had already been done by a prolonged episode of cardiac
I accept that to
be the case.
consultation with Mr Pham’s family, his care was transitioned to
and on 25 April
2019 Mr Pham was extubated.
family members that they believed Mr Pham had
died. She checked and found
no signs of life.
Was Mr Pham’s death preventable?
to the question of preventability is the issue of when the perforation in fact
occurred. Dr Sarre has opined that it is
likely that Mr Pham had an
undiagnosed duodenal ulcer at the time of his arrest. The perforation may have
been provoked by his narcotic
withdrawal as he was unable to tolerate oral
intake and was physically stressed and dehydrated. Dr Sarre was of the opinion
the perforation likely occurred during the evening of 20 April 2019 on a
background of an emaciated, dehydrated individual undergoing
withdrawal episode. Dr Joyner stated that it is impossible to be certain about
the timing of this perforation, noting
that it is not possible to say whether
any symptoms suffered by Mr Pham were due to opioid withdrawal or to an acute
duodenal ulcer.
On the balance of the evidence, I am unable to find precisely
when the perforation occurred, other than it was sometime after discharge
the LHM on 19 April 2019 and before his collapse at 4:19am on 21 April
I accept the evidence of both Drs Sarre and Joyner that the discharges from LMH
on both 18 and 19 April 2019 were appropriate
in the circumstances, and that
Mr Pham was showing no signs of duodenum perforation at that time, Dr Sarre
concluded that if Mr Pham
had been admitted to hospital on 19 or 20 April
2019, Mr Pham’s collapse and cardiac arrest may have been prevented.
that, he was not critical of the hospital assessment and discharge of
Mr Pham on those occasions, as I have mentioned above.
to whether Mr Pham’s death was still preventable as at the time of
his collapse in the cell on 21 April 2019, that question
is more complex. Dr
Joyner expressed that he could not identify a specific time prior to that
collapse episode that would have required
earlier transfer back to hospital.
Nonetheless, Dr Sarre also opined that if Mr Pham had been in hospital,
resuscitation would have
been better provided with the presence of trained staff
and full facilities. Implicit in that is that the resuscitation of Mr Pham
may have been more successful had he arrived at the hospital earlier. While an
earlier arrival of the ambulance may have resulted
in an earlier arrival at
hospital, and potentially a more successful resuscitation, it would be
speculative to assert that this would
have absolutely occurred. Too many
variables are involved to draw any firm conclusions about how events might have
unfolded had
the ambulance been contacted and arrived sooner after
Mr Pham’s first collapse in the cells.
note that Dr Sarre and Dr Jessen (Director of ICU at
both opined that the
resuscitation effort of the attending SAAS members was entirely appropriate, and
am satisfied that at the time Mr Pham presented to LMH on 21 April 2019,
his death was not preventable. His organs had sustained
irreversible damage
following a prolonged episode of cardiac arrest.
was in lawful custody from the time of his arrest.
assessment of Mr Pham at the LMH on 18 April 2019 and the decision to
release him into police custody was appropriate at that
was correctly identified as a high need detainee.
19 April 2019, locum Dr Spiro Doukakis took appropriate action by arranging for
Mr Pham to be transferred back to the LMH via ambulance
for assessment.
assessment of Mr Pham at the LMH on 19 April 2019 and the decision to
release him into police custody was appropriate at that
experienced perforation of a duodenal ulcer sometime after his return to custody
on 19 April 2019 and before his collapse
on 21 April 2019.
exact timing of the perforation is unknown.
the time of his first collapse at approximately 4:19am on 21 April 2019,
Mr Pham was critically unwell and required urgent ambulance
attendance.
was no specific time prior to that episode that required earlier transfer to
hospital (given he had already attended the hospital
twice in the previous
James and Acting Brevet Sergeant Shone decided shortly after witnessing
Mr Pham’s collapse at 4:19am on 21 April 2019
that Mr Pham
required medical attention.
to their lack of medical expertise, they did not appreciate the gravity of the
Mr Pham was a high need detainee requiring medical attention, an ambulance
should have been contacted immediately, in compliance
with the GOCM.
James contacted an ambulance approximately 20 minutes after discussing with
Acting Brevet Sergeant Shone that an ambulance
should be called.
did not amount to ‘immediate’ contact within the definition of the
of physical interactions with Mr Pham for the duration of his time in
custody, and in particular for the 41 minutes between his
first collapse at
4:19am on 21 April 2019 and the arrival of paramedics into the cell, may have
contributed to the lack of recognition
of his deterioration.
ambulance attendance may have led to a more favourable outcome for
actions of the paramedics who attended were entirely appropriate.
at the time of his arrival at LMH on 21 April 2019, Mr Pham’s death
was no longer preventable.
Recommendations
section 25(2)
Coroners Act 2003
I am empowered to make recommendations
that in the opinion of the Court might prevent, or reduce the likelihood of, a
of events similar to the events which were the subject of the
Court received into evidence an affidavit from Assistant Commissioner Simon
Watkins detailing some relevant changes that have
occurred within SAPOL since
the time of Mr Pham’s
on 11 August 2021, a new definition of ‘physical check’ was added to
the GOCM. A ‘physical check’
of a detainee is the inspection of a
detainee in person by an employee to check on the welfare of a detainee and
involves the employee
communicating personally with a detainee who is awake or
checking for signs of breathing and movement where a detainee is asleep.
physical check requires that the employee conducting the check will be able to
open the cell door, and personally interact and
respond to the needs of the
detainee. Observation of a detainee on closed circuit television (CCTV) or from
an office/intercom does
not constitute a physical check. I am satisfied that
this change negates the need for me to make any further recommendation about
a detainee should be physically checked in accordance with the GOCM.
26 March 2020, Wellbeing SA
formally agreed to supply qualified nurses to work in each of the four SAPOL
metropolitan custodial facilities to assist in appropriate
screening and
management of detainees. Since April 2020, Pop-Up Health Services are
contracted to supply nursing services to each
of the four metropolitan custodial
facilities to assist in the appropriate screening and management of detainees.
Pop-Up Health
are contracted to work at the City Watch House and Elizabeth
custodial facilities 24 hours per day, seven days per week. Nurses
Adelaide and Christies Beach custodial facilities work afternoon shift and night
shift seven days per week. In addition,
a day shift nurse will be on duty at
Port Adelaide and Christies Beach custodial facilities every Monday due to the
volume of detainees
these sites experience over a weekend. Pop-Up Health have
access to the SA Virtual Care service provided by SA Health within metropolitan
custodial facilities. The service provides an individualised assessment service
via video link for urgent patients on-scene with
SAAS staff, regional clinicians
(including Pop-Up Health) or aged care staff. This is a significant improvement
and again I need
not make any further recommendations in order to address the
predicament that arose by police officers not being sufficiently medically
trained to recognise the critical deterioration of Mr Pham.
relation to the failure to have someone present in the cell with Mr Pham
while awaiting arrival of the ambulance, it is my view
that the GOCM should
clearly specify this as a requirement any time a decision is made to contact an
ambulance for a detainee. Clearly,
in the case of Mr Pham, arrangements
were not made to have someone physically present in the cell, which suggested
that, regardless
of the intention behind the wording of the GOCM in place at
that time, physical presence of an officer in the cell was not understood
staff to be a requirement in this situation. Given the potential for any
patient to rapidly deteriorate awaiting the arrival
of an ambulance, and the
need for such a deterioration to be immediately identified, communicated to
ambulance and acted upon via
means of first aid if required, it should be
essential for a detainee awaiting arrival of an ambulance to have an officer in
cell making constant observations for the entirety of the time between the
decision to contact the ambulance and the arrival of the
Accordingly, I
that SAPOL update the GOCM to specify the
requirement that an officer be physically present in the cell with the detainee
times while awaiting an ambulance.
relation to the ambulance having not been called ‘immediately’, and
in light of the evidence of Sergeant James about
why he arranged for the escort
before calling for an ambulance, and in light of the comments I have made about
the potential for
confusion given the mention of escorts for medical transfers
on the page preceding the instruction in relation to high need detainees
require medical assistance, I
that the GOCM be reviewed to make
it abundantly clear that for a high need detainee requiring medical assessment,
an ambulance must
be called immediately, and nothing need occur before that
(including medical transfer paperwork or the arranging of an escort).
these recommendations to the Commissioner of Police.
conclusion, I extend my condolences to the family of Mr Pham for their
Keywords: Death in Custody; Police Cells; Natural Causes
Exhibits C82,
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
Exhibit C28
SAPOL’s integrated
operational police records
A medical emergency
characterised by sudden, severe abdominal pain that often requires immediate
surgical intervention
Exhibit C23
Exhibit C70, CCTV during
the night shift period captured Mr Pham using the toilet a minimum of 13
Exhibit C56
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page 56
Transcript, page 56
Transcript, page 55
Transcript, page 55
Transcript, pages
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (720 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (422 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter