URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCA/2025/112.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CLEANAWAY OPERATIONS PTY LTD v HANEL [2025] SASCA 112 (2 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Court of Appeal: Criminal)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
CLEANAWAY OPERATIONS PTY LTD v HANEL
[2025] SASCA 112
Judgment of the Court of Appeal
(The Honourable President Livesey, the Honourable Justice Lovell
and the Honourable Justice Bleby)
2 October 2025
INDUSTRIAL LAW - WORK HEALTH AND SAFETY - DUTIES AND LIABILITIES
INDUSTRIAL LAW - WORK HEALTH AND SAFETY - GENERALLY - APPEAL AND
MAGISTRATES - APPEAL AND REVIEW - SOUTH AUSTRALIA - APPEAL TO SUPREME
Appeal against conviction.
On 18 August 2014, a vacuum truck owned by the appellant, Cleanaway
Operations Pty Ltd (
), collided with vehicles at the
intersection at the bottom of the South Eastern Freeway, where Cross Road, Glen
Osmond Road and Portrush
Road meet at Myrtle Bank. The collision caused the
death of two people and serious injuries to the driver Mr Hicks, an employee
Cleanaway, and another person.
The respondent, an inspector employed by Comcare, commenced a prosecution
against Cleanaway, raising eight counts. Each concerned
breaches of duties
Work Health and Safety Act
which it was said were owed by Cleanaway to its employees or to others.
Following a trial before a magistrate, Cleanaway was convicted on all eight
On appeal to a single judge, six of the eight convictions were set aside.
Cleanaway appealed against the two remaining convictions, being counts 1 and
2. Count 1 concerned breaches of duties owed by Cleanaway
to its employees.
Count 2 concerned breaches of duties owed by Cleanaway to persons other than its
Cleanaway broadly contended that:
Magistrates Court of South Australia did not have jurisdiction to hear and
determine the charges laid against Cleanaway by the
respondent because the
respondent lacked lawful authority to issue the Complaint commencing the
criminal proceeding.
appeal judge erred in upholding the convictions on charges 1 and 2 on a basis
not alleged in the charge sheet or opened.
prosecution failed to prove the allegation that Mr Hicks’ competence to
drive all vehicles he might be called upon to drive
had not been properly
determined.
finding of guilt on charges 1 and 2 was based on an alleged reasonably
practicable measure that was not alleged in the charges
and on a basis that was
not, in any event, open on the evidence.
appeal judge erred in failing to apply the test of causation imposed by s 32(c)
of the WHS Act.
Held (the Court), granting leave to appeal and
dismissing the appeal:
one views the case as depending on the combination of the function identified in
s 152(h) of the WHS Act supported by the
powers conferred by ss 153 and
230(1)(b), and in addition or alternatively on the function in s 230 supported
by the power in s 153,
in each case read together with the power of delegation
in s 154, the respondent was authorised in writing to commence these
proceedings.
has not been demonstrated that the appeal judge erred in his approach to the
pleaded counts or his appreciation of the course of
the trial, including that
Cleanaway was not relevantly prejudiced in any material way by the convictions
based on the risks posed
by traveling in a vacuum truck with manual transmission
down the South Eastern Freeway. [180]
was open to the appeal judge to find that Mr Hicks’ competence had not
been properly determined. [195]-[199]
measures pleaded against Cleanaway were not taken and, on the evidence, it was
reasonably practicable for them to have been taken.
[246]-[247]
the circumstances of this case, it has not been shown that the appeal judge
erred in fact or law concerning the “exposure
element” in s 32(c) of
the WHS Act. [307]-[310]
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Australian Securities Commission Act 1989
Corporations Law
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
Independent
Commissioner Against Corruption Act 2012
Judiciary Act 1903
Magistrates Court Act 1991
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2004
Safety, Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1988
Supreme Court Act 1935
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Health and Safety Act 2011
Work Health and Safety Bill 2011
(Cth), referred to.
Bunnings Forest Products Pty Ltd v Shepherd
[1998] WASCA 119
Philp & Co Ltd v Murphy
(1993) 29 NSWLR 723
Carmichael v
Commonwealth of Australia
[2022] VSC 364
Director of Public Prosecutions
v Vibro-Pile (Aust) Pty Ltd
[2016] VSCA 55
(2016) 49 VR 676
Grasso Consulting Engineers
Pty Ltd v SafeWork NSW
[2021] NSWCCA 288
HD Projects Pty Ltd v SafeWork
[2022] NSWCCA 212
John Holland Pty Ltd v Wallis
[2022] WASC 358
Kirk v Industrial Relations Commission of New South Wales
(2010) 239 CLR
Mercantile Mutual Life Insurance Co v Australian Securities
[1993] FCA 77
(1993) 40 FCR 409
Wallis v John Holland Pty Ltd
Work Health Authority v Outback Ballooning Pty Ltd
[2019] HCA 2
, discussed.
AB (a pseudonym) v Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission
[2024] HCA 10
(2024) 278 CLR 300
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal & Actors Equity of
Australia Ltd v Saatchi & Saatchi Compton (Vic) Pty Ltd
(1985) 10 FCR 1
Australian Securities Commission v Marlborough Gold Mines Ltd
[1993] HCA 15
A v Maughan
[2016] WASCA 128
(2016) 50 WAR 263
Baiada Poultry Pty Ltd v
[2015] VSCA 344
(2015) 257 IR 204
Baiada Poultry Pty Ltd v The Queen
[2012] HCA 14
(2012) 246 CLR 92
Bell v The Queen
[2020] SASCFC 116
(2020) 286 A Crim R 501
Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1953] HCA 70
(1953) 89 CLR 653
Berwin v Donohoe
[1915] HCA 79
(1915) 21 CLR 1
Biochem Pharma Inc v Commissioner of Patents
Bradshaw v McEwans Pty Ltd
(1951) 217 ALR 1
[1950] HCA 36
(1950) 82 CLR 161
Bulga Underground Operations Pty Ltd v Nash
(2016) 93 NSWLR 338;
CAL No 14 Pty Ltd v Motor Accidents Insurance Board
(2009) 239 CLR 390
Certain Lloyd’s Underwriters v Cross
[2012] HCA 56
[2001] HCA 67
(2001) 209 CLR 1
Cleanaway Operations Pty Ltd v
Philip Hanel (Commonwealth: Comcare)
[2022] SASC 52
Commonwealth:
Comcare v Cleanaway Operations Pty Ltd (ACN 010 745 383) Transpacific Industries
[2021] SAMC 54;
Contract Control Services Pty Ltd v Brown
[2012] VSC 369
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v Haddad
Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) v Frewstal Pty Ltd
[2015] VSCA 266
Director of Public Prosecutions v Phillips
(2018) VSC 447
Director, Transport Safety v Metro Trains Melbourne Pty Ltd
(2019) 58 VR
Dovuro Pty Ltd v Wilkins
[2003] HCA 51
(2003) 215 CLR 317
DPP Reference No 2
[2001] VSCA 114
Edelsten v Health Insurance Commission
(1990) 27 FCR 56
Ex parte Smith
(1918) 35 WN (NSW) 54
Stuart; Re Mead; Ex parte Anderson; Re Mead
(1930) 47 WN (NSW) 60
Constructions Pty Ltd v Say-Dee Pty Ltd
(2007) 230 CLR 89
Midways Springwood Pty Ltd
[1980] FCA 142
(1980) 33 ALR 605
Hamilton Island Enterprises
Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1982] 1 NSWLR 113
Zuda Pty Ltd
[2022] HCA 21
(2022) 275 CLR 24
Hird v Chief Executive Officer of
Australian Sports Anti-Doping Authority
[2015] FCAFC 7
(2015) 227 FCR 95
Hongkong Bank
of Australia v Australian Securities Commission
[1992] FCA 376
(1992) 40 FCR 402
[1890] UKLawRpKQB 105
(1890) 25 QBD 391
John Holland Pty Ltd v Hanel
[2016] SASC
John Holland Pty Ltd v Industrial Court of NSW
[2010] NSWCA 338
Johnson v Miller
[1937] HCA 77
(1937) 59 CLR 467
Libke v The Queen
[2007] HCA 30
Luxton v Vines
[1952] HCA 19
(1952) 85 CLR 352
Majar v Northern Land
(1991) 37 FCR 117
Maxwell v The Queen
(1996) 184 CLR 501;
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
New South Wales v Cahill (No 2)
(2011) 210 IR 112
Oatley v The Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions
[2021] SASCA 108
O’Sullivan v Truth and Sportsman
[1955] SASR 85
Parks Holdings Pty Ltd v Chief Executive Officer of
[2004] FCA 820
(2004) 81 ALD 365
Police (SA) v Mahon
(2022) 141 SASR 374
Raymond v Attorney-General
[1982] QB 839
[2017] HCA 2
(2017) 91 ALJR
Reedy v O’Sullivan
[1953] SASR 114
Re Warden Calder; Ex
[2007] WASCA 161
(2007) 34 WAR 289
Royall v The Queen
[1991] HCA 27
(1991) 172 CLR 378
[1911] UKLawRpKQB 49
[1911] 1 KB 964
[1977] VicRp 3
[1977] VR 22
[2001] NSWCCA 174
(2001) 122 A Crim R 70
SafeWork NSW v Grasso Consulting
HCATrans 132
Simpson Design Associates Pty Ltd v Industrial Court of New
South Wales
[2011] NSWCA 316
(2013) 213 A Crim R 340
S Kidman & Co Ltd v Lowndes
[2016] NTCA 5
(2016) 314 FLR 358
State of New South Wales (NSW Police) v Inspector
[2005] NSWIR Comm 303
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
Taylor v Attorney-General
[2019] HCA 30
Thiess Pty Limited v Industrial Court of New South Wales
[2010] NSWCA 252
78 NSWLR 94
Unity Pty Ltd v SafeWork NSW
[2018] NSWCCA 266
Wyong Shire Council
[2005] HCA 62
(2005) 223 CLR 422
Woolcock Street Investments Pty
Ltd v CDG Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 16
(2004) 216 CLR 515
Wyong Shire Council v Shirt
[1980] HCA 12
(1980) 146 CLR 40
X7 v Australian Crime Commission
[2013] HCA 29
(2013) 248 CLR 92
considered.
CLEANAWAY OPERATIONS PTY LTD v HANEL
[2025] SASCA
Court of Appeal – Criminal: Livesey P, Lovell and Bleby JJA
Introduction
18 August 2014, a vacuum truck owned by the appellant, Cleanaway Operations Pty
), collided with vehicles at the intersection at the bottom
of the South Eastern Freeway, where Cross Road, Glen Osmond Road and Portrush
Road meet at Myrtle Bank. The collision caused the death of two people and
serious injuries to the driver Mr Hicks, an employee
of Cleanaway, and another
Philip Hanel (the
) is an inspector employed by Comcare, a
statutory corporation with responsibility, amongst other matters, for securing
and safety of workers and workplaces, including by securing
compliance with the
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
) “through effective and appropriate compliance and enforcement
respondent commenced a prosecution against Cleanaway by a Complaint and Summons
dated 15 August 2016, raising eight counts.
Each concerned breaches of duties
under the WHS Act which it was said were owed by Cleanaway to its employees or
a trial before a magistrate, Cleanaway was convicted on all eight
On appeal to a single
judge, six of the eight convictions were set
has appealed against the two remaining convictions, being counts 1 and 2.
Count 1 concerned breaches of duties owed by
Cleanaway to its employees. Count
2 concerned breaches of duties owed by Cleanaway to persons other than its
the parties proceeded as if the matter was governed by the terms of
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
(SA), the common form criminal appeal
provision, the appeal to the appeal judge was properly governed by
Magistrates Court Act 1991
(1) A party to a criminal action may, subject to this section and
in accordance with the rules of the appellate court, appeal
any judgment given in the action (including
a judgment dismissing a charge of a summary or minor indictable
offence but not any judgment
arising from committal proceedings).
(2) The appeal lies—
(ab) in the case of a
sentence passed on the conviction of a person of an offence that is, or offences
that include, a major indictable
offence—to the Court of Appeal
with the permission of the Court of Appeal; or
(b) in any other case—to the Supreme Court constituted of a
single Judge (but the Judge may, if he or she thinks fit, refer
the appeal for
hearing and determination by the Court of Appeal).
are recognised differences between these appeal
provisions.
As it turns out,
little turns on these differences in the circumstances of this case.
is also an issue about permission to
The appeal is governed by
s 50(4)(a)(ii)
Supreme Court Act 1935
(SA) and permission to
pursue a second appeal is required:
(1) Subject to this section—
(a) an appeal lies to the Court of Appeal against a judgment of the court
constituted of a single judge;
(4) An appeal lies only with the permission of the court—
(a) from a judgment of any
of the following classes:
(ii) a judgment given by a single judge on appeal from a judgment of the
Magistrates Court; ...
the respondent conceded permission to appeal ground 4, permission should be
granted for all grounds. For the following reasons,
the appeal should be
reasons are set out as follows:
The relevant statutory provisions – duty
outlining Cleanaway’s grounds of appeal, it is appropriate to address
certain of the relevant statutory provisions.
14 of the WHS Act provides that an employer’s duty cannot be transferred
to another person. Section 15 declares that
a person may owe more than one duty
by virtue of being in more than one class of duty holder. Section 16 provides
that two or more
persons can concurrently owe the same duty. Section 17 of
the WHS Act provides:
17 Management of risks
A duty imposed on a person to ensure health and safety requires the
(a) to eliminate risks to health and safety, so far as is reasonably
practicable; and
(b) if it is not reasonably practicable to eliminate risks to health and
safety, minimise those risks so far as is reasonably practicable.
18 of the WHS Act reflects what is sometimes described as the
calculus”, addressing what is reasonably practicable
at the time of any alleged
reasonably practicable
in ensuring health and
In this Act,
practicable
, in relation to a duty to ensure health and safety, means
that which is, or was at a particular time, reasonably able to be done
relation to ensuring health and safety, taking into account and weighing up all
relevant matters including:
(a) the likelihood of the hazard or the risk concerned occurring; and
(b) the degree of harm that might result from the hazard or the risk; and
(c) what the person concerned knows, or ought reasonably to know, about:
(i) the hazard or the risk; and
(ii) ways of eliminating or minimising the risk; and
(d) the availability and suitability of ways to eliminate or minimise the risk;
(e) after assessing the extent of the risk and the available ways of eliminating
or minimising the risk, the cost associated with
available ways of eliminating
or minimising the risk, including whether the cost is grossly disproportionate
to the risk.
19(1) of the WHS Act imposes the duty, described in the heading to that section
as the “Primary duty of care”,
on a person conducting a business or
undertaking. In this case, that person is Cleanaway. Section 19(1) of the WHS
Act provides:
19 Primary duty of care
(1) A person conducting a business or undertaking must ensure, so far as is
reasonably practicable, the health and safety of:
(a) workers engaged, or caused to be engaged by the person; and
(b) workers whose activities in carrying out work are influenced or directed by
the person;
while the workers are at work in the business or undertaking.
Separately,
s 19(2) of the WHS Act concerns the health and safety of others. Section 19(2)
(2) A person conducting a business or undertaking must ensure, so far as is
reasonably practicable, that the health and safety of
other persons is not put
at risk from work carried out as part of the conduct of the business or
undertaking.
is in the context of ss 19(1) and 19(2) that s 19(3) of the WHS Act addresses
what must be provided by a person such as Cleanaway
“so far as is
reasonably practicable”:
(3) Without limiting subsections (1) and (2), a person conducting a business or
undertaking must ensure, so far as is reasonably
practicable—
(a) the provision and maintenance of a work environment without risks to health
and safety; and
(b) the provision and maintenance of safe plant and structures; and
(c) the provision and maintenance of safe systems of work; and
(d) the safe use, handling and storage of plant, structures and substances;
(e) the provision of adequate facilities for the welfare at work of workers in
carrying out work for the business or undertaking,
including ensuring access to
those facilities; and
(f) the provision of any information, training, instruction or supervision that
is necessary to protect all persons from risks to
their health and safety
arising from work carried out as part of the conduct of the business or
undertaking; and
(g) that the health of workers and the conditions at the workplace are monitored
for the purpose of preventing illness or injury
of workers arising from the
conduct of the business or undertaking.
this case, having regard to the duties set out in s 19, the consequences of
breach are addressed by ss 32 and 33 of the WHS Act:
to comply with health and safety duty—Category 2
A person commits a Category 2 offence if:
(a) the person has a health and safety duty;
(b) the person fails to comply with that duty; and
(c) the failure exposes an individual to a risk of death or serious injury
or illness.
(a) In the case of an offence committed by an individual (other than as a
person conducting a business or undertaking or as an officer
of a person
conducting a business or undertaking)—$150 000.
(b) In the case of an offence committed by an individual as a person conducting
a business or undertaking or as an officer of a
person conducting a business or
undertaking—$300 000.
(c) In the case of an offence committed by a body corporate—$1 500
33 Failure to comply with health and safety duty—Category 3
A person commits a Category 3 offence if:
(a) the person has a health and safety duty; and
(b) the person fails to comply with that duty.
(a) In the case of an offence committed by an individual (other than as a
person conducting a business or undertaking or as an officer
of a person
conducting a business or undertaking)—$50 000.
(b) In the case of an offence committed by an individual as a person conducting
a business or undertaking or as an officer of a
person conducting a business or
undertaking—$100 000.
(c) In the case of an offence committed by a body corporate—$500
maximum penalty in s 32 is three times the maximum penalty in s 33. One key
difference is the presence of s 32(c) and the requirement
that the relevant
failure has exposed “an individual to a risk of death or serious injury or
case does not concern s 31 of the WHS Act, which creates the offence of what is,
in effect, a reckless breach of s
The Complaint and Summons
the Complaint and Summons dated 15 August 2016, issued by the respondent against
Cleanaway, charge 1 provided:
On or about 18 August 2014 at Adelaide in the State of South Australia
pursuant to section 32, section 19(1) and
section 19(3)(c)
Work Health
and Safety Act 2011
(Cth) (“the Act”) Cleanaway Operations Pty
Ltd (ACN 010 745 383) (also known as Transpacific Industries Pty. Ltd.) failed
to comply with a health and safety duty in that as a person conducting a
business or undertaking Transpacific Industries Pty. Ltd.
failed to ensure, so
far as was reasonably practicable, the health and safety of workers engaged or
caused to be engaged by Transpacific
Industries Pty. Ltd. while the workers were
at work in that business of undertaking.
Particulars
defendant, Cleanaway Operations Pty Ltd (ACN 010 745 383) (also known as
Transpacific Industries Pty. Ltd.) (“TPI”),
was at all material
times a body corporate.
was at all material times a non-Commonwealth licensee and as such subject to the
acts and omissions of the defendant took place at workplaces including the TPI
depot at Wingfield, South Australia, the South
Eastern Freeway in Adelaide and
various other places.
undertaking of the defendant included the collection and transport of septic
waste pursuant to a contract with Adelaide Hills
was a hazard in the workplace, namely the use of large vacuum trucks travelling
on public roads generally and the South Eastern
Freeway in particular.
defendant had a health and safety duty pursuant to
s. 19(1)(a)
s. 19(3)(c)
of the Act to provide and maintain a safe system of work to ensure, so far as
was reasonably practicable, the health and safety of
workers engaged, or caused
to be engaged by the defendant.
defendant failed to comply with that duty in that it exposed a worker, namely
Darren Hicks, to risk of death or serious injury.
health and safety risk to which Darren Hicks was exposed was serious injury or
death as a result of:
between vacuum trucks and other road users.
were reasonably practicable measures available to the defendant to control the
risks arising from the defendant’s undertaking.
The defendant: Failed to
maintain a system of work whereby Darren Hicks was prevented from driving vacuum
trucks without supervision
until his competence to drive all vehicles he may be
required to drive in the course of his work was properly determined by the
including the assessment by the defendant of Darren Hicks’
competence in the task of driving a truck with a manual gearbox.
2 was in identical terms, as were the particulars, save that the relevant
failure by Cleanaway was pleaded in the chapeau
as one which was concerned with
a duty owed to “other persons” as follows:
... failed to
comply with a health and safety duty in that as a person conducting a business
or undertaking [Cleanaway] failed to
ensure, so far as was reasonably
practicable, the health and safety of other persons was not put at risk from
work carried out as
part of the conduct of the business or undertaking.
six other charges were in similar terms and need not be addressed. As
mentioned, the convictions on those were set aside by
Factual background
evidence was that Mr Hicks had been recruited by Cleanaway on 11 August
2014 to work as a vacuum truck operator in the liquid
division at Wingfield.
Hicks had obtained his unrestricted HR class heavy vehicle driver’s
licence on 3 July 2014, following the completion of
15 hours of heavy vehicle
training with G&L Heavy Vehicle Driving Centre. That training was conducted
in a truck which had a
transmission.
the first two days Mr Hicks worked for Cleanaway, 12 and 13 August 2014, he
drove Truck 349 which was a vacuum truck with an automatic
transmission. On
both days, an experienced driver sat with Mr Hicks in the passenger seat as part
of a “buddy system”,
but did not give Mr Hicks any guidance on his
14 August 2014, Mr Hicks drove Truck 349 alone. The Fleet Supervisor for
Cleanaway was not aware of any policy or procedure for
how long a driver was to
be part of the buddy system, nor when the decision would be made that a new
driver would drive alone.
employed Mr Gregory Skinner as a Driver Trainer/Driver
Mr Skinner said in
evidence that, usually, the buddy system took place for a period of two to four
weeks and, the less experienced
the driver, the longer the period of buddy
accompaniment.
Other Cleanaway
drivers had been accompanied by a buddy for a period of between one and four
weeks when they commenced employment
14 August 2014, Mr Hicks undertook a Heavy Vehicle General Driving Assessment
with Mr Skinner. The assessment was undertaken
using the same truck, Truck 349,
which had an automatic
transmission.
Mr Skinner had no
control over the truck the drivers were assessed in, nor was he aware of any
procedure for choosing the vehicle
used in the driver
assessment.
assessment was undertaken by reference to a form different to that which applied
for a new driver.
wrote on the form that Mr Hicks was competent in “all tasks”
although he had not assessed him in a number
of the tasks set out on the form
including “Gear lever in gear”, “Gear changing clutch
operation” and “uses
18 August 2014, Mr Hicks and a colleague, Mr Melbourne, were allocated the
“Adelaide Hills
Mr Melbourne was not
required to mentor or buddy Mr Hicks. They drove separate
Hicks was allocated Truck 105, a vacuum truck with a manual
transmission.
Cleanaway had not
assessed Mr Hicks in a vehicle with a manual transmission before he was
allocated Truck 105, and the dispatcher
responsible for allocating trucks and
drivers to particular runs was not subject to any requirement to consider the
level of training or experience when allocating a truck or
18 August, Mr Hicks’ seventh day driving a heavy vehicle on a road, and
fifth day working at Cleanaway,
Mr Hicks and Mr Melbourne drove to Woodside in their respective trucks via the
South Eastern Freeway.
the first time Mr Hicks had driven a heavy vehicle on the South Eastern
the ascent, Mr Hicks drove Truck 105 in first or second
This was the second full
day Mr Hicks had driven a heavy vehicle without direct
supervision.
Mr Hicks’ first day driving a truck with a manual synchromesh
the trucks driven by Mr Hicks and Mr Melbourne were at capacity,
Mr Melbourne proceeded to Heathfield via the South Eastern
Freeway. After
he arrived at Heathfield, the gates were closed and Mr Melbourne called Mr Hicks
and told him to turn around and
proceed to Bolivar via Portrush
the start of the descent on the South Eastern Freeway, Mr Hicks had the seven
gear vacuum truck in fifth gear. He was travelling
at between 60 and
70 kph. The truck increased in speed to no more than 80 kph. The
exhaust brake was on.
Hicks used the foot brakes to slow the truck down but was unable to slow it
sufficiently to change the truck into a lower gear.
His use of the foot brake
was ineffective to slow the vehicle, and it continued to gain speed. The truck
became uncontrollable,
and the collision
a result of the collision, two drivers of vehicles were killed and a third was
seriously injured. Mr Hicks suffered serious injuries,
and his right leg was
amputated above the knee.
the collision, Cleanaway drafted guides and procedures addressing the risks
associated with using trucks with manual gearboxes
down steep descents. These
“Transpacific
Toolbox Talk – New Heavy Vehicle Laws on the South Eastern Freeway”,
which instructed employees that
the signs on the South Eastern Freeway about the
use of low gear meant that “a gear that is low enough to limit the speed
the truck or bus without the need to use the primary brake” and about
the proper use of arrester beds and that the “use
of the right gear avoids
the need to use an arrester
draft document “Quick Reference Guide TTS Wingfield Liquid Fleet
Manual” provided that “[n]ew fleet drivers
must not drive heavy
vehicles unsupervised until they have been assessed as competent ... which must
include South Eastern Freeway
Cleanaway’s
grounds of appeal
Cleanaway’s
grounds of appeal are as follows:
Ground 1: Failure to hold the
prosecution to its case as pleaded and opened 1.
learned Chief Justice erred in upholding the convictions on charges 1 and 2 on a
basis not alleged in the charge sheet or opened.
found at [10] that the particulars to the charges alleged that the Appellant was
required to properly determine Hicks’
competence to drive
he may be called upon to drive, including a manual vehicle, and
having held at [42] that the Prosecution had not proved the allegations
particularised in the charges, the learned Chief Justice erred in failing to
uphold the appeal and dismiss charges 1 and 2. (Judgment
Ground 2: Failure of the prosecution to prove the
allegation that Hicks’ competence to drive all vehicles he might be called
upon to drive had not been properly determined.
learned Chief Justice erred in failing to hold that that the Prosecution was
required to prove in respect of both charges 1 and
2, pursuant to its
allegations at particular [9] of both charges, and did not prove, that
Hicks’ competence to drive all vehicles
that he might be called upon to
drive, including manual vehicles, had not been
properly determined
the uncontested evidence was that such competence had been determined and
certified by authorised assessors under the statutory
scheme for determining
such competence in the State of South Australia. (Judgment [16], [124])
Ground 3: Finding of guilt on charges 1 and 2 based on an
alleged reasonably practicable measure that was not alleged in the charges
on a basis that was not, in any event, open on the evidence.
3.1 The learned Chief Justice erred in finding that the Appellant was, to
satisfy its duty, required to discreetly assess Hicks’
competence in gear
selection for a descent on the South Eastern Freeway, when such an allegation
was not made in the charge sheet
for either charge 1 or 2. Further or
alternatively, it was not open on the evidence to find that it was a reasonably
practicable
measure that would have minimised the risk. (Judgment at [16])
3.2 The learned Chief Justice erred in finding that the Appellant was guilty
of charges 1 and 2 because it had failed to discreetly
assess Hicks’
competence in gear selection on descent of the South Eastern Freeway when such
act or omission was not specified
as a reasonably practicable measure the
subject of charges 1 and 2. (Judgment at [16])
3.3 The learned Chief Justice erred in holding that an onus rested on the
Appellant to prove that it was not reasonably practicable
to assess Hicks’
competence in gear selection on descent of the South Eastern Freeway. (Judgment
at [14], [16] and [123])
3.4 The learned Chief Justice’s finding that the truck’s brake
failure was exacerbated by Hicks’ failure to use
gears effectively was
against the evidence and not open to find, beyond reasonable doubt. (Judgment at
3.5 The learned Chief Justice’s finding that Hicks had attempted to
change down from 5th gear when it was too late was against
the evidence and not
open to find beyond reasonable doubt. (Judgment at [96])
3.6 Having been conceded by the prosecution and on the basis of the
evidence, it was not open to the learned Chief Justice to find
other than that
Hicks was a competent driver who had driven competently down the South Eastern
Freeway on 18 August 2014.
Ground 4: Causation
4.1 The learned Chief Justice erred in failing to apply the test of
causation imposed by
Work Health and Safety Act
most recently explained by the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal in the
decision of
. (Judgment [56]-[65])
4.2 The learned Chief Justice erred in finding that the New South Wales
provision the subject of the decision in
must be different to
Work Health and Safety Act
, when the provisions are
identical and part of a National harmonised scheme, and his Honour was bound to
follow and apply
unless finding that it was clearly wrong.
(Judgment [61])
4.3 Applying the correct test of the element of causation, as explained in
, it was not open on the evidence to find the
proved, beyond reasonable doubt.
Reasons at [64], [67])
Ground 5: Authorisation
5.1 The Magistrates Court of South Australia did not have jurisdiction to
hear and determine the charges laid against the Appellant
by the Respondent
because the Respondent lacked lawful authority to issue the Complaint commencing
the criminal proceeding AMC-16-11227.
appeal ground 5 concerned a point not taken before the magistrate or the appeal
judge, it was common ground that it was open
to be taken before this Court. It
is convenient to commence with that ground.
Appeal ground 5 – invalid
authorisation
was no dispute between the parties that the charges comprised “summary
offences” within
Crimes Act 1914
), nor that the Magistrates Court had jurisdiction over these
Commonwealth offences by the conferral of federal jurisdiction under
Judiciary Act 1903
six of the Complaint and Summons nominated the Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions (the
) as the prosecutor, and there was no dispute
between the parties that the CDPP could prosecute this case.
there was no dispute that the respondent was appointed an inspector under s 156
of the WHS Act, Cleanaway contended that he
was not properly authorised in
writing to commence this proceeding and, without that authority, the Complaint
and Summons signed
by him on 15 August 2006 was, and remains, invalid.
contended that because a valid Complaint and Summons was an essential
pre‑condition to the Magistrates Court of South
Australia having and
exercising jurisdiction to hear and determine the charges against Cleanaway,
there was no jurisdiction to hear
the matter, enter convictions or impose any
the proceedings were beyond the jurisdiction of the Magistrates Court, they
comprised a nullity with the result that the
proceedings and purported
convictions must be set aside.
was no dispute between the parties that
any person to institute a prosecution for an offence against a Commonwealth Act
unless the contrary intention appeared
in the Act or Regulation creating the
13 Institution of proceedings in respect of offences
Unless the contrary intention appears in the Act or regulation creating the
offence, any person may:
(b) institute proceedings for the summary conviction of any person in respect
of any offence against the law of the Commonwealth
punishable on summary
conviction.
was no dispute between the parties that s 230 of the WHS Act, at the least,
evinced a contrary intention, so as to restrict
the class of people at liberty
to bring proceedings for an offence against the WHS Act. Section 230 relevantly
230 Prosecutions
(1) Subject to subsection (4), proceedings for an offence against this Act
may only be brought by:
(a) the regulator; or
(b) an inspector with the written authorisation of the regulator (either
generally or in a particular case).
(2) An authorisation under subsection (1)(b) is sufficient authority to
continue proceedings in any case where a court amends the
charge, warrant or
(4) Nothing in this section affects the ability of the Director of Public
Prosecutions to bring proceedings for an offence against
Explanatory Memorandum concerning the
Work Health and Safety Bill 2011
(Cth) relevantly
230 Prosecutions
230(1) provides that proceedings for an offence against the Bill can only be
brought by the regulator or an inspector authorised
in writing (generally or in
a particular case) by the regulator.
can be seen that the effect of s 230 of the WHS Act was to permit the following
people to exercise the power to bring proceedings
for an offence against the WHS
regulator (s 230(1)(a));
inspector with the written authorisation of the regulator (s 230(1)(b));
CDPP (s 230(4)).
the WHS Act, the regulator is
statutory corporation established under
Safety, Rehabilitation
and Compensation Act 1988
). By s 74(1A) of the
SRC Act, Comcare is constituted by a Chief Executive Officer appointed by the
Governor-General.
(and s 230), ss 152(h) and 153 of the
WHS Act, Comcare had relevant functions and power concerning proceedings for an
offence against
the WHS Act. By s 154(1)(b) of the WHS Act it was also
authorised to delegate in writing functions and powers to an inspector.
Relevantly, ss 152(h), 153 and 154 of the WHS Act provided:
Functions of regulator
The regulator has the following functions:
(h) to conduct and defend proceedings under this Act before a court or
of regulator
(1) Subject to this Act, the regulator has the power to do all things necessary
or convenient to be done for or in connection with
the performance of its
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), the regulator has all the powers and
functions that an inspector has under this Act.
Delegation by regulator
(1) The regulator may, by instrument in writing, delegate a power or function
under this Act other than this power of delegation
(a) a member of the staff of the regulator who is an SES employee or an acting
SES employee; or
(b) an inspector; or
(c) a member of the staff of the regulator prescribed by regulations.
(2) A delegation under this section may be made subject to such conditions as
the regulator thinks fit.
Note: For further provisions relating to delegations and the revocation of
delegations, see the
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
circumstances where the respondent was an inspector under the WHS Act, the
question is whether he had written authorisation to
bring proceedings for an
offence against the WHS Act.
part of the case featured conflicting approaches to what is a function as
distinct from a power, as well as the source of any
relevant function or power.
Key to the case was the Instrument of Delegation dated 19 November 2015,
addressed below.
22 July 2014, Ms Jennifer Taylor was appointed the Chief Executive Officer of
Comcare for a term of five years commencing on 24
a Comcare “Instrument of Appointment – Inspector” dated 15
August 2014, issued under the WHS Act, the respondent
was appointed an inspector
pursuant to s 156 of the WHS
appointment of Mr Justin Napier as the “General Manager Regulatory
Operations at Comcare” was approved by letters
and notices of appointment
and assignment dated 14 May
and these were accepted by
Mr Napier on 21 May 2015.
an Instrument of Delegation dated 19 November 2015, Ms Taylor purported to make
a number of delegations pursuant to s 154 of the
WHS Act. These were made in
the following
to each person, meeting the criteria specified in sub-section 154(1) of the WHS
from time to time occupying
or performing the duties of a position in Comcare specified in Part 1 of each
schedule to this Instrument
to perform the functions or exercise the powers of
the WHS Act and
Work Health and Safety Regulations 2011
Regulations
) which have been specified in Part 2 of that Schedule.
instrument also provided that, in accordance with
Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth), that Act applied to the instrument and to the
provisions of the instrument “as if they were an Act and the provisions
schedules to that instrument concerned the General Manager of the Regulatory
Operations Group of Comcare. That schedule
addressed “the powers and
functions” under various sections of the WHS Act, including under s 230,
“Prosecutions”.
A similar instrument dated 24 October 2017 made a
similar delegation concerning similar powers and
foreshadowed, it is the effect of this Instrument of Delegation in the context
of the WHS Act provisions already mentioned which
is in issue.
10 August 2016, Mr Napier purported to authorise the respondent to bring
proceedings against Cleanaway for offences against the
WHS Act, which occurred
on 18 August 2014 in relation to a Cleanaway vacuum truck colliding with three
cars at the intersection of
the South Eastern Freeway, Portrush Road and Cross
Road, Adelaide, South Australia. Reference was made in this instrument to s 32
of the WHS Act and the authorisation was purportedly given under s 230(1)(b) of
the WHS Act.
targeted the instrument dated 19 November 2015, and the purported delegation to
the General Manager of the Regulatory Operations
Group of Comcare of the powers
conferred on Comcare under the specified sections of the WHS Act which, as has
been seen, relevantly
only included s 230.
support of its primary case on invalid authorisation, Cleanaway relied upon the
decision of Archer J in
John Holland Pty Ltd v Wallis
, where her Honour
held that a delegation in similar terms to this case was not effective to
authorise a prosecution.
will be seen, after judgment was reserved, the Court of Appeal of Western
Australia overruled the decision of Archer J and, in
further submissions,
Cleanaway invited this Court to disagree with and depart from that decision,
whereas the respondent invited
this Court to follow
Cleanaway’s
contentions on invalid authorisation
the case of Cleanaway, s 230(1) of the WHS Act did not confer any power on
anyone. It merely limited and restricted the class
of persons who, but for the
contrary intention it evinced, would otherwise be both empowered and authorised
to bring proceedings
for an offence against the WHS Act.
drew a distinction between having the power to bring proceedings and being
authorised to do so. It submitted that no inspector
required the power to bring
proceedings for an offence against the WHS Act. However, no inspector could
exercise that power without
first obtaining the written authorisation of the
Chief Executive Officer of Comcare to bring proceedings.
contended that Comcare’s functions were described in s 152 and its plenary
power was conferred by s 153 of the WHS
Act. Other provisions of the WHS Act
conferred other, discrete powers on Comcare. In some instances, these included
the conferral
of discrete powers on inspectors. For example:
was conferred powers to obtain information by s 155 of the WHS Act;
was conferred powers to appoint inspectors by s 156 of the WHS Act; and
and its inspectors were conferred powers of entry, as well as various powers
following entry, by ss 163, 165 and 171 of the
this context, Cleanaway contended that Comcare’s power to give an
inspector written authority to bring proceedings for an
offence against the WHS
Act was derived from its plenary power conferred by s 153(1) of the WHS
Cleanaway allowed for the possibility that there was a further plenary power
conferred by s 70 of the SRC Act, s 73B of the
SRC Act provided that the
functions and powers of Comcare under the WHS Act may not be delegated. By
contrast, the Note 2 to s 73B
of the SRC Act provided that “the delegation
of Comcare’s functions and powers under the [WHS Act] is dealt with in s
154 of that Act”.
from drawing a distinction over the source of Comcare’s plenary power,
Cleanaway addressed the writing by which the respondent
was said to have been
authorised to bring proceedings for offences under the WHS Act. As will be
seen, particular emphasis was given
to the fact the relevant instrument referred
only to s 230 and not to ss 152 or 153 of the WHS Act.
contended that none of the specified sections in the instrument dated 19
November 2015 conferred any power to give a written
authorisation to bring
proceedings. Accordingly, said Cleanaway, the instrument was not effective to
confer any power on Mr Napier
to give the respondent written authorisation to
bring proceedings against Cleanaway concerning an offence against the WHS Act.
those circumstances, because the Chief Executive had not given written
authorisation to Mr Napier, and because the Chief Executive’s
did not confer any power to give written authorisation to the respondent to
bring proceedings, there was no valid written
authorisation given to the
respondent at any time to bring proceeding against Cleanaway.
for Comcare’s power of delegation under s 154(1) of the WHS Act, Cleanaway
relied upon the following observations of Goldberg
Parks Holdings Pty
Ltd v Chief Executive Officer of
provision which requires an act to be in writing must be considered by reference
to the context in which it appears. The notion
that something be done in writing
is designed to provide a measure of formality and official identification. In
the present context
the reason for the delegation to be in writing is no doubt
to ensure that any official act carried out pursuant to the instrument
delegation which affects the rights of persons, or impinges upon commercial or
personal activities, is seen to be within power
and authorised. One can readily
appreciate the issues of proof of authority which would arise in the context
where the power to delegate
acts which impinged upon the rights of individuals
was given with no permanent recorded proof of such delegation. As Miles CJ noted
Perpetual Trustee Co (Canberra) Ltd v Lewis (as Delegate for the
Commissioner for ACT Revenue)
(1994) 119 FLR 38
123 ACTR 17
The power to issue notices like those issues pursuant to section 18(2) of the
Taxation (Administration) Act is a power “whose
exercise will be likely
adversely to affect rights of the individuals”:
Commissioners of State Bank of Victoria
[1983] HCA 47
(1982) 153 CLR 1
at 12 per Gibbs CJ.
Therefore an instrument which delegates such a power or part of it should not be
construed loosely”.
also relied on what it contended was a long line of cases where criminal
convictions had been quashed due to the absence
of the requisite authority or
approval to bring proceedings.
Alternatively,
Cleanaway contended that the terms of the instrument dated 19 November 2015 were
wholly ineffective to confer on Mr
Napier, or anyone else occupying the position
of General Manager of the Regulatory Operations Group of Comcare, the power to
the respondent to commence proceedings against it for any
contravention of the WHS Act.
the decision of the Court of Appeal of Western Australia in
Wallis v John
Cleanaway made
further written submissions. Cleanaway commenced with the propositions that the
Court of Appeal decided only that
the relevant statutory power to authorise a
prosecution under the WHS Act is found in s 153(1) and not s 230 of the WHS Act
in addition, the decision did not otherwise engage the rule obliging this
Court to follow the decision of another intermediate appellate
particular, insofar as the Court of Appeal drew any conclusion about the effect
of the particular instrument in this case,
this Court was not obliged to follow
that ruling.
Cleanaway acknowledged that
Wallis v John Holland
involved a decision of
an intermediate appellate court on a similar question arising in relation to the
same Commonwealth legislation,
on similar but not identical instruments of
purported delegation and authorisation, it was necessary to observe the
difference between
the holding of the decision and its ratio. Only the ratio,
insofar as it concerned federal or uniform legislation, bound this
Cleanaway relied on the
following explanation given by McHugh J in
Woolcock Street Investments Pty
Ltd v CDG Pty
law distinguishes between the holding of a case, the rule of the case and its
ratio decidendi. The holding of a case is
the decision of the court on the
precise point in issue — for the plaintiff or the defendant. The rule of
the case is the principle
for which the case stands — although sometimes
judges describe the rule of the case as its holding. The ratio decidendi
of the case is the general rule of law that the court propounded as its
reason for the decision.
the holding of the Court of Appeal was clear enough, namely that the prosecution
was authorised, Cleanaway submitted that
the ratio of the decision was not
clear. Cleanaway described the reasoning of the three members of the Court as
“opaque and
contradictory”.
Buss considered that s 153(1) was not the only available source of power. Buss
P construed s 230(1)(b) as having two aspects,
comprising both a restriction on
standing as well as an empowerment to authorise an inspector to bring
proceedings.
contrast, Vaughan JA held that the general power in s 153(1) was the material
source of power and,
contrary to
the ruling of Buss P, s 230 was not a source of power but merely “a
provision”.
held that it was a “matter of necessary implication” that s 230
contemplated that the regulator may authorise
an inspector to bring
proceedings.
Vaughan held that the relevant function was not to be found in s 152(h) but
emerged by necessary implication from the terms
Vaughan JA gave
particular emphasis and a wide meaning to the use of the word
“under” in the relevant instrument, and
explained that this best
achieved the purpose of the delegation, with the result that the relevant power
in s 153 could be said to
arise “under” s 230 despite not having
been mentioned in the
instrument.
third member of the Court, Solomon J, held that the function of authorising
inspectors to bring a prosecution was contained in
s 230(1) and it was not
merely a standing provision.
Cleanaway submitted that this appeared to be contrary to the view of Vaughan JA.
addition, Solomon J took the view that the relevant plenary power in s 153 was
the source of power that attached to the function
conferred by s
Though his Honour allowed
that the construction of the instrument adopted by Archer J was “open and
available”,
having regard
to the object of the instrument, the intertwined nature of the power conferred
by s 153, and the function contained
in s 230(1), the use of the word
“under” in the instrument should be given a wide
Solomon J held that
the delegation was capable of conveying an intention to delegate the function
and any necessary attaching power
to enable the authorisation of inspectors to
bring proceedings.
contended that there were compelling reasons for this Court not to follow the
decision in
Wallis v John Holland
, particularly as, on the question of
the ruling about the Commonwealth legislation, the decision was plainly
these circumstances, Cleanaway contended that the respondent was not authorised
to sign, nor to cause or permit to be filed in
the Magistrates Court, any
Complaint and Summons commencing any criminal proceeding against Cleanaway for
alleged breaches of s 32
of the WHS Act.
The respondent’s
contentions on authorisation
respondent countered that he was authorised to bring proceedings within the
meaning of s 230(1)(b) of the WHS Act by reason of
the written authorisation
given by Mr Napier on 10 August
the time of his written authorisation, Mr Napier was the General Manager of the
Regulatory Operations Group of
and authorised by the
Instrument of Delegation given by the regulator, the Chief Executive Ms Taylor,
dated 19 November 2015.
According to the respondent, that instrument did not need to name
and could be
made generally and by reference to the relevant section of the WHS Act, s
respondent contended that the essential question under this ground of appeal was
whether the Instrument of Delegation had to
expressly refer to s 153, as well as
s 230, of the WHS Act in order to be effective. That is to say, the only link
in the chain
of authorisation which appeared to be under challenge by Cleanaway
was whether the Instrument of Delegation from the Chief Executive
to Mr Napier
was effective to allow Mr Napier to authorise the respondent to bring the
proceedings.
the case of the respondent, the Instrument of Delegation expressly delegated to
Mr Napier the function of bringing proceedings
under s 230(1)(b) of the WHS Act
and, by its terms, also delegated to him the power to perform that function,
being the power to
make an effective authorisation to an inspector.
respondent highlighted that the instrument delegated and authorised
Mr Napier “to perform the functions or exercise the
powers of the WHS
Act ... which have been specified in Part 2 of that
part, s 230 “Prosecutions” was listed as both a power and
respondent acknowledged that statutes may draw a distinction between powers and
Nonetheless, the
expressions define what it is that the body can
Whilst ss 152 and 153 of
the WHS Act refer separately to “functions” and to
“powers”, they come under the
heading to Division 1 of Part 8,
“Functions of Regulator”, and the heading formed part of the
Accordingly,
the respondent contended that as s 230(1)(b) of the WHS Act conferred a function
on the regulator to authorise inspectors
to bring proceedings, the effect was
similar to the way in which the Full Court of the Federal Court had evaluated s
Corporations Law
Mercantile Mutual
. That is to say,
that s 597 conferred a function, but not the power, on the Australian
Securities Commission to authorise a person
to make a relevant
application.
addition, as the relevant function was not separately provided for, the
respondent submitted that, in consequence, it remained
a function of the
regulator as described by s 152(i) of the WHS Act.
contention was rejected by Archer J in
John Holland Pty Ltd v
The respondent
contended that Archer J was wrong to conclude that authorising another, such as
an inspector, to institute proceedings
fitted within the ordinary meaning of the
words in s 152(h) of the WHS Act and could be described as “to
conduct” proceedings.
On the approach of Archer J, the delegation had to
expressly delegate the function under s 152(h) before anyone other than the
Executive could authorise an inspector to institute a proceeding for a
contravention against the WHS Act.
respondent took issue with this approach, contending that the regulator could
delegate “a power or function” under
s 154 of the WHS Act.
respondent noted that in
John Holland Pty Ltd v Wallis
correctly identified the finding made by the Full Court of the Federal Court in
Mercantile Mutual
disagreed with what followed:
Section 597(2) sets out who may make an Examination Application.
Section 597(2) does not expressly confer on the ASC the function
of authorising
a person to make Examination Applications, nor the power to authorise. Rather,
it is simply that it can be discerned
from s 597(2) that the ASC was intended to
have this function.
respondent contended that, other than by s 230(1)(b), there was no other express
conferral of the function to commence proceedings
on the regulator, and this had
been accepted by Archer J.
respondent relied on the terms of the Instrument of Delegation and the
references made to the performance of functions, as well
as to powers and
functions, as indicating that the regulator had delegated any powers necessary
for Mr Napier to perform the functions
nominated, including that under s
230(1)(b) of the WHS Act. Accordingly, the respondent submitted that the
Instrument of Delegation
intended to, and gave, Mr Napier power to give a
written authorisation to an inspector to bring proceedings under s 230(1)(b) of
the WHS Act. This, contended the respondent, was consistent with a fair reading
of the Instrument of
Delegation.
respondent also contended that though the wording of the delegations was
different, the reasoning of the plurality in
Mercantile Mutual
the conclusion that the Instrument of Delegation effectively delegated both the
function under s 230 and the power necessary
under s 153 of the WHS Act,
even though only the former was expressly cited in the
In particular, in
Mercantile Mutual
, the two instruments of delegation referred to
“powers and functions conferred or expressed to be conferred on the [ASC]
or under the following provisions” of the
Corporations Law
without making reference to s 11(4) of the
which the Full
Court held was the relevant “power provision”. Even though the
instrument only referred to the “function
provision” of s 597 of the
Corporations Act
, this was nonetheless held to effectively delegate the
power to perform the function. That was so notwithstanding that the
provision” was not mentioned and appeared in a different
Accordingly,
the respondent drew an analogy with the Instrument of Delegation in this case,
which referred only to the “function
provision” of s 230 of the WHS
Act, but not the “power provision” of s 153 of the WHS Act.
as Archer J rejected this approach in
John Holland Pty Ltd v
the respondent
invited this Court to reject it. The respondent acknowledged that the
delegation before Archer J in
John Holland Pty Ltd v Wallis
materially the same terms as the Instrument of Delegation before this Court, and
that her Honour considered and construed the
same provisions of the WHS Act as
are raised for consideration by this Court.
Nonetheless,
the respondent contended that what was before this Court was not a pure question
of statutory construction but a requirement
to construe the effect of the
Instrument of Delegation in circumstances where this Court is not bound by the
decision of Archer J
and may reach its own view. In particular, the respondent
contended that those decisions which required that interstate courts follow
intermediate appellate decisions on Commonwealth legislation, or the Australian
common law, had no
application.
contrast, in his further written submissions on the effect of the decision of
the Court of Appeal in
Wallis v John Holland
, the respondent contended
that this Court should not depart from a decision of another intermediate
appellate court on the interpretation
of Commonwealth legislation, uniform
national legislation or the common law of Australia unless convinced that the
interpretation
is plainly wrong or there is a compelling reason not to do so.
Whilst intermediate appellate courts and trial judges are not bound
obiter dicta
of other intermediate appellate courts, they would
ordinarily be expected to give them great
the respondent acknowledged that there were differences in reasoning between the
Court of Appeal judgments in
Wallis v John Holland
, all three judges
rejected the same argument advanced by Cleanaway. No member of the Court of
Appeal considered that s 230 of the
WHS Act conferred
nor a power. Rejecting the approach of Cleanaway, the respondent contended that
the conclusion that the delegation was
effective was reached by the Court of
Appeal applying orthodox principles of statutory construction, including those
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth), which applied
to the Instrument of Delegation by force of
The determination of the
authorisation issue
Court must consider the statutory text having regard to the evident context and
purpose of the provisions under consideration.
The determination of meaning
cannot be considered without regard to the context, including the general
purpose and policy of the
provisions.
When considering
the purpose of legislation, this must be derived from the statutory text rather
than from any assumption made about
the desired operation of the relevant
provisions.
WHS Act and a long line of authorities recognise a distinction between the
functions of a statutory body and its powers. Typically,
the purposes or
activities of the body are described as its functions, whereas it is separately
conferred the powers to perform those
Mercantile Mutual
, the Full Court of the Federal Court addressed a
challenge to examination orders made under s 597 of the
Corporations Law
and held that there had been an effective delegation, relying on the general
plenary power in
Australian Securities Commission Act 1989
In so doing, the Court
followed earlier Full Court decisions. The Court held that if the phrase in the
authorisations was to be
construed as indicating (erroneously) that the only
relevant head of power was s 597(1), then nevertheless the authorisations were
supported under the statutory power conferred by
Section 597(1)
identified the relevant function to which the conferral of power in
CJ observed that the relevant instrument mistakenly viewed s 597 as the relevant
source of power, but that this was not
Lockhart J points out, it is clear from the material before the court that the
second respondent assumed that the source of
his power to authorise the third
respondents to apply to the court under s 597 was that section itself.
I consider that the instrument of authorisation reflects the ASC’s
mistaken assumption, but this conclusion is not fatal to
the valid exercise of
the power that the ASC had by reason of the combination of s 11(4) of the ASC
Act and s 597 of the
Corporations Law
Brown v West
at 203. This case is quite different from
Australian Broadcasting
Tribunal v Saatchi & Saatchi Compton (Vic) Pty Ltd
(1985) 10 FCR 1.
There must of course be limits to the general principle that an act
purporting to be done under one statutory power may be supported
under another
statutory power. ...
considered the issue from the perspective of the Australian Securities
Commission (
) and who may be authorised by the ASC to make application
to a court under s 597 of the
Corporations Law
to seek an examination
The ASC Act
draws a distinction between the functions and powers of the ASC, a distinction
well recognised in the law with respect
to the functions and powers of
administrative bodies. The distinction is between functions or purposes or
activities of an administrative
body on the one hand, and the powers conferred
upon it to perform or execute those functions, purposes and activities on the
As Northrop J and I observed in
Edelsten v Health Insurance
(1990) 27 FCR 56
“The types of statutory contexts in which the expressions
‘functions’ and ‘powers’ of such bodies appear
considerably. Sometimes the two expressions are treated interchangeably or with
blurred dividing lines; whilst some statutory
definitions of
‘functions’ provide that ‘functions include powers and
duties’: see the definition of function
Stroud’s Judicial
Dictionary of Words’ and Phrases
ed, 1986) and
Kathleen Investments (Australia) Ltd v Australian Atomic Energy Commission
[1977] HCA 55
(1977) 139 CLR 117
Leon Fink Holdings Pty Ltd v Australian Film
(1979) 141 CLR 672
at 677-678;
Committee of Direction of Fruit
Marketing v Australian Postal Commission
[1979] FCA 31
(1979) 37 FLR 457.
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Saatchi & Saatchi Compton
(Vic) Pty Ltd
(1985) 10 FCR 1
per Bowen CJ at 4 and 8.
Since the ASC has many diverse functions conferred on it from various
statutory sources, obviously there is a need for it to be invested
incidental powers, the logical repository of which is the ASC Act itself. ...
It is clear from the language of s 597(1), (2)
and (3) of the
Corporations
that the Parliament envisaged that the functions, purposes or activities
of the ASC would include the authorisation of persons, other
than an official
manager, liquidator or provisional liquidator of a corporation, to make
application to a court under s 597 in relation
to that corporation.
In my opinion these considerations lead to the conclusion that s 597 itself
confers the function upon the ASC of authorising persons
to apply to a court for
an order under s 597.
after this decision, the New South Wales Court of Appeal took a different view
regarding the same legislation in
Burns Philp & Co Ltd v
albeit agreeing that
the authorisation given by the ASC was valid.
his reasons, Mahoney JA took the view that the State law – then relevantly
s 597 of the
Corporations Law
– could not in combination with the
plenary power provision in the Commonwealth Act –
Australian Securities Commission Act 1989
(Cth) – be relied on to
confer power on a Commonwealth authority to effect the relevant
delegation:
Commonwealth and the various State Corporation Laws are drawn in terms which
assume that ASC will do, and be able to do, what
the terms of those laws assume
it to do. Thus, they assume that it will, within s 597, be able to
“authorise” a person
to make a s 597 application. It is therefore
necessary to see how the legislative scheme operates to confer that power on
Two things have been suggested: that the power granted to ASC by
Australian Securities Commission Act
(“to do whatever is
necessary for or in connection with, and reasonably incidental to, the
performance of its functions”);
and that the power granted to it by
(“the Commission has any functions and powers that are expressed to
be conferred on it by a national scheme law of another
operate in this way.
Judges of the Federal Court, in the cases to which I have referred, have
concluded that ASC has power to act under the New South Wales
Act to authorise a
person to make a s 597 application because such a power is, within
Australian Securities Commission Act
, necessary or incidental to the
performance of its functions within that paragraph. With appropriate hesitation,
I have come to a
different conclusion. What is involved is the doing of
something which a State Act purports to empower it to do or assumes it may
But the “functions” of a Commonwealth authority prima facie cannot
be conferred on it, as such, by a State; consequently,
the power to grant an
authority under s 597 of a State Act prima facie cannot be one of the
“functions” of the ASC.
I am of the opinion that the power to grant an authority under s 597 is
conferred by
Australian Securities Commission Act
Australian Securities Commission Act
, as a Commonwealth Act, confers on a
Commonwealth authority “functions and powers that are expressed to be
conferred on it
by” a State Act. Section 597(1), I think, operates to do
separate reasons, Clarke and Handley JJA explained the context in which the
issue arose:
Section 597(1) appears to be an interpretation provision which defines
“prescribed person” as including “any
other person authorised
by the Commission”. Mr Bathurst QC submitted that this assumes but does
not confer the power to authorise
others, which must be found elsewhere.
The principal issue thus became whether s 597(1) conferred or was expressed
to confer any power or function on the ASC in relation
to the grant of such
authorities. If it did there was no dispute that it had been delegated to Mr
Braham and validly exercised by
him in favour of the new trustees. Mr Bathurst
QC submitted that the source of the ASC’s power to grant an authority
s 597(1) was
Australian Securities Commission Act
(Cth) which provides: “The Commission has power to do whatever is
necessary for or in connection with, or reasonably incidental
performance of its functions.”
Section 11(7)
further provides: “The Commission has any functions and
powers that are expressed to be conferred on it by a national scheme
another jurisdiction.”
Section 11(7)
applies to functions and powers which cannot, for
constitutional reasons, be conferred by State law alone on the ASC as a Federal
corporation. As a Federal law it authorises the ASC to receive and exercise
functions and powers which are “expressed to be
conferred” on it by
State law: see
Re Cram; Ex parte NSW Colliery Proprietors' Association
[1987] HCA 28
(1987) 163 CLR 117
at 126-127. The States have passed national scheme
laws such as the
Corporations Law
(NSW) which, despite their terms, do
not of their own force confer functions and powers on the ASC but are only
expressed to do so.
Such functions and powers are picked up and vested in the
The claimants’ point is that s 597(1) is a mere definition section
which is not expressed to confer any function or power. The
issue thus became
was the source of the ASC’s function or power to grant an
authority for the purposes of s 597 or whether that function or power
expressed to be conferred by s 597(1) and actually conferred by
Honours explained why the general plenary power in
was the source of the ASC’s power the claimants would succeed in
relation to the instrument of 21 March 1991 because the powers
were not delegated by that instrument. It would then be necessary to
consider the later instruments of delegation by the ASC which
were relied upon
by the new trustees. If the matter were free of authority we would have
concluded that the power was derived by
implication from s 597(1), was
expressed to be conferred by that section, and was delegated by the instrument
of 21 March 1991.
Section 11(4)
confers on the ASC powers which are necessary for or reasonably
incidental to the performance of its functions. Such a provision
is frequently
inserted in a statute for more abundant caution but any grant of power statutory
or otherwise carries with it by implication
all incidental powers necessary for
its effective exercise.
Section 11(4)
therefore adds nothing to the express
powers and functions otherwise conferred on the ASC: see
[1904] HCA 1
(1904) 1 CLR 91
Ex parte Walsh and Johnson; In re
[1925] HCA 53
(1925) 37 CLR 36
at 120, 121 and P
hilip Morris Inc v
Adam P Brown Male Fashions Pty Ltd
(1981) 148 CLR 457
at 496; see
McCarthy & Stone (Development) Ltd v Richmond upon Thames
London Borough Council
[1992] 2 AC 48 at 68.
Clarke and Handley took a similar approach to Mahoney JA, although, as has been
seen, they would have been prepared to find
that the requisite power could be
derived by implication from s
only applies where it is possible to identify
of the Commission. It does not apply in terms to the
Commission’s
. The distinction between a function and a
power is not clear and in some contexts may be illusory but it is drawn in
several places
Nothing of significance for present purposes ought to turn on any distinction
between function and power, and in particular on whether
s 597(1) is expressed
to confer on the ASC a power to authorise others to act as prescribed persons or
only a function of doing so.
If nevertheless it is necessary to know whether s
597(1) is expressed to confer this function, and the Court should conclude that
it does then s 597(1) is the source of the function and by necessary implication
confers all powers necessary for its effective exercise.
On the other hand if s
597(1) does not confer that function
has nothing to operate on and
cannot be the source of the power. In the result we have reached the firm
conclusion that this function
or power is, by necessary implication, expressed
to be conferred by s 597(1), and is actually vested in the ASC by
challenge to the appointment of the new trustees as prescribed persons therefore
Honours then referred to
Mercantile Mutual,
explaining why they declined
to follow it:
preparing the substance of the foregoing reasons the Federal Court has given
judgment in
Mercantile Mutual Life Insurance Co Ltd v Australian
Securities Commission
[1993] FCA 77
(1993) 11 ACLC 235
and has decided to follow its
previous decision in
Hongkong Bank of Australia Ltd v Australian Securities
. We have carefully considered the reasons for judgment of the
Court but have not been persuaded that we should come to a different
conclusion,
or that we should follow the Federal Court decisions despite our own view. In
the present case our decision will have
the merit of achieving consistency of
result in that the challenges to the status of the new trustees as
“prescribed persons”
in this Court and the Federal Court will all
have failed, although for differing reasons.
course, the complicating interaction between State and Federal legislation is
not an issue in this case. This debate between
the Federal Court and the Court
of Appeal tends however to demonstrate the artificiality of drawing firm
distinctions between functions
and powers, as well as the difficulties that can
arise when identifying a source of power which may or may not be express, and
may or may not correspond with the way in which an Instrument of
Delegation has been drawn.
this case, the functions and powers of the regulator are expressly addressed in
ss 152 and 153 of the WHS Act. And, as has been
seen, s 152 of the WHS Act
prescribes a number of functions, including the function of conducting and
defending proceedings under
the WHS Act before a court or
is necessary to construe that function having regard to the statutory context.
That context is that the word “proceedings”
necessarily includes
proceedings for an offence against the WHS Act as well as proceedings for a
contravention of a civil penalty
provision. The expression “to
conduct” is necessarily broader than merely “carrying on”
those proceedings,
and it is sufficiently broad in meaning to encompass the
bringing of proceedings for an offence against the WHS
identified a relevant function of the regulator, it is necessary then to
consider s 153(1) of the WHS Act, which provides
that the regulator “has
the power to do all things necessary or convenient to be done for or in
connection with the performance
of its functions”.
this is a very broad grant of power, it is necessarily constrained by the
legislative context and, in particular, the functions
conferred by the
The phrase “for
or in connection with” is broad, encompassing powers which it may be
necessary or convenient to exercise
rather than merely those powers required
“for” the performance of the specified
Indeed, the
expression “in connection with” spans a spectrum of connections,
ranging between those which are direct
and immediate, to those which are tenuous
and remote.
Accordingly,
these provisions of the WHS Act indicate that the regulator is conferred the
powers necessary or convenient to be exercised
in connection with the
performance of the function of bringing proceedings for an offence against the
WHS Act. This conclusion appears
to accord with the views expressed by Buss P
Wallis v John
154(1) authorises the regulator to delegate a power or function. The delegation
of a statutory function or power confers
authority on another to do things which
otherwise the delegator would have to do for
No strict or narrow
view of the Instrument of Delegation should be
Its meaning and
effect in this case is clear. Each person specified in Schedule 1 is delegated
the functions and powers specified
in Schedule 2, including those
“under” s 230 of the WHS Act.
this case, the regulator relevantly purported to delegate to Mr Napier the
powers and functions “under” s 230 of the
WHS Act. Section
230(1)(b) explicitly recognises that proceedings for an offence may be brought
by an inspector with the written
authorisation of the regulator, or here its
it is not in dispute that one purpose of s 230(1) was to narrow the class of
persons who may commence prosecutions for offences
under the WHS Act, it is
doubtful whether that is the full extent of the operation of s 230(1). Insofar
as is relevant to this case,
s 230(1)(b) assumes that proceedings for an offence
can be brought by an inspector with the written authorisation of the regulator.
Here, that means an inspector with the written authorisation of the
regulator’s delegate, Mr Napier.
one looks at s 230 as a whole, including s 230(2), s 230(1)(b) does
more than identify a member of the class authorised to bring
proceedings for an
offence against the WHS Act. In a manner similar to other
legislation,
s 230(1)(b)
should also be seen as a source of the power to authorise and implement the
function of bringing proceedings for a prosecution
under the WHS Act. Here, the
power is a matter of implication having regard to the whole of the provision,
when read in context.
By implication, s 230 should therefore be seen as a
provision which incorporates both a function and a power.
regulator, through Mr Napier, therefore authorised the respondent to commence
proceedings under s 230. The instrument recognised
that the written
authorisation of the regulator, through Mr Napier, was both necessary and had
the effect of conferring on the respondent
the power to commence proceedings.
This conclusion is, to an extent, reinforced by the text of s 230(2), which
recognises that the
written authorisation given under s 230(1)(b) is a
“sufficient authority” to continue proceedings in the event of
conclusion accords with the view of Buss P in
Wallis v John
as well as the
tentative view expressed by Solomon J in that
said that, both Vaughan JA and Solomon J in
Wallis v John Holland
preferred the view that s 230 identified the relevant function and was
backed by the broad conferral of power under s
For the purposes of
determining this part of Cleanaway’s appeal, this would represent yet
another available avenue by which
the relevant function of the regulator, to
provide a written authorisation of an inspector to bring a prosecution, had been
effectively
Accordingly,
and whether one views the case as depending on the combination of the function
identified in s 152(h) supported by the
powers conferred by ss 153 and
230(1)(b), and in addition or alternatively on the function in s 230 supported
by the power in s 153,
in each case read together with the power of delegation
in s 154, the respondent was authorised in writing to commence these
proceedings.
follows that appeal ground 5 should be
Appeal ground 1: the scope
of the prosecution case
contended that this ground concerned the fundamental principle that the
prosecutor must properly articulate the basis of
a charge and, subject only to
amendment, be held to that
contended that this principle is of particular significance in work health and
safety prosecutions where the physical element
of the offence is that the
accused failed to implement a reasonably practicable measure that would have
eliminated or minimised the
specified risk. A valid charge requires the clear
specification of the measure relied on by the
prosecution.
relied upon the following statement of the principle in
Grasso Consulting
Engineers Pty Ltd v SafeWork
prosecution such as this the identification of the particulars of breach is
critical. The prosecution must provide particulars
of the acts or omissions said
to give rise to the failure to comply with a health and safety
An accused person could
only be convicted if the prosecution establishes beyond reasonable doubt that
the person failed to comply
with the duty in one of the ways particularised.
(Citations in original.)
charges 1 and 2, Cleanaway pointed to particulars 6 to 9 as identifying the
alleged risk to health and safety, together with
the failure to implement
specified reasonably practical measures that would have eliminated or minimised
submitted that the prosecutor was obliged to prove all of the measures specified
in particular 9, together with proof that
the measure was reasonably practicable
(having regard to s 18 of the WHS Act) and that, if implemented, the measure
would have eliminated
or minimised the risk particularised at paragraph 6
(having regard to s 17 of the WHS Act). The relevant measure was particularised
as follows in sub-paragraph 9:
... to maintain a system of work
whereby Darren Hicks was prevented from driving vacuum trucks without
supervision until his competence
to drive all vehicles he may be required to
drive in the course of his work was properly determined by the defendant,
including the
assessment by the defendant of Darren Hicks’ competence in
the task of driving a truck with a manual gearbox ...
contended that the prosecutor abandoned a significant part of its case at the
stage of Cleanaway’s “no case”
submission and did not seek to
amend. Rather, the prosecutor maintained that all of the charges were proved to
the requisite standard
because it was reasonably practicable for Cleanaway to
“competency assess” Mr Hicks in relation to the vehicle being
on 18 August 2014 along the South Eastern Freeway.
was on this basis, said Cleanaway, that the magistrate found the appellant
guilty by inference,
regard to the well-known principle that the criminal standard of proof must
exclude reasonably hypotheses consistent with
innocence, as distinct from proof
of circumstances raising the more probable inference in favour of what is
contended that the appeal judge recognised that the charges as pleaded and
particularised could not on the evidence
complained that rather than concluding that the charges should therefore be
dismissed, and the relevant convictions quashed,
the appeal judge treated the
charges as if they alleged a failure to instruct Mr Hicks about which gears to
use and when to change
gears when travelling down the South Eastern Freeway in
the particular truck he was driving on the day of the
Cleanaway, was a fundamentally different case from the prosecution case advanced
in the charges.
it required that the appeal judge embark on a reasoning process that was not the
subject of submissions or argument, and
conflicted with fundamental principles
of the criminal law, which included that it is for the prosecution to prefer the
sees fit and the accused has no say in the form of the charges
brought against it.
approach was adopted, Cleanaway contended, despite the appeal judge reasoning
that the inclusion of the “all vehicles”
routes” allegations were unnecessary and embarrassing, and that it would
have been open to Cleanaway to have
those particulars struck out. The appeal
judge held that the unduly broad pleading “could not have caused the
appellant any
prejudice”.
attacked that particular conclusion. Cleanaway relied on the following
statement of
defendant is entitled to be apprised not only of the legal nature of the offence
with which he is charged but also of the particular
act, matter or thing alleged
as the foundation of the charge.
contended that the allegations in charges 1 and 2 were clear and were not
embarrassing, though they became embarrassing
for the prosecution when they
could not be proved. Cleanaway contended that there was no basis nor right for
it to have the “all
vehicles” reference, nor any other parts of the
charges, struck out.
the appeal judge held that it was not necessary for the prosecutor to have
alleged the “duty” so
whether a different
prosecutor may have brought different or more narrowly formulated charges did
not relieve the prosecution of
the burden of proving the charges in fact
preferred in this case beyond reasonable doubt.
to the suggestion made by the appeal judge, Cleanaway contended that the bulk of
the evidence in the case went to proving
the measures that it did not have in
place to “properly determine” the competence of Mr Hicks to drive
all vehicles and
all routes and that it did not have in place the measure
alleged in the charge sheet. As for the incident itself, the prosecution
repeatedly asserted that it was relevant only to the fact and magnitude of the
pleaded risk.
these circumstances, Cleanaway contended that the failure to prove all that was
alleged should have resulted in findings of not
guilty on charges 1 and 2. By
failing to proceed in that way, the appeal judge erred and fell into
the appellant’s conviction on the basis
of a perceived failure to implement a measure other than that specified in the
which had not been alleged.
the respondent, it was contended that the case pleaded was clear and the trial
was conducted in a manner consistent with the
way in which the case was
The respondent
contended that the particulars were drafted with the necessary precision and
specificity.
respondent acknowledged that the appeal judge held that paragraph 9 was
unnecessarily broad,
the prosecution case was otherwise clear from particulars 5 and
The respondent placed
particular emphasis on the finding of the appeal judge that the trial was
conducted in such a way that the
magistrate was left in no doubt that the
prosecution case was confined to the vacuum truck and the descent on the
respondent acknowledged that particulars must be sufficiently clear that a
defendant understands the case it is required to meet.
However, the respondent
relied on the principle stated in
HD Projects Pty Ltd v SafeWork NSW
that, unless the case is run on a different basis or a particular is in some way
integral to the offence, it is not necessary that
the prosecution establish each
of the particulars of breach in order to secure a
conviction.
respondent criticised the approach of Cleanaway as inviting an artificial and
erroneous application of the principles regarding
the importance of specificity
in a pleading, and that when the case against Cleanaway was considered by
reference to the entire pleading
and the case as opened and thereafter
conducted, the appeal judge did not err in upholding the convictions on charges
The determination of
appeal ground 1
Peek adopted the following propositions regarding the pleading of charges in a
work safety prosecution in
John Holland Pty Ltd v
complainant states of a passage in his outline of argument that “the
following principles of general application emerge
from the case law and appear
to be uncontroversial”. The defendant agreed with that statement, as do
I, and the passage appears
charge should be interpreted in the manner a reasonable defendant would
understand it, giving reasonable consideration
to the words of the charge in
their context’.
assessing the validity of a charge, a court is ‘entitled-and the defendant
must be expected-to use common sense in drawing
any inference that is apparent
on the face of the
common law requires that a defendant is entitled to be told not only of the
legal nature of the offence with which he or she is
charged, but also of the
particular act, matter or thing alleged as the foundation of the
question that arises...is whether the... charge contained the particulars
necessary to give reasonable information as to
the nature of the charge. The
“nature of the charge” involves the conduct making up the actual
ingredients of the
offending’.
common law requirement is that an information, or an application containing a
statement of offences, “must at the least
condescend to identifying the
essential factual ingredients of the actual
facts need not be as extensive as those which a defendant might obtain on an
application for further and better
particulars.
(Citations in original.)
HD Projects Pty Ltd v SafeWork
the Court relied on
the following extract from
, concerning the need to prove
essential facts rather than inessential facts or
particulars:
can be no doubt that a charge under s 112(1) of the
relies upon stealing as the indictable offence, must identify specific property
which is alleged to have been stolen. The
importance of this requirement is
evident from a number of cases, discussed in Archbold,
Criminal Evidence and
(2001) at [21]-[56]. Reference may be made to
[1969] 2 QB 400
[1969] 2 WLR 329
[1905] UKLawRpKQB 103
[1905] 2 KB
Pilgram v Rice-Smith
[1977] 2 All ER 658
[1977] 1 WLR 671
(1977) 65 Cr App R 142.
A helpful statement of general principle is to be found in
(unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, NSW, No 60773 of 1996, 7 July 1997) where
this Court was concerned with whether the Crown
had made the date of the alleged
offence in a charge of sexual assault of the essence, or to put it another way,
an essential ingredient
of the offence. Gleeson CJ (with whom Handley JA and
Studdert J agree) stated:
“As a general rule, what the Crown needs to establish in order to
obtain a conviction are the essential facts alleged in the
indictment, and if
the Crown fails to establish an inessential fact, or a particular which has been
provided before the trial, or
which emerged form the evidence of Crown
witnesses, that is not fatal. However, that generalisation may, in any given
to be qualified. Two examples of possible qualifications are of
present relevance. First, in some circumstances the requirements
of procedural
or substantive fairness may restrict the capacity of the Crown to depart from
particulars. Second, the evidence in
a case may be such that it would not be
open to a jury, acting reasonably, to treat one part of the Crown case as
reliable, and another
part as unreliable.
The general rule was stated by Atkin J in
(1918) 13 Cr App R 158
in the following terms (at 159-160):
‘From time immemorial a date specified in an indictment has never been
a material matter unless it is actually an essential
part of the alleged offence
... Thus, though the date of the offence should be alleged in the indictment, it
has never been necessary
that it should be laid according to truth unless time
is of the essence of the offence.’
There are, however, many examples of cases in which it has been held that
time has been made of the offence of the offence, or, to
use another expression
adopted by judges, has been made vital, by reason of circumstances which give
rise to qualifications of the
kind mentioned above (eg
[1932] NZLR
[1953] TASStRp 8
[1953] Tas SR 52
(1976) 15 SASR 171
(1995) 65 SASR 322
84 A Crim R 508
A Crim R 353).
HD Projects v SafeWork NSW
, the Court of Criminal Appeal emphasised the
basis upon which the case was run as well as whether a particular “is in
way integral to the
held that it was not necessary for the purposes of that workplace prosecution to
establish each and every of the particulars
of breach in order to secure a
conviction. It was only necessary for the prosecution to establish that the
defendant had failed
to comply with a relevant duty arising under the WHS Act.
this matter was approached from the perspective of the particulars, it is clear
that the case was pleaded in a much broader manner
than was ultimately pressed
or established. The allegations concerning “all vehicles” and
“all routes” were
not pressed, and the question is whether the
manner in which the case was run, and ultimately upheld by the magistrate and
judge, caused Cleanaway relevant prejudice.
one has regard to the ways in which the prosecution case was opened and closed,
and the attention given to the evidence, it
is clear that despite some
occasional references to “all vehicles” and “all
routes”, the case concentrated
on what it was that Mr Hicks was required
to do on the South Eastern Freeway descent on 18 August 2014 before the loss of
and collision.
case for the respondent was opened with an explanation that Cleanaway operated a
liquid and hazardous waste and recycling site
at George Street, Wingfield, and
had been declared eligible to be granted a licence under Part 8 of the SRC Act
which was, from time
to time, extended and, in that way, became subject to the
Commonwealth jurisdiction of the WHS
prosecutor explained that Truck 105 was being driven by Mr Hicks. It was being
operated at Woodside in the Adelaide Hills desludging
septic tanks under a
long-term contract between Cleanaway and the Adelaide Hills Council.
the collision, and following an investigation by Comcare, allegations were made
against Cleanaway. The prosecutor explained
the essence of those
allegations:
alleged that there was a hazard in the workplace, namely, the fact that truck
105, a large vacuum truck was travelling
at speed on public roads and
specifically the South Eastern Freeway, that there was a risk that existed in
the workplace, namely,
that the truck could collide with pedestrians or other
road users, that if this risk eventuated it could result in serious injuries
death to a worker. In this situation Darren Hicks, and/or other persons
including but not limited to Thomas [Spiers], Jacqueline
[Byrne] ... and Louise
Compton, that it said that [Cleanaway] owed a duty pursuant to s 19(1)(b) of the
Act to eliminate or reduce
this risk ... so far as was reasonably practicable,
that Cleanaway owed a duty pursuant to s 19(2) of the Act to eliminate or
this risk to [Spiers], Byrne and Compton so far as was reasonably
practicable ...
prosecutor went on to explain that the existence of the risk, and the degree of
harm that might result, was realised by Cleanaway
and that this was apparent
from the way in which it had been addressed by Cleanaway after the
prosecutor opened that Cleanaway failed to comply with a health and safety duty
by failing to maintain a system of work whereby
Mr Darren Hicks was prevented
from driving vacuum trucks without supervision until he was competent to drive
all vehicles he may
be required to drive in the course of his employment, and
until his competence was properly determined by Cleanaway, including by
assessment of his competence in the task of driving a truck with a manual
These, said the
prosecutor, were the allegations covered by charges 1 and
The prosecutor explained
that these charges 1 and 2 concerned “a system of work
prosecutor told the magistrate that there would be expert evidence as well as
evidence from Mr Hicks.
prosecutor then explained that the collision occurred on the first day
Mr Hicks was driving a heavy vehicle with a manual synchro-mesh
down the South Eastern Freeway. The prosecutor explained that the case was not
the management of the risk that
existed in the workplace and that there was a reasonably practicable step for
Cleanaway to have taken
that would have reduced that risk, that would have
better managed that risk, that was not
The evidence about
the collision went to the nature and scope of the risk and what might be gleaned
as to the ways that a reasonable
employer might have addressed those matters as
compared with what Cleanaway in fact
prosecutor referred to the evidence of Dr Rechnitzer and what was required in
order to identify for the driver the risks and
correct driving practice. This
evidence would address the risk control measures for what was a well-known, high
risk downhill route
and would have included the stipulation and specification of
the correct low gear to be used at the start of the downhill run and
the arrester beds in an emergency
prosecutor explained that Dr Rechnitzer would say that there were a number
of factors which contributed to the risk of collision
and that these included
Cleanaway failing to provide the required instruction, training and
supervision.
especially so for Mr Hicks on his first drive travelling down the steep descent
of the South Eastern Freeway which was
known to be
The prosecutor
would have been appropriate and necessary for Cleanaway to ensure the competence
of the novice heavy vehicle driver, Mr Hicks,
by first arranging training in the
form of Mr Hicks being a passenger with a competent and experienced
drive[r] in the Isuzu travelling
down the subject route to be shown the correct
and safe practice.
answer to questions from the magistrate, the prosecutor anticipated that there
would be an issue as to whether the steps outlined
by the prosecution were in
fact reasonably practicable having regard to the criteria under the Act and
having regard to whether they
would have reduced the
prosecutor opened that there would be lay evidence explaining the assessment of
Mr Hicks in an automatic truck for two days and
from which it would be inferred
that there was no system in place to make sure that Mr Hicks was assessed in a
truck with a manual
declined to open.
first witness was Dr George Rechnitzer, a forensic and safety engineer from
His evidence was
initially called in connection with a
to determine his
expertise. In the course of his evidence, he spoke about his inspection of the
rear brakes and his observation
that the brake shoes were very worn and that it
was very evident that these were through to the rivets and that the drums
overheated.
connection, Dr Rechnitzer spoke about his 50 years of engineering experience
understanding how brakes work.
Rechnitzer was asked about his opinion that the truck was in a high gear, fifth
out of six forward gears, which offered little
retardation from engine exhaust
In the course of
being asked about the observations he made about the long downhill run on the
South Eastern Freeway, he explained
his experience 30 years previously when
he was with the Accident Research Centre and his research involved investigating
of heavy vehicles with other road
the course of his
evidence, Dr Rechnitzer was essentially taken
through the terms of his pre-trial report. Dr Rechnitzer was then
cross‑examined
by Mr Griffin QC, who was then counsel for Cleanaway. The
cross‑examiner asked Dr Rechnitzer about the brakes being in a poor
condition and whether brake fade can reduce the braking power and stopping power
of the vehicle. Dr Rechnitzer answered that that
was so, but it could also
occur even if the brakes were in good
during the cross-examination of another of the witnesses, an objection was taken
by the prosecution to cross-examination on
the topic of the cause of the
collision. In the course of that debate, the prosecution relied upon the
decisions of the High Court
Kirk v Industrial Court of New South
Victorian Court of Appeal in
emphasising that the cause of the collision was not the issue because the case
was concerned with exposure to the relevant
response, the submissions from Cleanaway addressed how the accident might shed
light on whether the postulated risk management
would have avoided the risk. As
it was put by counsel, appropriate instruction and the like would not have
mattered because, assuming
a competent driver, the issue that created the risk
was the poor brakes and there could be no liability on the
to counsel for the respondent, counsel for Cleanaway “backed off”
from the submission earlier made that there
had to be a causal connection
between the breach and the
Ultimately, the
magistrate determined to address the issue on a question-by-question basis.
emerges from these and other passages of the transcript, including the arguments
considerable attention was devoted to the particular manual transmission truck
being driven by Mr Hicks and the particular
task of driving that truck down the
Freeway. It was in the context of Mr Hicks’ competency to do that,
that there was debate
it later came time to lead Dr Rechnitzer’s evidence, a redacted version of
his report dated 10 August 2016 was adopted,
together with his CV, as his
evidence‑in‑chief. The redactions were intended to reflect the
ruling earlier given by
the magistrate about what was admissible. Dr
Rechnitzer’s evidence was that the long and steep downhill route was
a problem concerning heavy trucks and the risk of brake
Rechnitzer gave evidence that the assessment of Mr Hicks for “all
vehicles” was not so onerous as to not be practicable
because it did not
require that he be assessed individually on every different hill that he might
He gave evidence
that if there were similar hazards and risks in different environments it was
not necessary to identify each one
as being different because there was a way of
handling that.
Rechnitzer also gave evidence that it would have been appropriate and necessary
for Cleanaway to ensure the competence of a novice
heavy vehicle driver such as
Mr Hicks by first arranging training in the form of Mr Hicks being a passenger
with a competent and
experienced Cleanaway driver in the vacuum truck,
travelling down the subject route, to be shown the correct, safe driving
That is to say, the correct low gear and no braking to slow the
vehicle except in an
As Dr Rechnitzer
explained it in his
practicable steps would have included: ensuring the roadworthy condition of the
heavy vehicle and in particular the brakes;
instruction and training to the
driver on how to travel safely down the route including low gear selection
without need of brakes
except in an emergency; and emergency use of the runoff
safety ramp. Preferably such training should have been with an experienced
It would have been practical, and indeed appropriate as part of the
competency assessment of a new driver for Mr Skinner to not confine
assessment just to the ad hoc unplanned assessment and include (and on the next
days as necessary):
Mr Hicks ... in a manual gear-box vehicle,
Rechnitzer gave evidence that the assessment undertaken by Mr Skinner should
have included an assessment of Mr Hicks using different
consideration of the evidence led from Mr Hicks and other lay witnesses tended
to demonstrate the attention given to the risks
associated with driving a vacuum
truck with a manual gearbox down the South Eastern
closing, the respondent relied on various parts of the evidence to demonstrate
that a truck driver should not have to use the
foot brakes to control the speed
of the truck and that a driver could select an appropriate gear before
descending a hill.
appropriate gear was one low enough that the primary foot brakes did not need to
be used and the speed of the truck could be
retarded by the engine
concentration on driving a manual truck down the South Eastern Freeway continued
during the final addresses and enabled the
magistrate to
is plain from the evidence led by the Crown that the allegations were specific.
The trial was focussed on the driving by Darren
Hicks of a manual truck (Truck
105), down the South Eastern Freeway which culminated in a collision at the
bottom of that freeway
on 18 August 2014.
The contrary construction suggested by the defendant and said to have been
adopted by the prosecution would make little sense. How
could it be said for
instance that a failure to properly determine Hicks’ competence to drive a
different type of vehicle or
to drive a different route would have exposed the
specific individuals alleged to a risk of death or serious injury on 18 August
2014. In my view, the construction suggested by the defendant is not only not
available but illogical. I am of the view the allegations
of failure contained
in Particular 9 of each charge have been specific from the outset of the trial.
I do not accept the defendant’s
approach to rejecting the proposition that the respondent had adopted a case
different from that set out in the Summons and
Complaint during the course of
the trial was accepted by the appeal judge as well. As the appeal judge
described it:
ground one of its notice of appeal Cleanaway complains that the Magistrate erred
in holding that the prosecution was not required
to prove those particulars of
the charges alleging a failure by Cleanaway to discharge its duties in respect
of Mr Hick’s competence
vehicles on
I would dismiss this ground of appeal for the reason that the trial was
clearly conducted on the basis that Cleanaway breached its
duties under the Act
in respect of Mr [Hicks’] competence to drive the vacuum truck on the
descent of the Freeway. Indeed,
the gravamen of the offences charged against s
32 of the Act was the exposure of Cleanaway’s employees, and others to the
of injury from a collision between the vacuum truck and others on that
descent. The extension of the particulars to all routes and
all vehicles was
unnecessary and embarrassing and ought, if an application had been made by
Cleanaway, to have been struck out.
Cleanaway did not so apply and there was
therefore no prejudice to it, other than, perhaps, as to costs. However, it is
a consequence
of my conclusion that offences against s 32 are anchored in the
particular risk to which others were exposed, and that a separate
offence is not
committed for each act or omission in breach of the duties imposed, that
Cleanaway is entitled to a defence by way
of a plea in bar to all counts but the
(Emphasis in original.)
has not been demonstrated that the appeal judge erred in his approach to the
pleaded counts or his appreciation of the course
of the trial. It has not been
demonstrated that Cleanaway was relevantly prejudiced in any material way by the
convictions based
on the risks posed by traveling in a vacuum truck with manual
transmission down the South Eastern Freeway.
ground 1 should be dismissed.
Appeal ground 2 – proof of Mr
Hicks’ competence
Cleanaway challenged the factual finding that Mr Hicks’ competence to
drive had not been “properly determined”.
Cleanaway invoked the
same fundamental principle as it relied on under appeal ground 1.
Cleanaway put it, the prosecution alleged, and was required to prove, that Mr
Hicks’ competence to drive all vehicles he
might be required to drive in
the course of his employment, had not been “properly determined”.
That needed to be established
according to the statutory scheme in place in
South Australia concerning licensing and certification for driving heavy
contended that where the imposition of a general duty is alleged to arise in
circumstances where a coherent statutory scheme
exists regulating the area of
controversy, the existence and content of the alleged duty must be construed in
light of the statutory
to Cleanaway, it is inconsistent with and subverts the coherent operation of the
statutory scheme for determining the competence
of heavy vehicle drivers to find
that the determination and certification of competency under the statutory
scheme was not a “proper
determination”.
relied on the decision in
Bunnings Forest
Forest Products
, the charge required the prosecutor to prove that the worker
had been “instructed” to perform certain work. That was
this case, the charges required that the prosecution prove that Cleanaway had
not properly determined the competence of Mr Hicks
to drive “all
vehicles” and “all routes”. Cleanaway contended that the
appeal judge failed to grapple with
this issue “properly or at all”.
Cleanaway contended that without addressing the comprehensive and detailed
regarding the requirement to obtain a licence and certificate of
competency, the appeal judge had simply observed, without any evidentiary
foundation, that obtaining a heavy vehicle licence was a regulatory requirement
which ensured a minimum, but not always sufficient,
standard of
competence.
contended that it was inapt to correlate learner drivers with a competency-based
assessment of heavy vehicle drivers without
regard to the evidence. On this
basis, Cleanaway contended that to deny that the assessment under the statutory
scheme constituted
a proper determination of competence was “not
compatible with proper recognition of the detailed legislative scheme enacted
precisely for that
respondent contended that the appeal judge was right to find that the statutory
scheme ensured a minimum but not always sufficient
standard of competence,
especially where the regulatory licensing requirement was insufficient to
mitigate the identified risk.
respondent pointed to the evidence before the appeal judge from which he could
be satisfied that Cleanaway well knew that something
more than reliance on the
statutory scheme was required to mitigate the relevant risk. That included the
fact that Cleanaway employed
a person to assess the competence of the drivers it
The respondent
pointed to the following additional evidence:
were risk assessments dated 20 May 2014 recording the probability of
pedestrian/vehicle interaction as “likely”
and the result as
“significant” and that the implemented control measures were
identified as being “Training, licensing
and assessment of
P5, dated 2012, similarly recorded a control measure for “interaction with
vehicle and pedestrian traffic” as
including “regular driving
assessments where hazard awareness and distraction avoidance are
earlier mentioned, the employment of Mr Gregory Skinner as a Driver
Trainer/Driver
determination of appeal ground 2
particular passages in the reasons of the appeal judge which are criticised by
Cleanaway are as
ground four Cleanaway contends that the Magistrate erred in finding that there
was sufficient evidence to prove that it was reasonably
practicable to assess
the competence of Mr Hicks to drive down the Freeway:
when there was
no evidence that Hicks was not competent;
when Mr Hicks
had been assessed as competent to hold a driver’s licence;
in the absence
of an industry standard or practice as to assessment of a truck driver’s
competence;
when it was not
put to Hicks that he had driven down the Freeway other than in accordance with
correct driving practices;
when it was not
suggested to any relevant witness that the procedures that Cleanaway had in
place were deficient;
when there was
no evidence that a reasonable person conducting Cleanaway’s business would
have regarded an assessment of competence
to drive down the Freeway as
warranting a discrete assessment.
I would dismiss the appeal on this
ground. The risks of a collision between a heavy vehicle like the vacuum truck
and other road
users arising from a failure to control its speed on the steep
descent along the Freeway into a busy suburban intersection was obvious
unusual. Driver competence in effecting appropriate gear changes was an
important safeguard against that risk. Holding a heavy
vehicle licence is a
regulatory requirement which ensures a minimum, but not always sufficient,
standard of competence. So much
was recognised by Cleanaway because it employed
a person to assess the competence of the drivers it employed. There was no
reason for not assessing Mr Hicks competence in gear selection for a
descent of the Freeway before he was directed to drive the vacuum
truck down the
the appeal judge returned to the issue, observing that the magistrate concluded
that the training and instruction which Dr
Rechnitzer had testified should have
been given, and which had been particularised in the charge, was reasonably
practicable.
judge cited the following passages from the reasons of the
magistrate:
have taken this factor into account. There is no evidence regards the cost of
the suggested measures. However given the findings
I have already made in
relation to each charge I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt the associated
costs would not be grossly disproportionate
to the magnitude of the risk. There
was a genuine possibility of the risk as evidenced by the incident itself. The
degree of harm
that might result was extreme. The defendant company new or ought
to have known of the risk and [k]new or ought reasonably to have
known that the
driver Hicks although the holder of an unrestricted heavy vehicle licence under
the statutory scheme had only recently
obtained that licence and lacked
practical experience in the driving of a manual heavy vehicle in particular and
the driving of heavy
vehicle on the South Eastern Freeway. Furthermore the
defendant company had in place resources to undertake the measures which would
have minimised the risk.
[310] Taking all of these matters into account I am satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt the suggested measure in relation to each count
was one that a
reasonable PCBU in the position of the defendant would have taken. They were
obvious, rudimentary and necessary before
the driver Hicks was assigned his
tasks on 18 August 2014. They are in my view steps that any reasonably PCBU
would have taken.
[311] In coming to this conclusion I have taken into account the
defendant’s argument concerning ‘industry standards’
specifically whether other PCBUs have been shown to have taken the measures
alleged. There is no evidence on this topic. However
the absence of that
evidence does not cause me to alter my finding that the measure was
‘reasonably practicable’ applying
the criteria contained in s.18 of
magistrate explained that he was satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the
suggested measure in relation to each count was one
that a reasonable employer
in the position of Cleanaway should have taken. He described these as
“obvious, rudimentary and
necessary” before Mr Hicks was assigned
his tasks on 18 August 2014.
magistrate did not lose sight of the fact that there was no evidence regarding
“industry standards”. Notwithstanding
the absence of that evidence,
the magistrate found that that did not cause him to alter his finding that the
relevant measures were
“reasonably practicable” applying the
criteria contained in s 18 of the WHS
After reviewing these
findings, the appeal judge
evidence of the appellant’s own employees as to the systems which were in
place demonstrate the reasonable practicability
of providing training of the
kind described by Dr Rechnitzer. The Freeway was not just any other road
in the greater Adelaide metropolitan
area. It has its unique challenges and
risks which are well known to motorists who have used it and were described in
the evidence
of Dr Rechnitzer. The appellant had trainers and assessors
available to it. If there was some reason why it was not reasonably
practicable
to engage one or more of them to give instructions to Mr Hicks on proper gear
selection at some time from his employment
up until the morning of the
, it was for the appellant to adduce that evidence.
The appellant interweaves within many of its submissions reliance on the fact
that Mr Hicks had been granted a heavy vehicle licence.
The effect of the grant
of that licence was to permit him, in the sense that it was not a criminal
offence, to drive heavy vehicles
unaccompanied by a more experienced driver. In
that sense licensing is a minimum requirement. It is everyday experience of
who have learnt to drive, or who have played any part in teaching others
to drive that, licensing marks the commencement of a period
of honing skills and
amassing experience as an unsupervised driver. It is a minimum requirement.
may be accepted that where there has been an assessment made under a statutory
driving scheme, associated with licensing and certification,
that will provide
some assurance about a driver’s level of competence. However, there is an
obvious difference between being
properly licensed and certified, and being
competent to perform particular tasks in a range of settings, when not all of
necessarily have been assessed in the course of licensing and
certification. That problem is reinforced in a case such as the present
the relevant driver lacked both experience and expertise in connection with a
hazardous downhill stretch of the Freeway.
it may be true to say that Mr Hicks was not truly a “learner”, it
was equally clear that his competence to drive
a vacuum truck with a manual
gearbox down a steep decline which was notoriously accident prone had not been
evaluated or assessed
by Cleanaway.
a loose, and admittedly broad way, some analogy might be drawn between the
statutory duties of the driver of a motor vehicle to
be licensed and to obey the
rules of the road, on the one hand and, on the other, the various common law and
statutory duties which
require the exercise of reasonable care for the safety of
others in connection with the operation of a motor vehicle in different
settings. Whilst these are not in conflict and are
complementary,
merely being
licensed and obeying the rules of the road does not necessarily equate to
observance of the common law and statutory
duties imposed in the exercise of
reasonable care. More may be required by the circumstances confronting the
indeed, is reflected in the very fact that Mr Skinner was employed to evaluate
the competence of Cleanaway drivers who, it
may be surmised, each held requisite
licensing and certification.
circumstances where there was evidence available to the appeal judge to
demonstrate that Cleanaway recognised that the statutory
licensing and
certification scheme could and should be supplemented, it was ultimately a
question of fact as to whether the competence
of Mr Hicks had been
“properly determined” having regard to the case before the court.
Once that case was recognised
as concentrating on the South Eastern Freeway
descent in a vacuum truck with a manual gearbox, it was open to the appeal judge
find that competence had not been properly
determined.
ground 2 should be dismissed.
ground 3 – a finding of guilt on a basis not alleged and not open
contended that the fact-finding by the appeal judge was affected by two
“critical errors”, and, in addition,
the appeal judge failed to
correctly apply legal principle when determining “the essential element of
reasonable practicability”.
first error in primary fact finding contended for by Cleanaway was that the
appeal judge said in his reasons “repeatedly”
that Mr Hicks had used
“the wrong gear” when descending the South Eastern Freeway.
contended that the only evidence to support that hypothesis was Dr
Rechnitzer’s evidence that Cleanaway should have
instructed Mr Hicks to
have the truck in a gear that kept its speed at 60 kph or less until he was
required to apply the brakes when
approaching the reduced speed zone and traffic
lights at the bottom of the descent. Cleanaway maintained that this hypothesis
discredited in cross‑examination and “expressly abandoned”
by the prosecution at trial.
Cleanaway contended that the appeal judge’s finding at [104] of his
reasons portrayed a misunderstanding of the evidence and
the practicalities of
changing down gears in a vacuum sealed truck. The appeal judge had
obvious enough from that evidence that the gear selected at any point in a
descent must be able to hold the vehicle not only
at a speed appropriate to that
part of the descent but also of a speed which will allow a change into a lower
gear, without using
the foot brake, when it becomes necessary or appropriate to
do so. No evidence contradicting Dr Rechnitzer on this topic was adduced
by Cleanaway.
to Cleanaway, the application of the clutch to change gears, as in the case of a
manual synchro‑mesh gearbox, involved
the release of the restraint applied
by the gears and, especially when travelling downhill, made it necessary for the
driver to slow
the vehicle by applying the brakes so that the speed was
appropriate for the selection of a lower gear.
contended that where a driver has descended a decline
“appropriately”, as it claimed Mr Hicks had, the vehicle
“ample brakes” to slow for the purposes of changing down gears.
This process is repeated as the vehicle is
required to slow and stop.
contended that it was plain enough that the appropriate time to change down
gears was when the speed limit changed down,
and the use of the brakes was
required. Cleanaway contended that Mr Hicks’ change down of gears was
“entirely orthodox
and appropriate”. Contrary to the finding made
by the appeal judge,
brake defects detected after the collision did not merely contribute to the
inability of Mr Hicks to change down gears as the
speed limit reduced and the
traffic lights approached. According to Cleanaway, the brake defects
“prevented a competent driver
from doing so”.
second primary factual finding which was attacked was the conclusion by the
appeal judge that an appropriate way to drive down
the South Eastern Freeway was
to have the vacuum truck in a gear that did not involve using the brakes
. Cleanaway referred to the recitation by the appeal judge of
Dr Rechnitzer’s
true and necessary implication of that direction and Dr Rechnitzer’s
opinion that the gear selected must be low enough
to control the vehicle within
safe speeds throughout the descent. Dr Rechnitzer explained why in the passages
of his cross examination
set out in the following paragraphs of the
Magistrate’s reasons:
[205] Your Honour, the whole principle is one, you’ve got the exhaust
brake, which gives you a certain retardation, and then
you need to be in a low
enough gear - so 60 - so whichever speed you pick, whether it’s 40 or 60
the whole idea is you don’t
use your primary brake at all, that's the
whole idea so you don’t run the risk of brake fade and losing control if
to stop for example in a hurry-’
[206] ‘... that they can travel down a hill like that in a gear that
will maintain the speed without using the service brakes.
The whole point is to
maintain control without using the service brakes. That’ s why it says
‘use low gear’.
[208] ‘... The whole point was that it had to hold the vehicle for all
the distance, so I’m not sure whether I'm inferring
too much from
mishearing the question, but the point is, it’s not whether it held it for
6 km and then didn’t after that.
The point is it has got to hold it for
all the distance. You can’t lose the brakes at all at any time, so
I’m not sure
whether the question was holistic or limited, that’s my
point. That’s why I wanted to rehear it because I might have
misheard it,
but that’s the critical point. It's no use saying ‘Okay, held it for
6 km, then thereafter sped up because
it wouldn't hold it for, you know, a
different gradient’. So that’s my only caveat that I want to make.
important one, though.
to Cleanaway, it was of course “impossible” not to use the brakes at
all. Cleanaway referred to the opinion
of Dr Rechnitzer that Mr Hicks should
have been instructed to select a lower gear (suggested by Dr Rechnitzer to be
the fourth gear)
which would have held the truck at 40-60 kph until the brakes
needed to be applied. Cleanaway contended that this opinion was both
discredited and abandoned.
to Cleanaway, the real aim was to have the truck in a gear that would hold it
under the speed limit until the point is
reached towards the bottom of the
descent when the brakes were needed to be applied to change down and slow as the
speed limits reduced
and, eventually, to stop at the traffic lights at the
bottom of the descent.
claimed Cleanaway, was precisely what Mr Hicks was doing but the brakes were in
such poor repair that they failed almost immediately,
leaving Mr Hicks in
“Angel gear” with no way of slowing.
contended that Dr Rechnitzer’s opinion that Mr Hicks should have been told
to put the truck in fourth gear when he
had it in fifth gear would have made no
difference at all to the risk or the outcome. Cleanaway pointed to the evidence
Hicks had the vacuum truck in fifth gear which held the truck steadily
and well under the speed limit until Mr Hicks was required
to apply the brakes
and slow at the bottom.
to Cleanaway, whether Mr Hicks travelled in fourth gear or fifth gear he, and
any other competent driver, would have been
required to apply the brakes when Mr
Hicks did, with the same resulting failure because of their poor mechanical
for the question of the correct legal principle to be applied when determining
the essential element of reasonable practicability,
Cleanaway contended that in
respect of each charge the court was required to determine if the measure
alleged had been proved to
have been not in place, that the measure would have
eliminated or minimised the risk had it been in place, and that it was
practicable to have had that measure in place.
contended that this required an assessment of all of the evidence, particularly
the matters set out in s 18 of the WHS
Act. These reflected the
been described as requiring the tribunal of fact to place itself in a point of
time before the incident the subject of
the investigation and ask whether it has
been proved beyond reasonable doubt that a reasonable person conducting a
business or undertaking
in the position and circumstances of Cleanaway would,
looking forward, have had the specified measure in
developing its contention that the appeal judge failed to apply the applicable
legal principles, Cleanaway submitted:
appeal judge did not determine the issue of reasonable practicability based on
the measure specified in the charge sheet but,
rather, determined that issue
having regard to another, uncharged
appeal judge wrongly reversed, and therefore failed to correctly apply, the onus
More particularly,
in the absence of any evidence from the prosecution that it was reasonably
practicable to assess Mr Hicks’
driving on the South Eastern Freeway (as
opposed to the “all routes” allegation) the appeal judge held that
Cleanaway to lead evidence that doing so was not reasonably
practicable.
the appeal judge recited the matters requiring consideration under s 18 of
the WHS Act,
otherwise refer to the matters requiring consideration and wrongly regarded this
element as proved because “there
was no practical reason for not assessing
Mr Hicks’ competence in gear selection for a descent of the
In addition,
the appeal judge erroneously held that Cleanaway had not disproved this
allegation.
appeal judge failed to give any consideration or weight to the fact that the
prosecution did not adduce any evidence of industry
practice or industry
standards, which evidence is central to the consideration of the criteria under
was particularly critical of the following portion of the appeal judge’s
received a heavy vehicle licence training from G&L heavy vehicle driving
centre in June 2014. He enrolled for the training
on 22 June 2014 and was
trained on 23 and 24 June over roads which included descents but there was
no evidence that they approximated
the descent on the Freeway. His training was
on an Isuzu tipper truck of three axles with a road ranger gear box of 15
He was instructed on the need to give attention to the appropriate
gearing. In particular, he was instructed on how to use lower
gears when on a
descent but, not on the use of brakes when travelling downhill. The trainer
described Mr Hicks as a very good candidate
for a heavy vehicle
contended that this did not accurately reflect the state of the evidence. There
was no evidence disproving that the testing
and competency assessment under the
legislative scheme did not involve a demonstrated capacity to understand and
implement the basic
procedure of having the vehicle in a gear which would have
retarded speed under the speed limit without using the primary brake until
need came to apply the brakes at the bottom of the descent.
respondent contended that Cleanaway’s complaints were without
for the factual findings concerning the “wrong gear”, the respondent
contended that the prosecution case at trial
was that Mr Hicks was inexperienced
and in the wrong gear at the commencement of the
Rechnitzer’s evidence to this effect was neither discredited in
cross-examination, abandoned by the prosecution, nor acknowledged
as having been
abandoned by the appeal judge. The respondent submitted that, in fact, the
appeal judge:
the evidence about the appropriate gear for the descent and the basis for the
magistrate’s findings about that; and
an assessment, open on the evidence, that the magistrate’s conclusion
Mr Hicks was
respondent contended that Cleanaway’s criticism sought to revive an issue
in circumstances where it had adduced no evidence
contradicting the opinion of
Dr Rechnitzer. Because of the evidence that was led, the finding was open and
not in error.
for the findings made concerning “no brakes”, the respondent
contended that the same position applied. In fact, the
appeal judge found that
“the gear selected must be low enough to control the vehicle within a safe
speed throughout the
judge did not conclude that it was appropriate to drive down the South Eastern
Freeway by selecting a gear that did not
involve using the brakes at all. The
appeal judge’s finding on this topic was “obvious enough”
based on the evidence
of Dr Rechnitzer given in
cross-examination.
circumstances where there was no evidence led to contradict the opinion of Dr
Rechnitzer, the appeal judge made no error in making
a finding which was open on
the evidence that was
the question of what was “reasonably practicable”, the respondent
emphasised that the finding made by the appeal judge
was that there was
“no practical reason for not assessing Hicks’ competence in gear
selection for a descent of the
respondent acknowledged that the complaint made by Cleanaway was that this
differed from the reasonably practicable control measure
specified in particular
9 involving driving “all vehicles” on “all routes” with
a manual gearbox.
the respondent contended that, considered in context, the finding made by the
appeal judge did not amount to a finding that
Cleanaway was required to
separately assess the competence of Mr Hicks to make appropriate gear selection
for a descent on the South
Eastern Freeway. Rather, the appeal judge gave
consideration to whether competence testing in a manual vehicle was capable of
controlling
the identified risk.
finding made by the appeal judge was primarily directed to whether competence
testing was capable of controlling the relevant
risk. Gear selection, a
fundamental aspect of driving a manual truck, formed part of that. For example,
the appeal judge said
risks of a collision between a heavy vehicle like the vacuum truck and other
road users arising from a failure to control
its speed on the steep descent
along the Freeway into a busy suburban intersection was obvious and unusual.
Driver competence in
effecting appropriate gear changes was an important
safeguard against that risk. Holding a heavy vehicle licence is a regulatory
requirement which ensures a minimum, but not always sufficient, standard of
competence. ...
the appeal judge accepted that the relevant risk could have been minimised in
any one or a number of ways, namely, as
providing a supervisor, not allowing Mr Hicks to drive, properly training
Mr Hicks on manual gearboxes, or properly training Mr
Hicks on driving
down the Freeway.
addition, the appeal judge found that the failure to train Mr Hicks “on
how and at what point on the descent to engage a
sufficiently low gear”
exposed Mr Hicks and others to a risk of injury from
is in these circumstances that the respondent contended that there was ample
evidence before the appeal judge to conclude that
appropriate gear selection was
a relevant and material part of assessing the competence in Mr Hicks to drive a
manual truck, which
was one of the reasonably practicable measures alleged.
respondent rejected the proposition that the appeal judge found that there was
an onus on Cleanaway to prove that it was not
reasonably practicable to assess
the competence of Mr Hicks in gear selection on a descent down the South Eastern
Freeway. Rather,
the appeal judge found that the respondent had proved that the
control measures were reasonably
practicable.
The passage
relied on by Cleanaway in fact demonstrated that the appeal judge recognised
that there was no evidence led by Cleanaway
which impacted on that finding.
for industry practice or standards, the appeal judge was aware that the
prosecution had not adduced evidence of these.
The appeal judge referred to the
passage in the reasons of the magistrate about the absence of evidence
concerning “industry
standards”, together with the
magistrate’s conclusion that the absence of that evidence did not cause
him to alter his
finding that the alleged measure was “reasonably
practicable”, applying the criteria in s 18 of the WHS Act. The appeal
judge adopted the same approach. That is to say, the appeal judge found that
the absence of evidence of industry standards was not
determinative of the issue
of reasonable practicability.
respondent challenged the assertion by Cleanaway that an aspect of the reasons
of the appeal judge did not accurately reflect
the state of the evidence. That
passage was earlier set
respondent submitted that the basis for the complaint by Cleanaway was unclear
and, insofar as Cleanaway submitted that the findings
of guilt were unreasonable
or unsupported by the evidence, it was necessary for this Court to determine
whether it was open to the
decision-maker to be satisfied of guilt beyond
reasonable doubt.
respondent submitted that because there was ample evidence on which it was open
to the appeal judge to be satisfied about the
appellant’s guilt beyond
reasonable doubt, it had not been demonstrated that the appeal judge must, as
distinct from might,
have had doubt about the guilt of Cleanaway.
The determination of appeal
case of Cleanaway under this ground was that it was necessary to keep the vacuum
truck in a gear that would hold it under the
speed limit until the point was
reached towards the bottom of the descent when the brakes were needed to be
applied. Cleanaway pressed
this view of the management of the risk, criticising
the idea that it was necessary to keep the vacuum truck in a gear that did not
involve using the brakes at all.
is at once apparent that there is little difference between this case and the
prosecution case, for both recognised that the gearing
must control the
truck’s speed until the point was reached toward the bottom of the descent
when the brakes must be applied
in order to change down.
is apparent from the evidence of Mr Hicks was that the loss of control occurred
well after the arrester beds and at a time when
the vacuum truck was travelling
too quickly to enable the gears to be used. It was at that point that the use
of the brakes was
case of the respondent was that Mr Hicks’ selection of the wrong gear at
the commencement of the descent was consistent
with his inexperience in driving
a vacuum truck with a manual gearbox down a steep descent, leading to a loss of
control. That is
consistent with the approach taken by the appeal judge after
his review of the findings made by the magistrate. For example, as
following salient aspect of that account should be noted. First, Mr Hicks
descended the Freeway in a much higher gear (5 of 7)
than the gears engaged on
his ascent. Secondly, on his unsuccessful attempt to change down a gear the
truck speed had already increased
from between 60-70km/h to about 80km/h and he
had passed the second arrester bed. At that time he was fast approaching the
zone. He found it necessary to apply the footbrake to allow the change
to a lower gear but the brake was less effective than he
had hoped. The truck
slowed only a little and sounded an alarm. Thirdly, the decline then steepened,
the truck speed increased
and the braking had no effect.
As I earlier observed, knowing in advance at what point during a descent
gears should be changed down, so that the truck can slow
as it enters lower
speed zones and can, when necessary, safely come to a complete stop, requires
experience or training. Plainly
Mr Hicks had attempted to change down from
gear when it was too late to do so and 5
too high a gear to limit the trucks speed to 60km/ hour.
There was evidence in the form of the concerns of other drivers, the evidence
of Dr Rechnitzer and the location of the two arrester
beds that the descent
on that part of the Freeway was particularly long and steep relative to other
major Adelaide roads. Mr Hicks
did not have the experience, nor any instruction
or training tailored to the vacuum truck he was driving on the Freeway, to
at what points along the descent he should progressively engage lower
gears. On Mr Hicks’ own evidence, it was not possible
to change from the
gear to a lower gear when the truck was travelling between 60 kph
to 70 kph. Cleanaway did not adduce evidence or suggest that that
was due to a
latent defect or was, for any other reason, unexpected.
appeal judge recognised that there was evidence available to the magistrate to
permit the finding that was made by the magistrate,
and this was upheld by the
appeal judge. Indeed, these conclusions were consistent with the evidence
earlier reviewed by the appeal
judge concerning Mr Hicks’ understanding of
the task and what Cleanaway had done in order to properly apprise and train him
cross-examination Hicks agreed that, as part of his training, he had been
provided a ‘vehicle awareness document’.
He was asked, whether he
understood what was meant by the heading ‘trucks and buses must use low
gear signage’
any event can I suggest to this to you, by the time you finished your training
with G&L you fully understood that that sign
‘Trucks and buses must
use low gear’ signage meant that the driver was to put the truck in a gear
that would restrain
the truck at a lower applicable speed limit without the need
to use the primary brake.
I pause here to make the perhaps trite observation that it is one thing to
know the objective which must be achieved, i.e. the selection
of a gear which
will keep the speed of a heavy vehicle with the application speed limit, but it
is another to know practically how
to do so by selecting the gear before
entering that speed zone which will allow a gear change or changes which will
keep the vehicle
within the speed limit having regard to the steepness of the
Mr Hicks testified that he could not recall Cleanaway asking about his heavy
vehicle driving experience, or his experience driving
on the Freeway before the
accident. It is experience of that kind which a driver must have to meet the
objective stated in the vehicle
awareness document on a descent such as the
Freeway as it approaches the intersection where the collision occurred.
fair reading of the transcript and the reasons below demonstrates that
Dr Rechnitzer’s evidence concerning the prosecution
case, and the
“wrong gear”, was neither discredited nor abandoned. It was never
suggested, whether by the expert, the
magistrate or the appeal judge, that no
brakes should ever be used.
and consistently with Cleanaway’s preferred case, the relevant gear
selection had to be low enough to control the vehicle
within a safe speed, and
under the speed limit throughout the descent until the brakes needed to be
the question of a brake defect was an important issue, that issue was recognised
both by the magistrate and the appeal judge.
For example, as the appeal judge
it is that the brake defect contributed to the inability to engage a lower gear
but it will be remembered that at the apex of
the descent there were signs
warning truck drivers to use low gears, which were understood by Mr Hicks to
mean gears low enough to
keep the truck within the applicable speed limit
without using the brakes.
Dr Rechnitzer was subjected to a searching cross-examination, and not all of his
views were accepted, his views about the
key matters bearing on this issue were
accepted, as the reasons of the appeal judge demonstrate. For example, both the
and the appeal judge accepted the following expressions of opinion by
Rechnitzer:
synchromesh gearbox Transmission:
A general guide for selecting the
appropriate low gear is usually the same gear (or lower) that would be used to
travel up the hill.
This is also noted in the post incident SA video ‘How
to descen[d] the South Eastern Freeway Safely’. The correct gear
hold the truck at below the specified speed limit, and not speed up going down
the hill without using the brakes at all.
If the driver finds he has not selected the right low gear (i.e. the vehicle
is speeding up), he should then use the brakes to come
to a stop, and re start
in a lower gear. In an emergency the driver should still try to change down
gears, and have the training
to do so (e.g. by matching engine and road speeds;
and / or using double de‑clutching).
views were supported by a footnoted reference to the “USA 2005 Model
Commercial Drivers Licence Manual”
Starting Down a Hill. Slow down and shift down to a speed that you can control
without using the brakes hard. Otherwise the
brakes can overheat and lose their
braking power.
Downshift before starting down the hill. Make sure you are in a low enough
gear, usually lower than the gear required to climb the
Ultimately,
the appeal judge found no error in the approach of the magistrate and upheld the
case based on Dr Rechnitzer’s
of Dr Rechnitzer’s evidence was that the gear should
generally be no higher than the gear used on the ascent, and that it should
low enough to constrain the speed within safe limits throughout the descent. Mr
Hick’s did not adhere to these rules because
he was not trained on how to
do so. Dr Rechnitzer’s opinion on those rules of safe gear selection was
not contradicted. That
evidence, and the evidence of Mr Hicks’ inability
to change down a gear, in the absence of evidence providing an alternative
explanation for the inability to engage a lower gear (other than the brake
failure which was the very risk which the low gear is
calculated to guard
against) strongly supported an inference that the 5
gear selected
by Mr Hicks was too high a gear in which to commence the descent. The failure
to train Mr [Hicks] on how and at what
point on the descend to engage a
sufficiently low gear therefore exposed Mr Hicks, and others, to a risk of
injury from a collision
because the braking power of the truck might not be
adequate to slow or stop the truck.
appeal judge found that the magistrate was correct to conclude in the following
the evidence of Dr Rechnitzer regarding the circumstances of the incident of
18 August 2014. In particular that the vehicles
reduced braking capacity
due to defective brakes was ‘exacerbated’ by the fact that the
vehicle was in fifth of seven
gears resulting in little retardation from engine
braking meaning the vehicle could ‘run away’ and reach high speeds.
This conclusion accords with Dr Rechnitzer’s observations of the condition
of the brakes and the account given by Hicks. It
is apparent from Hicks’
evidence that despite the fact he had selected fifth gear which had initially
held the speed of the
vehicle, once the gradient increased the speed of the
vehicle was not constrained but increased. This caused Hicks to apply the brakes
along with the fact the 80km/h zone was approaching. After this the brakes
failed and the vehicle was then unrestrained (both by
brakes and gears). It
became out of control.
regard to the matters addressed in connection with appeal grounds 1 and 2,
Cleanaway’s criticisms regarding the approach
taken by the appeal judge to
the evidence, particularly the suggested “wrong gear” and “no
brakes” evidence
and findings, must be rejected.
was a case where it had been demonstrated that Cleanaway had not assessed the
competence of Mr Hicks to drive a heavy vacuum
truck with a manual gearbox down
a steep descent, particularly one that was notoriously dangerous.
measures pleaded against Cleanaway were not taken and, on the evidence, it was
reasonably practicable for them to have been taken.
Had they been taken, there
was a basis for the finding made by the magistrate and the appeal judge that the
risk of collision on
the freeway caused by a truck travelling too fast would
have been, at the least, minimised if not also eliminated. It could not
that these difficulties were displaced by the difficulties associated with the
braking system.
find that there was no practical reason for not assessing Mr Hicks’
competence in gear selection using a manual gearbox
in a vacuum truck down a
descent like the freeway did not reverse the onus of proof. It merely reflected
the state of the evidence
in circumstances where it was otherwise reasonably
practicable to have undertaken that assessment.
ground 3 should be dismissed.
ground 4 – the question of causation
contended that the appeal judge erred in law by failing to apply the correct
“causation test” in accordance
with the requirements of s 32(c) of
the WHS Act and binding authority. The appeal judge wrongly found that all that
was required
to satisfy s 32(c) was that there were reasonably practicable
measures which, if adopted by Cleanaway, would have materially reduced
to which employees or others were exposed, even if the risk substantially arose
out of circumstances for which Cleanaway
responsible.
contended that there was no basis to read down the clear words of s 32(c) of the
WHS Act to have a meaning other than what
they say, imposing the requirement for
the prosecution to prove that the failure to have in place the specified
reasonably practicable
measures caused the people nominated to be exposed to
death or serious injury.
also contended that the appeal judge should have found that the prosecution was
required but failed to prove beyond reasonable
doubt that the failure to have in
place the reasonably practical measures alleged caused those nominated to be
exposed to death or
serious injury on the occasion nominated. This had to be
done by way of a counter-factual analysis to determine if it had been
established
that the alleged failure actually had the impact of causing the
exposure to risk, applying established criminal law principles of
next contended that the appeal judge was wrong to rely on observations made by
the Victorian Court of Appeal in
to Cleanaway, Victoria did not implement the harmonised WHS laws and the
structure and content of the s 21 Victorian offence
is different to s 32 of the
WHS Act. Not the least difference is that there is no equivalent under the
Victorian Act to s 32(c)
of the WHS Act and other harmonised laws.
criticised the approach of the appeal judge, contending that on his test
concerning satisfaction of s 32(c) he merely repeated
what was required to be
proved to establish the breach of duty element under s 32(b). This approach, as
explained in
Grasso v SafeWork
by Cavanagh
conflated two distinct and
different elements of the s 32 offence.
to the criticism made by the appeal judge that the interpretation in
conflated the Commonwealth approach to causation with a statutory
duty to eliminate or minimise
Cleanaway contended
that it was in fact the appeal judge’s approach that conflated the s 32(b)
obligation to satisfy the duty
by taking the specified reasonably practicable
measure to obviate risk, with a separate and distinct additional causation
prescribed by s 32(c). In so doing, it was overlooked that it is
necessary to demonstrate that it is the failure under s 32(b) to
eliminate or
minimise risk in a general sense that must be proved under s 32(c) to actually
cause the nominated people to be exposed
to the risk of death or serious injury
on the nominated occasion. This, according to Cleanaway, helped to explain why
the penalty
is three times greater than for the offending under s 33 which is
complete upon proof only of the s 32(b) element.
contended that the appeal judge was bound to follow the decision of the New
South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal in
Grasso v SafeWork
unless he was
convinced that it was plainly
According to
Cleanaway, the appeal judge clearly disagreed with the decision but failed to
apply it because he erroneously believed
that the underlying legislation must
have been different.
also contended that, on the proper application of
Grasso v SafeWork
essential element of causation prescribed by s 32(c) of the WHS Act had not been
made out on both charges 1 and 2. This was
required because
is plainly correct having regard to existing authority and the
structure of the s 32 offence.
continued that there was no evidence, nor any attempt to prove, that a failure
to have in place the measures specified
in charges 1 and 2 had an impact on the
exposure to the risk of the people nominated on 18 August 2014 sufficient to
establish the
element of causation.
contended that the s 32(c) element, as explained in
Grasso v SafeWork
must be proved by way of the application of well recognised and understood
criminal law principles of causation. It required proof
of causation not
between a duty failure and the incident or injury, but rather by the duty
failure causing, on a specified occasion,
a person to be exposed to the risk of
death or serious injury, whether or not death or serious injury actually
eventuated.
statutory term “exposure to risk” required that on the nominated
occasion, the person be sufficiently proximate for
the risk to “come
when the brakes failed, the
people who were killed or suffered serious injury
were relevantly exposed to the risk of death or serious injury whether or not
accident had actually
to Cleanaway, the issue requiring determination in this case was whether the
failure to have in place the measure in the
charge sheet caused the specified
exposure to risk on 18 August 2014.
many years, said Cleanaway, the authorities that have been applied make it clear
that the relevant question on causation is whether
the act or omission of the
defendant was a significant or substantial cause of the employee being exposed
to the risk of death or
serious injury on a nominated
submitted that the concept of the failure being the cause of the exposure to
risk applied to the New South Wales legislation
preceded the introduction of the
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
(NSW). The 2011 New South Wales Act is
relevantly identical to the WHS Act. The leading authorities which explain the
exposure to risk, apart from
Bulga Underground Operations Pty Ltd
Pty Limited v Industrial Court of New South
The causation
question must be determined by the application of common sense to the facts,
bearing in mind that the purpose of the
inquiry is to attribute legal
responsibility in a criminal
Accordingly,
Cleanaway submitted that
Grasso v SafeWork
was required to be applied by
the appeal judge and by this Court unless this Court was convinced that it is
plainly wrong.
contended that it was explained to the appeal judge that the prosecution case
was conducted from the outset by ignoring
the existence of the causation element
and then, when pressed, by the prosecutor leading the appeal judge into error by
the test for the duty element with a different and distinct test for
the essential element of causation.
Accordingly,
by rejecting
Grasso v SafeWork
, the appeal judge fell into error in
New South Wales provision under consideration in
Grasso v SafeWork
different to the Commonwealth provision in the WHS Act, when they are in fact
identical. They form part of the national harmonious
scheme for work, health
and safety legislation.
provided assistance and authority when construing s 32(c) of the WHS Act even
though Victoria is not part of the harmonised legislative
scheme, and the
provisions of the
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
materially different. In particular, the Victorian provisions do not contain
the causation element imposed upon an alleged
contravention of s 32 of the
WHS Act as represented by s 32(c).
contended, after citing passages of the judgment of Cavanagh J in
, that the appeal judge had observed, in apparent disagreement, that
the reasoning assumed the application of a causation element
that treats the
exposure to risk in the same way as an actual injury or
contended that this was precisely the test that the appeal judge was required to
apply. In particular, the appeal judge
was required to apply established
principles of causation under the criminal law – not to the actual cause
of the incident
or injury – but to the point in time preceding any
incident or injury when the nominated people were exposed to the death or
serious injury in the sense of being sufficiently proximate to suffer death or
serious injury should the risk come
criticised the approach of the appeal judge when addressing
. Cleanaway submitted that in the following passage, the appeal
judge was considering the reasons of
Grasso v SafeWork
which was directed
towards the “tolerably clear proposition” that the prosecution was
required to prove that it was the
alleged failure to undertake the computer
modelling that caused the specified workers to be exposed to the risk whilst
undertaking
respect, it is difficult to see why the element described in the second sentence
raises a question of causation at all. If the
second sentence is reframed to
state that the prosecution must establish that the workers were exposed to a
risk which GCE could
reasonably have eliminated or minimised by performing
computer modelling, any question of causation is removed. The only connection
which need be proved is between the risk to which a worker is exposed and the
reasonably practicable measures which would have reduced
that risk. The trial
Judge did not find that GCE failed to take a reasonable practicable measure
which would have reduced that risk
and for that reason the prosecution for a
breach of s 32 was bound to fail. Cavanagh J continued:
is conceptually difficult to understand how this could be when the demolition
workers were not following GCE advice and there is
no evidence as what the
computer modelling of the GCE sequencing advice would have shown.
my view, in accepting the causal connection between the failure to undertake
computer modelling and the workers being exposed to
a risk to their health and
safety, the trial judge erred in considering the causation question through the
prism of what GCE did
at the time of breach rather than how its work exposed the
workers to a risk at the time they were doing the demolition
244 This is evident from his Honour’s findings as
follows at [344]:
‘The creation of a computer model was a reasonably practicable measure
that would have allowed GCE’s advice to be tested,
thereby eliminating or
minimising the risk of an unplanned structural collapse. In the absence of the
computer model, GCE’s
advice did not eliminate or minimise the risk of an
unplanned structural collapse. The exercise of Mr Grasso’s engineering
judgement was fallible, resulting in the potential for the risk to come home
during the course of the demolition.’
is correct to say that in the absence of computer modelling GCE’s advice
did not eliminate or minimise the risk and thus
did not ensure the health and
safety as required by s 19(2) but that does not answer the question as to how or
why the failure to
undertake computer modelling at the time of giving the advice
was a substantial cause of the risk to which the workers were exposed
time they were doing their work, especially in circumstances in which they were
not following that advice.
it is correct to say that the exercise of engineering judgment by GCE was
fallible resulting in the potential for the risk
to come home during the course
of the demolition but there was no potential for that risk to come home whilst
the workers were demolishing
the roof as a result of the advice given when the
workers were not following the GCE advice.
question on breach, however, was different and it required addressing whether
the measure would have eliminated or minimised
the risk in a general sense (s
32(b)). By contrast, the question on causation required determining whether the
failure caused the
nominated people to be exposed to the risk of death or
serious injury on the nominated occasion, in the sense of being sufficiently
proximate to the risk for it to come home, whether or not the risk actually
crystallised and death or serious injury actually resulted.
to Cleanaway, this was not a complex issue or distinction. In some cases, in a
practical sense, establishing causation
concerning the exposure to risk will
involve a similar, if not identical, reasoning process to causation of the
incident or injury
on the nominated
contended that the following finding by the appeal judge must be
contrary to my construction of s 32, I were to consider the element of exposure
through the prism of causation in this case, then
I would find that
notwithstanding the brake defects, the failure to instruct Mr Hicks, on the
effective use of gears to retard the
speed of the truck when descending the
Freeway, was a significant cause of the risk of collision, between the vacuum
truck and other
road users, arising from an inability to stop the truck,
notwithstanding the brake defects.
said Cleanaway, the appeal judge failed to apply the approach in
and there was no evidence before the court capable of satisfying
that test. Cleanaway contended that it was unclear what the appeal
the test in
Grasso v SafeWork
to mean or what the appeal judge meant by
saying that he looked at the “element of exposure through the prism of
causation”.
contended that the appeal judge did not undertake the process of looking at what
happened on the day and determining whether
it had been proved that
implementation of the pleaded measure
have had any impact upon
what, immediately before the collision, caused the nominated people to be
exposed to the relevant risk,
let alone whether the alleged failure was a
substantial or significant cause of the exposure to the risk.
if the failure to instruct Mr Hicks on the effective use of gears to retard the
speed of the truck down the Freeway was the
failure alleged, there was no
evidence that it would have had any impact on the way Mr Hicks drove down the
South Eastern Freeway
on the day and, therefore, no impact upon the exposure to
risk. This, said Cleanaway, was in a context where it was plain that the
condition of the brakes caused the exposure to risk and it would have made no
difference if Mr Hicks had commenced the descent in
fourth gear (as suggested by
Dr Rechnitzer) rather than fifth gear.
was no evidence that, had Cleanaway implemented the charged measure, or the
uncharged measure relied on by the appeal judge,
it would have made any
difference at all to what happened on the day and therefore would not have had
any impact upon the exposure
of the nominated people to the relevant risk.
respondent commenced with what he contended were the relevant elements of the
offence under s 32 of the WHS Act, relying upon
the Victorian authority of
Carmichael v Commonwealth of
existence of a health and safety duty (the “duty element”);
failure to comply with that duty (the “breach element”); and
of an individual to the risk of death or serious injury or illness resulting
from the failure to comply with the duty (the
respondent contended that the apparent judicial disagreement over the
“exposure element” derived from “causation”
having such
a well-defined meaning and associated body of jurisprudence in other areas of
The respondent
relied on the following explanation provided by Incerti J in
Carmichael v
Commonwealth of
the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal [in
Grasso v SafeWork
comfortable describing the relationship as a ‘causal’ one, Kourakis
] preferred the language of a ‘connection’
between the breach and exposure in order to avoid ‘[conflating] the common
law approach to causation of an event or injury with the statutory duty to
eliminate or minimise risks which may never eventuate’.
(Citations omitted.)
respondent also relied upon
Carmichael v Commonwealth of Australia
the proposition that the different expressions used regarding the application of
the exposure element in
Grasso v SafeWork
Cleanaway Operations
Pty Ltd v Hanel
(by the appeal judge) were not
inconsistent:
the offence created by s 32 of the WHS Act does not require proof of any harm or
damage. However, that does not mean that
the exposure element cannot be
discussed or understood by reference to a causal relationship of some kind. In
its broadest sense,
‘causation’ is simply the ‘relation of
cause to effect’. Both
make clear that,
for the purposes of s 32 (when applied to the duty in s 19(1)):
(a) the relevant ‘cause’ is the failure to eliminate or minimise
risks to health and safety ‘so far as is reasonably
practicable’;
(b) the relevant ‘effect’ is the exposure of a person to a risk of
death or serious injury or illness – and not
actual occurrence
of such death, injury or illness.
(Citations omitted.)
in her Honour’s reasons, Incerti J
view, the fundamental difficulty presented by the exposure element of the
offence created by s 32 of the WHS Act is not labelling
the relationship between
breach and exposure to risk (whether that label be ‘causation’, a
‘nexus’ or some
other ‘connection’), but rather defining
the risk to which a person was actually exposed, and the strength of the
relationship
between the breach and exposure required to found criminal
(a) in relation to defining the risk, I note Walton J’s observation in
that the exposure element of the offence is concerned with the
‘risk as pleaded in
the particular circumstances at a particular
when a person is exposed to risk’ (emphasis added). As noted by
Cavanagh J, this requires a retrospective assessment by reference
particularised measures and the relevant events that
actually occurred
(b) in relation to the strength of the relationship, I note that:
(i) Walton and Cavanagh JJ in
each separately required a
‘significant or substantial’ relationship between the breach and
exposure to risk (applying
Bulga Underground Operations Pty Ltd v Nash
(2016) 93 NSWLR 338), Walton J further noting that the connection ‘must be
sufficiently substantial to permit a conclusion
of criminal
responsibility’; whereas
(ii) Kourakis CJ in
formulated the relevant test as whether
compliance with the duty (to take all reasonably practicable measures)
‘would have
materially reduced the risk to which workers or others were
exposed even if the risk substantially arose out of circumstances for
PCBU [person conducting a business or undertaking] was not responsible’.
(Citations omitted.)
this basis, the respondent argued that there was no substantive difference
between the approaches taken in
Grasso v SafeWork
and by the appeal judge
because they involved differences of expression which ultimately led to the same
respondent referred to the application for special leave to appeal to the High
Court in the matter of
Grasso v SafeWork
, where it was submitted that any
difference between that case and the appeal judge’s decision was
“linguistic rather
substantive”.
the language of causation was used in
Grasso v SafeWork
, both decisions
“correctly identify the need for there to be in fact a connection between
the breach of duty on the one hand
and the exposure of an individual to risk on
the other”.
Accordingly,
submitted the respondent, it was of no consequence whether the appeal judge
Grasso v SafeWork
. The respondent submitted that the language
used by the appeal judge was to be preferred because using
“causation‑based
language” was undesirable:
had a different legal meaning in other established legal contexts, such as in
the law of negligence;
was liable to suggest, wrongly, that the statutory offences required proof of a
causal link between the employer’s conduct
and any accident or
In other words,
using that language was liable to suggest, incorrectly, that the cause of the
collision must be proved.
respondent contended that the appeal judge did not conflate the different
elements of the offence under s 32 of the WHS Act.
Rather, the appeal judge
expressly distinguished s 32 from the basic offence under s 33 and described the
effect as being the “critical
additional element of s 32”, being the
exposure element.
the appeal judge did not err in concluding that the proper construction to s 32
of the WHS Act was that the connection
which must be proved between the alleged
failure to comply with the duty, and the exposure to the identified risk
resulting from
the failure to comply with the duty, was that there were
reasonably practicable measures available to Cleanaway which, if adopted,
have materially reduced the
respondent relied on the proposition that even if it were concluded that the
causation test expressed in
Grasso v SafeWork
was in some way different
to the test applied by the appeal judge, the appeal judge specifically
contemplated that different test
and determined that the “exposure
element” was still made
Accordingly,
the respondent contended that there could be no substantial miscarriage of
The determination of
appeal ground 4
form of s 32 of the WHS Act relied on in this case corresponds with the
harmonised provisions, including the provision considered
under s 32 of the WHS Act comprises the following elements:
existence of a health and safety duty (the “duty element”);
failure to comply with that duty (the “breach element”); and
exposure of an individual to the risk of death or serious injury or illness
resulting from the failure to comply with the duty
(the “exposure
Respectfully,
it is preferable to describe the third limb as the “exposure
element” rather than a test of
That better
reflects the text of the provision and avoids the potential for confusion with
the use of the concept of causation in
other contexts. The question in this
case, however, is not whether
Grasso v SafeWork
should be followed, but whether the appeal judge relevantly erred in fact or law
when considering the exposure element, s 32(c) in
this case, and whether it had
been established that the exposure resulted from the breach of duty.
was a case where the defendant and its director had been
convicted after a roof collapsed during the demolition of the old Sydney
Entertainment Centre, narrowly missing two workers. They succeeded in setting
aside those convictions on appeal because, on the
evidence, the engineering
advice they gave had not been followed.
the advice been followed and had the roof collapsed, they may have been liable
for the exposure of workers to the risk of death
or serious injury. As it was,
no failing by them exposed demolition workers to the risk of death or serious
and the expert
analysis on the breach issue (the failure to adopt computer modelling) did not
assist the determination of the exposure
As this issue was
explained by Walton
... the appeal
should be upheld with respect to the issue of causation, essentially upon the
basis of the conclusions reached by Cavanagh
J that there were too many
intervening events or factors to permit the finding that the way in which Mr
Grasso depicted his advice
diagrammatically
without additional words was
a substantial and significant cause to the demolition workers being exposed to a
risk of death or injury
whilst they were undertaking demolition work. Further,
there was an absence of evidence as to how and why a failure to undertake
computer modelling constituted a substantial cause of the risk to which the
workers were exposed at the time the risk materialised.
the same case, Cavanagh J
is important not to conflate non-compliance with a health and safety duty with
the issue of causation which is an essential
element of the offence. Breach must
be assessed prospectively but causation must be assessed having regard to what
actually occurred.
this Court said:
“[I]t was necessary to establish whether the failure to appoint an SAC
was causally related to the risk of the employee’s
safety which occurred
on the evening in question. That question is to be determined by the application
of common sense to the facts
in question, appreciating that the purpose of the
inquiry is to attribute legal responsibility in a criminal
The causation question which arises in this matter is how or whether the
conduct of GCE as particularised by the respondent was causally
related to the
risk to the safety of the demolition workers that occurred at the time when they
were working under the roof.
Work Health Authority v Outback Ballooning Pty Ltd
, the High Court
explained that, under the harmonised system of work health laws, s 19(2)
requires that a person conducting a business
or undertaking must ensure, so far
as is reasonably practicable, that the health and safety of persons “is
not put at risk
from work carried out as part of the conduct of the business or
undertaking”.
Section 19(3) provides that, without limiting subsections (1) and (2), a
person conducting a business or undertaking must ensure,
so far as reasonably
practicable, various matters directed to the protection of employees and others
from risks to their health and
safety from work carried out as part of the
conduct of the business or
undertaking.
WHS Act is contravened when there is a failure by the person conducting a
business or undertaking to take particularised measures
to prevent exposure to
an identifiable risk.
heart of any prosecution for offending under s 32 for a breach of the duty under
s 19 is the exposure of workers and others
to the risk of death or serious
injury, and that does not require proof that there has been the manifestation of
that risk, still
less that a relevant accident or incident has actually caused
death or serious injury. As the Victorian Court of Appeal explained
has been repeatedly pointed out in the authorities, proof of breach is
independent of any link with injury or
Thus, the High Court
It is not necessary that harm has already befallen an employee for an offence
to have been committed. Where an inspector authorised
under the OH&S Act
identifies a risk to the health, safety or welfare of employees present at a
workplace, which an employer
has not addressed, [the general duty] may be
contravened. An obvious example would be the failure to guard dangerous
In many instances, as the plurality judgment in
pointed out, the
specification in the charge of the measure which the employer should have taken
will identify the risk being addressed.
Proof that the specified measure would
have eliminated or reduced that risk establishes the requisite nexus between the
omission and the risk. There is no necessity to introduce
notions of causation. As we have suggested, such notions are likely to
misunderstanding, as occurred in this case.
Moreover, undue focus on the accident is likely to lead to an inappropriately
narrow definition of the risk the subject of the charges.
This point has been
succinctly expressed, in terms approved by the New South Wales Industrial Court,
as follows:
[C]areful attention must be paid to the correct identification of the risk
the subject of the charges ... [I]t is inappropriate to
seek to artificially
confine the risk to one narrowly defined by reference to an accident with the
benefit of hindsight: it is the
general class of risk which matters. The
danger repeatedly cautioned against of focussing too much attention on an
accident is twofold:
such a misguided focus can obscure the relevant risk, and
it can also misdirect an analysis of
portion of this passage was cited with approval in
whilst workplace prosecutions are usually commenced in the wake of death or
serious injury, that should not be permitted
to obscure what are the elements of
a charge under s 32 of the WHS
That is consistent with
what was observed by the Court of Criminal Appeal in
Unity Pty Ltd v SafeWork
prosecutions for breach of occupational safety laws are rarely, if ever, brought
where there has not been a serious injury or
death, the test of breach of duty
nevertheless remains prospective. However, there are different levels of
particularity at which
risks can be assessed. Prospectively, a reasonably broad
approach may be appropriate; by contrast, a retrospective analysis of the
precise circumstances of an injury or fatality may lead to a narrow description
of the risk which materialised. ...
, the convictions concerned offences under
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2004
(Vic). The Court of Appeal
explained that the prosecution in that case needed only to establish
(a) there was a risk to employee health and safety;
(b) the measures identified as necessary would have
eliminated or reduced the risk (as the case may be); and
(c) it was ‘reasonably practicable’ in
the circumstances for the employer to have taken those measures.
the third limb in s 32 of the WHS Act, the “exposure element”, did
not form part of the prosecution case in
looking at the third limb of s 32, the exposure element under s 32(c), it may be
accepted that it is necessary to look at the
issue having regard to the context
in which it arises, namely, a criminal prosecution, but that does not mean that
it is necessary
to use the language of causation. Some care should therefore be
exercised when considering passages such as the
is to be viewed in a common sense and a practical way, appreciating that the
purpose of the inquiry is to attribute legal
responsibility in a criminal
Royall v The Queen
(1991) 172 CLR 378
[1991] HCA 27
[17] (per Mason CJ), [19] (per Deane and
Dawson JJ) and [15] and [21] (per Toohey and Gaudron JJ). As Allsop P stated in
Whelan, Heath Andrew v R
[2012] NSWCCA 147
, whilst causation is an
issue that has been the subject of much debate in some legislation in the civil
sphere, in crime, it remains,
in many contexts a jury question and is governed
by the test in
. The question is one of fact, dealt with by common
sense, appreciating that the purpose of the inquiry is to attribute legal
responsibility
in a criminal matter and so the causal connection must be
sufficiently substantial to permit a conclusion of criminal responsibility.
One further observation may be made with respect to causation. The question
of causation will necessarily be impacted by the manner
in which the charges are
framed but, as a foundational proposition, the question excited by causation is
whether the duty holder’s
acts or omissions cause the risk as pleaded in
the particular circumstances at a particular time when a person is exposed to
The Crown in the Right of the
State of New South Wales
(Department of Education and Training) v Maurice O’Sullivan
[2005] NSWIRComm 198
this case, the appeal judge was aware of the “exposure element” but
preferred to avoid using the language of causation.
The appeal judge explained
his conclusion on the exposure element in the following
five Cleanaway contends that the Magistrate erred in finding that the
‘causation’ element of the offences was
satisfied by proof that the
alleged measures would have reduced the risk. Cleanaway submits that the
Magistrate should have found
that, the prosecution was required to prove that
the omission to put in place the alleged measures was a significant or
substantial
cause of the nominated people being exposed to the specified risk of
serious injury or death.
I would dismiss ground five because on a proper construction of s 32 of
the Act the only connection which must be proved between the
exposure to risk
and the alleged breach of duty is that there were reasonably practicable
measures which, if adopted by [Cleanaway],
would have materially reduced the
risk to which workers or others were exposed even if the risk substantially
arose out of circumstances
for which [Cleanaway] was not responsible.
the core of Cleanaway’s complaints are two propositions. The first is
that the relevant risk was caused by the failure
of the brakes rather than by
the failure to properly evaluate and instruct Mr Hicks regarding the appropriate
means of traveling
down steep descents, such as the Freeway, in a fully laden
vacuum truck using a manual transmission. The second is that the appeal
ignored the third limb, eliding the breach and exposure elements.
a significant extent the first proposition is answered by various of the reasons
given concerning the earlier grounds.
was evidence to support the findings made by the magistrate and upheld by the
appeal judge that a cause of the loss of control,
and by inference the risk of
death or serious injury, was the failure to evaluate and instruct Mr Hicks
regarding appropriate manual
gear selection. The weight of the expert and lay
evidence led by the respondent was accepted as demonstrating that a significant
and material cause of the exposure of Cleanaway’s workers and others to
death or serious injury was the failure to implement
reasonably practicable
measures which would have ensured that Mr Hicks’ driving ability was
properly evaluated before he got
onto the Freeway, or at the least Mr Hicks was
instructed about how to make an appropriate gear selection in circumstances such
those applying on 18 August 2014.
ought not be overlooked that there was no opinion evidence called in opposition
to those of Dr Rechnitzer’s opinions that
were accepted.
had no clear system for evaluating Mr Hicks’ competence and it could have
kept him in trucks with automatic transmission,
or operating with the assistance
of a buddy, until his competence to drive a vacuum truck with a manual
transmission on his own down
a descent such as the Freeway had been properly
evaluated. In any event, it was open to find that it was by reason of his
inexperience
that Mr Hicks selected the wrong gear at the start of his descent
and was unable to control the speed of the truck and keep it at
a safe speed
until it was necessary to apply the brakes and bring the truck to a stop at the
bottom of the Freeway.
Hicks lost control well before that stage, and was travelling at around
80 km/h and unable to change down or effectively apply
the footbrake as the
alarm sounded when the decline steepened, after he had passed the two arrester
for the suggested misapplication by the appeal judge of the third element
concerning the exposure to risk, the appeal judge was
well aware of the need for
this to be separately
established:
critical additional element of s 32 of the Act, which distinguishes it from
the basic offence enacted by s 33, is that a person
risk of death or serious injury or illness in respect of which all reasonably
practicable measures to eliminate or minimise
the risk have not been taken. The
metes and bounds of a discrete offence against s 32 of the Act are
therefore subject to the further,
narrowing filter, that a person has been
exposed to the risk which the employer has failed to eliminate or minimise. It
follows even
more strongly, therefore, that an offence against s 33 is
delineated by the particular risk to which a person has been exposed. A
which alleged that a person was exposed to a multiplicity of risks, would
necessarily be bad for duplicity. The conclusion
in respect of s 32 supports
the taking of a symmetrical approach to s 33 of the Act even though exposure to
a risk is not an element
of the basic offence.
There can be no offence against s 32 of the Act if the only risk flowing
from the failure to take all reasonably practical measures
to minimise or
eliminate it, is of minor harm. However, the concept of
requires something more than simply the failure to minimise risk. There is a
distinction between failing to
health and safety (to use the language of s 17 of the Act) and
person at risk
(to use the language of s 19(2)) on the one hand, and
that element of s 32(c) of the Act which is
an individual
to risk on the other. Some examples may help to illuminate that distinction.
appeal judge then gave two relevant
conducting an enterprise who fails to check the brakes of heavy vehicles as
often as it is reasonably practicable to do so
fails to minimise the risk of a
collision caused by a brake failure. That PCBU does not ensure the safety of the
enterprise’s
workers and puts others at risk. The PCBU, therefore,
breaches the duty and commits an offence against s 33 of the [WHS Act] even
the vehicle has not left the garage after the last inspection was due. So too
if the vehicle is driven well after a scheduled
inspection even though the
brakes are nevertheless found to be in proper working order. However, if the
truck is driven out of the
garage, and the brakes are then found to have a
latent fault which might have resulted in a catastrophic brake failure, and the
offence been committed, but in addition, persons in the vehicle’s
path have also been
to risk. An offence against s 32 of the
Act will therefore have been committed.
So too, with respect to a failure to assess the competence of a newly engaged
driver. A failure to make an assessment when it is
reasonably practicable to do
so, will result in a breach of the duty and a failure to minimise risk and the
commission of a s 33
offence. If the driver is found, in fact, to be perfectly
competent to drive the vehicle on the route it took, no one will have
exposed to a risk. On the other hand, if the driver is shown not to have the
necessary competencies to control the speed of
the truck and manage a brake
failure down the steep route on which the truck was driven, the PCBU commits a
s 32 offence.
the appeal judge expressed a preference for the approach taken in
rather than the approach taken in
Grasso v SafeWork
and whether or not he had a misunderstanding about the respective statutory
tests, his preference was clearly in connection with
avoiding the language of
“causation” and adhering to the statutory
The question was
whether the exposure to the risk of death or serious injury or illness resulted
from the failure of Cleanaway to
comply with the duty element.
a significant extent, the criticisms made by Cleanaway have been answered by
Incerti J in
Carmichael v Commonwealth of Australia
in the passages
earlier set out.
judge did not misunderstand or elide the exposure element when upholding the
finding that it had been proved that the
exposure to death or serious injury
resulted from the breach of duty.
it is in any event significant that, even on the approach favoured by Cleanaway,
the appeal judge found that “causation”
established:
contrary to my construction of s 32, I were to consider the element of exposure
through the prism of causation in this case, then
I would find that
notwithstanding the brake defects, the failure to instruct Mr Hicks, on the
effective use of gears to retard the
speed of the truck when descending the
Freeway, was a significant cause of the risk of collision, between the vacuum
truck and other
road users, arising from an inability to stop the truck,
notwithstanding the brake defects.
the circumstances of this case, these findings were open on the evidence, and it
has not been shown that the appeal judge erred
in fact or law concerning the
exposure element. Appeal ground 4 should be
to appeal should be granted. The appeal should be
WHS Act, s 3(1)(e).
Commonwealth: Comcare v
Cleanaway Operations Pty Ltd (CAN 010 745 383) Transpacific Industries Pty
[2021] SAMC 54 (Magistrate Smart) (the
Cleanaway Operations Pty
Ltd v Philip Hanel (Commonwealth: Comcare)
[2022] SASC 52 (Kourakis
appeal judge
Police (SA) v Mahon
(2022) 141 SASR 374
, [81]-[84] (Livesey P, Lovell and Doyle JJA).
Oatley v The Commonwealth
Director of Public Prosecutions
[2021] SASCA 108
, [36] (Livesey P,
Lovell JA and Stanley AJA).
Wyong Shire Council v
[1980] HCA 12
(1980) 146 CLR 40.
See exhibit P4.
Exhibit P4; Transcript, pp
Transcript, p 264.
Exhibit P4, paragraph 41
and the appeal judge, [91].
Transcript, pp 325-326.
Transcript, pp 98-99,
Exhibit P4, [40]-[41],
document 45, pp 1, 8; Transcript p 331 and onwards, p 422.
Transcript, pp 310,
Exhibit P4, document 34.
Exhibit P9. See Transcript, pp 329, 331, 333-334, 342.
Exhibit P4, document 34.
Transcript, pp 333-338, 342-343.
Transcript, pp 101,
Transcript, p 103.
Exhibit P4, [43];
Transcript, pp 102, 104, 311.
Transcript, pp 308,
Exhibit P4, [23], [36] and
Transcript, p 106.
Transcript, pp 415,
425-427, 449.
Transcript, p 430.
Transcript, p 413.
Transcript, pp 414, 423,
Transcript, p 106.
Transcript, pp 430-435,
Exhibit P4, document
Exhibit P8, p 3;
Transcript, pp 296-297.
See, generally,
[1950] HCA 36
(1950) 82 CLR 161
Taylor v Attorney-General
[2019] HCA 30
(2019) 268 CLR
, [18]-[36] (Kiefel CJ, Bell, Gageler and Keane JJ).
Explanatory Memorandum to
Work Health and Safety Bill 2011
(Cth), pp 81-82.
WHS Act, s 4.
Comcare is also a body
corporate with perpetual succession, SRC Act, s 74(1)(a).
Subsection 154(1) of the
WHS Act states: The regulator may, by instrument in writing, delegate a power or
function under this Act
other than this power of delegation to:
(a) a member of the staff of the regulator who is an SES employee or acting
SES employee; or
(b) an inspector; or
(c) a member of the staff of the regulator prescribed by the
regulations.
John Holland Pty Ltd v
[2022] WASC 358.
Wallis v John Holland
[2024] WASCA 26
Wallis v John Holland
And not by s 230 of the WHS
Parks Holdings Pty Ltd v
Chief Executive Officer of Customs
[2004] FCA 820
(2004) 81 ALD 365
, [99] (Goldberg J).
[1911] UKLawRpKQB 49
, 965 (Lord Alverstone CJ, Lawrance and Pickford JJ);
[1915] HCA 79
(1915) 21 CLR 1
, 25 (Isaacs J, with whom Powers J agreed),27
(Higgins J, with whom Powers J agreed);
Ex parte Smith
(1918) 35 WN (NSW)
54 (Ferguson
Ex parte Stuart; Re Mead; Ex parte Anderson; Re Mead
(1930) 47 WN (NSW) 60
, 61 (Halse Rogers J);
O’Sullivan v Truth and
Sportsman Ltd
[1955] SASR 85
, 87 (Ross J);
[1977] VicRp 3
[1977] VR 22
29 (Young CJ). Recently, this statement was referred to and applied in
Director of Public Prosecutions v Phillips
(2018) VSC 447
, 639 [13]-[16]
(Ginnane J);
Gilmour v Midways Springwood Pty Ltd
[1980] FCA 142
(1980) 33 ALR 605
(Brennan J);
A v Maughan
[2016] WASCA 128
(2016) 50 WAR 263
, [152] (McLure P, with whom
Corboy J agreed);
Director, Transport Safety v Metro Trains Melbourne Pty
(2019) 58 VR 355
, [3]-[53] (Garde J);
Director of Public Prosecutions
(Cth) v Haddad
[2019] NSWCA 55
, [12]-[13] (Bell P, White and Brereton
Wallis v John Holland
[2024] WASCA 26.
Hill v Zuda Pty Ltd
[2022] HCA 21
(2022) 275 CLR 24
, [26] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Keane, Gordon, Edelman, Steward and
Gleeson JJ);
CAL No 14 Pty Ltd v Motor Accidents Insurance Board
239 CLR 390
, [49] (Gummow, Heydon and Crennan JJ).
Woolcock Street
Investments Pty Ltd v CDG Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 16
(2004) 216 CLR 515
, [59] (McHugh J).
Wallis v John Holland
[2024] WASCA 26
, [51], [64] (Buss P).
Wallis v John Holland
[2024] WASCA 26
, [96] (Vaughan JA).
Wallis v John Holland
[2024] WASCA 26
, [117] (Vaughan JA).
Wallis v John Holland
[2024] WASCA 26
, [120] (Vaughan JA).
Wallis v John Holland
[2024] WASCA 26
, [121]-[123] (Vaughan JA).
Wallis v John Holland
[2024] WASCA 26
, [152], [156]-[157] (Vaughan JA).
Wallis v John Holland
[2024] WASCA 26
, [237], [249] (Solomon J).
Wallis v John Holland
[2024] WASCA 26
, [238] (Solomon J).
Wallis v John Holland
[2024] WASCA 26
, [250] (Solomon J).
Wallis v John Holland
[2024] WASCA 26
, [253] (Solomon J).
Wallis v John Holland
[2024] WASCA 26
, [253] (Solomon J).
Instrument of Appointment
dated 14 May 2015, AB, p 352.
Acts Interpretation Act
Acts Interpretation Act
s 34AB(1)(a).
Edelsten v Health
Insurance Commission
(1990) 27 FCR 56
, 62-63 (Northrop and Lockhart JJ);
Mercantile Mutual Life Insurance Co v Australian Securities Commission
[1993] FCA 77
(1993) 40 FCR 409
Mercantile Mutual
), 422 (Lockhart
Interpretation in Australia
ed), [12.31].
Acts Interpretation Act
Hongkong Bank of
Australia v Australian Securities Commission
[1992] FCA 376
(1992) 40 FCR 402
Mercantile Mutual
[1993] FCA 77
(1993) 40 FCR 409
, 422 (Lockhart J).
John Holland Pty Ltd v
[2022] WASC 358
, [64] (Archer J).
John Holland Pty Ltd v
[2022] WASC 358
, [112] (Archer J).
John Holland Pty Ltd v
[2022] WASC 358
, [113] (Archer J).
John Holland Pty Ltd v
[2022] WASC 358
And not an overly generous
construction of it,
Mercantile Mutual
[1993] FCA 77
(1993) 40 FCR 409
(Gummow J).
Mercantile Mutual
[1993] FCA 77
(1993) 40 FCR 409.
John Holland Pty Ltd v
[2022] WASC 358
, [120]-[130] (Archer J).
Securities Commission v Marlborough Gold Mines Ltd
[1993] HCA 15
(1993) 177 CLR 485
(Mason CJ, Brennan, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ);
Farah Constructions
Pty Ltd v Say-Dee Pty Ltd
(2007) 230 CLR 89
, [135] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow,
Callinan, Heydon and Crennan JJ);
Hill v Zuda Pty Ltd
[2022] HCA 21
(2022) 275 CLR 24
[25]-[26] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Keane, Gordon, Edelman, Steward and Gleeson JJ).
Obviously, there is no need for this Court to follow
the approach which requires
single judges to follow other single judges of co-ordinate authority when
interpreting Commonwealth legislation
unless the second court takes the view
that the first court was clearly wrong, cf
Hamilton Island Enterprises Pty Ltd v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[1982] 1 NSWLR 113
, 119 (Rogers J).
Hill v Zuda
[2022] HCA 21
(2022) 275 CLR 24
, [25]-[26] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Keane, Gordon,
Edelman, Steward and Gleeson JJ). See also
Farah Constructions Pty Ltd v
Say-Dee Pty Ltd
(2007) 230 CLR 89
, [134]-[135] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow,
Callinan, Heydon and Crennan JJ).
SZTAL v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
, [14] (Kiefel CJ,
Nettle and Gordon JJ);
AB (a pseudonym) v Independent Broad-based
Anti-corruption Commission
[2024] HCA 10
(2024) 278 CLR 300
, [21] (Gageler CJ, Gordon,
Edelman, Steward, Gleeson, Jagot and Beech-Jones JJ).
Certain Lloyd’s
Underwriters v Cross
[2012] HCA 56
(2012) 248 CLR 378
, [26] (French CJ and Hayne J).
Australian Broadcasting
Tribunal & Actors Equity of Australia Ltd v Saatchi & Saatchi Compton
(Vic) Pty Ltd
(1985) 10 FCR 1
, 4-8 (Bowen CJ);
Majar v Northern Land
(1991) 37 FCR 117
, 136 (Olney J).
Mercantile Mutual
[1993] FCA 77
(1993) 40 FCR 409.
Mercantile Mutual
[1993] FCA 77
(1993) 40 FCR 409
, 412 (Black CJ).
Mercantile Mutual
[1993] FCA 77
(1993) 40 FCR 409
, 422 (Lockhart J, with whom Black CJ agreed).
Burns Philp & Co Ltd
(1993) 29 NSWLR 723.
Burns Philp & Co Ltd
(1993) 29 NSWLR 723
, 726 (Mahoney JA).
Burns Philp v Murphy
(1993) 29 NSWLR 723
, 729 (Clarke and Handley JJA).
Burns Philp v Murphy
(1993) 29 NSWLR 723
, 730 (Clarke and Handley JJA).
Burns Philp v Murphy
(1993) 29 NSWLR 723
, 730-731 (Clarke and Handley JJA).
Burns Philp v Murphy
(1993) 29 NSWLR 723
, 731-732 (Clarke and Handley JJA).
See WHS Act, s 152(h).
Wallis v John
[2024] WASCA 26
, [41] (Buss P), citing
Attorney-General
[1982] QB 839
, 846-847 (Sir Sebag Shaw);
Biochem Pharma
Inc v Commissioner of Patents
(1998) 82 FCR 87
, 92 (Hill J).
Hird v Chief Executive
Officer of Australian Sports Anti-Doping Authority
[2015] FCAFC 7
(2015) 227 FCR 95
(Kenny, Besanko and White JJ).
Berry v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[1953] HCA 70
(1953) 89 CLR 653
, 658-659 (Kitto J).
Berry v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[1953] HCA 70
(1953) 89 CLR 653
, 658-659 (Kitto J);
Calder; Ex parte Lee
[2007] WASCA 161
(2007) 34 WAR 289
, [36]-[38] (McLure JA, with whom
Pullin and Buss JJA agreed).
Wallis v John
[2024] WASCA 26
, [47] (Buss P).
Huth v Clarke
[1890] UKLawRpKQB 105
(1890) 25 QBD 391
, 395 (Wills J).
Mercantile Mutual
[1993] FCA 77
(1993) 40 FCR 409
, 440 (Gummow J);
Parks Holdings Pty Ltd v Chief Executive
Officer of Customs
[2004] FCA 820
(2004) 81 ALD 365
, [87] (Goldberg J).
Burns Philp & Co
Ltd v Murphy
(1993) 29 NSWLR 723
, 729-730 (Clarke and Handley JJA);
v The Queen
[2020] SASCFC 116
(2020) 286 A Crim R 501
, [152]-[168] (Kourakis CJ, Peek and Blue
JJ) regarding the “functions” provision in
Independent Commissioner Against Corruption Act 2012
(SA). As to the
last case, see the discussion by Solomon J in
Wallis v John Holland
[2024] WASCA 26
, [229]‑[234].
Wallis v John
[2024] WASCA 26
, [51]-[52] (Buss P).
Wallis v John
[2024] WASCA 26
, [238] (Solomon J).
Wallis v John
[2024] WASCA 26
, [129]-[130] (Vaughan JA), [238] (Solomon J).
Kirk v Industrial
Relations Commission of New South Wales
(2010) 239 CLR 531,
[5], [12]‑[19], [26]‑[37] (French CJ,
Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ).
Bunnings Forest
Products Pty Ltd v Shepherd
[1998] WASCA 119
Bunnings Forest
) (Anderson J, with whom Franklyn and Ipp JJ agreed);
Kidman & Co Ltd v Lowndes CM
[2016] NTCA 5
(2016) 314 FLR 358
, [66], [99]-[103] (Grant
CJ, Kelly and Hiley JJ).
Grasso Consulting
Engineers Pty Ltd v SafeWork NSW
[2021] NSWCCA 288
Grasso v SafeWork
), [54] (Cavanagh J).
CLR 531, [16] (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ).
Magistrate, [297],
[321], [345] and [365].
Bradshaw v McEwans
(1951) 217 ALR 1
, 5 (Dixon, Williams, Webb, Fullagar and Kitto JJ);
Luxton v Vines
[1952] HCA 19
(1952) 85 CLR 352
, 358 (Dixon, Fullagar and Kitto JJ);
[2017] HCA 2
(2017) 91 ALJR 262
, [18] (Gordon J).
Appeal judge, [42].
Appeal judge, [16],
[41], [54], [96]-[97] and [119].
X7 v Australian Crime
[2013] HCA 29
(2013) 248 CLR 92
, [99]-[101] (Hayne and Bell JJ);
[2001] HCA 67
(2001) 209 CLR 1
, [47] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Hayne JJ);
Maxwell v The
(1996) 184 CLR 501, [27] (Gaudron and Gummow JJ).
Appeal judge, [44].
Johnson v Miller
[1937] HCA 77
(1937) 59 CLR 467
, 489 (Dixon J).
Conflicting with the
principle that relevant risk should not be defined narrowly and with undue focus
on any particular accident,
Director of Public Prosecutions v Vibro-Pile
(Aust) Pty Ltd
[2016] VSCA 55
(2016) 49 VR 676
), [86] (Maxwell P,
Redlich and Whelan JJA).
[2016] VSCA 55
, [91] (Maxwell P, Redlich and Whelan JJA).
Appeal judge, [10],
John Holland Pty Ltd
[2016] SASC 192
, [23] (Peek J).
Appeal judge, [41].
Appeal judge, [42].
Appeal judge, [43].
HD Projects Pty Ltd v
SafeWork NSW
[2022] NSWCCA 212
, [81] (Cavanagh J, with whom Hamill J
John Holland Pty Ltd
[2016] SASC 192
, [23] (Peek J).
DPP Reference No 2 of
[2001] VSCA 114
, [40]; cited by Kyrou J in
Contract Control Services
Pty Ltd v Brown
[2012] VSC 369
[1953] SASR 114
Johnson v Miller
[1937] HCA 77
(1937) 59 CLR 467
, 486 and 501;
(2010) 239 CLR 531, [26].
Baiada Poultry Pty
Ltd v Glenister
[2015] VSCA 344
(2015) 257 IR 204
CLR 531, [26].
CLR 531, [26]; see also
John Holland Pty Ltd v Industrial Court of NSW
[2010] NSWCA 338
, [78]-[79], [123], [141];
Baiada Poultry Pty Ltd v
[2015] VSCA 344
(2015) 257 IR 204
HD Projects Pty Ltd v
SafeWork NSW
[2022] NSWCCA 212.
[2001] NSWCCA 174
122 A Crim R 70
, [32]-[33] (Carruthers AJ, with whom Hidden J and
Badgery‑Parker AJ agreed).
HD Projects Pty Ltd v
SafeWork NSW
[2022] NSWCCA 212
, [81] (Cavanagh J, with whom Hamill J
Prosecution opening, p
Prosecution opening, pp
Prosecution opening, p
Prosecution opening, pp
Prosecution opening, pp
Prosecution opening, p
Prosecution opening, pp
Prosecution opening, p
Prosecution opening, pp
Prosecution opening, p
Prosecution opening, p
Prosecution opening, p
Prosecution opening, p
Prosecution opening, pp
Prosecution opening, pp
Prosecution opening, p
Transcript, p 25.
Transcript, p 28.
Transcript, p 29.
Transcript, p 31.
Transcript, p 51.
[2016] VSCA 55
Transcript, p 201.
Transcript, p 212.
Transcript, p 213.
See, for example, the
debate about the licensing and certification of Mr Hicks, transcript p 556.
Exhibit P13, p 19.
Transcript, p 793.
Transcript, p 793.
Exhibit P13, p 42.
Exhibit P13, pp
Exhibit P13, p 60.
See Mr Darren Hicks,
transcript p 407 onwards; Mr Darryn Cleary, transcript p 217 onwards;
Mr Gregory Skinner, transcript p 313
See Exhibit P15, the
forensic mechanical engineering report from Dr White.
Exhibit P15, transcript
pp 224-225, 230-231, 367-368.
Magistrate,
Appeal judge, [9]-[10].
See also [43]-[46].
CAL No 14 Pty Ltd v
Motor Accidents Insurance Board
(2009) 239 CLR 390
, [41]-[42] (Gummow,
Heydon and Crennan JJ).
Bunnings Forest
[1998] WASCA 119.
Bunnings Forest
[1998] WASCA 119
, 24-25 (Anderson J, with whom Ipp and Franklin JJ
Appeal judge, [16] and
Appellant’s
written submission, [26].
Appeal judge, [16].
Exhibits P6 and P7;
Appeal judge, [87].
Exhibit P5; Appeal
judge, [86].
Exhibit P4, [41]; Appeal
judge, [86].
Appeal judge,
Appeal judge, [122].
Magistrate,
[309]-[311].
Magistrate, [310].
Magistrate, [311].
Appeal judge,
[123]-[124].
Work Health Authority
v Outback Ballooning Pty Ltd
[2019] HCA 2
(2019) 266 CLR 428
, [89] (Gageler J).
Appeal judge, [16],
[123]-[124]; Magistrate, [309]-[311].
Appeal judge, [96]-[98],
[104], [107], [113], [118]-[119].
Appeal judge, [104].
Appeal judge, [98].
Appeal judge, [103].
Referring to the
evidence of the prosecution expert, Dr White, Exhibit P15, [27].
Wyong Shire Council v
[1980] HCA 12
(1980) 146 CLR 40.
Vairy v Wyong Shire
[2005] HCA 62
(2005) 223 CLR 422
, [126], [128] (Hayne J).
Appeal judge, [16].
Appeal judge, [14],
[16], [121] and [123].
Appeal judge, [123], see
also [14]. On the failure of the appeal judge to approach the assessment of
reasonable practicability
in the appropriate manner, Cleanaway relied on
Baiada Poultry Pty Ltd v The Queen
[2012] HCA 14
(2012) 246 CLR 92
, [55] (Heydon
Appeal judge, [22].
Appeal judge, [16].
Appeal judge, [123].
See, for example,
Dovuro Pty Ltd v Wilkins
[2003] HCA 51
(2003) 215 CLR 317
, [34] (McHugh J).
Appeal judge, [67].
“Written submissions of the respondent” dated 23 June 2021, [42].
Appeal judge,
[94]-[108].
Appeal judge, [109].
Appeal judge, [103].
Appeal judge,
[103]-[104].
Appeal judge, [104].
Appeal judge, [16].
Appeal judge, [16].
Appeal judge, [45].
Appeal judge, [107].
Appeal judge, [123].
Appeal judge, [122].
Appeal judge, [67].
Relying upon
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
Libke v The Queen
[2007] HCA 30
(2007) 230 CLR 559.
125, “Written submissions of the respondent”, [61]-[65].
Appeal judge,
Appeal judge,
Appeal judge, [103].
Appeal judge, [98].
Appeal judge, [101].
Appeal judge, [102].
Appeal judge, [107].
Appeal judge, [108];
Magistrate, [241].
Appeal judge, [18],
Grasso v SafeWork
[2021] NSWCCA 288
, [2] (Simpson AJA), [12], [15], [26]-[29], [37]-[38]
(Walton J), [99] (regarding conflation of the duty element and the
element), [101], [224]‑[235], [241]‑[251] and [262]-[263]
(Cavanagh J).
[2016] VSCA 55
Grasso v SafeWork
[2021] NSWCCA 288
, [99] (Cavanagh J).
Appeal judge, [53].
Farah Constructions
Pty Ltd v Say-Dee Pty Ltd
(2007) 230 CLR 89
, [135] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow,
Callinan, Heydon and Crennan JJ).
Thiess Pty Limited v
Industrial Court of New South Wales
[2010] NSWCA 252
(2010) 78 NSWLR 94
, [67], [69]
(Spigelman CJ, with whom Beazley and Basten JJA agreed).
Bulga Underground
Operations Pty Ltd v Nash
(2016) 93 NSWLR 338, [127] (Bathhurst CJ, Hidden
and Davies JJ).
Bulga Underground
Operations Pty Ltd v Nash
(2016) 93 NSWLR 338.
Thiess Pty Limited v
Industrial Court of New South Wales
[2010] NSWCA 252
(2010) 78 NSWLR 94.
These authorities
have regularly and routinely been applied in many cases under the 2011 New South
Wales Act and under identical
legislation in Queensland.
Royall v The
[1991] HCA 27
(1991) 172 CLR 378.
Appeal judge, [61].
Thiess Pty Limited v
Industrial Court of New South Wales
[2010] NSWCA 252
(2010) 78 NSWLR 94
, [67], [69]
(Spigelman CJ, with whom Beazley and Basten JJA agreed).
Appeal judge, [63],
referring to
Grasso v SafeWork
[2021] NSWCCA 288
See, for example,
Simpson Design Associates Pty Ltd v Industrial Court of New South Wales
[2011] NSWCA 316
(2013) 213 A Crim R 340.
Appeal judge, [65].
Carmichael v
Commonwealth of Australia
[2022] VSC 364
, [26] (Incerti J).
Carmichael v
Commonwealth of Australia
[2022] VSC 364
, [31] (Incerti J).
Carmichael v
Commonwealth of Australia
[2022] VSC 364
, [33] (Incerti J).
Carmichael v
Commonwealth of Australia
[2022] VSC 364
, [32] (Incerti J).
Carmichael v
Commonwealth of Australia
[2022] VSC 364
, [35] (Incerti J).
SafeWork NSW v Grasso
[2022] HCATrans 132
(12 August 2022) (Gageler, Steward and
Gleeson JJ), p 12.
SafeWork NSW v Grasso
[2022] HCATrans 132
(12 August 2022) (Gageler, Steward and
Gleeson JJ), p 12.
[2016] VSCA 55
, [83] (Maxwell P, Redlich and Whelan JJA).
Appeal judge, [36].
Appeal judge, [18].
Appeal judge, [65].
Grasso v SafeWork
[2021] NSWCCA 288
, [15]-[17] (Walton J).
[2016] VSCA 55
, [84]-[86] (Maxwell P, Redlich and Whelan JJA);
Carmichael v
Commonwealth of Australia
[2022] VSC 364
, [26] (Incerti J).
Grasso v SafeWork
[2021] NSWCCA 288
, [2] (Simpson AJA).
Grasso v SafeWork
[2021] NSWCCA 288
, [7] (Simpson AJA).
Grasso v SafeWork
[2021] NSWCCA 288
, [12] (Walton J).
Grasso v SafeWork
[2021] NSWCCA 288
, [99]-[101] (Cavanagh J).
Bulga Underground
Operations Pty Ltd v Nash
(2016) 93 NSWLR 338, [128] (Bathurst CJ, Hidden
and Davies JJ).
Work Health Authority
v Outback Ballooning Pty Ltd
[2019] HCA 2
(2019) 266 CLR 428
, [2] (Kiefel CJ, Bell,
Keane, Nettle and Gordon JJ).
Work Health Authority
v Outback Ballooning Pty Ltd
[2019] HCA 2
(2019) 266 CLR 428
, [2] (Kiefel CJ, Bell,
Keane, Nettle and Gordon JJ).
CLR 531, [12]-[13] (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ);
Bulga Underground Operations Pty Ltd v Nash
(2016) 93 NSWLR 338, [11] and
[123] (Bathurst CJ, Hidden and Davies JJ), concerning predecessor
legislation.
[2016] VSCA 55
, [84]-[86] (Maxwell P, Redlich and Whelan JJA).
CLR 531, 553 [13] (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ);
Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) v Frewstal Pty Ltd
[2015] VSCA 266
(2015) 47 VR
, [41] (Maxwell P), [126]‑[127] (Priest and Kaye JJA).
CLR 531, [14] (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ).
State of New South
Wales (NSW Police) v Inspector Covi
[2005] NSWIR Comm 303
, [26], cited in
New South Wales v Cahill (No 2)
(2011) 210 IR 112
, [39], [45]
(Boland P, Walton VP and Staff J).
Grasso v SafeWork
[2021] NSWCCA 288
, [21] (Walton J).
[2016] VSCA 55
, [1] (Maxwell P, Redlich and Whelan JJA).
Unity Pty Ltd v
SafeWork NSW
[2018] NSWCCA 266
, [55] (Basten JA, with whom Beazley P and
Wilson J agreed).
[2016] VSCA 55
, [6] (Maxwell P, Redlich and Whelan JJA).
Grasso v SafeWork
[2021] NSWCCA 288
, [28]-[29] (Walton J).
Appeal judge,
Appeal judge, [94]-[95];
Magistrate, [236]-[238].
Appeal judge,
Appeal judge,
Appeal judge, [53]-[55],
Carmichael v
Commonwealth of Australia
[2022] VSC 364
, [31]-[35] (Incerti J).
Appeal judge, [65].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (936 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter