URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAEOT/2015/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:56:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
COURTS ADMINISTRATION AUTHORITY [2015] SAEOT 3 (22 April 2015)
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
(District Court Administrative and
Disciplinary Division)
to comply with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting
publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person
using material in the judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed
to the Registry of the Court in which it was generated.
In the Matter of AN APPLICATION
FOR EXEMPTION UNDER THE
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY ACT 1984
ADMINISTRATION AUTHORITY
[2015] SAEOT
Reasons for
Decision of His Honour Judge Costello, Member Mr R Altman and Member Mr H
HUMAN RIGHTS -
DISCRIMINATION
Application by the Courts Administration Authority for an exemption from the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
to enable it to employ only female legal
practitioners in its Step Up to the Bar Program - positive discriminatory
measures necessary
to redress current gender imbalance in favour of males at the
Independent Bar in South Australia - grant of application will promote
of opportunity for female legal practitioners wishing to pursue a career at the
HELD: Exemption from the provisions of
of the Act granted for three
years from 13 April 2015.
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
, referred to.
Pulteney Grammar School v Equal Opportunity Tribunal
[2007] SASC 308
considered.
ADMINISTRATION AUTHORITY
Introduction
is an application by the Courts Administration Authority
(‘the applicant’) for an exemption, pursuant to
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
(SA) (‘the Act’), from the
provisions of
of the Act to enable it to discriminate in favour of female
legal practitioners in its ‘Step Up to the Bar’ Program
The Legislative Scheme
the outset, it is convenient to set out the relevant provisions of the Act which
govern this application:
29—Criteria
for discrimination on ground of sex, chosen gender or sexuality
(2) For the purposes of this Act, a person discriminates on the ground of
(a) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of the other's sex; or
(b) if he or she treats another unfavourably because the other does not comply,
or is not able to comply, with a particular requirement
(i) the nature of the requirement is such that a substantially higher proportion
of persons of the opposite sex complies, or is able
to comply, with the
requirement than of those of the other's sex; and
(ii) the requirement is not reasonable in the circumstances of the case; or
(c) if he or she treats another unfavourably on the basis of a characteristic
that appertains generally to persons of the other's
sex, or on the basis of a
presumed characteristic that is generally imputed to persons of that sex; or
(d) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of an attribute of or a
circumstance affecting a relative or associate of the
other, being an attribute
or circumstance described in the preceding paragraphs.
30—Discrimination
against applicants and employees
(1) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against a person on the
ground of sex, chosen gender or sexuality—
(a) in determining, or in the course of determining, who should be offered
employment; or
(b) in the terms or conditions on which employment is offered.
(2) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against an employee on the
ground of sex, chosen gender or sexuality—
(a) in the terms or conditions of employment; or
(b) by denying or limiting access to opportunities for promotion, transfer or
training, or to other benefits connected with employment;
(c) by dismissing the employee; or
(d) by subjecting the employee to other detriment.
92—The Tribunal may grant exemptions
(1) The Tribunal may, on application under this section, grant exemptions from a
provision of this Act in relation to—
(a) a person, or class of persons; or
(b) an activity, or class of activity; or
(c) circumstances of a specified nature.
(2) An exemption under this section—
(a) may be granted unconditionally or on conditions; and
(b) may be revoked by the Tribunal on breach of a condition; and
(c) subject to revocation, remains in force for a period, not exceeding
three years, determined by the Tribunal, but may be renewed
from time to
time for a further period, not exceeding three years, determined by the
(3) An application for the grant, renewal or revocation of an exemption may be
made to the Tribunal by the Commissioner or any other
(4) The following persons
are entitled to appear and be heard by the Tribunal on an application under this
(a) the applicant;
(b) if the Commissioner is not the applicant—the Commissioner;
(c) a person in whose favour the exemption in question is sought, or has been
(5) A person referred to in
subsection (4)
may call or give evidence in support of, or against, the application.
(6) In determining an application under this section, the Tribunal
(a) have regard (where relevant) to the desirability of certain discriminatory
actions being permitted for the purpose of redressing
the effect of past
discrimination; and
(b) have regard to other factors that the Tribunal considers relevant.
(7) Notice of the grant, renewal or revocation of an exemption under this
section must be published in the Gazette.
(8) Notice of the grant or renewal of an exemption under this section must
(a) the period for which the exemption has been granted or renewed; and
(b) the conditions (if any) to which the exemption is
Background to the Application
recent years it has become apparent that, despite the fact that the ratio of
male to female legal graduates (at all
) in this State strongly
favours females, the number of female barristers at the Independent Bar, both in
South Australia and, for
that matter, throughout Australia, is around 35%.
Moreover, since 2002 only 30% of those undertaking the Bar Readers Course in
Australia have been female legal practitioners.
a view to redressing this obvious imbalance, the applicant has proposed the
introduction of the Program which will be conducted
under the auspices of the
Chief Justice and other Justices of the Supreme Court in
South Australia.
The Program
Program is aimed at female legal practitioners with legal competence, expertise,
and post-admission experience of at least two
years. The successful female
appointee will be employed on a temporary contract with the applicant and
remunerated commensurately
with her years of service in the legal profession as
well as by reference to the South Australian Public Sector Classification
and salary rates for Legal Officers.
Program will commence with one female legal practitioner each year in the first
three years. The person selected will perform
similar duties and
responsibilities to those of Associates within the Supreme Court of South
Nevertheless, having
regard to the participant’s legal competence and years of post-admission
experience, the participant will
be expected to be involved in more complex
matters with minimal oversight and supervision. She will also be expected
to engage with
the Justices of the Supreme Court, barristers, and other legal
practitioners at an advanced level.
Associates within the Supreme Court are assigned to a single Justice for the
duration of their temporary contract, the participant
will be expected to work
with multiple Justices of the Court on a rotation basis. The three female
Justices, currently in the Court,
will act as mentors for the participant and
may be expected to play pivotal roles in the Program. Furthermore, it is
anticipated
that the Program will enable opportunities for the participant to
develop networks and professional relationships which will support
career at the Independent Bar.
Tribunal was informed that the concerns which have led to the setting up of the
Program in South Australia are not confined to
South Australia.
These concerns exist nationwide and have been recently addressed in the
Law Council of Australia National Attrition
and Re-engagement Study
(the NARS Report) released in March 2014. This Report is to be the subject
of a nationwide conference to
be held by the Law Council of Australia in mid
concerns, also expressed by the South Australian women at the SA Bar, have,
in turn, led to the setting up of the Women at the
Bar SubCommittee as part of
the SA Bar’s response to the NARS Report.
Women at the Bar Sub-Committee, under the auspices of the SA Bar, supports the
Program and has been working with the Chief Justice
to address the imbalances in
South Australia identified in the NARS Report. In this way, the Program may be
seen as but one example
(albeit an important one) of the steps that are underway
to address the well established statistical imbalances relating to women
Bar in this State.
from the foregoing material, the Tribunal was aided by very helpful written and
oral submissions, in support of the application,
by Mr White of counsel, on
behalf of the applicant.
issue, which falls for consideration in this application, is whether, having
regard to the evidence presented to us and the general
objects of the Act, there
are proper grounds for granting the exemption sought pursuant to
Pulteney Grammar School v Equal Opportunity
when considering the
purpose of the Act, in a context not entirely dissimilar to this, White J
The principal submission of Mr Stanley QC, who appeared
on the appeal for Pulteney, was that the Tribunal had construed the purposes
the EOA too narrowly. In particular, the Tribunal had failed to appreciate that
the promotion of equality of opportunity between
all citizens (including
students) was as much a purpose of the EOA as was the elimination of
discrimination on the specified grounds.
This error of the Tribunal had caused
it to conclude that Pulteney’s application was not consistent with the
purposes of the
In support of this submission, Mr Stanley QC referred to the following passage
in the Tribunal’s reasons:
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
is concerned with the prevention of
discrimination based on sex.
We reject the argument by counsel for Pulteney that favouring girls is
consistent with the objects of the Act because the objective
of 50/50 provides
girls with an equal opportunity. The Act is concerned with discrimination
against individuals, not overall balances.
Section 92 does not provide any guideline as to the circumstances in which an
exemption should be granted. Most assistance is provided
by the preamble to the
Act which enunciates the objective of preventing discrimination on the basis of
Later in its reasons, the Tribunal described the prevention of discrimination as
‘the dominant purpose of the Act’.
In my opinion, Pulteney’s submission that the Tribunal did construe the
purposes of the EOA too narrowly is correct. The Tribunal
was in error by
concluding that the dominant purpose of the Act was the prevention of
discrimination on a proscribed ground.
An Act and its objects may be construed by having regard to its long title. The
long title of the EOA is:
An Act to promote equality of opportunity between the citizens of this State; to
prevent certain kinds of discrimination based on
sex, sexuality, marital status,
pregnancy, race, physical or intellectual impairment or age; to facilitate the
participation of citizens
in the economic and social life of the community; and
to deal with other related matters.
The first purpose as stated in the long title is to promote equality of
opportunity between citizens of this State, and the third
purpose is to
facilitate the participation of citizens in the economic and social life of the
community. The object of preventing
discrimination on certain grounds is only
one of the stated purposes.
In my opinion, it is also natural to construe the EOA as intending to achieve
some larger purpose than the mere elimination of discrimination
for its own
sake. The elimination of discrimination is a means of achieving the wider
purpose of equality of opportunity amongst
all citizens of the State
I note that the relevant tribunal in Victoria has, in a number of decisions,
determined that an object of the
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
(‘EOA (Vic)’) (which is comparable with the EOA) is the promotion of
equality of opportunity. For example, in
Firbank Anglican School v Hunt
it was said (quoting from an earlier unreported decision):
It seems to me that there is a public interest in granting this exemption and
that it is consistent with the objectives of the Act,
and that to emphasise and
underline the coeducational philosophy of the school will, in fact, promote
equality of opportunity in
those who attend.
I therefore conclude that the Tribunal erred in failing to recognise that an
object of the EOA is the promotion of equality of opportunity
failed to assess the application of Pulteney with regard to that purpose. (our
is evident to us, from the material supplied in support of this application,
that for female legal practitioners the barriers and
impediments to the pursuit
of a legal career and particularly one at the Bar are real and continuing and
that some positive discriminatory
measures are necessary in order to redress the
gender imbalance which exists in favour of male legal practitioners.
are satisfied that the grant of this application will go some way towards the
promotion and encouragement of equality of opportunity
for those female legal
practitioners wishing to pursue a career at the Bar.
addition, we are satisfied that in so doing, it will also serve the wider public
interest referred to by White J in the
case, in the sense that
it will promote a great level of participation by female legal practitioners at
the Bar. In this way, it is
anticipated that in time it will lead to
increased numbers of female practitioners being appointed to the senior ranks of
this branch
of the legal profession and ultimately to positions as members of
the Judiciary at all levels in this State. Finally, we are not
persuaded that
the grant of this application will result in any unacceptable obstacles to male
practitioners wishing to pursue a
career at the Bar.
are, therefore, satisfied that there are proper grounds for granting the
exemption sought.
Accordingly,
we make an order pursuant to
exempting the Courts
Administration Authority from the provisions of
of the Act,
enable it to advertise for, select and then employ, female legal practitioners
only to participate in its ‘Step Up to the
Bar’ Program.
exemption is granted for a period of three years from 13 April 2015.
I agree with the conclusions of Judge Costello and Member Altman. I
wish to add the following reasons:
this case the Courts Administration Authority’s application has not been
opposed by any party. Consequently no opposing arguments
were addressed, and nor
any contrary materials adduced as evidence. It is therefore at best an
application.
of the Act this Tribunal is
not bound by the rules
of evidence, but may inform itself on a matter in such manner as it thinks
nevertheless remains an essentially adversarial process. The best form of
assistance that can be rendered to this Tribunal remains,
where possible, that
of opposing counsel objectively adducing contrary evidence and addressing
arguments accordingly.
my opinion it is desirable if the Act makes it possible for an ex parte
application to be
Bachelor graduates 62.3%
female; graduate certificate/diploma graduates 59.9% female; masters coursework
graduates 59.7% female;
masters research/PhD graduates 60% - 2013 Australian
Graduate Survey.
Although the duties performed
may be similar in some respects, the appointee will not be employed as an
Associate, nor will she
take the place of an Associate. Accordingly, the Program
will have no impact on the manner of future appointments to the role of
Court Associate. In particular, it will not impinge on the potential for male
legal graduates to be appointed to the position
of Supreme Court Associate.
[2007] SASC 308.
Ibid at [27]-[33].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (148 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter