URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRC/2017/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
South Australian Salaried Medical Officers� Association v Chief Executive, Department of the Premier and Cabinet [2017] SAIRC 10 (3 March 2017)
South Australian Salaried Medical Officers’ Association v Chief
Executive, Department of the Premier and Cabinet
[2017] SAIRC
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT (SA)
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
SALARIED MEDICAL OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
CHIEF EXECUTIVE,
DEPARTMENT of the PREMIER AND CABINET (on behalf of the CHIEF EXECUTIVE,
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND AGEING)
Application under
ss 11 and 15 Fair Work Act 1994 - Disclosure Application
5926 of 2016
HEARING DATE:
16 February 2017
His Honour Judge PD Hannon
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Application by registered employee
association for the interpretation of an enterprise agreement and for orders
that an employer remedy
an alleged contravention of the agreement - Application
for orders for disclosure of documents - Whether the documents in relation
which disclosure was sought were directly relevant or only indirectly relevant
and if the latter whether it was in the interests
of justice that an order for
disclosure be made -
the documents not directly relevant but were
indirectly relevant and that it was in the interests of justice that they be
- Orders to be made accordingly - Sections 11 and 15 Fair Work Act
1994 - Rule 48(1) Industrial Proceedings Rules 2010
Harris Scarfe
Australia Pty Ltd v Shoe Source Group Importing Pty Ltd & Ors
[2008] SASC 187
Quenchy Crusta Sales Pty Ltd v Logi-Tech Pty Ltd
[2002] SASC 374
Harris Scarfe Ltd v Ernst & Young (No
[2005] SASC 443
(2005) 93 SASR 300
Highfield Property Investments Pty Ltd v Urban
Construct (SA) Pty Ltd & Anor
[2010] SASC 148
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr S
Respondent: Ms A Doecke
Solicitors:
Applicant: Iles
Respondent: Crown Solicitor’s Office
South Australian Salaried Medical Officers’ Association (“the
applicant”) has lodged an application under s
Fair Work Act
(“the Act”) seeking an interpretation of certain
provisions of the
SA Health Salaried Medical Officers Enterprise Agreement
(“the Agreement”). It also seeks orders under s 15 of the
Act to the effect that the relevant employing authority take
steps to remedy an
alleged contravention of the Agreement and that it refrain from further
contravention of the Agreement.
employing authority is the Chief Executive, Department for Health and Ageing,
and is represented in these proceedings by Chief
Executive, Department for the
Premier and Cabinet (“the respondent”), as the employer for public
employees for the purposes
of the Act.
relation to the claim made under s 15 of the Act, the applicant sought
disclosure of certain documents which it contended were
directly relevant to one
of the grounds of the alleged breach. The respondent has declined to make the
disclosure sought.
applicant has filed an application for directions seeking orders for disclosure.
This decision relates to that application.
applicant alleges that the respondent has contravened and remains in
contravention of cl 56.12 of the Agreement. The contravention
is alleged to have
arisen from a direction (“the Direction”) given verbally in August
2015 and later in writing in January
2016 and May 2016, by Professor Maddern,
Clinical Director, Division of Surgery, whose many responsibilities include
managerial duties
within Central Adelaide Local Health Network
(“CALHN”) in relation to the Surgical Services Directorate
Services”) at the Royal Adelaide Hospital
Direction was given to employees including members of the applicant who were
junior medical officers (“JMOs”) located
within Surgical Services at
the RAH. Those officers included all members of the Medical Practitioner Group
defined by the Agreement, which encompassed employees in
five categories from the level of senior registrar to the most junior level
intern. Surgical Services has three Divisions at the RAH and 19 units within
those Divisions. Many of the JMOs the subject of
the Direction rotate a number
of times annually between those units. The ordinary hours of duty for full-time
MPG employees was an
average of 38 hours per week, with overtime being worked
regularly, the majority of which was rostered overtime.
Direction addressed procedures to be adopted for seeking approval of nonrostered
overtime either before or after it was performed.
At the times the Direction was
made, there was a Protocol for the Authorisation of Non-Rostered Overtime
(“the Protocol”)
to which the respondent had agreed to adhere under
cl 56.12 of the Agreement. The applicant alleged that the Direction is in
of three clauses of the Protocol. Two clauses specifically relate to
procedures to be undertaken in accordance with the Protocol
to obtain approval
or authorisation before or after the performance of non-rostered
They are not relevant for
the purposes of the disclosure application, which concerns item 3 of the
Protocol, which provides that
“No employee shall be expected or required
to work non-rostered overtime without payment”.
9 of the initiating application as amended alleged that the Direction
contravened item 3 in that employees subject to the
Direction were being
required or expected to work non-rostered overtime without payment. In
particular, it is alleged that, as a
matter of ordinary experience, it was
obvious that:
(a) some junior
employees will perceive it will be intimidating to seek approval pursuant to the
Direction on every occasion when
nonrostered overtime is reasonably required,
and that there will be negative connotations as to the perception of their
overall job
performance associated with seeking such approval;
(b) some junior
employees will perceive it to be unreasonable to seek, or will be concerned that
they will be perceived as being unreasonable
for seeking, approval pursuant to
the Direction on some occasions when they work non-rostered overtime as it
necessarily requires
disturbing a very senior Division Director outside of
ordinary hours, at any hour and on any day of the year;
ordinary and obvious effect of the Direction is that a junior employee who may
be required to work non-rostered overtime to
complete his or her duties will on
some occasions not seek approval pursuant to the Direction or may not seek
authorisation after
working non-rostered overtime, and accordingly will not be
paid for that non-rostered overtime, notwithstanding that the non-rostered
overtime was reasonably required and that they were otherwise entitled to be
paid for that non-rostered overtime.
documents it contended were relevant to the allegation
of a breach of item 3.
Following the respondent declining to make such disclosure, an application for
directions was filed by the
applicant on 16 December 2016. It sought an
order pursuant to r 48 of the
Industrial Proceedings Rules 2010
(“the Rules”) for disclosure of records in the possession of the
employing authority which identified the extent of non-rostered
overtime worked
by JMOs within Surgical Services at the RAH (“the specified
employees”).
respondent continued to oppose the disclosure order. The applicant has since
refined the scope of the disclosure request as detailed
below but the respondent
has maintained its position.
The documentary material the subject of the disclosure
application
was agreement in broad terms as to the nature and extent of the data available
relating to overtime worked by the specified
employees. Details were set out in
a number of affidavits filed during the course of the disclosure
proceedings.
application for disclosure as finally revised sought two
The first order sought was
for disclosure and production within 21 days of copies of employee timesheets
for MPG employees who were
employed in or worked within Surgical Services at the
level of “Intern” during varying periods. This was a significant
reduction in the scope of the disclosure first sought which encompassed all JMOs
of MPG classification. It was common ground that
there were 38 interns working
within Surgical Services over any given fortnight, rotating from time to time
between different units.
Further, as opposed to the initial application, which
sought disclosure with respect to the period from July 2013 to November 2016,
the applicant modified its position by inviting the Court, as it considered
appropriate, to select one of a cascading range of periods
from a period of 3.5
years from July 2013 to December 2016 to a period of two years from July
2014 to July 2016.
MPG timesheets were completed by individual employees each fortnight. The
applicant tendered an example of such a
It was divided into two
sections with respect to each day over a 14 day period. The employee was
required to enter with respect to
each day the time worked by way of
“Rostered Hours” and “Non-Rostered Hours”.
to July 2015 timesheets were completed manually by each employee on the basis of
rosters separately prepared by each of the
nineteen units within Surgical
Services. From July 2015 a “formal roster system” was introduced
whereby the information
relating to the roster for each individual JMO was
electronically transferred to a pro forma timesheet, which was then completed
each JMO in accordance with time actually worked.
information contained in each timesheet was entered by Payroll Services into the
electronic payroll system with a fortnightly
payment being made to each JMO on
the basis of that information. The pay codes used by Payroll Services to record
overtime entered
into the timesheets did not distinguish between rostered
overtime and non-rostered overtime. As a result overtime hours recorded
Payroll Services, where relevant, incorporated both rostered and non-rostered
the timesheet details were entered into the electronic payroll system, the
timesheets were archived and stored in boxes in Record
Management located off
site. Timesheets of all MPG classifications within Surgical Services processed
in a particular fortnight were
stored together, and were not separately stored
by reference to classification or to the Division or unit within Surgical
where a particular employee worked. Thus it would take no less time to
retrieve and scan a particular timesheet if timesheets were
sought only in
respect of a particular classification of MPG employee, such as by reference to
interns only.
second order sought production and disclosure of material generated by an
electronic reporting system known as the LHN Activity
Reporting System
(“LARS”) which had been available at the RAH since April 2014. Among
other things, as from July 2015,
LARS had been used to create monthly reports
LARS relied on data drawn from other systems including payroll data. As
mentioned above, the payroll data comprised details of payments
to employees of
base salary and overtime which did not allow for identification of components
attributable to rostered overtime as
opposed to non-rostered overtime. Nor did
the LARS reports differentiate between overtime worked by JMOs at different
classification
approximately July 2015 and October 2016 LARS was used to generate a monthly MPG
report on the expenditure for the previous
month’s base hours and overtime
penalty payments as a percentage of base salary in respect of each cost centre
within Surgical
Services. Due to various technical issues, no such reports have
been available for the period since November 2016.
information generated through LARS was copied into an Excel spreadsheet which in
turn was used to prepare graphs that visually
represented base hours and
overtime (including both rostered and nonrostered overtime) and overtime as a
percentage of base hours.
The respondent produced a copy of such a graph with
respect to the CALHN Surgical Directorate at RAH for the period July 2015 to
October 2016, which included a trend line of the amount of overtime paid over
the period as a percentage of base
The graph revealed a
substantial downward trend of overtime paid as against a relatively constant
amount paid by way of the base
Equivalent graphs were said
to be available in respect of each of the Divisions within the Surgical Services
and the respective units
within those Divisions that had cost centres that were
separately reported in
Relevant rules and disclosure principles
r 48 of the Rules, the Court has power to:
“order a party to a
proceeding to disclose the documents that are, or have been, in the
party’s possession and –
(a) are directly relevant to any issue fairly arising in the proceeding; or
(b) are to be disclosed by order of the Tribunal.”
rule is to be considered in the context of r 3 which provides that the general
purpose of the Rules is “to provide for
the just, efficient and
expeditious disposition of the business” of the Court “at minimum
expense”, and r 46(1)
which, in the context of case management, empowers
the Court to manage litigation to the extent necessary to ensure that it is
fairly and as expeditiously and economically as is consistent with the
proper administration of justice.
above rules are to be considered, as the respondent contended, in the context
that the Court has no power to award costs in an
application of the type now
before it, such that the respondent does not have the potential for protection
in the future by means
of a costs order if it transpires that the disclosure
order, if made, results in an expensive and ultimately fruitless disclosure
parties referred me to the applicable law on the effect of the then recently
introduced Supreme Court Rule 58A which restricted
the primary discovery
obligation to disclosure of directly relevant documents, as does r 48 of the
Rules. The principles are set
out in a number of decisions of the Supreme Court
of South Australia summarised by Judge Lunn in
Harris Scarfe Australia Pty
Ltd v Shoe Source Group Importing Pty Ltd &
The principles were
considered in the context of a case in which it was alleged that some of the
documents went to strands, or links
in a chain, of circumstantial evidence that
would be relied upon to prove the matters in issue.
was made to a decision of Doyle CJ in
Quenchy Crusta Sales Pty Ltd v
Logi-Tech Pty Ltd
made the following
observation:
is not wise to attempt to state in comprehensive terms the effect of the
requirement that the document be ‘directly
relevant.’ The adverb
‘directly’ is probably intended to emphasise the requirement of
relevance, and to be used
in the sense of requiring that the document be
directly in point, excluding as sufficient indirect relevance which might be
established
through another linking circumstance. That is not to say, as I have
already said, that a document is not directly relevant if it
is merely a piece
of circumstantial evidence. The point is that a document will not be directly
relevant if, rather than tending
to prove an issue on the pleadings, it merely
tends to prove something that may be relevant to an issue.”
Lunn also cited the following observation of Bleby J in
Harris Scarfe Ltd v
Ernst & Young (No
“The document will be directly relevant if it
tends to prove or disprove a matter which is in issue. It is not directly
if it merely tends to prove or disprove something that may be relevant
to a matter in issue, or if there is a mere chance the document
will prove or
disprove a matter in
Lunn made the comment that it was not enough to make a document directly
relevant merely to say that it was a piece of circumstantial
evidence going to
proof of a fact in issue, and that merely to label a document as a piece of
circumstantial evidence did not necessarily
make it directly relevant for the
purposes of discovery.
document, or class of documents, in question need to be linked to other
discernible pieces of evidence which collectively,
if all proved, could
constitute circumstantial proof of a fact in issue. If any such piece of the
totality of the circumstantial
evidence on a point is not discernible, then the
document in question only may be relevant to an issue, and so is not shown to
been directly relevant to it.”
can be seen by reference to r 48(b) above, even though a document is not
directly relevant such that discovery must be made under
r 48(a), it is
nevertheless open to the Court to make an order for disclosure of documents that
may be only indirectly relevant.
In that regard, the respondent referred to
another decision of Judge Lunn in
Highfield Property Investments Pty Ltd v
Urban Construct (SA) Pty Ltd
that it is just an order should be made...for the disclosure of the documents
...as being indirectly relevant the Court
must be able to see from the pleadings
and the evidence adduced what role such indirectly relevant documents might play
in resolving
the disputed issues. The Court needs to be satisfied that the
documents may be so logically probative of a matter in issue that
it justifies
an order be made requiring the other party to go to the trouble, and incur the
expense, of obtaining and disclosing
these documents. The wider the category of
documents sought, the greater needs to be the justification for an order for
their disclosure.”
Consideration
primary allegation is that the Direction contravenes cl 56.12 of the Agreement
due to a breach of three items of the Protocol.
Given the allegations made by
the applicant in amended para 9, floridly expressed though it might be, as the
respondent contended,
an issue which fairly arises on the pleadings is whether
the specified employees are being required or expected to work non-rostered
overtime without payment.
applicant accepted that the case it put in this regard was a circumstantial
case. It accepted that the disclosure of the documentary
material sought would
not of itself establish its case, and could only do so by reference to other
aspects of evidence which might
support the inference for which it
relation to the first order seeking disclosure and production of the timesheets,
the applicant submitted that the graph referred
was compelling evidence of
a significant reduction in the overall amount of overtime claimed compared to a
relatively constant rate
for base rate hours over the period from July 2015,
when the Direction was first issued, to October 2016. The applicant indicated
that, if the disclosure order was made, the information in the timesheets would
be analysed so as to extrapolate any trend in the
amount of non-rostered
overtime recorded in the timesheets before and after the making of the
Direction. That would then be compared
with the downward trend in the percentage
of overtime worked overall as against base hours as revealed by the graph, and
the further
graphs and spreadsheets sought by way of the application for the
second order.
applicant accepted that, if the analysis revealed a downward trend in claims for
payment of non-rostered overtime, the alleged
effect of the Direction would not
necessarily be the only factor that impacted in that regard, but contended that
it would be a significant
factor. Accordingly, it submitted that the timesheets
were directly relevant, as the inferences to be drawn from the information
contained within them, in combination with other evidence, may prove whether the
Direction has had the effect of constructively requiring
employees to work
non-rostered overtime without being paid.
respondent contended that the timesheets were not directly relevant to any issue
fairly arising in the proceedings. Even if an
analysis of the timesheets
revealed that the amount of non-rostered overtime recorded before and after the
Direction had reduced
to a greater extent than rostered overtime, the respondent
submitted this would not explain the cause or the reasons for that reduction.
Further, whilst the respondent accepted that a downward trend in this regard
would be consistent with what was alleged by the applicant,
it submitted that,
of itself, any such trend would not support the assertion that non-rostered
overtime was being worked without
my view the respondent’s submission that the documents sought are not
directly relevant to an issue fairly arising in the
proceedings must be correct.
At best it can be said that the timesheets recording non-rostered overtime
before and after the Direction
are items of circumstantial evidence which might
directly or indirectly lead to a train of enquiry which might, through linkage
other circumstantial evidence, advance the applicant’s case. However,
they are not documents which are directly on point, as
they do not tend to prove
the issue in the proceedings, as to whether the specified employees are being
expected or required to work
non-rostered overtime without pay. They merely tend
to prove something that may be relevant to that issue.
conclusion as to a lack of direct relevance in relation to the disclosure of the
timesheets applies even more to the graphs and
Excel spreadsheets sought under
the second order. At best, that material can do no more than tend to prove
something that may be
relevant to the issue.
Accordingly,
the respondent is under no obligation under r 48(a) of the Rules to disclose or
produce the documents sought by either
of the proposed orders as the documents
are not directly relevant.
find however, that the documents sought are indirectly relevant to the issue of
the alleged breach of item 3 of the Protocol. An
analysis of the trends in the
claims for payment of non-rostered overtime before and after the Direction,
combined with other more
general information disclosed in the graphs and
spreadsheets, may tend to prove an apparently disproportionate reduction in
for non-rostered overtime, which in turn may be a basis for the drawing
of inferences supportive of the applicant’s allegations
in amended para 9
of the application. Ultimately, that will be a matter to be considered in the
context of any other evidence which
may reveal that changes in hours of both
rostered overtime and non-rostered overtime have occurred for reasons other than
those alleged
by the applicant.
question then becomes whether the Court should exercise its discretion to order
production and disclosure of those indirectly
relevant documents under
r 48(b). Whether disclosure should be ordered in the circumstances is a
matter for the discretion of the
Court having regard to the interests of
justice. I have considered the approach taken in
Highfield Property
Investments
. I am satisfied that, having regard to the pleadings, the nature
of the documents sought, the proposed use to which they will be
put, and the
submissions of the applicant, the role those indirectly relevant documents may
play in resolving the disputed issues
can be discerned. I accept that the
documents, in combination with other evidence, may be logically probative of the
matter in issue.
However, it is necessary to consider whether the potential
probative nature of the documents is such that it justifies the making
order in circumstances which require the respondent to go to considerable
trouble and expense in obtaining and disclosing the
documents sought.
that regard, the respondent raised a number of matters in support of its
submission that the disclosure task was oppressive, and
that having regard to
the uncertainty as to what might be gained through the exercise, and the
attendant delay and cost, it was not
in the interests of justice that the
disclosure orders be made.
respondent contended that the Court should accept, on the basis of the affidavit
material it tendered, that whichever of the proposed
cascading periods any
disclosure order might encompass, and even with the disclosure request being
limited to 38 interns, it would
result in a very considerable amount of time
consuming administrative work being done to retrieve, identify, extract,
collate, and
photocopy or scan the relevant timesheets. It submitted that the
process would be further complicated by the fact that the interns
between various units during the course of any one year, such that each
individual search would require crosschecking of
records as against the names of
interns at the relevant time.
to the respondent’s outline of argument was an annexure containing
calculations as to the estimated time to retrieve
timesheets depending upon the
scope of the order made. The time estimate was that the most extensive order
would take one staff member,
working a full-time week, some 7.68 weeks to
complete, assuming that it would take five minutes to retrieve each time sheet
out the administrative actions referred to above. It was estimated
that it would take 4.39 weeks to process an order with the most
limited of the
proposed periods.
the respondent acknowledged that the burden of the task of disclosure was
reduced due to the applicant now confining its application
to timesheets
relating to interns only, it contended that the likelihood that any documents
produced would assist the applicant in
its case was thereby rendered even more
tenuous, as the identification of any trend by reference to intern timesheets
would not on
its own indicate anything in relation to trends in other
classifications, and would not be a reliable source of identification of
overall general trend.
the respondent submitted that at best from the applicant’s perspective, an
analysis of the documents produced would
not explain the reason for any downward
trend in claims for non-rostered overtime after the time of the Direction, but
would at most
indicate further possible lines of enquiry. That fact, combined
with the likely need for the respondent to obtain and present further
which indicated a reason for the reduction in non-rostered overtime other than
that asserted by the applicant, would significantly
increase the scope of the
proceedings, potentially to no ultimate benefit.
these reasons, the respondent submitted that an order for production and
disclosure, even with respect to the most limited timeframe
would be unduly
burdensome having regard to the administrative work involved and the tenuous
benefit of the exercise, and the potential
prolongation of the hearing.
relation to the graphs and spreadsheets sought under the second order, the
respondent accepted that compliance would not be a burdensome
exercise as the
information could readily be extracted from LARS. However, the respondent
submitted that further information relating
to individual units or cost centres
with respect to the general trend of a reduction in overtime overall from July
2015 to October
2016 would not assist the applicant’s case as to the
reasons for any reduction in nonrostered overtime, and that the relevance
this material was so indirect that no order should be made.
the respondent’s submissions, I consider that there are a number of
reasons why the interests of justice are such that
I should order disclosure and
production as sought by the applicant, although I have determined it should be
for one of the lesser
periods set out in its proposed cascading orders, namely
the period from July 2014 to December 2016.
have had regard to the fact that the allegations raise important issues.
Management of the public health system so as to provide
appropriate and timely
services to the public within budgetary constraints is a difficult exercise, and
no doubt involves the balancing
of many competing considerations. One of those
considerations is the management of the demands placed upon JMOs, and balancing
need for their availability to attend to members of the public seeking
medical assistance in response to fluctuating demands over
which the employing
authority has no control, whilst at the same time managing their hours of work,
including overtime, in a manner
which has regard to their health and well-being,
and their ability to provide service at optimum levels at all times, which at
same time having regard to the need for administrative efficiency and
budgetary parameters.
applicant is a registered association under the Act. I am entitled to assume
that the allegation as to the Direction having the
effect of creating the
requirement or expectation that non-rostered overtime the work without payment
is not made lightly. On its
face, it is a serious allegation. I have regard to
application is made in the context of it being known that over the fifteen
months following July 2015, coincidentally the month
before the Direction was
first issued, there has been a substantial reduction in the overall amount of
overtime worked compared to
the base rate of pay, in the context of the base
rate of pay remaining at much the same level. That fact would seem to count
the hope that the introduction of the formal rostering system in 2015
would allow for rostering which minimised overtime, where appropriate,
substituting overtime for additional standard (base)
The fact of that trend
provides a basis for the applicant to contend that the timesheets are likely to
reveal trends on non-rostered
overtime supportive of its case.
the analysis of the timesheets indicates a downward trend in the amount of
non-rostered overtime recorded over the period after
July 2015, it may cause the
respondent to call evidence in addition to that now contemplated, to explain why
such a reduction may
have occurred for reasons other than those which the
applicant alleges. For example, by explaining, if it is the case, any greater
efficiencies in the allocation of resources which have resulted from the
introduction of the “formal roster system” or
from the issue of the
Direction itself. Some explanations have been touched upon in the affidavit
The respondent said
the possibility that the disclosure might result in it calling further evidence
should count against the making
of an order, as it might unnecessarily prolong
the hearing and add to its cost. I take that possibility into account, but I
that any evidence proffering explanations as above would substantially
expand the proceedings.
take into account that, as opposed to examples which can be seen in some of the
authorities referred to above, the disclosure request
is not of such a wide
ranging nature that it has the flavour of a fishing exercise, undertaken in the
hope of finding some documentation
which might advance the applicant’s
case. As finally framed, the first order sought, although wide ranging in time,
is restricted
to one type of document completed each fortnight by a relatively
small category of the most junior employees, who among all of the
MPG employees,
can be taken to be those most likely to be affected by the alleged consequence
of the Direction. As the respondent
conceded, the documents sought by way of the
second order will be able to be readily produced.
Undoubtedly
a significant administrative burden will be placed on the respondent by the
first order given the number of fortnightly
timesheets to be produced over the
specified period. The applicant took issue with the respondent’s
contention as to the time
it would involve, particularly the estimate of five
minutes of administrative work for each timesheet. However, I accept the
respondent’s
explanation for that estimate, and have taken it into
account, along with other matters, in determining that the disclosure exercise
take place over 2.5 years, a lesser period than the applicant’s preferred
option. The respondent estimates that it will take
one employee 5.49 weeks to
retrieve the material. I would expect that once the process of retrieval is
underway, efficiencies are
likely to develop which reduce that time
have also taken into account the respondent’s submission that the
disclosure process may lead nowhere, and may not indicate
any trend which
advances the applicant’s case, such that the delay, time and expense
consequent on the disclosure process will
be to no avail. Further, that it is
unable to recover wasted costs of such an exercise given the constraints on the
Court as to the
circumstances in which it is permitted to make orders for costs
under the Act. These are relevant factors, but they are outweighed,
in my view,
by the importance of the issue at stake and by the potential for the proposed
disclosure to reveal material which may
advance the applicant’s case,
albeit that it may not of itself establish its case, but only allow for
inferences to be drawn
having regard to other more general evidence as to trends
in overtime.
documents in relation to which the applicant seeks orders for disclosure and
production are not directly relevant to any issue
fairly arising in the
proceedings. However, they are indirectly relevant, and it is in the interests
of justice that an order be
made under r 48(b) of the Rules that the documents
be disclosed.
Court proposes to make orders as follows:
(a) that within
six weeks the respondent disclose and produce copies of employee timesheets for
MPG employees who were employed and
worked within the Surgical Services
Directorate of CALHN at the Royal Adelaide Hospital at the level of
“intern” during
the period from July 2014 to December 2016;
(b) that within
14 days the respondent disclose and produce electronic copies of graphs and
Excel spreadsheets in accordance with
the applicant’s proposed minutes of
necessary, the Court will hear further from the parties as to the precise terms
Items 4 and 6 of the
As taken from para 9
sub-paras h, i, j, k and l.
Affidavits tendered by the
applicant of Ms Mulholland 26 October 2016 and 24 January 2017, and of Mr Iles
16 December 2016; affidavits
tendered by the respondent of Mr Marciano 17 and 24
January 2017 (received over the objection of the applicant as to some aspects
but on the basis that the objections may go to the weight to be given to those
aspects– tr 40.15) and of Mr Trainor 9 February
As set out in “Proposed
Minutes of Order” handed up on 16 February
Exhibit A1.
The information contained in
this and the preceding three paragraphs was taken from para 14 of the affidavit
of Mr Trainor sworn
9 February 2017 (“the Trainor affidavit”).
Exhibit “BJT-4” to
the Trainor affidavit.
from about 47% to 34%.
The summary contained in this
and the two preceding paragraphs is taken from para 9 of the Trainor
Respondent’s outline para
[2008] SASC
[2002] SASC
[2005] SASC 443
(2005) 93 SASR
[2010] SASC 148
Exhibit BJT4 to the
Trainor affidavit – refer to [19] above.
Affidavit of Mr Marciano
dated 17 January 2017 – para
Affidavit Professor
Maddern sworn 9 December 2016 at para 60; Mr Marciano fn 19.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (173 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter