URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCA/2025/123.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
NORMAN v THE KING [2025] SASCA 123 (23 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Court of Appeal: Criminal)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
NORMAN v THE KING
[2025] SASCA 123
Judgment of the Court of Appeal
(The Honourable Justice S Doyle, the Honourable Justice Bleby and
the Honourable Justice David)
23 October 2025
CRIMINAL LAW - APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - APPEAL AGAINST SENTENCE - GROUNDS
FOR INTERFERENCE - SENTENCE MANIFESTLY EXCESSIVE OR INADEQUATE
Appeal against sentence.
The appellant pleaded guilty to two counts of damaging property contrary to
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) (‘CLCA’)
(Counts 4 and 6), one count of theft contrary to
of the CLCA (Count 7),
one count of attempted theft contrary to
(1) of the CLCA
(Count 8), and one count of assault contrary to
of the CLCA (Count 9).
The offending all occurred on 5 October 2021 in the vicinity of the Marion
Westfield Shopping Centre.
The appellant was sentenced to a total period of imprisonment of three years,
five months and 15 days with a non-parole period of
one year, 11 months and 22
The appellant raised one complaint on appeal, that the sentence imposed was
manifestly excessive. He particularised the ground with
complaints about aspects
of the sentencing judge’s approach, including that the starting point for
each offence was manifestly
excessive and that the offending was part of a
course of conduct such that the judge erred in failing to make to the individual
substantially concurrent. He relied on these particulars as reasons
for why the total sentence was manifestly excessive.
Held (by the Court) granting permission to appeal, allowing the appeal,
setting aside the sentence and resentencing the appellant:
total head sentence of three years, nine months and 22 days, before deductions,
was manifestly excessive.
degree of partial concurrency is appropriate in resentencing the appellant in
respect of each of the offences which, although separate
and distinct, were
committed as part of one course of conduct.
appellant is resentenced to a period of imprisonment with a head sentence of two
years and 23 days, with a non-parole period of
one year, four months and 23
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Sentencing Act 2017
, referred to.
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Markarian v The Queen
(2005) 228 CLR 357;
Hackett v The Queen
[2021] SASCA 32
Barbaro v The
[2014] HCA 2
(2014) 253 CLR 58
[2015] HCA 39
(2015) 256 CLR 550
[2023] SASCA 75
Mackenzie v Betts
(1980) 23 SASR 307
(1981) 27 SASR 481
White v The Queen
(2022) 141 SASR 398
R v Copeland (No 2)
(2010) 108 SASR 398;
Trott-Dan v The King
[2023] SASCA 2
, considered.
NORMAN v THE KING
[2025] SASCA 123
Court of Appeal – Criminal: Doyle, Bleby and David JJA
This is an application for permission to appeal against sentence. The
appellant pleaded guilty to two counts of damaging property
contrary to
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(‘CLCA’) (Counts 4 and 6), one count of theft contrary to
of the CLCA (Count 7), one count of attempted theft contrary to
(1) of the CLCA (Count 8), and one count of assault contrary to
the CLCA (Count 9). The offending all occurred on 5 October 2021.
25 July 2025, a District Court judge sentenced the appellant to a total period
of imprisonment of three years, five months and
15 days with a non‑parole
period of one year, 11 months and 22 days. The sentence was backdated to
commence on 5 November 2024.
The appellant has appealed against his sentence on
the sole ground that the sentence was manifestly excessive. He has
particularised
that ground with complaints about aspects of the sentencing
judge’s approach.
5 October 2021, Mr Corey Sard was working at Bunnings at the Westfield Marion
Shopping Centre. His motorcycle was parked just
outside the Bunnings store in
the car park. At about 5:10 pm, a customer informed him that there was a
motorcycle on the ground in
the car park. Mr Sard went outside and saw that it
was his motorcycle. CCTV footage showed that at about 4:17 pm, the appellant
walked up to the motorcycle and kicked it once with his left foot, causing it to
fall over. There was significant damage to the motorcycle,
including to its
indicator, clutch pedal, clutch lever and scratches to the foot pedals and
mirrors, costing approximately $4,000
CCTV footage depicted the appellant’s back and pink mohawk. The appellant
was wearing hi-vis and a black backpack. This
conduct was charged as Count 4 on
the information (damaging property).
the Woolworths pick up and collect at Marion.
He was in the utility, and the
engine was still running. The appellant opened the driver’s side door
while Mr Warner was on
the phone. The appellant appeared to be very
intoxicated. The appellant said ‘Hey Chris’, to which Mr Warner
‘Mate, I’m not who you think I am. Don’t open my door,
appellant told Mr Warner not to swear at him. He opened the door again and
pulled it as far open as he could. Mr Warner tried
to hold onto the door and was
pulled out of the car. He told the appellant to ‘fuck off’. The
appellant said, ‘I’ll
fucking carjack you’. The appellant
tried to push past Mr Warner to enter the driver’s area of the vehicle. Mr
tried to stop him. The appellant pushed past Mr Warner and swung his left
elbow at Mr Warner’s head, which connected with his
mouth area. This act
was charged as Count 9 on the information (assault).
appellant entered the driver’s side of the vehicle headfirst with his feet
still on the ground. Mr Warner was worried that
the appellant was going to drive
away, as the car was still running. He pulled the appellant out of the car by
his backpack, causing
the appellant to fall to the ground. He got into the
driver’s seat, locked the door and called the police. This conduct of
appellant was charged as Count 8 on the information (attempted theft).
appellant hit the driver’s side window while yelling at Mr Warner.
Mr Warner was on the phone and could not tell what the
appellant was
saying. The appellant kicked the driver’s side door several times, causing
it to dent in several places. The
cost to repair the damage was quoted to be
approximately $1,400. This was charged as Count 6 on the information (damaging
Warner told the appellant that he had called the police. The appellant kicked
the driver’s side door again and then walked
up a carton of Corona Extra beer, worth $57, that
was located at the front of
the store and left without paying. This was charged as Count 7 on the
information (theft).
4:00 pm and 5:00 pm on the same day, numerous police cars were tasked to
incidents in and around Marion. Police located the
appellant at about
5:15 pm with the carton of beer trying to board a bus at the interchange.
Police removed the appellant from the
bus. The carton of beer was returned to
arrested and searched the appellant. The appellant was in a highly aggravated
state. Police found a six-pack of premix spirits
and two bottles of whiskey in
his backpack. The appellant complained of feeling unwell and disclosed that he
had a heart condition.
He was taken to the Flinders Medical Centre for
assessment. When he arrived at the hospital, he became extremely agitated,
the door of the police vehicle and yelling aggressively. A doctor
assessed him at the hospital and deemed him fit for custody. Police
conveyed the
appellant to the Christies Beach cell complex. The appellant was unable to be
interviewed due to his behaviour.
appellant is 45 years old. He has a lengthy antecedent history incorporating
numerous convictions for assault, property damage
and dishonestly taking
property. He has been sentenced to terms of imprisonment that have been
suspended. He has breached bonds and
been ordered to serve terms of
imprisonment. In 2023, in Queensland, he was sentenced to a term of imprisonment
for the offences
of stealing, possessing dangerous drugs, unlawful possession of
suspected stolen property and other minor offending. In 2024, in
Adelaide, he
was sentenced to a term of imprisonment of eight months from 5 March 2024
for the offences of damaging property and
trespassing in a residence.
19 September 2023, whilst the appellant was on home detention bail, he cut off
his ankle bracelet and absconded. He was later
imprisoned in Queensland. He had
spent one year and 10 months on home detention. He was apprehended on a warrant
on 5 March 2024
and has been in custody since this time, which has included
serving the eight-month sentence referred to
judge sentenced the appellant as follows:
(damaging property, motorcycle): the judge indicated a starting point of one
year and four months. She reduced that by 10
per cent on account of the guilty
plea, making one year, two months and 13 days;
(damaging property, Toyota HiLux): the judge indicated a starting point of one
year and six months. She reduced that by 10
per cent on account of the guilty
plea, making one year, four months and seven days;
Count 7 (theft,
carton of beer): the judge indicated a starting point of eight months. She
reduced that by 10 per cent on account
of the guilty plea, making seven months
and seven days;
(attempted theft, Toyota HiLux): the judge indicated a starting point of one
year and six months. She reduced that by 35 per
cent on account of the guilty
plea, making 11 months and 22 days;
(assault): the judge indicated a starting point of one year. She reduced that by
35 per cent on account of the guilty plea,
making seven months and 25
judge ordered the sentences for Counts 6 and 8 to be served concurrently, and
the balance of the sentences to be served cumulatively,
resulting in a head
sentence of three years, nine months and 22 days. She set a non-parole period of
two years and four months. From
these periods she deducted 38 days to take into
account the period spent in custody between 5 October and 12 November 2021. She
the sentence by a further three months to take into account the time
spent on home detention.
resulted in a final head sentence of three years, five months and 15 days, with
a non-parole period of one year, 11 months and
22 days. She declined to suspend
the sentence or to order that it be served on home detention.
indicated earlier, the complaint on appeal is that the sentence is manifestly
excessive. The appellant particularised this complaint
in the form of the
following essential contentions:
the starting
point identified for each count was manifestly excessive in each case;
in circumstances
where the offending all occurred in less than an hour, the offending was a
course of conduct and the judge erred
in failing to make all the sentences
substantially concurrent, rather than the sentences for only counts six and
the offending
relating to the HiLux comprised an incident of short duration. There was no
reason to make the sentence for the assault
cumulative on the sentence for the
other two offences relating to the HiLux; and
the judge failed
to apply the principle of totality, having regard to the fact that the sentence
was imposed cumulatively on the eight-month
sentence expiring on 4 November
the appellant identified these particularised matters as ‘arguably
flawed’ aspects of the sentencing process, he
ultimately relied on them as
‘reasons’ why the sentence was manifestly excessive. Ultimately,
manifest excess is a conclusion
to the effect that a sentence is unreasonable or
plainly unjust.
The sentencing
discretion does not yield a single correct
However, as this Court
observed in
Hackett v The
which is unreasonable or plainly unjust for no reason other than that it is
manifestly too long or too short is a sentence
which has not been imposed
according to rules of reason and
It is not sufficient for
this court to conclude that it would have come to a different decision to
the one reached by the sentencing
judge. The judgment is a discretionary one
and what is required is that the sentencing judge must take into account all
(and only relevant) considerations in forming the conclusions reached.
Judges at first instance are to be allowed as much flexibility
in sentencing as
is consonant with consistency of approach and as accords with the statutory
regime that applies.
that a sentence is “very heavy” when compared with other sentences
is not, without more, to conclude that
it exceeded the bounds of the sentencing
judge’s discretion.
(Footnotes in original)
the number of offences for which the appellant was sentenced, it is convenient
to address each of the asserted reasons in turn.
At the outset, however, it is
necessary to acknowledge their limited utility in an analysis of whether the
final sentence was manifestly
notional starting points may provide some support for a submission that the
sentence is manifestly excessive, the applicant
must establish that the final
sentence imposed for all of the offending is manifestly excessive. When looking
at the overall sentence,
this Court is not bound to follow the ‘notional
sentences’ nor the sentencing Judge’s approach to concurrency when
considering whether the single sentence is manifestly excessive.
The starting points
appellant submitted that each of the starting points, other than that indicated
for the assault, was manifestly excessive. He
did not point to any yardstick
sentence for the offending. There is none, other than the maximum penalty
prescribed in each case.
attacks were random and unprovoked. They occurred in a public place. The HiLux
offending would have been terrifying to Mr Warner.
The appellant engaged in the
offending against a background of an extensive criminal history of like
offending demonstrated a continued disregard for the law and suggested that the
appellant had not derived any benefit from previous
community-based orders or
been deterred by previous sentences of imprisonment. His prospects of
rehabilitation were extremely low.
appellant demonstrated no remorse for the offending, other than by entry of the
pleas of guilty. He entered the guilty pleas
only days before the trial, which
had been vacated previously, was due to commence. He had absconded to Queensland
while on home
detention and committed further offences while at large.
appellant had a supportive father and grandfather and had recently commenced
medication to assist him with abstaining from illicit
substances.
all of the circumstances, protection of the community and personal deterrence
warranted significant sentences. Having said that,
the individual starting
points were very high for offending of this nature. Count 4, which attracted a
starting point of one year
and four months, comprised a single kick to a
motorcycle, albeit that this resulted in significant damage. Count 7, which
walking out of a shop with a carton of beer worth $57, attracted a
starting point of eight months. These incidents were picked up
on CCTV. They
were not committed in the physical presence of any person.
6, damaging property (the HiLux) attracted a starting point of one year and six
months, notwithstanding the quoted cost of
repairing the damage was only about
$1,400. It occurred in a frightening circumstance, given that Mr Warner was in
the vehicle. However,
the appellant was charged separately with respect to the
attempted theft and the assault.
appellant used the term ‘manifestly excessive’ in respect of the
individual starting points, other than that for
the assault. However, as noted
earlier, his complaint of law is directed only at the final outcome. At this
stage, it is sufficient
to observe that notwithstanding that there was little to
be said by way of mitigation, and the appellant’s criminal record
reason for confidence in his prospects of rehabilitation, the sentences for the
property damage offending and the theft of
the beer were very
Cumulative sentences
observed earlier, the judge made the sentences cumulative, other than the two
property offences involving the HiLux. The appellant’s
complaint in this
regard relies on the proposition that the offending was a course of offending
over a short period of time. He referred
to the ‘general principle’,
articulated in
Mackenzie v
and approved in
where offences arise out of the one course of criminal conduct or activity and
are truly connected with each other, the sentences
should be concurrent.
closeness in time is relevant but not determinative. In
that the appellant had committed four crimes over five days, all of a similar
nature and with the same motive, being to
raise money to go back to New Zealand,
was insufficient to constitute them as a course of conduct or provide the
necessary nexus
connection.
White v The Queen
Court considered at length the development of the application of concurrency and
partial concurrency since
Mackenzie v
concepts of a single “course of conduct” or “one multi-faceted
course of criminal conduct”, while simple
in enunciation, have, on
occasion, proved problematic in their application.
Court referred with approval
the justifications for a wider principle of concurrency that Kourakis J
articulated in
R v Copeland (No
These are, in essence,
the deprivations
of a sentence will be suffered more deeply if served after the completion of one
or more earlier terms;
the length of
imprisonment necessary to achieve specific and general deterrence in the case of
a course of conduct will generally
be less than the result of the multiplication
of the sentence for a single offence by the number of offences committed;
offences are committed within a short space of time, the offender may have had
limited time and capacity to reflect before
committing the further offences,
which may mitigate their moral culpability.
be no hard and fast rules, but considerations like the ones to which I have
referred will inform the characterisation of
offences as one or more courses of
conduct and the extent if any, to which the sentences imposed for them should be
concurrent. I
hasten to add that too much emphasis should not be placed on the
characterisation of multiple offences as a single course, or a number
courses, of conduct. Even where the connections are insufficient to characterise
the offences as a single course of conduct it
may be that there is sufficient
reason to make the sentences at least partially concurrent.
appellant’s offending occurred within a relatively short space of time.
However, each incident or group of incidents was
random and unconnected with the
damaging of the motorbike was a gratuitous act that demonstrated complete
disregard for another person’s property.
incidents involving the HiLux occurred approximately 25 minutes later. As the
respondent submitted, these incidents were of a
completely different nature and
scope. They comprised serious incidents of attempted theft and assault.
Mr Warner attempted to defend
himself and his property and the incident
became protracted.
theft of the carton of beer occurred approximately 20 minutes later. This was an
unconnected theft from retail premises.
only ‘connections’ between the three offending outbursts were the
relatively short space of time between them and
the fact they appear to have
been induced to some extent by intoxication of some kind. It is true to say, as
the respondent submitted,
that the appellant had time to reflect between each
set of offending. The victims were different in each case.
said that, it is still the case that the offending all occurred well within the
space of an hour. The appellant was engaged
in an intoxicated sojourn of random
offending in a shopping centre precinct. While he committed the offences at
separate times, there
is force in the observation that the length of
imprisonment necessary to achieve specific and general deterrence for this
would be less than the sum of the sentences for each offence.
the appellant did not submit that the failure to order any concurrency amounted
to a separate process error. However, it will
be necessary to consider the
effect of this aspect of the sentencing, together with the starting points, in
assessing the outcome.
The HiLux offending
appellant complained that the sentence for assault should have been ordered to
be served concurrently with those for the property
offences relating to the
assault is properly seen as part of the course of conduct that the appellant
engaged in with respect to the HiLux and, in particular,
the attempted theft.
Nevertheless, as the respondent submitted, the assault had a different character
from the property offending.
It was an offence against the person. Mr Warner was
traumatised. The appellant had prior convictions for offences against the
is important to maintain the flexibility that should be afforded to sentencing
judges when ensuring
proportionality.
It would have
been open to the sentencing judge to impose some measure of concurrency as
between the assault and the HiLux property
offending. Again, the consequence of
not doing so is ultimately a matter that contributes to the complaint of outcome
appellant complained that the judge imposed the final head sentence,
cumulatively upon the sentence of eight-months’ imprisonment
the appellant
had served from 5 March 2024 until 5 November 2024, without consideration of the
total period of imprisonment that
the appellant would thereby be required to
serve. The sentence was backdated to commence from 5 November 2024, the
appellant having
remained in custody following the expiry of that eight-month
judge referred to the eight-month period of imprisonment. She did not mention
the principle of totality. A failure to mention
totality does not necessarily
mean that the judge did not consider it, or amount to a process
The judge likely did not
see the need to refer to it, in circumstances where she made concurrent the
sentences for the HiLux property
fact of the prior period of imprisonment of eight months was a relevant personal
circumstance. The complaint that totality required
some reduction of the
sentence, in order to ensure that the sentence was not disproportionate, or that
this period of imprisonment
was otherwise not taken into account, folds into the
question of whether the final sentence was manifestly excessive.
Manifest excess
is necessary to step back and consider the sentence as a whole, in light of all
the circumstances of the offending and the appellant’s
circumstances. The appellant did not suggest that the judge misapprehended his
personal circumstances, recounted above.
regard to all of the matters addressed above, and in particular the
appellant’s criminal history and manifest failure
to be deterred from
offending of this kind in the past, it was necessary to impose a significant
sentence. Having said that, the
combination of the very high sentences for the
property offending and the failure to afford any concurrency (other than in
of the HiLux offending) resulted in a sentence that went well beyond
what was necessary to achieve the sentencing purposes for this
outburst of
offending that occurred in well under an hour. The sentence was, in all the
circumstances, disproportionate. We accept
the appellant’s submission that
the head sentence of three years, nine months and 22 days, before deductions,
was manifestly
grant permission to appeal, allow the appeal, set aside the sentence and
resentence the appellant. We indicate the following starting
reductions on account of the guilty pleas:
(damaging property, motorcycle): we would resentence the appellant to 10
months’ imprisonment. Reducing that by 10 per
cent on account of the
guilty plea results in nine months;
(damaging property, HiLux): we would resentence the appellant to one
year’s imprisonment. Reducing that by 10 per cent
on account of the guilty
plea results in ten months and 24 days;
(attempted theft, HiLux): we would resentence the appellant to one year and six
months’ imprisonment. Reducing that
by 35 per cent on account of the
guilty plea results in eleven months and 21 days;
(assault): like the sentencing judge, we would resentence the appellant to one
year’s imprisonment. Reducing that by
35 per cent on account of the guilty
plea results in seven months and 24 days;
Count 7 (theft,
carton of beer): we would resentence the appellant to three months’
imprisonment. Reducing that by 10 per cent
on account of the guilty plea results
in two months and 21 days.
HiLux offending is the most serious. That all occurred within minutes, albeit
that the appellant managed to commit several distinct
offences. A degree of
partial concurrency is appropriate, given that this offending comprised a
chaotic course of conduct. Having
indicated the individual sentences we would
impose, pursuant to
Sentencing Act
impose a single sentence of two years for these three offences.
of Counts 4 and 7 occurred close in time to the HiLux offending. They were
separate incidents, but for the reasons already indicated,
this was nonetheless
a course of conduct the protective and deterrent response to which can, to a
degree, be met proportionately
with a total sentence that is less than the sum
of the parts. We would order that five months of the sentence for Count 4 be
concurrent with the sentence for the HiLux offending. We would order that
one month and 21 days of the sentence for Count 7 be made
concurrent with the
accumulated sentence for the other counts.
results in a head sentence of two years and five months. We would impose a
non-parole period of one year and nine months, a
little over 70 per cent.
There is nothing in the appellant’s personal circumstances to recommend a
lower non-parole period.
reduce the sentence by 38 days for time spent in custody and, like the judge,
allow three months for time spent on home detention.
That results in a head
sentence of two years and 23 days, with a non-parole period of one year, four
months and 23 days. The sentence
is backdated to commence on 5 November 2024.
Having regard to the appellant’s criminal history, it is not appropriate
the sentence be suspended or served on home
House v The King
55 CLR 499.
Markarian v The Queen
(2005) 228 CLR 357 at [27] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne and Callinan JJ).
[2021] SASCA 32
Barbaro v The Queen
[2014] HCA 2
(2014) 253 CLR 58
(Gageler J).
Markarian v The Queen
(2005) 228 CLR 357 at [27] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne and Callinan JJ).
[2015] HCA 39
(2015) 256 CLR
(Bell and Gageler JJ).
Brougham v The King
[2023] SASCA 75
(1980) 23 SASR 307
(1981) 27 SASR 481
R v Dorning
27 SASR 481
(2022) 141 SASR 398.
(1980) 23 SASR 307.
(1981) 27 SASR 481.
White v The Queen
(2022) 141 SASR 398
White v The Queen
(2022) 141 SASR 398
(2010) 108 SASR 398.
R v Copeland (No 2)
(2010) 108 SASR 398 at [102]-[105].
R v Copeland (No 2)
(2010) 108 SASR 398 at [106].
Trott-Dan v The King
[2023] SASCA 2
White v The Queen
(2022) 141 SASR 398
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (388 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter