URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SARTTRP/2009/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:05:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Williamson v Harbor Village Pty Ltd [2009] SARTTRP 5 (12 June 2009)
Section 38 - Residential Park site agreement - alteration to the
exterior of a dwelling
Williamson v Harbor Village Pty Ltd RP09/0010)
The applicant lives in a residential park of over 300 houses. Each resident
owns their house and rents a site. The applicant wishes
to install solar panels
to help the environment and reduce electricity costs at a time he can take
advantage of a Federal Government
rebate for panels.
The Tribunal finds the park owner has unreasonably withheld consent under
Section 38 of the Act to the applicant altering the exterior
of his dwelling and
allows the installation of the panels.
REASONS FOR ORDER OF THE TRIBUNAL MADE ON 23 JUNE
Hearing 12 June 2009 at Victor Harbor
WILLIAMSON V HARBOR VILLAGE PTY LTD
(RP09/0010)
This is the determination of an application lodged on 19 May 2009 by Robert
Williamson, a resident of a residential park known as
Rosetta Village at Victor
Harbor. By his amended application, Mr Williamson seeks an order under
Residential Parks Act 2007
(“the Act”) to have the
park owner’s refusal to approve the installation of solar panels on his
dwelling located
at Site 342 Rosetta Village, declared unreasonable.
I heard sworn evidence from Mr Williamson and his witnesses who were Mr Garth
McKenzie, Mr Alistair O’Donnell, Mrs Mariann Hunt,
Mr Clyde Yeates, Mrs
Jean Hayter, Mr Kay Lockwood and Mr Adam Wright. I also received unsworn
submissions from Mr Brian Saxton and
Mr Rix. In addition, I heard sworn
evidence from Ms Beverly O’Rourke on behalf of the park owner and her
witnesses Mrs Rosemary
Thomas, Mr Peter Beacham, Mr John Miller and Mr Ian
MacFadyen. In addition I received an unsworn statement from Mr David Carson.
With the exception of Mr Wright, each of the witnesses who gave evidence are
residents of Rosetta Village and own their own dwelling
and have a license from
Harbor Village Pty Ltd to use the site on which their dwelling is situated. I
am satisfied that the respondent
Harbor Village Pty Ltd owns the residential
park known as Rosetta Village.
Mr Williamson wishes to take advantage of the Commonwealth Government Solar
Rebate Scheme which ended unexpectedly on 8 June 2009
to install solar panels on
the roof of his dwelling to generate electricity from sunlight. Although the
current rebate scheme has
ended Mr Williamson and other residents within the
Village are still eligible to take advantage of the rebate scheme because their
applications were lodged prior to the cut off date. Although he may not have
been notified in writing, Harbor Village will not grant
Mr Williamson permission
to install solar panels. Mr Williamson needs permission because of
of the Act which provides as follows:
38—Residential park site agreement—alterations on site
It is a term of a residential park site agreement that—
(a) a resident must not, without the park owner's written consent, make an
alteration or addition to the exterior of the dwelling
installed or located on
the site, or add any structure to the site; and
(b) the park owner—
(i) must not unreasonably withhold consent; and
(ii) must not make a charge for giving consent or considering an application
for consent exceeding the park owner's reasonable expenses.
Mr William submits that Harbor Village Pty Ltd is being unreasonable in
withholding consent.
Before hearing the oral evidence, I viewed Rosetta Village and in particular
three solar panels of the same type which Mr Williamson
seeks to install which
have been placed on a display home at the Village and also a mock up of six
panels of the approximate size
which Mr Williamson seeks to install. In
addition to these panels which were laid directly on the roofs, I saw three
panels which
had been set at an angle of approximately 30 degrees and stood
proud of the roof.
I am satisfied that there are some 340 existing houses at the Village with
provision for a further eight. At the view I observed
the close proximity of
the houses to each other, that the houses are positioned at many different
angles and that many of the houses
back onto another house. Mr
Williamson’s house however backs onto a public roadway. The front of most
houses face onto the
private roadways within the Village meaning that most
houses have a view opposite of the front of another house.
In walking through the Village I observed that whilst there are several
different house designs and colours the houses are all low
level and single
storey and of a similar type being constructed of the same building materials.
All the sites which I observed by
walking along the major roadways within the
Village are neat and tidy and many have pretty gardens fronting those roadways.
common areas which I observed are both attractive and well maintained. I
noted that a small number of houses have satellite dishes
fitted to the roof.
The dishes are obvious from the roadways upon which we walked.
After the view of Rosetta Village Mr Williamson, Ms O’Rourke and I then
observed solar panels installed on houses near the Village
in Rymill Avenue.
Whilst those houses are not comparable with those in Rosetta Village one of the
houses had two rows of solar panels
of the same variety Mr Williamson seeks to
install. Another had solar panels set at an angle in the same manner as those
temporarily
placed on one of the display houses at the Village.
THE EVIDENCE
It is not disputed that five local councils including the Victor Harbor
Council have joined together to take advantage of the Federal
Government rebate
to allow eligible residents within the council areas to purchase solar panels at
a reduced price and have them
installed at a reduced cost. It is not disputed
that Mr Williamson is in a position to purchase and have six solar panels
at a cost of $1,997.00 after receiving a government rebate of
$8,000.00. For a further $440.00 the electricity meter can be altered
excess electricity to the grid.
In order to minimise global warming in a small way and to reduce his
electricity costs Mr Williamson asks for permission to install
six solar panels
on the roof of the dwelling he owns.
Mr Williamson told me that having the panels installed will add some
$12,000.00 in value to his house as that is the approximate proper
cost of the
panels and installation. Apart from the asset value, Mr Williamson said access
to solar generated electricity will lead
to a reduction in his electricity bills
and enable him to return unused electricity to the grid and receive a credit
from his electricity
provider. He said access to cheap electricity is important
particularly because his house, like all those in Rosetta Village, is
winter and thus expensive to heat.
Mr Williamson submitted that the vote taken by Ms O’Rourke to gauge the
acceptance or otherwise of solar panels by Village residents
was not valid. I
have a copy of the voting paper before me. It gives information to residents
the cost benefits and the possible
disadvantages. It invites residents to a meeting at which representatives from
Zen Home Energy
(the solar company engaged by the councils as part of the
scheme) would be present. Residents are then asked to vote “yes”
“no” “to allow solar panels on roofs at Rosetta
Village”. The voting paper states there is one vote per
requires the house number to be given.
Ms O’Rourke told me at the preliminary hearing that 55 votes in favour
of panels and 62 against were received. I understand
from the evidence that of
the 340 houses in the Village 327 are occupied.
Mr Williamson said that the vote was not properly monitored and should not
have required the voter to identify his or her house number.
He pointed out
that votes were received from only around one third of the houses in the Village
so did not reflect the views of
all of the residents.
Mr McKenzie told me he owns house number 219 and supports Mr Williamson in
his bid to have solar panels installed. He too is concerned
for the environment
and wishes to reduce his own electricity costs. He pointed out that although
the licence agreement he entered
into does not permit the installation of roof
mounted air conditioners, management has allowed chimney stacks and satellite
to be installed on houses within the Village. He then pointed to the
possible arguments against installing solar panels namely that
they are too
heavy, they cause reflection and problems with the cable leading to the inverter
in the meter. In fact, of those three
issues Ms O’Rourke only raised that
of reflection. Mr McKenzie pointed out that reflection is not an issue as light
a reflective surface will only reflect at the same angle. So by
inference, the solar panels will not cause a problem for neighbours.
Mrs Hunt, Mr Yeates, Mrs Hayter and Mrs Lockwood all expressed their
acceptance of solar panels as an investment in the future by
reducing global
warming as well as reducing electricity costs. In his unsworn statement, Mr Rix
of 103 Rosetta Village also queried
the validity of the voting system.
Mr Wright had provided a written statement for the Tribunal and then attended
to give evidence. Mr Wright told me that his primary
business is as a
residential developer involved in an environmentally sustainable development
some five kilometres from Rosetta Village
in which renewable energy systems have
priority. He trades under the name Environmentally Sustainable Developments.
He has also
been chosen by the local councils to manage their program to have
residents within the local council areas take advantage of the
Government rebate to install solar panels. He told me that to date some 1,400
residents in the five council areas have registered
with the program including
approximately 40 from Rosetta Village.
Mr Wright said that after five to six years in the industry he has a good
knowledge of sustainable products in the building industry
with particular
knowledge of solar products gained in the last two years and he has been the
agent for the councils for the last
four or so months.
Mr Wright said that the proposal is to install six panels only on the roofs
at Rosetta Village. He said six panels represents the
minimum one kilowatt
system necessary to gain the government rebate and is also a reasonable number
taking into account house size
and number of occupants. He said the panels
would be prefabricated off site meaning there will be no open cuts on the frames
they will not rust. He said that unless panels are installed on a completely
flat surface they do not need any particular cleaning.
In response to
questioning by Ms O’Rourke who produced a cutting from a local paper
written by Solar Shop Australia promoting
thin film amorphous silicon panels
over the monocrystalline panels being used by Zen, he said the monocrystalline
panels are the
most appropriate given the climatic conditions in Victor Harbor.
He disputed the assumption in the article by Solar Shop Australia
that if part
of a monocrystalline panel is in the shade the whole panel shuts off power
production. Rather, he said only those diodes
in the panel which are in the
shade at any one time shut off power production in the same manner as the thin
film modules promoted
by the Solar Shop. Having said that, he acknowledged that
some old monocrystalline panels did shut down totally when in part shade.
However, those panels are not proposed for use in Rosetta Village.
Mr Wright said that most houses within Rosetta Village have a north facing
roof space of around eight metres which is needed in order
to install six
panels. He said where there is insufficient north facing space for panels to be
placed directly on the roof then
he proposes that panels be installed at an
angle on framework but only at the rear of houses in order to reduce the visual
He said that if installed as part of the current proposal which takes
advantage of the Federal Government rebate, the framework
would be supplied at
no additional cost to the resident. Mr Wright acknowledged that there may be
some houses in the Village that
are in too much shade to make installation of
solar panels an option.
Mr Wright said that he has seen electricity bills from many village residents
and although he cannot be definitive because consumption
rates differ, on
average and taking in account electricity returned to the grid, a resident could
expect somewhere up to a fifty
percent reduction in electricity bills.
Mr Wright acknowledged that research into solar technology may produce a new
product that will mean the current panels are outmoded
but he said despite
announcements of new products they have not been successful outside the
laboratory.
Mr Wright said the panels which are used by Zen have a warranty of 25 years
to work at 80% efficiency. He expects the panels to have
a long life beyond
that with diminishing efficiency. Mr Wright said that he expects in 25 years
time there will be even more efficient
ways to dispose of panels by recycling
all or most of the components.
Ms O’Rourke told me that as manager of the Village she has no
particular opinion about the solar panels but feels obligated
to act to protect
the conditions in each Licence that there be no substantial objects on roofs.
Her concern is that in allowing
solar panels the visual impact will change the
Village forever. This concern was expressed by her in a newsletter to residents
9 June 2009 in the following terms:
“... management is not against solar or other sustainable
development matters but is concerned about their impact on the Village
it is a fact that the density of the Village magnifies the visual impact of roof
The placing of solar panels on the Village houses will fundamentally alter
the look of the Village for a very long time. Management
is concerned that,
just as with evaporative air conditioners, technology will change rapidly and in
a few years huge solar panels
covering major parts of the house roof will become
obsolete and be replaced with something far more efficient and with less visual
blight. ...
The technology is shifting so fast that what is currently proposed may be
obsolete in a few years but the panels will still be on
the roofs long after the
scientists have found a better solution. In fact it could be that the solar
panel system you are being
enticed to purchase today (with subsidies and
freebies) is already obsolete.
In the final analysis it is your living environment but management’s
view is that the solar panels will have a detrimental effect
on the look and
amenity of the Village.”
Ms O’Rourke said the issue of solar panels is dividing the Village and
she is concerned that if allowed, the issue will turn
neighbour against
neighbour. She is concerned about cleaning the panels and that they might rust
and need special treatment when
they need to be disposed of.
Ms O’Rourke’s concerns were amplified by her witnesses. Mr
MacFadyen said that he enjoys living in a neat and tidy village
and does not
want panels which would spoil his view. Mr Beacham and Mrs Thomas pointed out
that when they entered the Village they
did so on the basis that objects were
not allowed on the roofs. Given the close proximity of the houses each of Ms
witnesses considered the panels would be an eyesore which
would require maintenance and cleaning. In an unsworn statement, Mr Carson
number 303 also pointed out that there are other ways of cutting the cost of
electricity by for instance turning off appliances
and using rugs in the
Clause 6 of the Licence Agreement entered into between Mr and Mrs Williamson
and Harbor Village Pty Ltd provides in part:
“You must not erect or place any structure or improvement including
lattice or infill material, or any signs, trees or large
bushes, on the site,
without first obtaining our written approval.”
of the Act provides:
38—Residential park site agreement—alterations on site
It is a term of a residential park site agreement that—
(a) a resident must not, without the park owner's written consent, make an
alteration or addition to the exterior of the dwelling
installed or located on
the site, or add any structure to the site; and
(b) the park owner—
(i) must not unreasonably withhold consent; and
(ii) must not make a charge for giving consent or considering an application
for consent exceeding the park owner's reasonable expenses.
Both the Licence Agreement and
of the Act only permit the
installation of solar panels if Harbor Village Pty Ltd agrees. Regardless of
the fact that it is not
stated in the Licence Agreement,
it a term of the agreement that Harbor Village “must not unreasonably
withhold consent”.
The issue for the Tribunal is whether Harbor Village Pty Ltd is being
unreasonable
in withholding consent. The word “unreasonable”
has no special meaning under the Act. The New Oxford Dictionary of
defines the word “unreasonable” in the following terms:
unreasonable
not guided by or based on good
your attitude is completely unreasonable.
the limits of acceptability or fairness:
an unreasonable
It seems to me, in the absence of any statutory provisions to guide me, I
must simply consider whether the decision to disallow solar
panels is so
illogical that it is not based on good sense and that no reasonable person would
adopt it in all the circumstances.
There is a great body of scientific evidence upon which the Federal
Government and the local councils are relying in promoting the
installation of
solar panels to reduce greenhouse emissions. Although I did not hear any direct
evidence about it from any expert,
that premise is not disputed.
I accept that in installing solar panels Mr Williamson will be able to take
advantage of a Federal Government rebate and in the longer
term save on his
electricity costs. I am also satisfied that if Mr Williamson is to install
panels, they shall be installed on the
roof space at the rear of his house which
backs onto a public road and will thus have little or no visual impact on other
of Rosetta Village.
However, in deciding whether or not to consent, Ms O’Rourke on behalf
of Harbor Village Pty Ltd had to bear in mind that she
needs to consider the
whole Village and not just Mr Williamson. If consent was to be given to Mr
Williamson it would be difficult
to sustain an argument that only Mr Williamson
or only those residents with north facing roofs which back onto a public road
install solar panels. The whole of the Village had to be considered by Ms
O’Rourke in reaching a decision and I must do the
The burden is on Mr Williamson to satisfy me that Ms O’Rourke’s
decision is unreasonable – it is not for Ms O’Rourke
to prove it was
reasonable.
The major objection which Ms O’Rourke has is that the solar panels will
change the aesthetics of the Village forever. The panels
will take up around
eight metres of space on a north facing roof and if there is no northern roof
with sufficient space the panels
will need to stand proud of the roof at an
angle of 30 degrees. Whether flat against the roof or at an angle they will be
very visible.
Those standing proud of the roof on an angle are in my view the
least attractive. I take it that this view is also held by Mr Wright
his wish to overcome that problem by only placing such solar panels at the rear
of a house and away from a private roadway.
The other issues raised are in my view of less importance. I accept Mr
Wright’s evidence that as no panels would be placed
on roofs that are
flat, the panels will self clean in the rain and the panels will not rust as
they would be prefabricated off site
so that there are no cut edges. I also
accept the evidence that Mr Wright gave that residents could expect significant
up to 50% of their current electricity accounts. I also accept the
submission by Mr Williamson and others that the vote arranged
O’Rourke was not organised in a way in which people were free to cast
their vote because of the requirement to include
the house number. I accept
that some may have been deterred from casting a vote in favour of the panels by
not wanting to offend
management. In any event, the low turn out of voters does
not give a true indication of those in favour or against solar panels.
Although I heard no technical or scientific evidence of the reduction in
greenhouse gas emissions by the use of solar energy or the
benefits of renewable
energy, it seems to me that I would be flying in the face of logic to ignore
that the rebate system put in
place by the Federal Government has major
environmental benefits. It is in my view not sensible to disregard those
benefits largely
on the basis of amenity. Whilst I accept that the panels will
change the look of the Village forever the panels themselves are neat
Where there is not sufficient space for the panels to lie flat against the roof
they can be partly disguised on the rear
of the roof. It may be that in the
years to come there will be less visually intrusive panels available but given
the concern for
the environment displayed by all levels of government and many
in the scientific world, it would be without reason in my view to
installation and thus lose the benefit of the Government rebate and cheaper
electricity costs.
I accept Ms O’Rourke has a genuine concern that allowing solar panels
may upset the harmony of the Village but, in my view not
allowing the panels
will possibly have equally disruptive consequences.
In my view, taking into account all of the evidence, the decision to disallow
the installation of solar panels on roofs in Rosetta
Village is unreasonable. I
shall therefore make the order sought.
Pursuant to
Section 116(1)
Residential Parks Act 2007
I declare unreasonable the park
owner’s refusal to approve the installation of six solar panels of the
sort installed by Zen
Mr Williamson’s dwelling at 342 Rosetta Village and require the
approve the installation forthwith.
Presiding Member
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (78.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter