URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/sa/SACorCResp/2023/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 17:11:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MORRISON, Wayne Fella - Inquest Number 15/2018 (1857/2016), Responses [2023] SACorCResp 4 (12 May 2023)
Morrison, Wayne Fella (Coroner Basheer)
Recommendation 1
- The appointment of an
independent Board of Inquiry by the Executive Government to undertake a
comprehensive review of the key findings
and to make recommendations to
government with particular emphasis on:
a) The content and delivery of restraint training to correctional officers at
b) The content and delivery of training for supervisory roles.
c) Performance review processes (or the lack thereof).
d) The enforcement of refresher training in restraint, first aid and
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR).
e) Risk management processes.
f) Record keeping requirements (electronic and hard copy) with particular
emphasis on records relating to risk assessment, and the
feasibility of moving
from paper-based records to electronic records.
Responses from the Department For Correctional Services and South Australia
In addition to
intensive internal investigations, this incident has been subject to external
and independent scrutiny including a
full investigation initiated by the
Ombudsman of South Australia, as well as the Coronial process.
Ombudsman’s investigation resulted in 17 detailed recommendations, all of
which were considered by the DCS Investigations
Review Committee and aligned
with the Department’s Action Plan. All 17 recommendations have been
implemented.
In consideration
of the passage of time following Mr Morrison’s death, and in the context
of all the critical review work already
undertaken by the Department, including
the implementation of a range of security and process improvements, a further
independent
review is not supported by the agency.
The Minister
with responsibility for Correctional Services will however engage Mr Peter
Severin, as an independent correctional expert,
to conduct a desktop review of
the Department’s response with respect to the specific recommendations
made by the Deputy State
Mr Severin has a
strong background in corrections operations and extensive experience in prison
management. He was the Chief Executive
of DCS for nine years before becoming the
Commissioner, Corrective Services New South Wales in 2012, until his retirement
He currently serves as the President of the International Corrections
and Prisons Association. Mr Severin is well-placed to undertake
this independent
desktop review.
Recommendation 2
- Correctional Officers be prohibited from undertaking
operational duties which require contact with prisoners UNLESS AND UNTIL they
have completed the DCS Control Restraint Defensive Training program AND:
a) The correctional officer has completed DCS refresher training on or before
the date it falls due.
b) The correctional officer holds a current First Aid certificate.
c) The correctional officer has completed an annual renewal of the CPR component
of first aid training and holds a valid CPR qualification
on or before the date
it falls due.
From the time of
this incident, a comprehensive review and enhancement of Correctional Officer
(CO) mandatory training has been undertaken.
DCS has since implemented advanced
systems to monitor mandatory training validity, alongside more robust
In 2020, the
Department introduced the Learning Academy, which has the responsibility for
strategic workforce planning and delivery
of a range of learning and development
opportunities across the agency.
Learning Academy sits a Mandatory Training Team who has oversight of the
compulsory training via a Mandatory Training Matrix,
which identifies and aligns
to the employees’ position within the Department. This includes Control
Restraint Defensive Training
(CRDT) which is mandatory every three years to
ensure currency of restraint and defensive techniques are maintained.
DCS will impose
limitations on the duties that can be undertaken by a CO in the event relevant
training has not been completed, for
example, certain posts will be excluded for
a CO if mandatory training requirements have not been met. Staff will also be
for opportunities unless mandated training requirements are met.
The Department
strives to provide and manage a safe and secure custodial environment and it is
therefore necessary to have appropriate
levels of staffing for an immediate
response in the event of a critical incident. Subsequently, staff who have not
met their mandatory
training requirements will not be precluded from other
face-to-face operational roles.
Recommendation 3
- That an expiry date for restraint, first aid and CPR
training be recorded on the rear of correctional officers’ identity tags
in tamper proof form.
DCS considers
that a hardcopy-based, static approach is not practical, and poses risk.
implemented a robust digital training recording system and invested in a new
state-of-the-art rostering system that will also
enhance the agency’s
visibility of a CO’s training status.
rostering system is expected to be implemented in mid-2024.
Recommendation 4
- That resuscitation equipment including automatic
external defibrillators (‘AEDs’) be placed in all areas of Yatala
Prison which manage the arrival of prisoners (e.g. the G Division sally
AEDs are now
installed in all areas of Yatala Labour Prison which manage the arrival of
prisoners. In addition, the Adelaide Remand
Centre, as the primary admission
prison for the correctional system in South Australia, has AEDs installed in all
prisoner arrival
DCS will also
meet the requirements prescribed by the External Defibrillators (Public Access)
Act 2022 (AED Act) for an AED to be
installed for every 1200m2 of floor area. A
correctional institution is a designated building or facility under this
legislation.
Recommendation 5
- The repeal of legislative provisions of the
Correctional Services Act 1982
which enable the Holden Hill police cells and/or
other similar facilities to be declared as ‘a prison’ or ‘a
prison’ or proclaimed for such use.
Correctional Services Act 1982
(the Act) provides that the Governor may
declare premises to be prisons or police prisons. Various police stations have
been declared
to be police prisons for the purpose of section 18 of the Act
through the
Correctional Services Act
(Declaration of Police Prisons)
Proclamation 2007 (the Proclamation).
The Department
has not utilised police cells since 23 May 2018 and the Holden Hill Police Cells
have been decommissioned by the South
Australia Police (SAPOL).
An important
safeguard as part of the Department’s custodial surge demand management
strategy, is the ability to utilise SAPOL
police cells during periods of high
demand on prisoner numbers.
In place of
repealing the legislative powers of section 18 of the Act, the Department will
seek to issue a new Proclamation for the
purposes of section 18 of the Act that
will only reference current police cells.
Recommendation 6
- Recommendations 2-10 inclusive made by Deputy Coroner
White in the inquest into the death of Joshua Marek STACHOR be implemented
The Department
confirms recommendations 2-10 in relation to Mr Stachor have been accepted and
progress of these recommendations is
being monitored through the Investigations
Review Committee. All required actions are being completed through enhancements
Standard Operating Procedures and processes relevant to managing
prisoners at risk of suicide and self-harm.
Recommendation 7
- Subject to security and health considerations, I
recommend that all first-time Aboriginal prisoners must be placed in a shared
I recommend that if for any reason such prisoners are to be relocated to a
single cell the SA Prison Health Service should be immediately
The Department
is supportive of this recommendation in the context of newly admitted prisoners,
and changes will be made to the DCS
case management and admissions processes to
provide that first-time Aboriginal prisoners will, where possible, be placed in
This however is
only if the shared placement is considered safe following a prisoner’s
admissions risk and health assessment,
undertaken in conjunction with the South
Australian Prison Health Services (SAPHS) and will require ongoing, close
liaison with SAPHS.
Recommendation 8
- Information pamphlets and/or other printed material be
provided to all Aboriginal prisoners on admission or in their accommodation
units setting out in detail the availability and operation of Aboriginal health
and liaison services within the correctional facility.
Improvements
have been made to ensure Aboriginal prisoners are identified as early as
possible in the admission process and access
to Aboriginal Liaison Officers
(ALOs) is provided. An information pamphlet outlining the services of ALOs was
circulated to all prison
sites on 28 August 2023. The pamphlet is displayed in
common areas, family visits centres and near prisoner kiosks.
Recommendation 9
- Noting that SAPOL officers who are stationed at Holden
Hill are usually the first responders to any incidents at Yatala Labour Prison,
I recommend that all officers who are inducted into the Holden Hill Local
Service Area attend at Yatala for the purpose of their
details being entered
onto the biometric data base to facilitate entry to the prison during such
The Department
confirms the biometrics registration system is available to SAPOL officers. On
31 October 2023, 1,329 SAPOL officers
had been registered on the DCS biometrics
system and SAPOL is developing a Statewide policy of registrations at prisons to
this recommendation ongoing. SAPOL has advised however that due to the
logistics of having officers move through operations rapidly,
at times, it may
be difficult to capture a 100% coverage. In June 2023, following a meeting
between DCS and South Australia Police,
the process commenced for all permanent
Holden Hill police to record their biometrics with DCS. The requirement for
biometrics recording
for new members is now included within SAPOL’s Holden
Hill Induction policy. SAPOL notes in the event of an immediate police
event, police will not be required to undergo biometric scanning. This was
recently experienced in July 2023 when officers
from Major Crime Investigation
Section (amongst others) entered YLP in response to a murder. Corrections
officers recorded the identity
of police in and out of the prison negating the
need for biometric scanning.
Recommendation 10
- I recommend that the DCS enter into discussions with
the Public Service Association and the Correctional Officers Legal Fund with
view to developing a Memorandum of Understanding directed at the implementation
of procedures which ensure prompt access to legal
advice by correctional
officers (and other Department employees) in the event of future incidents at
Yatala Labour Prison.
The safety of
staff and prisoners is paramount to the Department and the focus in the event of
a critical incident is to provide a
prompt response that ensures the security
and good order of the institution. DCS considers this recommendation to be
inconsistent
with that area of focus and therefore does not support this
recommendation.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter