URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACAT/2025/53.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:53:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gledhill v Registrar of Motor Vehicles [2025] SACAT 53 (8 July 2025)
Damian Gledhill
Registrar of Motor Vehicles
NEUTRAL CITATION
Gledhill v Registrar of Motor Vehicles
[2025] SACAT 53
Senior Member Ward
8 July 2025
HEARING DATES
On the papers
SACAT FILE NO.
2025/SA000475
ON REVIEW FROM
Registrar of Motor Vehicles
The applicant sought review of a decision of the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles to refuse his application for exemption from Mandatory
Interlock Scheme (MAIS) conditions that applied to his licence pursuant to
Motor Vehicles Act 1959
The applicant submitted that he was unable to operate the alcohol interlock
because of respiratory issues and therefore his licence
should not be subject to
the MAIS conditions. Medical evidence provided by two experts stated that the
applicant has sufficient lung
capacity and expiratory flow rate to activate an
alcohol interlock.
Held, affirming the decision under review:
the applicant is
medically able to operate an alcohol interlock. There are no prescribed
circumstances warranting an exemption under
Administrative review –
Motor Vehicles Act 1959
of a decision of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to refuse an exemption from
Mandatory Alcohol Interlock Scheme conditions
LEGISLATION CONSIDERED
Motor Vehicles Act 1959
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Motor Vehicles Regulations 2010
Road Traffic Act 1961
REASONS FOR DECISION
Affirm decision
Made under the
South Australian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Findings of the Tribunal
is an application made by Mr Gledhill under
South Australian
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(SACAT Act) for review of a
decision of a delegate of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles made on 10 February
Motor Vehicles Act 1959
delegate upheld a decision to issue Mr Gledhill a probationary driver’s
licence on 27 December 2024 that was subject to
a mandatory alcohol interlock
scheme (MAIS) condition for a period of 365 days.
matter was originally listed for a full hearing this morning. However, Mr
Gledhill wrote to the Tribunal Registry yesterday
indicating that he would be
unavailable to attend the full hearing as he was unwell. Subsequently, the
parties agreed that the Tribunal
could determine this matter on the papers.
have had regard to the material that was before the Registrar and to the
additional written evidence and submissions put before
the Tribunal on review.
This includes Mr Gledhill’s brief written submissions dated 7 July 2025,
which are referred to further
the reasons that follow, I consider that the decision made on 10 February 2025
is the correct or preferable decision and that
it should be affirmed.
Legislation
imposition of the MAIS condition on Mr Gledhill’s licence occurred under s
81E of the MV Act which states:
81E—Circumstances
in which licence will be subject to mandatory alcohol interlock scheme
(1) In this
disqualification
means disqualification from holding or obtaining a
licence or learner's permit;
serious drink driving offence
means any drink driving offence other
(a) a category 1 offence; or
(b) a category 2 offence that is a first offence.
(2) In determining whether a category 2 offence is a first offence for the
purposes of this section, any previous drink driving offence
(other than a
category 1 offence) for which the defendant has been convicted will be taken
into account, but only if the previous
offence was committed within the period
of 5 years immediately preceding the date on which the offence under
consideration was committed.
(3) Subject to
subsection (4)
if a person who applies for a licence—
(a) has been disqualified from holding or obtaining a licence by order of a
court on conviction for a serious drink driving offence
committed on or after
the commencement of this section; and
(b) the person has not held a licence since the end of the period of
disqualification,
a licence issued to the person will be subject to the mandatory alcohol
interlock scheme conditions (in addition to any conditions
otherwise required)
(c) the conditions have
been effective for the following period (the
prescribed minimum
(i) in the case of a person who has been given a notice of immediate licence
disqualification or suspension under
section 47IAA
Traffic Act 1961
in respect of the offence—
(A) subject to
subsubparagraph (AB)
a period equal to the aggregate of the period of licence disqualification or
suspension that has applied as a result of the notice
and the period of
disqualification for the offence ordered by the court; or
(AB) in the case of an order
section 47IAA(9)(e)(i)
Traffic Act 1961
—the period equal to the period of
disqualification for the offence ordered by the court; or
(B) a period of 3 years,
whichever is the lesser;
(ii) in any other case—
(A) a period equal to the period of disqualification for the offence ordered by
the court; or
(B) a period of 3 years,
whichever is the lesser; and
(d) the person qualifies for the issue of a licence that is not subject to the
mandatory alcohol interlock scheme conditions in accordance
subsection (5)
(4) If the applicant
satisfies the Registrar, on such evidence as the Registrar may require, that
prescribed circumstances exist in
the particular case, a licence issued to the
applicant will not be subject to the mandatory alcohol interlock scheme
conditions.
(5) The holder of a licence
subject to the mandatory alcohol interlock scheme conditions qualifies for the
issue of a licence not
subject to such conditions if—
(a) the conditions have been effective for the prescribed minimum period; and
(b) the Registrar is satisfied that, during the immediately preceding period of
3 months, the alcohol interlock fitted to the nominated
vehicle for the
person has not recorded any incidents of a kind specified in a notice by the
Minister in the Gazette.
(6) For the purposes of this section, in determining whether the mandatory
alcohol interlock conditions of a person's licence have
been effective for the
prescribed minimum period, the following periods are not to be taken into
(a) any period during which an alcohol interlock was not fitted to the nominated
vehicle for the person;
(b) any period during which there was no nominated vehicle for the person;
(c) any period during which the person's licence was suspended under this Act or
another law of this State (unless the suspension
came into operation before the
commencement of this paragraph).
Consideration by Tribunal
respondent asserts that Mr Gledhill committed a serious drink driving offence on
22 March 2021 and that his licence was immediately
suspended until 2 June 2021.
The relevant offence was refusing or failing to comply with a direction of
police in relation to an
alcotest or breath analysis. I note that this appears
to be an offence under
Road Traffic Act
which is not a category 1 or category 2 offence, and is hence a serious drink
driving offence for the purposes of s 81E of the MV
Act. The respondent
asserts that Mr Gledhill was subsequently disqualified by the Court from driving
from 9 March 2024 until 25 December
2024 and that his licence was cancelled on 9
March 2024.
terms of s 81E(3) of the MV Act are mandatory. However, it is subject to
s 81E(4). I understand that the only issue between the
parties is whether
s 81E(4) applies to Mr Gledhill such that his licence should not be subject
to the MAIS condition.
81E(4) requires consideration of reg 61 of the
Motor Vehicles Regulations
MV Regulations
). This states:
61—Circumstances
in which licence not subject to mandatory alcohol interlock scheme
For the purposes of section 81E(4) of the Act, the prescribed circumstances
(a) the applicant for a licence is unable to operate an alcohol interlock by
reason of some physical or medical condition of the
applicant; and
(b) it is not reasonably practicable for an alcohol interlock to be modified so
as to enable the applicant to operate the device.
are two limbs to reg 61 that must both be satisfied.
alcohol interlock is currently connected to Mr Gledhill’s vehicle. It
operates by being blown into at the commencement of
a journey and at intervals
during the journey.
Gledhill does not think his licence should be subject to the MAIS condition. He
referred in his application for review to having
respiratory issues. He
referred to having a hypersensitive airway condition, laryngospasm,
hyperreactive airways, anxiety and asthma.
Mr Gledhill had an appointment for a
lung function test with his specialist for 30 May 2025 and proposed then filing
a medical report
from his specialist.
Gledhill however did not file a medical report. He instead states in his
submissions of 7 July 2025 that:
* I have attended my specialist appointment however I don’t have any
further information to submit
* I have read the document that [respondent’s solicitor] has submitted
however do not agree with all that has been mentioned
* I have discussed this matter with legal aid and the person I sat down with
thought for a first offence the interlock was an extreme
form of punishment, in
addition to not having my license for 12 months plus all the fines incurred
causing financial hardship.
* I did not refuse to comply with the breath test when this incident occurred
and did not initially refuse the blood test as shown
on bodycam footage. The
police officer said to keep trying where I feel this was setting me up to fail.
* An ambulance should have been called to the scene and they could have taken me
to hospital to be checked over and to have blood
taken, I was open to this. I
feel the police officers were negligent in regards to this.
* My specialist agreed that this device is a big distraction, I’ve almost
had 3 accidents due to this device being fitted in
my vehicle.
* I would like the Registrar of motor vehicles be held accountable if this
device causes an accident, I cannot pull over when the
device goes off randomly
as I live in the Adelaide Hills and cannot pull over on the up track nor the
down track or when surrounded
by traffic, it’s just not that simple.
* I feel that this whole situation is based around government revenue not
people’s safety and people’s lives.
* I feel in my case the interlock should be removed and I would appreciate your
consideration on an individual case basis.
the Tribunal can only take into account the question of whether Mr Gledhill is
“unable to operate an alcohol interlock
by reason of some physical or
medical condition” and, if so, whether it is “reasonably practicable
for an alcohol interlock
to be modified” so as to enable him to operate
it. Therefore, Mr Gledhill’s submissions of 7 July 2025 are essentially
irrelevant. The Tribunal will not permit Mr Gledhill to relitigate in these
proceedings his guilt or innocence of the drink driving
offence of which he was
convicted by the Court. The Tribunal will not permit Mr Gledhill to relitigate
in these proceedings the
sentence that Mr Gledhill received from the Court. The
Tribunal has no jurisdiction in these matters. The Tribunal also cannot
into account any generalised concerns that Mr Gledhill may have about safety
considerations in the use of the MAIS device nor
questions of his convenience
when driving his vehicle. The terms of reg 61 set out the sole issue that can
be considered.
am satisfied that the overwhelming weight of the evidence is that Mr Gledhill is
able to operate an alcohol interlock. There is
no evidence that he is unable to
do so by reason of some physical or medical condition.
take into account the medical evidence of Dr Ral Antic and Dr Thang Vuong.
Antic is a respiratory and sleep physician. He appears to be Mr
Gledhill’s specialist. Dr Antic’s report of 25 October
apparently followed pulmonary function tests done on the same date. He stated
that Mr Gledhill’s:
current lung function is normal and well done [sic] by lab testing. We
previously established that he has hyper-reactive airways.
He is concerned that
as happened when pulled up by police 3 years ago, he will not be able to do a
satisfactory exhalation which
will presumably be needed for the vehicle to
It is possible that again he will not be able to perform the test, be it from
panic/anxiety, laryngospasm or if the airways are more
hyper-reactive than
Antic’s report is clearly not evidence that Mr Gledhill is unable to
operate an alcohol interlock by reason of some physical
or medical condition.
He opines only that it is a possibility in certain circumstances.
Vuong prepared a report dated 18 December 2024. Dr Vuong reviewed Dr
Antic’s letter and the tests done on the same date.
Dr Vuong opined that
Mr Gledhill has sufficient lung capacity and expiratory flow rate to activate
the interlock device.
Gledhill has not provided any medical evidence to contradict that of Drs Antic
and Vuong. I place no countervailing weight on
the assertions made by Mr
Gledhill as to his lung function. There is no indication that Mr Gledhill has
relevant medical training
to be able to express such views.
Mr Gledhill cannot satisfy the first limb of reg 61 of the MV Regulations,
he cannot satisfy s 81E(4) of the MV Act. It is therefore
not necessary to
determine if the second limb of reg 61 is satisfied.
s 34 of the SACAT Act, I must reach the correct or preferable decision. I
am satisfied that the correct or preferable decision
is to affirm the decision
under review. This means that Mr Gledhill’s licence must remain subject to
the MAIS condition.
Orders of the Tribunal
Tribunal affirms the decision under review.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.21 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter