URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACorC/2025/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:54:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
PROVIS, Adam James ([2025] SACC 20) [2025] SACorC 20 (3 July 2025)
CORONERS COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
[2025] SACC 20
Inquest Findings of his Honour State Coroner
3 July 2025
CORONIAL INQUEST
Examination into the cause and circumstances of the death of a 50-year-old
man who died in hospital whilst the subject of an inpatient
treatment order. Mr
Provis had recently been experiencing a decline in his mental state considered
consistent with an atypical manic
phase of bipolar affective disorder; the
treatment order was imposed as a result of this decline. The inquest examined
the circumstances
of the imposition of the treatment order, and the
appropriateness and adequacy of his treatment and care whilst in hospital.
James Provis, aged 50 years of Peterhead, died at the Royal Adelaide Hospital on
17 October 2021 as a result of in-hospital cardiac
arrest on a background of
seizures and atheroembolic cerebrovascular disease.
Circumstances
of death as set out in these findings.
recommendations made.
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
[2025] SACC 20
Introduction and reason for inquest
James Provis was born on 25 April 1971 and died on 17 October 2021 at the Royal
Adelaide Hospital. He was 50 years old.
Provis’ death was a ‘death in custody’ as defined in the
Coroners Act 2003
as he died whilst subject to a level 2 inpatient
treatment order (ITO) imposed under the
Mental Health Act 2009
though the cause of death was a natural cause, Mr Provis was held in a ward
wholly set aside for the treatment of persons
with mental illness, so the
Coroners Court must hold an inquest to determine the cause or circumstances of
level 2 ITO had been imposed by Dr Angela Okungu at The Queen Elizabeth Hospital
on 6 October 2021. The order was due to expire
on 17 November
Cause of death
post-mortem examination was conducted on 26 October 2021 by Dr Neil Langlois,
consultant forensic pathologist, at Forensic Science
SA. Dr Langlois reported
that the cause of Mr Provis’ death was ‘in-hospital cardiac arrest
on a background of seizures
and atheroembolic cerebrovascular
I will deal with
this in greater detail later in these
Provis and his sister, Kirsty, were raised in South Australia by their parents,
Phillip and Margaret. Mr Provis completed schooling
at Brighton High School
before commencing work with Kodak. He later had his own photographic business
in Port Adelaide.
2000 Mr Provis purchased his home in Peterhead where he and his father would
regularly spend time together, working on their cars.
2005 he commenced working for SA Health at the Royal Adelaide Hospital, and then
later at The Queen Elizabeth Hospital where he
worked as a distribution
Provis was noted by his father to be in reasonable health prior to July 2021.
Medical history
2016 Mr Provis engaged with his general practitioner, Dr Sun, at the Trinity
Medical Centre in relation to an upper respiratory
tract infection. Prior to
this time he had been diagnosed with hypertension, anxiety, depression and
alcohol abuse. He was also
May 2021 Dr Sun recommenced a prescription of blood pressure medication after
being informed by Mr Provis that he had stopped taking
his medication when he
began to feel well again. Mr Provis told Dr Sun he was previously
prescribed antidepressant medication but
had stopped this also when his mood
Sun noted that during Mr Provis’ engagement with the Trinity Medical
Centre he reported issues including anxiety and panic
disorder, low mood and
agoraphobia, leg pain and general unwellness. In August 2021 Dr Sun referred Mr
Provis to a psychologist
for his worsening depression and anxiety symptoms,
however was unsure if Mr Provis followed up with this
Provis’ hospital admissions
noted in the affidavit of his
Mr Provis began to feel
unwell in July 2021 and began exhibiting signs of confusion. He was having
circulation issues with his leg
and was referred to The Queen Elizabeth Hospital
for medical treatment. On 27 June 2021 Mr Provis stayed at his parents’
for about five nights before returning to his home for about three nights.
He returned to stay with his parents again for the next
16 nights. His parents
were aware something was wrong, but did not know
staying with his parents in early August 2021, Mr Provis demonstrated signs of
confusion. One evening he telephoned his parents
from their hallway saying he
was confused and did not know where he
August 2021 Mr Provis attended the Trinity Medical Centre where a
mental health care plan was put into place. He reported increasing
anxiety, on
a history of anxiety and depression.
20 August 2021 Mr Provis collapsed during breakfast at his parents’
put him on the floor where
he commenced thrashing around making noises. His father called an ambulance
which conveyed Mr Provis
to the Flinders Medical Centre. He was diagnosed with
grand mal seizures, without mention of intractable epilepsy.
Provis returned to normal quickly whilst in hospital and was discharged from the
Flinders Medical Centre three days later, staying
with his parents again. He
was referred to the Flinders Medical Centre neurology seizure clinic for follow
up in six months. He
was also booked for an MRI and EEG to occur in
September 2021. Mr Provis was commenced on thiamine and atorvastatin. He
with his parents for five days but began to show signs of confusion
again and wanted to go home.
28 August 2021 Mr Provis returned to his home, with his parents advising they
would visit him the following day.
29 August 2021 Mr Provis’ parents attended his home for a visit and took
him for a drive around Port Adelaide, something
he usually enjoyed. Mr
Provis’ father stated that upon returning home:
inside and we thought he was going inside to get his clothes to come back to our
place. Instead, Adam took his clothes
off and lay on the floor, he said, "I'm
Provis’ father called an ambulance, and Mr Provis was admitted to The
Queen Elizabeth Hospital presenting with ‘confusion,
paranoia and a
seizure from an unknown
2 September 2021 Dr Alan Xu assessed Mr Provis noting his presentation to
hospital with acute onset behavioural disturbance of
one to two days
characterised by disinhibited behaviour disrobing at home and the suspected
seizures. Whilst in hospital Mr Provis
was observed as more confused and
disorganised, verbally and physically aggressive, and it was thought that he
might be experiencing
auditory hallucinations along with paranoid ideation. Dr
Xu placed Mr Provis under a level 1 ITO.
9 September 2021 Dr Bhargavraman Parthasarthy assessed Mr Provis noting
that his behavioural disruption and confusion had settled
significantly, however
he continued to be paranoid with recent memory impairment leading to confusion
and disorganisation. He noted
the risk of aggression remained high and imposed
a level 2 ITO. According to his father, Mr Provis fluctuated in his levels of
during this time.
scans conducted on Mr Provis on 31 August 2021 showed abnormalities compatible
with subacute lacunar
15 September 2021 Mr Provis attended a case conference with the neuropsychiatry
team at the Royal Adelaide Hospital with a view
to diagnosing and determining
how best to treat him. As a result of this conference, it was determined that
Mr Provis’ presentation
was consistent with ‘atypical manic phase of
bipolar affective
Provis’ level 2 ITO was revoked on 16 September 2021 to facilitate his
discharge to the Western Intermediate Care Centre
where he could recover with
the aim of returning to work.
Provis was admitted to the Western Intermediate Care Centre on 21 September
2021. His initial assessments suggested an emerging
schizoaffective disorder. He
was prescribed medication including sertraline and
Over the course of
the next several days his condition deteriorated. On assessment on 29 September
2021, he had recently developed
right-side weakness in his hand and foot. He
had marked fluctuations in his confusion, especially with disorganised thoughts
behaviours and mild dysarthria. He was diagnosed with sub-acute delirium, or
as experiencing catatonic features of his new psychotic
level 1 ITO was put in place on 29 September 2021 by Dr Gupta and Mr Provis was
transferred to The Queen Elizabeth Hospital. He
had been noted as very confused
and having problems with his communication.
6 October 2021 Dr Okungu assessed Mr Provis and identified that his mental
state was at risk of further decline. She imposed a
level 2 ITO on this date.
This is the order Mr Provis was subject to at the time of his death.
Provis was transferred to the RAH later that day in accordance with his care
Provis was to remain on a level 2 ITO until 17 November 2021 within the acute
mental health ward of the RAH. His regular medications
were to continue, and
future cognitive screening was to occur. There was an aim for further
neuropsychology team input and further
functional assessments to determine
deficits in caring for himself.
the days leading to Mr Provis’ death, he continued to display confused,
disorientated and paranoid behaviours during interactions
with hospital staff.
conducted. At approximately 8am registered nurse Christina
Crossman attended to
administer medication to Mr Provis. She located him unresponsive and called a
code blue. CPR was commenced,
however was unsuccessful and Mr Provis was
pronounced life extinct at 8:31am.
Discussion re cause of
his report Dr Langlois provided a comprehensive categorisation and review of the
clinical care and investigations undertaken by
the medical professionals
responsible for Mr Provis’
Langlois found evidence of the mini strokes detected at The Queen Elizabeth
Hospital. Unusually though, he could not identify
the source of the
infarctions. He noted that the MRI
were supported in the
post-mortem discoveries.
Langlois noted the history and clinical notes and stated that behavioural
changes could be the result of a mini stroke or an epileptic
It was not possible to
determine post-mortem. Of note, seizure activity may not be physically
observed, and even though he had
commenced anti-seizure treatment, it may not be
am satisfied that Dr Langlois’ opinion as to cause of death is correct and
appropriate and I find the cause of Mr Provis’
death to be in-hospital
cardiac arrest on a background of seizures and atheroembolic cerebrovascular
to Dr Langlois this would not have been a straightforward case for
Mr Provis’ treating team. For example, there was
clear evidence of
the lacunar infarcts during investigations, yet Dr Langlois was unable to locate
a source for those.
Coronial investigation and
conclusions
Brevet Sergeant Hannah Stirling of Western District Criminal Investigation
Branch was the investigating officer in this
matter and provided a comprehensive
report assessing the lawfulness of custody and the adequacy of the treatment
provided to Mr Provis.
Stirling stated that she did not identify any deficiency in the treatment or
care provided whilst Mr Provis was a patient
at The Queen Elizbeth Hospital, the
Flinders Medical Centre, Western Intermediate Care Centre or the Royal Adelaide
note that Mr Provis’ father stated he was ‘happy’ that his son
was ‘cared for properly’ in the lead
find that the ITOs imposed on Mr Provis were both valid and appropriate and that
the care and treatment he received during his admissions
appropriate.
Recommendations
make no recommendations in this matter.
Keywords: Death in Custody; Inpatient Treatment Order
Exhibit C2a, page
Exhibit C8, page
Exhibit C1a, page
Exhibit C1a, page
Exhibit C7, page
Exhibit C2a, pages
MRI undertaken on 31
August 2021 at TQEH
C2a, page 5
Exhibit C1a, page 6
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (248 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (149 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter