URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACorC/2025/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:54:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
WEETRA, Michael Lionel Richard ([2025] SACC 9) [2025] SACorC 9 (6 May 2025)
CORONERS COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
MICHAEL LIONEL RICHARD
[2025] SACC 9
Inquest Findings of his Honour
Deputy State Coroner White
CORONIAL INQUEST
Examination of the cause and circumstances of the
death of Michael Lionel Richard Weetra, an 18-year-old indigenous man who was
from prison on home detention bail and was found hanging three days
later. The Inquest examined the time he spent in custody and
the series of
events that led to him taking his own life.
Lionel Richard Weetra, aged 18 years of Elizabeth South, died at Elizabeth South
on 14 September 2019 as a result of hanging.
Circumstances
of death as set out in these findings.
Recommendations made.
This judgment contains
discussion of suicide and may be distressing to some people
There is always help available
If you need support, contact
Lifeline Australia
Call 13 11 14 or Text 0477 13 11 14
or chat online at www.lifeline.org.au/crisis-chat
Aboriginal & Torres Strait Islander Support
Call 13YARN (13 92 76)
Kids Helpline
Call 1800 55 1800
MensLine Australia
Call 1300 78 99 78
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
MICHAEL LIONEL RICHARD
[2025] SACC 9
Introduction and
cause of death
was the sad duty of this Court to conduct an Inquest into a death in custody of
an 18‑year-old Aboriginal man, Michael Lionel
Richard Weetra. The Court
was given permission by his family to refer to his name as Michael Weetra or
Mr Weetra in evidence and
in this Finding.
took his own life at his sister’s house at Elizabeth South in the early
hours of Saturday, 14 September 2019. He
did so by hanging himself in her
backyard. A post-mortem examination of Mr Weetra was performed at Forensic
Science South Australia
Associate Professor Neil Langlois, consultant forensic pathologist, on
17 September 2019. He determined the cause of death was
‘compression
of the neck in keeping with hanging’. I accept his evidence as provided
in the post-mortem report
the cause of death is hanging.
Reason for Inquest
was residing at his sister’s house having been granted home detention
by the Elizabeth Magistrates
on 11 September 2019. The HD
bail was related to charges of affray and property damage allegedly committed on
29 August 2019. Under
Coroners Act
a person on HD bail is
defined to be in custody. The Act stipulates that a death in custody must be
subject to an Inquest. Accordingly,
it was mandatory to hold an Inquest into
Mr Weetra’s death.
29 August 2019 Mr Weetra was arrested by South Australia
at the alleged crime scene
in Elizabeth South and taken into police custody. I have seen the video
recording of the arrest. He was
behaving consistently with being
intoxicated.
was transported from the alleged crime scene to the Lyell McEwin
after complaining of being
hit with a brick during the alleged criminal behaviour. A blood alcohol test
was conducted and showed
a reading of 0.126%. A portion of his time in the LMH
Emergency Department
was subject to
CCTV recording. I have seen the video recording of his time in the ED. He was
seemingly at ease with many people
with him as support.
completion of his assessment in the ED, Mr Weetra was taken to the
Elizabeth Police Station. He was not eligible for bail due
to a warrant issued
by the Youth Court on 21 August 2019 for his failure to appear at a court
hearing. He participated in a record
of interview which I have also seen.
following day, 30 August 2019, he appeared in the EMC. The Court indicated that
HD bail would be the only acceptable form of
bail that would be considered. As
this takes time to organise and includes an assessment of the suitability of the
address proposed,
the next hearing was set for 5 September 2019.
Mr Weetra’s mother’s address was nominated for HD bail, but it
to be unsuitable.
Consequently,
at the next hearing on 5 September 2019, his sister’s address was
nominated as a substitute. This address proved
to be suitable. At the
subsequent hearing on 11 September 2019, Mr Weetra successfully
applied for HD bail at that address and was
released from immediate custody.
His solicitor for these hearings only had a brief opportunity to see him in
person on one occasion,
being in the EMC cells immediately prior to the hearing
on 30 August 2019. He had appeared via video link from Yatala Labour
for the hearings on 5 and
11 September 2019. She had no independent memory of him. Evidently in the
recording of the hearing on
5 September 2019, she had conveyed a comment by
Mr Weetra to the Court that he felt ‘not well in the head and the
and that he was ‘requiring some cultural
bail was quickly granted.
I make no criticism of the conduct of the solicitor. To the contrary, the
application of bail was successful, meaning the Department
for Correctional
would still be
supervising him under HD bail in the community. I find the HD bail was
appropriate given all the factors that the
Court had been asked to consider.
However, the Court had not been informed of his struggles at Yatala.
is customary for HD bail, Mr Weetra was subject to strict conditions by DCS
including electronic monitoring via an ankle bracelet,
to remain at the premises
unless given permission to leave by DCS or in the case of an emergency, and to
be subject to drug and alcohol
this Inquest evidence was presented concerning Mr Weetra’s time spent in
custody and DCS immediate custody at Yatala, and their respective
involvement with him following his release on 11 September 2019.
also heard evidence from his sister and her partner regarding his behaviour at
the house. Medical evidence was also presented
from Yatala, in relation to his
mental health, and from a locum general
practitioner
who briefly visited
him at the house in relation to his physical health.
Additionally,
expert psychiatric evidence was given by Dr Lynette Rose who conducted an
overview of Mr Weetra’s behaviour and
the care he received between
his arrest until the time of his death.
Hindsight and outcome
warn myself concerning two vital considerations in the assessment of the
evidence and any potential criticisms of witnesses in this
Inquest, namely
hindsight bias and outcome bias.
Australasian Coroners Manual describes ‘hindsight bias’ as
'... the tendency after the event to assume that events are
more predictable or foreseeable than they really were. What is clear
hindsight is rarely as clear before the fact. If it were, there would be far
fewer mistakes made. It is an obvious point, but
one that nonetheless bears
repeating, particularly when coroners are considering assigning blame or making
adverse comments that
might damage a person’s reputation.
Hindsight, of course, is a very useful tool for learning lessons from an
unfortunate event. It is not useful for understanding how
the involved people
comprehended the situation as it developed. This distinction needs to be
understood and rigorously
stated, I am very mindful of this warning when considering evidence of what
efforts were made by DCS, medical carers and his family
from the time of his
arrest until his death.
also am very mindful of outcome bias. That is, the terrible outcome of
Mr Weetra’s death should not lead me to more harshly
evidence of attempts to help him and further issues, particularly his
supervision, of which I will identify in this Finding.
In other words, the
outcome of Mr Weetra’s death must not overwhelm or unduly influence
my task of assessing the evidence
Witnesses called at Inquest
evidence was heard from the following witnesses:
Luke Williams,
Manager, High Dependency Unit, YLP
Beagley, Intensive Compliance Officer, DCS
Terah Bolt,
Psychiatric Nurse, Northern Community Mental Health Centre
Brendan Taylor,
Intensive Compliance Officer, DCS
Tanya Weetra,
sister of Mr Weetra
Wayne Willis,
partner of Tanya Weetra
Dr Okechuku
Nwachuku, general practitioner, National Home Doctor Service
Dr Lynette Rose,
Consultant Psychiatrist, Marion Psychosis Unit
Williams was a registered psychologist and Manager of the High Dependency
and Health Centre at YLP in
September 2019. At that point he had been an employee of DCS for nine years.
Mr Williams undertook
a range of duties as the Manager of HDU, including
managing the clinical staff and the prisoners in their care, providing oversight
of custodial operations, as well as clinical oversight of prisoners in HDU and
prisoners in Yatala more broadly.
Mr Weetra was admitted to Yatala on 30 August 2019, a notice of
was raised following his
admission interview. It is routine for each incoming prisoner to partake in an
admission interview. It
involves an assessment in which the prisoner is asked
questions set out in a DCS document called the ‘Prisoner Stress
form. I have detailed the importance of this document at
length in the Finding of the Inquest into the death of the late Mr Joshua
Marek Stachor.
document is pivotal as to the way a prisoner is first cared for in immediate
custody. It asks standard questions focusing on
a prisoner’s physical and
mental health, as well as any fears for safety regarding a prisoner or group of
prisoners. Each
question carries a score to be determined by the interviewer.
Some questions concern what is regarded as ‘critical items’,
which any affirmative answer should cause a NOC to be raised.
NOC must also be raised for scores of eight or above. Mr Weetra attained a
score of seven in his assessment and, although this
did not meet the minimum
threshold to warrant a mandatory NOC, he had provided an affirmative answer to
one of the critical questions
which prompted the interviewer, Mr Darren
Hills, to raise a NOC. In his evidence, Mr Williams said this was an
entirely appropriate
response made by a very experienced DCS
Mr Williams
explained that when NOCs are raised by DCS staff at Yatala, this triggers a
sequence of actions within the prison. Firstly,
a responsible officer would
arrange for the prisoner to be held safely until he can be assessed by medical
staff. The medical staff
and responsible officer would then devise an initial
response plan setting out how the prisoner would be managed to mitigate any
risks they have to themselves. Thereafter, the NOC is emailed to the High-Risk
Assessment Team
and the prisoner
is added to the HRAT list for allocation to a member of the Offender Development
staff for further assessment. Accordingly,
Mr Weetra was referred to the
HRAT for monitoring.
is a multidisciplinary team comprising institutional social workers, case
management consultants, members of the SA Prison Health
Aboriginal Liaison
Officers, and psychologists. They oversee the management of prisoners who have
been identified as being at risk
of self-harm or suicide.
the purpose of the weekly HRAT meetings, the Offender Development manager
compiles every assessment made for each prisoner on
the list so that they can be
reviewed. A discussion is held to make determinations as to how each prisoner
is to be managed in the
coming week. Separate assessments are conducted by
relevant disciplines within the prison for the individual prisoner. For
indigenous or First Nations prisoners would generally be assessed by an
Aboriginal Liaison Officer.
was assessed on 9 September 2019 by both Mr Edward August, a social worker, and
Mr Patrick Sumner, an ALO. He was further
assessed by Mr Williams on
10 September 2019. It was Mr Williams’ impression that the purpose
for this occasion was an emergency
triage assessment because a staff member had
brought Mr Weetra to him in the Health Centre after having concerns about
his presentation.
Mr Williams stated with certainty that Mr Weetra
was clearly experiencing psychotic symptoms. Cognisant of the fact that
manifest differently in different cultures, Mr Williams was mindful to
factor this into his assessment of Mr Weetra as a very young
the view this was an emergency triage assessment, Mr Williams needed to
make a relatively quick decision on Mr Weetra’s
placement, hence he
did not access Mr Weetra’s history to inform his assessment at the
time. It was likely only after the
assessment that he would have accessed
Mr Weetra’s SAPHS records and information on the Justice Information
I believe this was a
good initiative by Mr Williams.
the assessment Mr Williams arranged for Mr Weetra’s brother, who
was also a prisoner at Yatala, to be brought to the
Health Centre. It was
Mr Williams’ belief that familial support is important in situations
where an individual is experiencing
what appears to be a mental health crisis.
In this instance, he believed Mr Weetra’s brother would be able to
offer him support,
as well as provide Mr Williams with some insight into family
and cultural matters.
identified Mr Weetra was presenting with acute mental health symptoms,
Mr Williams felt it was appropriate to transfer him
to the Acute Unit
within HDU to ensure there was adequate clinical oversight of his management.
He adopted a risk‑averse approach
in managing his self-harm risk. In the
Acute Unit cells, Mr Weetra was placed under camera observations and on a
canvas regime overnight.
Mr Williams’ plan ultimately was that when
Mr Weetra’s risk had stabilised enough such that it was no longer
to monitor him through camera observations, he would be placed in a
cell with his brother.
Rose’s expert report criticised Prison Mental Health for not referring
Mr Weetra for urgent psychiatric assessment at this
point, with transfer to
the Royal Adelaide Hospital or the LMH ED, despite the staff being concerned
enough to order for a camera
and canvas regime overnight. In response to this
criticism, Mr Williams explained he and other staff at the prison were not
as authorised medical officers under the
Mental Health Act 2009
This meant they would not have been able to impose an inpatient treatment
on Mr Weetra, which
would have been required to facilitate his transfer to hospital for assessment.
Instead, their usual practice
was to flag any concerns with SAPHS, who would
then arrange for an authorised medical officer to conduct an assessment and
an ITO if it was necessary.
this, in the past there had been exceptional cases where they utilised
authorised medical officers from the Emergency Response
Group to exercise care
and control powers to transport prisoners to hospital for assessment. However,
this approach was considered
as a last resort for the Prison Mental Health staff
because it had previously proved problematic as the treating doctors and
psychiatrists
at the prison were unable to conduct medical handovers with those
at the hospital. In his assessment of Mr Weetra on 10 September
he determined Mr Weetra did not meet the threshold that would compel him to
undertake that course of action, in that Mr Weetra
had not exhibited
persistent self-harming behaviour or property damaging behaviour such that
prison staff could not safely manage
the risk any longer.
asked whether it would have been helpful if he could readily access
Mr Weetra’s records to inform his assessment, Mr Williams
more information is always helpful, but that he did not believe it would have
changed his ultimate decision in relation to
Mr Weetra’s
Mr Williams
was cross-examined on whether he took a different approach when assessing
indigenous men within Yatala. He agreed that
he would interpret certain
indicators differently if he was assessing an indigenous person as opposed to a
non-indigenous person.
For example, an indigenous person avoiding eye contact
would not be as noteworthy as a non-indigenous person displaying the same
behaviour, and Mr Williams would likely attribute this to being a cultural
difference. Further, he would be more aware of the importance
of cultural or
family supports for indigenous people, and whether they were available to them.
Mr Williams was clear in his evidence
that he would always seek the
assistance of other staff, such as an ALO, who would be better placed to provide
cultural context to
information the indigenous prisoner may reveal during their
assessment. He said he would welcome an additional tool similar to psychometric
testing which could assist psychologists in determining whether a symptom is
culturally appropriate, rather than a sign of psychosis,
as this could affect
how a prisoner is subsequently managed.
Mr Williams
explained that HDU staff were generally aware of upcoming court dates for the 30
high-risk and complex prisoners they
were responsible for managing. However,
because these dates were subject to change at short notice and there could be
multiple changes
within the group of 30 on any given day, with some being
discharged and new ones being admitted, Mr Williams could not guarantee
staff were aware of every court appearance, let alone the purpose of the court
hearing. The staff would normally be apprised
of prisoners being released from
prison after the event.
testified it was ‘very common’ for HDU prisoners to be released on
bail into the community.
only occasionally that DCS officers would contact HDU to request information as
material for a bail inquiry report or a home
detention report, such as the
reason the prisoner is being managed by HDU and whether the prisoner might need
structural support
in place for when they were released. DCS would have access
to JIS case notes, which allowed them to gain the information they required
the first instance, though Mr Williams is not aware of any policy or procedure
in this regard.
the Manager of the HDU, Mr Williams would be involved in discussions with
HDU clinicians to share their concerns when prisoners
with complex needs were
released at very short notice, sometimes on the day of their admission. In his
experience, this would happen
frequently. It did not appear as though a
prisoner being in HDU was factored into consideration when deciding to release
According to Mr Williams, this is unsatisfactory as this puts the
prisoners at risk of their mental health deteriorating. It was
his belief that
the more time HDU staff are allowed to plan for a prisoner’s discharge,
the more comprehensive supports they
can ensure are in place for their release.
a hypothetical scenario of what would happen had Mr Weetra attempted to
commit suicide whilst in HDU, Mr Williams response was
Mr Weetra under CCTV observations and placed in a cell specifically
designed to minimise a person’s ability to harm
themselves, with no
ligature points and no sharp edges, this would have minimised his ability to
harm himself. In all the time the
HDU had been operating at the time up to this
Inquest, there had not been a single case of a prisoner ending his own life when
that level of observation.
was released on HD bail only one day after Ms Nicola Galatis, a
psychologist in HDU, reported his psychotic features. His
poor engagement and
rapport had rendered her unable to complete a comprehensive Suicide Assessment
Manual for Inmates assessment.
With reference to case notes, Mr Williams
agreed that prior to his release, no-one had ascertained whether
Mr Weetra’s risk
had subsided after being subjected to a camera and
canvas regime overnight. Mr Williams had attempted to facilitate a session
a psychiatrist for Mr Weetra, but this did not eventuate before his
release. Inadvertently, Mr Weetra was released without any referral
a psychiatrist.
Mr Williams,
together with other DCS officers caring for Mr Weetra, were subject to
criticism by Mr Weetra’s family.
worked at the DCS Elizabeth office as an Intensive Compliance
and was assigned as case
manager for Mr Weetra’s HD bail. She met him at the DCS Elizabeth
office on the afternoon of 12 September
2019. He arrived with his sister,
Ms Tanya Weetra. Almost immediately he began to make concerning statements
including about harming
others and being possessed by the devil. He was talking
to himself whilst Ms Beagley attempted to question him.
to Mr Weetra’s behaviour, she contacted another ICO to sit in with
her. When that happened, he told them that ‘he
does not want to be
Aboriginal anymore’
that he saw Aboriginal people standing behind them.
checking the DCS notes from his time in custody at YLP, Ms Beagley
it was decided that
she should call the Acute Crisis Intervention
which she promptly did.
She spoke to Mr Andrew Fort, the call-taker on duty for ACIS, about her concerns
regarding Mr Weetra. As
Mr Weetra was reporting thoughts of hurting
other people, Mr Fort advised her to call SAPOL on 131 444 to request they
welfare check on him.
Ms Beagley’s contact with ACIS, an automatic referral was made for
Mr Weetra to the Northern Community Mental Health
approximately an hour, she concluded the appointment with Mr Weetra. When
Ms Beagley walked out of the room, Ms Weetra approached
the reception
counter. Ms Beagley asked her if she had any concerns regarding her
brother’s behaviour and presentation. Ms
Weetra said she would keep
talking to him and that she was hoping a cultural healer could see him that
night or the following morning.
Ms Beagley gave Ms Weetra contact
numbers for ACIS, DCS and SAPOL.
Ms Beagley waited for confirmation, via GPS tracking, that Mr Weetra had
returned home, she called SAPOL as advised by ACIS and
relayed his comments
a formal reference number for
It was recommended to
Ms Beagley as a critical safeguard, but SAPOL never conducted this welfare
check, thus losing the chance to
change the course of events by making a
potential assessment and ensuring follow-up care.
found Ms Beagley to be a caring ICO and an impressive witness. Her conduct
in the appointment with Mr Weetra was appropriate and
she responded to his
presentation swiftly. She correctly escalated further actions concerning his
welfare and those that may be in
danger from him at the house.
September 2019, Ms Terah Bolt was employed in two different roles at the NCMHS.
She was employed 0.5 full-time
as the associate
nurse unit manager,
substantive role, and 0.5 FTE as a nurse practitioner for the Cultural Healing
On any given day she
would undertake both roles simultaneously depending on the tasks allocated to
She had commenced her role
as ANUM in 2014, but it was not until January or February 2019 that she had
taken on the role of nurse
practitioner for the CHT.
Mr Weetra’s
referral came through the CHT. The CHT worked across three different teams,
which were the Salisbury, Playford,
and North-East teams. Their focus was
entirely on servicing these three teams in assisting Aboriginal and Torres
Straight Islanders
obtain mental health treatment. The ‘consumers’
of their service would be referred to their team. Ms Bolt, as the
would devise appropriate treatment plans for each referral. These
treatment plans would then be finalised at a multidisciplinary
clinical review
meeting involving the five disciplines staffing each centre, namely
psychiatrists, mental health nurses, social workers,
occupational therapists and
psychologists.
Playford team was staffed seven days a week from 8am to 9pm. However, team
members would work different shifts on a rostered
basis, and the CHT members did
not work on the weekends. Ms Bolt worked 8:30am to 5:30pm Monday to
explained they would receive referrals from Mental Health
which is a 24-hour
referral service that connects people in need of mental health support with a
mental health service.
would be notified of these referrals when MHT sent a record to their team by an
electronic system called ‘Community-Based
Information
clinicians employed in mental health are able to
These referrals would
already be coded by MHT with either an emergency response, rapid response, tier
1, tier 2, or non-urgent
tier rating to indicate priority or urgency, with
each having a corresponding recommended response time to be met by NCMHS. The
referrals would sometimes, but not often, be presented to the team’s
consultant psychiatrist to have the referral re-triaged
if they thought it was
appropriate to do so.
Mr Weetra’s
non-urgent referral was received by NCMHS at around 5pm on Thursday, 12
September 2019, but it was not until midday
on Friday, 13 September 2019 that
the committee passed the referral to Ms Bolt personally.
gathering information and context surrounding any referral, Ms Bolt would
consult CBIS to obtain the consumer’s background
and the reason for
referral, as well as the Open Architecture Clinical Information
which would display all
inpatient records and discharge summaries from hospitals. NCMHS does not have
access to DCS records. It
was from the demographic information screen within
CBIS that Ms Bolt accessed Mr Weetra’s telephone number and
residential
line with normal practice, once Ms Bolt received Mr Weetra’s
referral on 13 September 2019, she attempted to ring his phone
notify him she had received it and to arrange for a suitable time to meet for an
assessment. An assessment involved a
mental state examination, an assessment of
that person’s risk both to themselves and to other people, and of their
vulnerability.
The purpose of these assessments was to explore any delusional
or psychotic thought patterns that the person might be having.
Bolt’s practice was to ask a variety of open-ended questions to
assist in determining what the next treatment step would be.
there was no answer on the number she dialled, she went to visit
Mr Weetra’s home address in an attempt to see him in person.
recalled leaving the office in company with ALO Richard Smith to attend the
recorded address of 94 Ridley Road, Elizabeth South
at approximately
Before they departed,
Mr Smith commented that he thought the house at the recorded address had burnt
Upon arriving, they
discovered Mr Smith was correct; the house had burnt down and was boarded up.
Mr Smith told Ms Bolt he believed
that the family had since moved to
Port Adelaide.
Port Adelaide fell outside their team’s catchment area, Ms Bolt
resolved to return to the office and submit a Safety
report to indicate the
referral contained an incorrect address. It was her intention upon returning to
the office the following
Monday to obtain the correct address for Mr Weetra
and redirect the referral to another team if appropriate. Ms Bolt
justified leaving
this task to the following Monday, rather than later that
afternoon on the Friday, by reasoning that Mr Weetra had been triaged as
requiring a non-urgent response within 72 hours of referral and, therefore, it
was not absolutely necessary for her to actively search
for him that day.
September 2019 CHT was composed of the team manager, Ms Bolt as the only
nurse practitioner, and three ALOs, making a total of
five members within NCMHS
that were part of CHT. The team manager did not carry out a clinical role as he
did not have a mental
health care background.
agreed that Mr Weetra’s symptoms, as described by Ms Beagley,
including past self-harm and having relatively new thoughts
to hurt other
people, would ordinarily necessitate a rapid response, contrary to the
non-urgent response that was assigned to Mr
Weetra’s referral. Ms
Bolt said this is the conclusion you would properly come to if you were
considering a referral in isolation,
but that this is not their practice to do
so. When evaluating a referral, she would consider the referral as a whole and
the person’s
symptoms in combination with the chart. It is on a
case-by-case basis that they approach each referral they receive.
was Ms Bolt’s understanding that the only new symptom Mr Weetra
was presenting with was his intention to hurt other people,
which was a feature
that had already been appropriately addressed by way of the referrer having
already reported this to SAPOL.
Aside from this, all other symptoms were
longstanding and chronic in nature as they had been present for at least a year
point. In terms of Mr Weetra’s risk of self-harm,
Ms Bolt explained this presented on only one occasion while he was in the
Adelaide Youth Training Centre, around the age of 14 or 15 years, which he later
revealed was a ruse in the hope he would be released
afterwards. Ultimately,
Ms Bolt did not believe it was necessary to re-triage the referral. She
described the process as being
more fluid than
the next stage of her evidence Ms Bolt’s attention was turned to CBIS
notes pertaining to Mr Weetra’s risk assessment
conducted by
Ms Beagley.
agreed that Mr Weetra scored moderate ratings for two of the criteria, in
line with warranting a rapid response, and a ‘not
known’ rating for
the other four criteria. Although her overall position is to take a risk-averse
approach, it is not the
case that just because they do not have the information
for certain criteria regarding an individual, that they are automatically
regarded as being at high risk. Rather, although unknowns are treated as
contributing to high risk until that information becomes
available, Ms Bolt
maintained that they look at the referral as a whole. She deemed it was
unnecessary to facilitate a re-triage
of the non-urgent referral for two
already stated, the only new presenting symptom of wanting to hurt others had
already been addressed by the referrer when they
advised SAPOL; and
was aware Mr Weetra was living with his sister on HD bail and that he would
be monitored by DCS. With this support network
in place at the time,
Ms Bolt did not feel it was necessary to heighten the urgency of the
referral such that it had to be attended
to within an hour.
a response was required, the 72-hour timeframe commencing from
Mr Weetra’s referral received by NCMHS at 5pm on Thursday,
September 2019 would have ended at 5pm on Sunday, 15 September 2019.
Ms Bolt was queried why she postponed the task to the following
She clarified it was only necessary that she undertake some kind of action in
relation to the referral within the time of
response to satisfy the policy. In
Mr Weetra’s case, Ms Bolt had attempted to ring Mr Weetra
and had visited the recorded
address without success. So, although she was
unsuccessful in establishing contact with Mr Weetra, Ms Bolt explained
did not obligate her to see him face-to-face within the response
time. According to her, she needed to have had at least tried to
make contact
within those first 72 hours to satisfy that criterion of the non-urgent
agreed that once she realised the address they had on record was incorrect, it
was open to her to make phone calls to either
Ms Beagley, the referrer from DCS,
or Ms Tanya Weetra, Mr Weetra’s sister, whose number was listed
on CBIS, to try and acquire
Mr Weetra’s correct address. She was
informed that Mr Weetra was potentially living outside of their designated
zone, based
on Mr Smith’s comment he believed the family had moved to Port
Adelaide. This meant to her she would not only have to obtain
the new address
and drive to Port Adelaide to physically verify where he lived, but would also
have had to send the referral on to
the appropriate team. She stated it would
have taken a ‘whole day’ to find
Furthermore,
she had other tasks scheduled for the remainder of the day that needed her
attention. It was open to her to handover
to Mr Smith, as the ALO, or perhaps
the afternoon staff or weekend staff to make those phone call inquiries. She
did not opt to
do so but decided to leave these tasks for the following Monday
when she would be back on shift. She explained that this referral
was received
on a non-urgent basis, thus there was nothing apparent to indicate it was
absolutely necessary she investigate this
issue before she was due to return to
work following the weekend. Ms Bolt commented on the hypothetical
situation where, if these
events had transpired on Thursday, she would have made
further attempts to make contact with Mr Weetra on Friday. In light of the
failed visit to the wrong address, on balance and acknowledging hindsight bias,
I believe a check on him on the weekend was warranted
despite the lack of
urgency classification.
Mr Brendan Taylor
Brendan Taylor was an employee of DCS in September 2019. He was an ICO working
in the Intensive Compliance Unit of Edwardstown
Corrections.
Edwardstown
Community Corrections serviced most of South Australia.
an ICO Mr Taylor would conduct home visits, welfare checks, breath analyses,
drug testing and other duties as
He could receive
anywhere between two and fourteen tasks on any given day, which he would attend
in a pair alongside another ICO.
Duties would be clearly divided between the
partners, with the driver’s responsibilities being to organise operational
prepare radios, duress straps and monitoring equipment, and the
passenger being responsible for documents, taskings and computer
Taylor’s daily taskings were allocated to him by the team leader. The
taskings would generally be created by the monitoring
centre officer who had
deemed it necessary for an ICO to attend. Upon commencing a shift, ICOs would
log on to their computer and
access taskings allocated to them within a shared
drive folder.
‘Participants’
or ‘offenders’ whom ICOs attend upon are persons on HD bail, parole,
court-ordered sentencing,
intensive correctional orders and extended supervision
orders. It was not an unusual occurrence for him in his work to encounter
participants suffering from poor mental health, whether diagnosed or not. Mr
Taylor was not a mental health
professional.
Friday 13 September 2019, Mr Taylor and fellow ICO Robert Hutchison were tasked
by their team leader, Garry Cobb, to attend at
Mr Weetra’s residence
to conduct a welfare check and a home
The purpose of the visit
was to ascertain his wellbeing on HD bail and ensure he was living in a
safe environment with no potential
hazards or risks to himself. On home visits,
Mr Taylor’s role is to investigate and address factors which do not appear
by either taking further action to make it safe, or eliminate any risks
posed to the participant or offender, or to cause a shift
to another residence
if necessary.
carry mobile rugged tablets
their vehicles which they use throughout their shifts to upload case notes,
access information on the JIS and receive additional
taskings. At the time of
giving his evidence, Mr Taylor did not have an independent recollection of
whether he accessed JIS, either
in his Edwardstown office or on the MRT, to
check if Mr Weetra had any warning information against his offender record.
it was safe to say no-one had passed that information on to him
because if they had, he would have remembered something that
significant.
arriving at Mr Weetra’s residence, Mr Taylor met his sister, Tanya
Weetra, who was there with her young children. He observed
sitting on a couch in the loungeroom by himself. He was watching television and
eating a bowl of cereal. He appeared
quiet, withdrawn and sad. Mr Weetra
acknowledged Mr Taylor and Mr Hutchinson. He was calm and polite when they
engaged him in conversation.
Despite his calm and polite reactions, it was
apparent from Mr Weetra’s demeanour he was suffering from some kind
health condition as he was very still, staring straight ahead and
speaking in monotone. During the conversation, the ICOs asked
Mr Weetra as
to how he was feeling and why he had left the residence earlier that morning.
This had been alerted to DCS by the monitoring
system of the ankle bracelet. It
was Mr Taylor’s recollection that they were not emphasising to
Mr Weetra he had breached
his HD conditions, but rather were just inquiring
what had happened to cause him to leave momentarily, and to remind him he was
to leave unless authorised to do so. In response, Mr Weetra admitted
he had left to go on a walk, but that he had returned home.
He informed the
ICOs everything was fine.
made various comments to Mr Taylor and Mr Hutchinson, including that he wanted
to go out to the lands and had ‘walked
through the valley of the shadow of
death’, in reference to a biblical
Mr Weetra also
stated to them at one point ‘I should have been dead a long time
ago’. Mr Taylor asked what he meant
by that. He probed Mr Weetra
with a series of yes/no questions such as ‘Are you hearing voices?’,
‘Are there voices
telling you things?’, ‘Are you planning on
harming yourself?’,
which Mr Weetra simply responded to the effect of ‘No,
everything’s fine, I’m
They discussed
whether he had a treating GP, whether he had been prescribed any medication,
whether he had had a depot injection
which may be wearing off, and whether there
was any plan in place to help him manage his mental health.
Taylor suggested that Mr Weetra make an appointment to see his local GP and
construct a mental health care
This was received well by
Mr Weetra and
However, Mr
Taylor was not meaning for Mr Weetra to obtain a mental health care plan in
the traditional sense, which would involve
seeking psychological support or some
counselling sessions, but rather that he was referring to constructing a
strategy or a ‘game
plan’ in general to receive ‘immediate
assistance’ in addressing his mental health
Mr Taylor then
explained to them both how to facilitate an urgent authorised pass out so that
Mr Weetra would avoid breaching his
bail conditions for when he does need
to leave the premises to consult his local GP. His advice to see a GP was
intended to be conveyed
as requiring action without delay, but Mr Taylor was
concerned Ms Weetra would not make the arrangements straight away as she seemed
more ascribed to cultural healing.
his attendance it was apparent to Mr Taylor that Ms Weetra was very supportive
of Mr Weetra and wanted what was best for
him. At the time, she believed
he was fine and did not disclose anything to the contrary, but was receptive of
the ICOs’ suggestion
for Mr Weetra to see his GP. She mentioned she
would also be seeking help from a cultural
While Mr Taylor
considered Mr Weetra was likely suffering from some mental health issues,
he did not consider he was at risk of
self-harm or that he posed a risk to
series of propositions were put to Mr Taylor during evidence to establish what
information he was aware of prior to attending the
tasking. He explained that
on the morning of 13 September 2019 he had been called in at short notice to
cover a staff absence which
meant he arrived late to the shift and had to leave
the office promptly. Furthermore, on the drive to Mr Weetra’s HD
the MRT was malfunctioning so he attempted to call the office to obtain
more information, however his call went
unanswered.
In answer to these
propositions, Mr Taylor revealed he was only privy to the fact he was tasked to
conduct a welfare check as Mr
Weetra had left the residence earlier that
morning and had since returned; all other information was gained by way of his
interaction
with Mr Weetra and his sister. He simply could not recall what
he did and did not know at the time.
Taylor’s perception of Mr Weetra’s mental wellbeing was that
‘something was amiss, and he needed some
medication’
despite him
constantly reassuring Mr Taylor and Mr Hutchinson he was fine. However, he
was unable to pinpoint what the issues were
as he was not an expert.
Mr Weetra did appear as though he was delusional as he was quoting biblical
verses, but he would alternate
this nonsensical speech with logical speech,
which Mr Taylor said happens quite frequently with people who are experiencing
health issues.
his evidence Mr Taylor maintained Mr Weetra needed immediate assistance and
could not be left untreated. He said this
was especially so considering he was
on the strictest form of bail and confined in a small house with young children,
which meant
his circumstances were dynamic and could change rather quickly. It
was then proposed to Mr Taylor that if he genuinely believed
this was the case,
rather than referring him to a GP, an alternative open to him at the time would
have been to accompany Mr Weetra
while he attended hospital voluntarily to
be psychiatrically assessed there. Although Mr Taylor agreed this
alternative was open,
he would have needed to have obtained authority from his
team leader or manager before transporting Mr Weetra, as this had gone awry
when doing so with offenders in the past. Hence, he explained why such a
procedure was reserved for exceptional circumstances.
Taylor said that even if they did have express authority to detain offenders and
transport them to undergo a mental health assessment,
their vehicle was not
equipped or secure to take a person in custody as it is ‘just an average
family sedan’, not a cage
car or a purpose-designed conveyance
He also mentioned that
while there is a duress button for emergencies located within the vehicle,
pressing it would not materialise
immediate assistance. Ordinarily they would
not carry equipment such as handcuffs, a taser, a spray or any weapon, which
transporting people in custody would present a real risk to the ICOs.
Such equipment was only brought along in cases of revocation
tasks where the
ICOs were tasked to attend and revoke an offender’s bail to have them
returned to custody if so ordered.
agreed that, alternatively, it was open to him to call SAPOL and request a
patrol attend and assess Mr Weetra. However, Mr Taylor
did not think
police attendance was warranted as the circumstances did not meet the criteria
Mental Health Act 2009
, these being that Mr Weetra was
not presenting as a threat to himself, nor was he at immediate risk of harm to
others at the time.
Mr Taylor explained that when SAPOL had been contacted in
the past, they would resist attending when the ICO was not able to prove
criteria to detain someone.
not a requirement of ICOs, Mr Taylor, of his own volition, educated himself on
this part of the legislation so that he had better
knowledge to perform his job,
knowing that domestic violence and mental health encompassed the vast majority
of what he encountered
daily in his line of work. He has advocated for training
of ICOs to include education on the legislation as he believes it is lacking
this regard. He detailed that, firstly, there was no training on what signs and
symptoms the ICOs needed to look out for under
and when it would be
appropriate to make the call for a mental health assessment to be conducted.
Secondly, there was no training
with this situation, which could be anywhere from transporting that person
to the hospital, or making a request for SAPOL to do so, down to the
lower options such as encouraging them to see their GP. As
there was no formal
practice or training that provided guidelines for ICOs in carrying out their
role in this regard, they simply
relied on word of mouth between officers and
team leaders which were based on their own experiences.
he was not qualified to make an assessment whether someone should be detained
Mental Health Act
, he did effectively have to make assessments about a
person’s presentation to decide whether they needed to be assessed by
professional. He agreed it would assist if the ‘Intensive Compliance Unit
– Daily Tasking’s Service Record’
provided specific
prompts for when the ICOs attend welfare checks, particularly a reminder to
consider any other information that
might be available on JIS in relation to the
health of the person.
was Mr Taylor’s recollection that Ms Weetra was very engaged and
supportive of Mr Weetra during his visit. When Mr Taylor
Mr Weetra with a series of questions after he had made the comment ‘I
should have been dead a long time ago’,
and assured Mr Taylor he was fine,
Ms Weetra appeared concerned, but not alarmed. Her reaction suggested to Mr
Taylor that she accepted
this was his normal behaviour and that she was already
aware he was struggling with something. She seemed satisfied at the time
it was an effective course of action for Mr Weetra to voluntarily attend a
GP to be assessed and generate a plan.
Taylor was very upset about Mr Weetra’s death, which at one point he
displayed in his evidence. He was asked about his reaction
when he learnt of
his death. His response was:
'It's been very hard and I'm not in
the job - I'm here to make a difference in a positive light, not have things
like this happen,
and I believe I do my job thoroughly and above and beyond at
times to make sure that things like this don't eventuate, and it's been
hard to process. It's been on my mind for months, years, and then each time you
do a welfare check, it always comes to the
front of your mind to reinforce that
you perform your job
correctly.'
was highly upset and emotional in giving his response. I found him to be a
caring and impressive witness. This is so despite
alleged mistakes he may have
ultimately made and criticisms about him. If he did make mistakes, it was not
through a lack of care
for Mr Weetra. His actions need to be evaluated
without any hindsight or outcome bias. With that warning in mind, I find his
to Mr Weetra on that visit to be professional, caring and
reasonable. He was satisfied by Ms Weetra’s words and actions about
brother, in particular about seeing a GP as he suggested. He is now full of
regret due to the outcome of Mr Weetra’s death.
Tanya Weetra
Tanya Weetra was the seventh eldest of 12 children. She was the older sister of
Mr Weetra, who was the second to youngest
She described
Mr Weetra as being the big uncle to all his nieces and nephews. He enjoyed
taking care of them. He was very protective
and did everything for them. He
loved music and dancing,
always the happy one who lit up the room when he walked
Weetra recalls that at one stage her brother was living at their older sister
Lavinia’s house on HD bail. This was the house
that DCS had on their
record as accessed by Ms Bolt that had burnt down.
September 2019 Ms Weetra had four young children. When Mr Weetra was
arrested in late-August 2019 and sent to Yatala, Ms Weetra
attended one of his
court hearings alongside another one of their older sisters, Roma. Ms Weetra
provided a written address to be
read out during the hearing in the hope that
Mr Weetra could be placed to stay with her on HD bail.
DCS officers attended Ms Weetra’s house on 13 September 2019 to visit her
brother, she thought that they would have ‘picked
something up too because
[of] the way he was just looking at them’, like how she thought he was
looking through her when he
As a witness in the
Inquest, she was not able to recall whether the DCS officers discussed taking
Mr Weetra to see a doctor to put
a plan in place to help him with his
mental health, or to ring an ambulance for him to get assessed, nor much else of
the conversation.
She did recall, however, that just as they went to leave,
Mr Weetra made a comment to the officers along the lines of ‘I should
have died a long time ago’ which caused them to turn around and come back
in to speak with him further.
that night at about 6:30pm she called the 13SICK number, which offers after
hours GP services,
to request a
doctor to conduct a home visit for her brother. Dr Nwachuku attended their
house to assess Mr Weetra, for which she
was also present. She estimated
this consultation lasted no longer than five minutes. While she was slightly
distracted and preoccupied
with her children, she remembers the doctor giving
Mr Weetra two diazepam pills, instructing him to ‘take one now, and
one tomorrow in the
This was after
Ms Weetra informed the locum doctor service that her brother had just been out
of prison and was now on home detention,
and that he needed medication to help
relax as he had not been sleeping for the last one to three days. Overall, it
was a short
visit where the doctor mainly dealt with his sleeping issues and did
not probe Mr Weetra at length about how he was feeling.
the Friday the DCS officers attended, Ms Weetra recalled her brother standing in
her backyard holding a rope that her children
had been playing tug-of-war with
earlier. He was staring at the tree and twisting the rope around his hands.
She believed she asked
Wayne, her partner, to grab the rope off him as she felt
something was not right and her instinct was to remove the rope from him.
was not sure if this incident took place before or after the DCS officers had
attended. As this event was not mentioned to
Mr Taylor, it was more likely
to have happened after the DCS visit.
Mr Weetra returned home from prison, Ms Weetra said she struggled to have
open conversations with him as she had before. It
was hard to get a smile from
She was ‘lucky to
get two words out of him’. It was ‘like talking to a brick
wall’, and that when he made
eye contact it was like he was looking right
through her.
Other things she
noticed that were out of character upon his return was that he would mumble to
himself sometimes, and that when
he would use the toilet, he would leave the
door open as if he was still in
day she accompanied her brother to the Elizabeth Corrections Centre, the ICO
Ms Beagley had asked if Mr Weetra was okay, and Ms
Weetra informed her
that he was not well and needed to be checked over by an Aboriginal healer.
Other than this detail, Ms Weetra
could not recall much else regarding the
conversation with Ms Beagley.
Weetra became very upset on a few occasions throughout her evidence. A
compelling piece of her evidence was when she spoke of
the day she saw her
brother with the rope in the backyard. She believed that if she had not been so
sleep-deprived after staying
up with Mr Weetra all night following the GP
visiting their home, that maybe she would have told someone about it, and he
would still
be alive today. Had she not been so exhausted and rundown caring
for her four children and her nieces and nephews that day, she
believed things
may have been different. She said:
‘Yeah, if I'd had a sleep
I probably would have been - he would have been still alive
today ... I want to ... the bloody
This answer was broken up due to her understandable emotional state in
expressing her sorrow. It was sad to see her blame herself
in this way given
everything she did for him. I hope she realises that her brother’s death
was not her fault in any way.
She loved and cared for her little brother very
much and did all she could for him in my opinion.
Weetra had to be consoled by an Elder during her evidence. It was difficult for
her as she had nowhere to recompose herself other
than in Court, which was less
than ideal for her. I appreciate her courage to continue and finish her
evidence in very trying circumstances.
Dr Okechuku
Okechuku Nwachuku worked for the National Home Doctor Service in
the commencement of his shift on 13 September 2019, as the locum doctor on duty,
he logged on to the National Home Doctor Service
app on the mobile device he
carried to check calls received by the service. The software displays calls
logged by the service which
have been assigned and dispatched to a doctor to
attend to. It provides the patient’s details and presenting complaint,
not access to the patient’s medical
Tanya Weetra’s request came through for an after-hours doctor to visit her
brother, Michael Weetra, the app displayed the
patient details as being a
Michael Havea residing at 48 Jeffries Road, Elizabeth South. His presenting
complaint was ‘Just
out of prison, home detention, not sleeping and
requesting relaxant medication
13/09/2019’.
information was communicated to Dr Nwachuku via the app. Mr Weetra’s
symptoms had been recorded
‘Not sleeping (1-3 Days), Symptoms Worsening’, but it was
Dr Nwachuku’s evidence that that information was not
communicated to
him that evening. He presumed that section of the app was utilised only by the
call centre to categorise calls.
to the electronic audit trail, Ms Weetra’s request was dispatched to
Dr Nwachuku at 18:27:35 on 13 September 2019
via mass dispatch. The visit
was completed later that night at 19:46:58, a time which Dr Nwachuku entered
himself into the system
at the end of the consultation.
Nwachuku relied heavily on his statements provided to SAPOL and what he had
recorded electronically to refresh his recollection
of the events of that night.
He was unable to recollect ‘the fine details of the discussion’
between himself and
whilst he agreed that it would have been essential to obtain a history from
Mr Weetra prior to prescribing him diazepam,
an addictive Schedule 4 drug,
he could neither confirm nor deny he had asked Mr Weetra if he had
experienced sleeping problems in
the past. Dr Nwachuku prescribed only two
tablets of diazepam, just enough to ‘tide him over that night’, with
the expectation
that Mr Weetra would follow-up with his regular GP who
would make the ultimate decision as to whether it was necessary to prescribe
more tablets. He reasoned those two tablets of diazepam ‘would not cause
an addiction’.
Nwachuku explained that although he omitted to include in the electronic record
any details of their discussion regarding Mr Weetra’s
past medical
history, or lack thereof, it should not be assumed he failed to carry out his
due diligence in treating Mr Weetra and
prescribing a drug like diazepam.
He also emphasised it should not be assumed he failed to check whether
Mr Weetra had any history
of sleeping problems, or whether he had
previously taken any types of drugs to assist him to sleep. He believed he
did’ ask him and had simply forgotten to document these
This was especially so considering it was Dr
Nwachuku’s usual practice to only document history that he considered was
significant’ to a patient’s
consultation.
He concluded that
Mr Weetra had ‘insomnia’ and gave him limited access to
diazepam to relieve that condition.
the end, his memory of this consultation was scant at best. I take into account
his role as a locum service doctor, to assist
Mr Weetra to ‘tide him
over to until he could consult with his regular health
providers’.
I also note he
was experienced with Aboriginal prisoners having provided GP services to Port
Augusta Prison in 2008 and 2009. He
had seen prisoners with poor sleep and
anxiety due to the very fact of their circumstances of being in DCS
Mr Wayne Willis
Willis has been Tanya Weetra’s partner since 2008. They share five
children together.
The children
and Tanya Weetra resided at 48 Jeffries Road, Elizabeth Vale. Mr Willis only
lived there part of the time. He had
become acquainted with Mr Weetra
around the time he first met Ms Weetra, or possibly a year prior to that, which
would have meant
Mr Weetra was between six and eight years old at that
Thursday, 12 September 2019, Mr Willis had stayed overnight at Ms Weetra’s
house. He was there the following day when Ms
Weetra had called out and drawn
his attention to her brother standing in the backyard with some rope. He
remembered feeling nervous
as he ‘didn’t want him to harm
himself’ and ‘just wanted to get it away from
He presumed this
incident took place at around 4pm as he had returned home from a course he
attended that day for gaining employment.
the Inquest he initially could not recall whether Mr Weetra was holding the
rope in his hands or if it was on the tree when he
first noticed
In later evidence he
remembered ‘ripping it off the tree’. He then hid the rope in a
‘cupboard in the back’
to prevent Mr Weetra from finding it.
This was the first of two occasions that same
second occasion took place about an hour after the first. Mr Willis at this
time was with his brother-in-law, Charlie Burnell,
who had approached
Mr Weetra and grabbed the rope off him. Following this incident the family
gathered around to chat with Mr Weetra
in the loungeroom, assuring him they
loved him. Mr Willis believed it was a matter for family to discuss. That is
why he was not
so inclined to call someone external to the family, such as DCS
or an ambulance or a doctor for assistance for Mr Weetra.
Willis described Mr Weetra’s mood that afternoon as ‘really
quiet’, ‘didn’t even talk a lot, didn’t
nothing’, which was significantly out of character. Before going to
prison he was energetic, happy, and would ‘talk
a lot’. This
changed after coming out of prison as they ‘couldn’t even get a word
out of him’.
did not hear Mr Weetra say anything about wanting to hurt anyone else or
act in any way like that.
Willis at best had a fair recollection of certain events but was very poor on
other related events. For example, he could not
recall whether, prior to
leaving for his afternoon course that Thursday, DCS officers had attended at Ms
Weetra’s home following
Mr Weetra breaching his HD conditions by
leaving the premises. His evidence was he could not recall any of this
occurring likely
because he ‘might have been
said that back then he would ‘sleep in a
Although he
remembered a doctor visiting Mr Weetra that Friday night, he could not
remember whether he contributed to the overall
conversation at all. He did have
a few drinks that night and thought maybe he was occupied in either the laundry
or the kitchen.
He left Ms Weetra to deal with the doctor to help her brother.
He trusted that she would do ‘what she’s got to do to
look after her
Dr Lynette Rose
Rose is an expert consultant psychiatrist of over 30 years working experience.
In her career she has always worked in the public
mental health system, together
with working in the private mental health system. In 2019, she became the
inaugural Head of the Marion
Psychosis Unit which specialised in the treatment
of schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders in the southern community.
psychosis is defined at its core as a situation:
people lose some contact with reality. This might involve seeing or hearing
things that other people cannot see or
hear (hallucinations) and believing
things that are not actually true (delusions). It may also involve confused
(disordered) thinking
30 July 2022 Dr Rose provided a written report to the State Coroner after
conducting an expert review of Mr Weetra’s mental
health history,
care and treatment. This report was part of her evidence at the
Her curriculum vitae
provided evidence of her extensive clinical and academic career in psychiatry.
She was eminently qualified
to provide her opinion to this Inquest about both
Mr Weetra’s long-term mental health as well as for the last weeks of
Rose was provided with all the relevant statements and exhibits from the
Inquest, including Mr Weetra’s health records.
She noted that he
identified as an Anunga man and was ‘largely raised by his older
siblings’. He had a long history
of juvenile offending from 2013 and had
spent time in detention from 2016 onwards. Unfortunately, his education was
limited’, and he had experienced a traumatic childhood
involving domestic violence, an alcoholic mother and his brother being
some positive influences and support from his wider family, he fell into bad
ways including crime and substance abuse such
as glue sniffing, cannabis and
alcohol from a ‘very young age’.
he had poor impulse control and struggled with anger issues. This was coupled
with self-harm episodes, including applying
ligatures to his neck in 2016 whilst
in youth detention.
the background of all the problems described above, in 2018 he started to
express that he was under a culturally bad spirit. Despite
some determinations
to the contrary by cultural consultants, he continued to make these claims into
August 2018 Dr Daphne, a psychiatrist, assessed Mr Weetra in youth
detention and concluded that he had ‘an antisocial personality
and a background of trauma with impulsive aggression, at chronic risk to himself
and others’. During this assessment
he told her of hearing voices and
seeing spirit members of his family that had died. Unsurprisingly, she found
these hallucinations
were ‘culturally bound’.
saw him again in January 2016 in youth detention with a cultural consultant
after he had complained of feeling threatened by others
and believing he was
under spells by African residents. She concluded he was unlikely to be
psychotic, but did recommend ongoing
final contact with him was on 1 February 2019. This was after two reports that
he was threatening to stab other juveniles and,
later in January, he was hearing
voices and ‘casting spells’. She concluded the issues
‘related to personality,
vulnerability, complex trauma, cognitive delays
and a family with an atypical stance towards cultural interpretation, with
psychosis’.
is the last documented contact with a mental health service provider until
Yatala under the care of Mr Williams at the HDU where,
by 10 September
2019, he was believed to be psychotic.
we know, he was granted bail the next day without this belief as to his mental
state being known to his solicitor or the EMC.
As Dr Rose summarised, ‘he
went from a high level of concern, on camera observation and canvas due to acute
risk concerns,
to living with his sister and her young family with no special
precautions or supports in
Rose was aware of the DCS contact with him on HD bail. She was asked to comment
on the events in the 14 days from his arrest to
his death concerning any
features that were of importance and how they were handled.
identified events in her report as being missed opportunities to obtain urgent
psychiatric assessment and treatment. These involved
DCS, predominantly from
his last day and night at YLP in HDU on 10 September 2019, through to the locum
GP visit in the early hours
of 13 September 2019. It is true that any variation
of the events and responses could have caused a vastly different outcome. I
have to be mindful of the general background that DCS and Mr Weetra’s
family, in particular his sister, were acting in good
faith to help him. Mr
Williams was caring for him in ignorance of his bid to gain bail.
Mr Weetra’s
family have advocated strongly that DCS did not do enough to get him the acute
mental health care he needed. I
have carefully considered their thorough oral
and written submissions. I have already set out in detail each DCS
allegation is that great caution ought to be applied to the criticism, although
it was ‘acknowledged that there are certain factors that, cumulatively,
resulted in a lack of mental health support being provided
to Mr Weetra
upon his release from
concession is a proper one. It would be obvious to anyone that his monitoring
in HDU as described made the chance for him to
die by suicide negligible. He
then moved to a busy and small house carrying the burden of mental health
issues. His sister did
all she could for him in regard to love and support. He
died when she was asleep.
comprehensive HRAT assessment with Mr Weetra on the afternoon of
10 September 2019 could not be completed ‘due to his psychotic
features, poor engagement and
believed at that point he should have been referred to a
psychiatrist.
I am confident
that if his stay extended in HDU, and he did not improve, Mr Williams would
have referred him to SAPHS, and that
level of care would have been strongly
considered and probably actioned. Mr Williams’ actions in caring for
Mr Weetra showed
a professional and risk-adverse approach.
breakdown of intense monitoring for Mr Weetra concerning mental health care
manifested in a gap in referral about him to CMH which
lasted until
Ms Beagley’s actions on 12 September 2019 when she notified
NCMHS. One of the most unfortunate features of this
crucial time period was the
inability of NCMHS to see Mr Weetra on Friday 13 September 2019 for
the reasons explained in evidence,
particularly by Ms Bolt.
Bolt was falsely comforted about the problems of finding him and seeing him that
day by the non-urgent referral given for his visit.
The reason for that
classification was due to Mr Fort’s application of the triage chart used
by the MHS for assessment of
what future action is required for any
chart and its application by Mr Fort in this call was a key area of evidence and
submissions in the Inquest. It must be remembered
that this call was the only
opportunity Mr Fort had to make the assessment of the non-urgent referral. This
is where I must remind
myself of the important principles of hindsight bias and
outcome bias as discussed above.
have heard this call
times and confirm that Ms Beagley conveyed the following information:
was released yesterday.
to Ms Beagley today with a blunt appearance.
18-year-old
Aboriginal male.
claimed to be possessed by the devil ‘which is the same presentation of
when he was in Yatala, he was transferred to the
high dependency unit, because
of his presentation. They weren’t able to complete an assessment due to
his irritability and
ALO from Yatala was following up on a cultural healer.
does not want to be Aboriginal anymore, nor live in New
anymore and feels like
he is burning.
described him being ‘quite disengaged in anything I try to talk to him
was responding to voices and had a history of voices telling him to hurt
had never seen him before and was ‘a bit concerned about
Fort assessed the situation as she was ‘describing a lot of things that
haven’t changed’ but noted the change
of having thoughts of hurting
other people. As he put it, when such a thought is reported, ‘we
generally harvest the person
who is telling you about that, who knows most about
it, to ring the police’ with the aim of an attendance at the house. This
is what Ms Beagley did, believing that SAPOL had the chance to consider
exercising their powers, including detention, under the
Mental Health
SAPOL did not honour
the request.
Twiggs, placed at the Elizabeth Police Station, made an assessment of the
tasking at 5:53pm on 12 September 2019. She noted
that Mr Weetra had made
‘generalised’ comments about wanting to harm others as well as
reports of being deluded. Further,
she found it important that ACIS had not
was under DCS supervision. In all the circumstances, including
no behaviours having escalated, there was no need for attendance
position was supported by Inspector Cornell based on the same information and
in the end, nothing happened as an extra precaution on behalf of ACIS after they
made a non-urgent assessment. It seems that
either Ms Beagley or ACIS
should have been notified of this decision which, at the very least, would allow
further discussion to
have taken place between the agencies
Mr John Strachan
at April 2023 Mr Strachan was Acting Regional Director of Community Corrections
South. Prior to obtaining this position he was
Principal Advisor for the
Offender Service for five years.
role included oversight of the Intensive Compliance Unit at Edwardstown which
monitors people on HD bail. He outlined that whilst
there are ‘no base
requirements’
an ICO, there are mandatory training and induction requirements.
also conducts training in Aboriginal Culture Awareness for all its officers.
Further, in 2020, a system was developed to allow
authorised officers to convey
a prisoner to an approved treatment centre as defined in the
Mental Health Act
for care under
of that Act.
Strachan cautioned against introducing a NOC system for prisoners or bailees
under HD conditions, or otherwise in the community,
due to ICOs’ work
being ‘rapidly overrun’ by such a system.
have considered Mr Weetra’s family’s position in response to
these developments. They correctly refer me to the Royal
Commission into
Aboriginal Deaths in Custody in
and, in particular,
Recommendations 156 and 157. Recommendations 156 and 157 emphasise the
importance for prisoners to undergo a
thorough medical assessment upon their
admission and that a prisoner’s medical file should accompany them on
their transfer
to other institutions and upon their readmission.
modern times, this translates to a complete file sharing protocol such as
juvenile detention medical records and information being
available to those who
need it in the adult DCS institution.
Mr Andrew Wiley
Wiley in 2023 was Director of SAPHS as part of the Central Adelaide Local Health
described the release of Mr Weetra on bail from HDU on 11 September 2019 in
the following manner:
‘It appears there was a communication
break-down on 11 September 2019 in that Mr Weetra was released from the
High Dependency
) of Yatala Labour Prison (
) (where he
had been under observation for a day after displaying some psychotic behaviour)
to home detention bail without Community
Mental Health Services (
being made aware of the need for his further assessment until about 24 hours
Wiley listed the extensive changes since 2019 to:
strengthen the discharge planning process to ensure that appropriate referrals
are made to community services, including
CMHS. Three staff are allocated to
deal with any discharges each shift and ensure that any ongoing health issues,
such as treatment,
medication, referrals, etc are addressed and discharge
summaries are completed. Discharge of HRAT prisoners prompts an email to
staff including those managing
discharges.’
changes include:
positions at major prisons including Yatala and Mobilong Prison for an
Aboriginal Health
Practitioner.
An AHP exists
at Port Augusta Prison.
SAPHS to provide cultural/traditional
at metropolitan
prisons, especially for situations of Aboriginal prisoners being released from
immediate custody.
Consultations
for prisoners leaving immediate custody at Yatala, specifically focused on
continuing management of health issues.
appointment of a full-time mental health clinical nurse to manage patients on
system of care involving Forensic Mental Health Services providing a psychiatric
service for prisoners going into a community setting.
desire to move from a paper-based SAPHS health record system to an electronic
system to allow public health clinicians to see a
prisoner’s patient
pains me to say that, from what we know now and his observed behaviours and
words, Mr Weetra would have been better placed had
he not received bail and
remained at Yatala in HDU at that time in September 2019. This goes against
every principle concerning
the detriment to Aboriginal people of being in
custody awaiting their outcome of criminal charges against them. It would have
best for him to have his psychotic state treated and controlled before
releasing him on bail. As I have already stated, I believe
Mr Williams was
controlling the situation in HDU very well before Mr Weetra’s
is no criticism of the decision to grant HD bail in the terms that were done.
The Court granted bail with the balancing aim
of ensuring that other citizens
would not be subject to unsafe behaviour towards them by Mr Weetra, as well
as his own considerations
demanding controlled liberty rather than immediate
believe Mr Weetra’s care at Yatala was of reasonable to high standard at
the time of his admission until his discharge. I
accept that whilst living
under conditions imposed by HDU he was physically safe from taking his own
Williams’ evidence convinced me that Mr Weetra’s mental health
care was going to be elevated to the appropriate levels
until it was able to be
managed by less strict conditions of living.
I have previously expressed, Mr Weetra was a very troubled and
disadvantaged young Aboriginal man. Upon release on HD bail errors
as conceded. He did not receive the benefit of trained mental health workers
assisting him by a timely assessment as
to how his mental health would be
managed in the community setting, albeit on a limited basis of HD bail.
errors were compounded by the decision of SAPOL not to assist as requested.
ultimate issue is, was this assessment as a non-urgent follow up by NCMHS
proper, or at least reasonable in the circumstances
based on the criteria in the
triage chart?
the end, I cannot find that Mr Fort’s decision was wholly unreasonable or
lacking in care when it was made. This finding
was made based on his experience
and from the calm manner in which he conducted the call with Ms Beagley.
He also analysed the situation
of the new threat to hurt others and sought to
involve SAPOL. He also provided the reporting person, namely Ms Beagley,
for SAPOL to deal with as she was the most informed. I find that in
hindsight, the assessment should have led to a more urgent response
assessment of him that day. I refer again to hindsight not being the focus of
an assessment of a witness compared with analysing
the reasonableness of actions
and behaviour at the time the relevant decision was
Recommendations
section 25(2)
Coroners Act 2003
I am empowered to make recommendations
that in the opinion of the Court might prevent, or reduce the likelihood of, a
of an event similar to the event that was the subject of the Inquest.
was a series of unfortunate events as I have set out.
have been somewhat addressed by DCS to prevent them being able to be repeated in
the future. The Court received comprehensive
affidavits from Mr Andrew
and Mr John
in this regard.
All the initiatives mentioned in these affidavits must be maintained and
developed where necessary. To remove any
doubt, I view these initiatives as
essential for the future care of Aboriginal people under the care of DCS.
the following:
the Minister for Correctional Services review the protocol of file sharing
between the Youth Detention Centre and adult prisons
concerning youths in
detention, who later spend time in immediate custody as adults; and
the Minister for Health and Wellbeing upgrade the SAPHS records to electronic
format to allow public health clinicians treating
and providing care for
prisoners to access information and medical history promptly if necessary.
the Minister for Correctional Services make the procedures and protocols
outlined in paragraph 139 of this Finding permanent
and subject to ongoing
improvements as warranted in the opinion of the Minister at the relevant
Keywords: Death in Custody; Home Detention Bail; Mental Health;
See affidavit of
solicitor, Exhibit C31 and audio recording of EMC hearings, Exhibit
Hugh Dillon and Marie
The Australasian Coroner’s Manual
(The Federation Press,
2015), page 10
Delivered 28 June
Transcript, page 418;
Exhibit C22, pages 53-54
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C32 at
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C33 at
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
SLS - Exhibit
Transcript, page
Exhibit C21, pages
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C34 at
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C34 at
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C34 at
Transcript, page
Transcript, pages
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C34, Annexure
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, pages
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Also known as locum
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C18 and
Transcript, page 386
Transcript, page 388
C20 and Transcript, page 389
The electronic ‘Audit
Transcript,
page 392-393
Transcript,
page 393-394
Exhibit C18a at
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, pages
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, pages 373
NHS Website
Exhibit C30, page
Exhibit C30, page
Written submissions of
DCS at [124]
Transcript,
Transcript, page
Triage chart or the
Exhibits C14b and
C37 (transcript)
Transcript, pages 183 and
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
See exhibit C15,
Statement of Sgt Twiggs
Exhibit C46 at [7]
Commission’
Exhibit C19 at
Exhibit C19 at
Exhibit C46
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (552 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (428 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter