URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAERDC/2025/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:56:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
THOMAS JAKE TRELOAR v ASSESSMENT PANEL AT CITY OF HOLDFAST BAY [2025] SAERDC 10 (19 May 2025)
ENVIRONMENT, RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT COURT OF SOUTH
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
In the Matter of AN APPLICATION FOR JOINDER
THOMAS JAKE TRELOAR v ASSESSMENT PANEL AT CITY OF HOLDFAST
[2025] SAERDC 10
Judgment of Commissioner Dawson
19 May 2025
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING - PLANNING - DEVELOPMENT ASSESSMENT AND CONTROL -
APPLICATIONS
Application to join proceedings by a third party – proposed two storey
semi-detached dwellings with roof terraces in the General
Neighbourhood Zone at
South Brighton refused by Council Assessment Panel - applicant for joinder an
adjoining landowner – consideration
of applicant’s interest in the
matter under appeal – compromise proposal put to and accepted by the
Respondent - applicant
has sufficient interest and will adduce expert evidence
– consideration of the contribution of the applicant and the resultant
impact or delay on the resolution of the proceedings given a settlement between
the parties has been reached.
Held: application for joinder granted.
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
Environment, Resources and Development Court Act 1993
& Design Code v2024.17
, referred to.
Pitt v Environment, Resources and Development Court
(1995) 66 SASR
O’Neill v Kimhi
[2008] SASC 109
Moloney v 21-25 South
Esplanade Pty Ltd & Ors
[2024] SASCA 58
Green Gold Energy Pty Ltd v
Corporation of the City of Port Augusta
[2024] SAERDC 17
Manufacturing Pty Ltd v Environment Protection Authority
[2005] SASC 216
(2005) 92 SASR 67
21-25 South Esplanade Pty Ltd v State Planning Commission
[2022] SAERDC
, considered.
THOMAS JAKE TRELOAR v ASSESSMENT PANEL AT CITY OF HOLDFAST
[2025] SAERDC 10
THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING JUDGMENT:
Thomas Treloar (
) lodged a development application to construct
two, two storey dwellings with rooftop terraces at 18 Gulf Parade, South
). The Assessment Panel at City of Holdfast Bay
) refused to grant planning consent to the
Appellant’s application on account of the height of the dwellings, the
for overlooking and proposed side boundary
Appellant lodged an appeal against that
to which the owner of an
adjoining dwelling, Ms Kylie Grigg (
Joinder Applicant
), filed an
application to be joined.
Appellant is opposed to the joinder, with the CAP raising no objection.
the commencement of the appeal, the Appellant has submitted a compromise
proposal to the CAP, which has been accepted by it
but a settlement between the
parties is yet to be presented to the Court. As such consideration has been
given to the impact that
the joinder will have on the parties settling the
matter, the interests of the Joinder Applicant and the public interest that the
merits of the compromise be suitably scrutinised.
have formed the view that the Joinder Applicant has a
special interest in the matter under appeal. I am
satisfied that it is in the interest of justice that they be joined as they will
make a useful contribution to the resolution of the issues before the Court and
not unreasonably prolong the matter for the parties
before the Court.
the following reasons, I exercise my discretion to join Ms Grigg to these
proceedings.
Appellant seeks approval for two, two storey detached dwellings with roof
terraces upon the Land. The proposal was publicly notified
by the Respondent in
accordance with
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act
CAP refused the proposal, citing three reasons within the decision notification
and whilst poorly worded, and
in parts unclear, I have interpreted and summarised the reasons as follows:
insufficient
side setbacks, particularly the upper level, and the subsequent impact upon
suburban character and access to natural
unacceptable
degree of overlooking from upper level balconies; and
wall heights in
excess of 7 metres.
Appellant subsequently lodged an appeal against the decision of the CAP. The
application for joinder was lodged prior to a conciliation
conference being held
pursuant to
Environment, Resources and Development Court Act 1993
ERD Court Act
). The conference between the parties is yet to be
the hearing of the joinder application a compromise proposal was put to the CAP
for consideration. The compromise sought
to address the grounds for refusal
through the following amendments:
increase in the
height of the roof terrace balustrade and change from solid walling to obscure
removal of the
spas and lift from the roof terraces;
angling of the
balcony roofs to limit downward views from the roof terraces;
reduction in the
wall height to a maximum of 7.1 metres.
CAP has accepted the compromise proposal, subject to six conditions. The
compromise plans and proposed conditions were provided
to the Court and Joinder
Applicant. The Joinder Applicant provided additional written submissions in
relation to the compromise proposal.
They remain opposed to the proposal in its
revised form and wish to be joined as a party to the proceedings. The Appellant
a written response. They remain opposed to the application for
was submitted by the parties that a second application for two, two storey
dwellings and associated swimming pools was lodged
by the Appellant following
the refusal of the subject application, and was approved by the Council
Assessment Manager, without the
need for public notification (
). It is understood that the Approved Dwellings replicate the
dwellings which are the subject of the proposal before the Court, except
inclusion of the roof terraces. It is understood that the construction of the
Approved Dwellings has commenced on the Land
with the previous dwelling now
demolished, the Land cleared and initial works commenced.
application
Grigg owns the adjoining allotment at 181 Esplanade, South Brighton abutting the
south western corner of the Land. Ms Grigg submitted
a representation during the
public notification opposing the development. Ms Grigg also engaged a legal
representative to appear
before the CAP in support of her representation.
representation primarily focused on the potential for, and impact of,
overlooking into Ms Griggs rear yard, swimming pool and
internal living spaces
and the wall height exceeding 7 metres. She also raised concerns with respect to
the side/southern boundary
setback and overshadowing, however it is unclear how
these elements would impact upon Ms Griggs interests given the location of her
property relative to the Land. Counsel for Ms Grigg expanded upon her concerns
within the application hearing, submitting that the
roof terraces exacerbated
the bulk and scale of the dwellings when viewed from Ms Grigg’s rear
and raised concerns as to the
extent of fill proposed and the underestimation of the height of the dwellings
by Council staff.
from the use of the roof terrace, its assessment against the
Design Code
) and potential public safety risks from furniture
or other items being blown off the terraces were also identified as areas of
to Ms Grigg.
for Ms Grigg confirmed that the compromise proposal put to the CAP did not
address the fundamental concerns held in relation
to the roof
joined to the appeal, the Joinder Applicant submitted that they would be legally
represented and would provide the Court with
own lay evidence and would also allow the Court to view the Land and locality
from their dwelling and private rear yard. Counsel
for Ms Grigg confirmed that
she would call planning evidence in relation to the bulk, scale and overlooking
impacts of the proposal
upon her property. Legal submissions would also be made
in relation to the interpretation of building and wall heights and whether
roof terrace is an element which is contemplated and/or encouraged by the
previously stated, the CAP does not oppose the joinder application. When the
joinder application was heard, the CAP indicated
at that time that it would be
calling planning evidence in support of its refusal, should the matter progress
to a hearing.
circumstances have now changed given the CAP is now supportive of the proposal
in its revised form.
Appellant opposes the joinder application, questioning whether the interest of
the Joinder Applicant meets the threshold for
joinder and the value that they
will bring in assisting the resolution of the matter before the Court. It was
submitted that the
potential for overlooking was sufficiently addressed by the
obscure balustrades and that any incidental overlooking was no greater
which already occurred within the locality. It was submitted that the compromise
proposal put to the CAP addressed the
matters raised by the Joinder
Application.
Test for Joinder
17 of the ERD Court Act confers a general power and a discretion on this Court
to join a person as a party to any proceedings.
Section 205(2)(c) of the Act set
outs the following statutory test for determining joinder
applications:
(c) the Court may, in dealing with an application from a person to be joined as
a party to the proceedings (other than the Crown,
a relevant authority applying
under section 122, or a person who was entitled to be given notice of a decision
in prescribed circumstances
(if relevant)), determine not to grant the
application—
(i) on the ground that the Court is not satisfied that the person has a special
interest in the subject-matter of the application;
(ii) on the ground that, whatever the interest of the person may be, the Court
is not satisfied that the interests of justice require
that the person be joined
as a party; or
(iii) on any other ground determined to be appropriate by the Court.
decisions of
Pitt v Environment, Resources and Development Court
66 SASR 274
O’Neill v Kimhi
[2008] SASC 109
set out the approach to be taken in determining the merits
of an application for joinder. That approach, as detailed by Doyle CJ in
requires the consideration of the nature and strength of the interest held
by the Joinder Applicant, the contribution that they are
likely to make to a
proper resolution of the issues before the Court, whether their interests will
be adequately dealt with by the
parties already before the Court, and the impact
that the joinder may have on proceedings and
interests of the parties in the prompt and efficient dispatch of
proceedings.
Court of Appeal decision in
Moloney v 21-25 South Esplanade Pty Ltd & Ors
[2024] SASCA 58
), held that the approach taken in
continues to apply to the consideration of
joinder applications. The statements of principle laid down in
remain applicable notwithstanding any compromise having been reached in a
I have followed the
approach as outlined above. I have also considered the fact that the Appellant
and CAP have recently reached
an agreement on a compromise proposal, a factor
that was found in
to be a relevant but not decisive
consideration.
Consideration
Nature and strength of interest
it was held that a special interest would be demonstrated where
“the proposed development is likely to have a materially deleterious,
and not merely trivial, impact on the amenity and value
of the adjoining
Joinder Applicant owns the adjoining dwelling to the south west of the Land.
Several photographs detailing the proximity of the
proposed dwellings to Ms
Grigg’s rear yard and swimming pool were tendered to demonstrate the
visual impact and overlooking
likely to be experienced.
Appellant has designed the dwellings with balconies and roof terraces to take
advantage of the westerly outlook to Gulf St. Vincent
over the adjoining
properties fronting the Esplanade, including the Joinder Applicant’s
property. The Land is notably higher
than the Joinder Applicant’s
property. The relative ground levels, two storey construction and proposed roof
terraces are such
that the proposed dwellings will be readily apparent to the
Joinder Applicant from both their internal living areas and external
open space. This will result in a level of impact upon the Joinder
Applicant’s enjoyment of their land and dwelling,
to a degree which I
consider satisfies the special interest test.
the reasons given I find that the Joinder Applicant has a special interest in
the matter under
Contribution to be made
and whether interests will be adequately dealt with
the Joinder Applicant may have a special interest in the matter, consideration
of the contribution they are likely to make
to a proper resolution of the issues
before the ERD Court is required. This includes whether
their interests and the material to be advanced will
be adequately dealt with by the parties already before the
previously noted, the Joinder Applicant wishes to agitate matters relating to
the visual impact of the roof terraces and impacts
resulting from their use,
primarily being overlooking but also including noise and light spill. In the
event the matter proceeded
to a hearing, the Joinder Applicant will call
planning evidence from an expert, provide their own lay evidence and make legal
submissions
relating to building height and the treatment of roof terraces
within the Code. The Joinder Applicant would also make their dwelling
private yard available for the Court to view.
relation to the matters raised by the Joinder Applicant it is noted that the
proposed finished floor level of the dwellings is
approximately 2 metres above
the existing ground level at the rear of the dwellings, as shown on the site and
drainage plan.
The assessment
report to the CAP, prepared by Council staff, notes a “
main dwelling
of 7.1 metres, increasing to 8.4 metres inclusive of the roof
terrace screening.
This appears
to have been calculated from the ceiling heights and other dimensions on the
elevations which are measured from the
proposed finished floor level of the
dwellings. The flat roof nature of the dwellings is such that the top of the
perimeter parapet
walls is also the highest point of the building.
8 of the Code specifies that wall height is to be measured from the top of the
footings of the wall. This appears to be the
point at which the Council staff
have determined the height within the CAP report. Building height is defined in
the Code as the
“maximum vertical distance between the lower of the
natural or finished ground level .........and the finished roof height at
its highest point”
. Based upon the natural ground levels shown on the
site and drainage plan, which is lower than the proposed finished floor level,
Dwelling 1 has a building height of approximately 9 metres at the western end
and a height of approximately 10 metres if taken to
include the roof terrace
balustrade/screening.
agree with the submissions of the Joinder Applicant that it appears that little
regard has been given to the compounding visual
impact of the proposed fill,
building height and roof terrace screening on adjoining
properties.
It is noted however
that approval has been granted to the Approved Dwellings, being a pair of two
storey dwellings and associated
retaining walls and fill to the same
level/height as currently proposed in the development, the subject of this
appeal. The Appellant
confirmed that the Land has already been filled in
accordance with that approval. Whilst these elements are now separately
and can be constructed as of right, it does not detract from the need
to assess the visual impact and appearance of the roof terraces,
which do not
form part of the Approved Dwellings. In this regard the objections of the
Joinder Applicant appear to have merit and
warrant consideration which was found
to be relevant to the exercise of discretion to order
The offer from the
Joinder Applicant to make their property available to the Court during the view
would be of assistance in assessing
the potential visual impact of the roof
of building height, bulk, scale, setback, overlooking and overshadowing raised
by the Joinder Applicant are planning issues
to be considered by the Court,
assisted by the planning evidence brought by the parties. As was held in
OneSteel Manufacturing Pty Ltd v Environment Protection Authority
[2005] SASC 216
, it is not enough to say that a party will simply call evidence, it
must be evidence which cannot or will not be adduced by the parties
already before the court.
the acceptance of the compromise proposal between the parties it is reasonable
to assume that Ms Grigg’s interests in
the matter now differ significantly
to that of the CAP, who can no longer be assumed to oppose the matter. This
leaves the Joinder
Applicant as the only contradictor who can assist the Court
in its consideration of the compromise and the consequential orders
They will also aid in
any potential hearing, either
on the merits of the compromise or
limited by the Court to any remaining matters in dispute.
have considered the evidence, both lay and expert, proposed to be adduced by the
Joinder Applicant. I consider that their interests
and the material they will
advance will not be adequately dealt with by the parties already before the
Court in circumstances where
a settlement has now been reached between the
parties. The joining of Ms Grigg will provide the Court with a contradictor to
issues of building height and visual impact which would unlikely be the
case otherwise. In considering Mr Moloney’s application
for joinder in the
first instance, the Environment, Resources & Development Court determined
that it would be in the public interest
that the merits of a revised development
proposal be subject to scrutiny.
Joining Ms Grigg enables that scrutiny to occur. If it is the case that the
matter proceeds to a hearing, if there is merit in the
issues which Ms Grigg
raises on appeal, then the core difficulty for the compromise may be that it
does not in fact represent an
appropriate resolution of the planning issues in
Concerning that
possible core difficulty for a compromise in such circumstances the Court of
Appeal stated in
The prospect that joinder might
ultimately unearth that core difficulty, and be associated with some delay, does
not mean that joinder
should have been refused, or that it was not in the public
interest to ensure that the merit of what was proposed be publicly examined
the ERD Court in accordance with the relevant planning law and instruments.
Impact on proceedings and the interests of
the parties
consideration of the potential impact that an order for joinder will have on
proceedings and the interests of the parties already
before the Court is a
relevant factor when applying the discretion conferred upon this Court to join a
Appellant submitted that an order for joinder would unduly extend the appeal
process, result in additional cost and provide no
additional benefit to the
For the reasons
previously given, I consider that the joinder of Ms Grigg to the proceedings
would likely provide additional benefit
to the Court.
Doyle CJ cautioned against taking an unduly restrictive approach to
joinder on the basis that it may impact on
proceedings.
By its very nature
the joining of a party to proceedings will result in additional effort and time
for the parties involved. Whether
the appeal will be prolonged is relevant, but
it will not necessarily be
determinative.
In determining an
application for joinder, the Court must consider and weigh the resultant impact
upon the interests of the parties,
the interests of the Joinder Applicant and
the public interest in the efficient use of Court resources and the fulsome
consideration
of planning disputes.
it was held that in the event of joinder being granted the Court
still needs to determine “
whether and to what extent it was necessary
to proceed by way of a hearing de novo on the
This decision
would be made by the Court following the conference process between the parties
held in accordance with s 16 of the
ERD Court Act. It cannot be assumed that the
matter would progress to a hearing nor that such a hearing would consider all
of the proposal
. For example, it may be possible that the
hearing would be limited to those issues which remain in dispute. It is
therefore difficult
to determine what the potential delay and cost may be for
the Appellant in those circumstances.
impact upon Ms Grigg of not granting her application is that she will be
deprived of the opportunity to comment on the compromise
proposal that has been
put to, and has now been accepted by, the CAP. Ms Grigg would also be unable to
seek to have further revisions
made that may be possible to better address her
concerns or to progress the matter to a hearing where those concerns can be
to the Court. The primary impact upon the Appellant in granting
joinder is further delay in respect of the roof terrace element of
the proposal
the subject of this appeal. Construction has now commenced on the Approved
Dwellings. This has allowed the Appellant
to continue with a substantial
component of the Approved Dwellings in the interim period whilst this matter is
being considered by
the Court. This is a unique feature of the circumstances of
this case. In many cases, a developer would not necessarily have secured
approval which they would be able to implement while awaiting the outcome of
their appeal on an alternative proposal on the
same site. I have therefore not
afforded that particular issue great weight, but in this case, the practical
effect of the implementation
of the Approved Dwellings on the Land is that the
Appellant could not be said to be experiencing the kind of delay that any other
developer would ordinarily experience in the joinder of a party to an appeal
where a settlement has been reached.
CAP may face additional cost and time in participating in the matter should they
elect to participate in the proceedings. It
is unclear what role the CAP might
play in a contested hearing in circumstances where a settlement has been reached
between it and
the proponent.
the inclusion of the Joinder Applicant will impact the interests of the parties,
it is in the public interest that the Court
be assisted in assessing the merits
of the proposal under appeal, in an appropriate and considered way. The benefit
to the Court
from the participation of the Joinder Applicant in this case weighs
in favour of their joinder to the proceedings.
Joinder Applicant has sought to represent their interest in the matter through
the submission of a written representation to
the CAP and engagement of legal
counsel. They are concerned about the potential impacts of the proposal upon
their land. They have
a special interest in the matter as an adjoining owner
whose amenity and enjoyment of their land may be impacted upon by the
Joinder Applicant will provide lay evidence, call expert planning evidence in
relation to the impact of the proposal and make
legal submissions relating to
building height and the assessment of roof terraces.
contemplating an application for joinder, consideration must be given to the
impact that it will have upon the interests of
the parties before the Court as
of right. The impacts of joinder can be more apparent to parties when a
settlement has been reached.
Whilst not a determinative factor, the compromise
between the parties is of relevance in the Court’s consideration of the
application. In the matter of
Energy Pty Ltd v Corporation of the City of Port Augusta
[2024] SAERDC 17
neighbouring landowner had sought to join the proceedings in circumstances where
the parties had reached a settlement. However,
the applicant for joinder did not
propose to call any expert evidence in support of her case or to present a case
of substance on
appeal. The court noted that while a settlement is not a bar to
joinder it is relevant to consider whether the case of the applicant
demonstrably weak.
have concluded that on balance the joinder of Ms Grigg
not unreasonably impact and delay the
resolution of the proceedings and that it is in the interest of justice that Ms
Grigg be permitted
to participate in a matter which may have ongoing impacts
upon her land particularly given the fact that she will present a case
substance on appeal and will assist the court as a contradictor exposing the
merits of the proposal, in its revised form, to further
scrutiny which I
consider to be in the public interest.
the reasons given I am satisfied that the Joinder Applicant has a special
interest in the matter and that the interests of justice
require her joinder in
this instance. I therefore exercise my discretion in granting the application of
Ms Grigg to be joined as
a party to the appeal and will make an order
accordingly.
3 - Book of Documents – Attachment 3 Decision Notification Form –
Note, no page numbers were provided in the Book
of Documents submitted by the
Respondent.
FDN 1 – Originating
FDN 4 – Application to be
FDN 3 - Book of Documents
– Attachment 3 Decision Notification Form.
T18 lines 24 to28.
T23 to T26.
T30 to T34.
T55 lines 25 to 27.
T35 line 24 to T36 line 2.
T54 lines 15-16.
Confirmation of planning evidence was provided prior to the CAP accepting the
compromise proposal.
66 SASR 274
[2024] SASCA 58
Ibid, [177].
(1995) 66 SASR 274
FDN 3 – Copy
Documents, Attachment 3.
FDN 3 – Copy
Documents, Attachment 2.
T26 to T27.
[2024] SASCA 58
[2005] SASC 216
(2005) 92 SASR 67
[2024] SASCA 58
21-25 South Esplanade Pty
Ltd v State Planning Commission
[2022] SAERDC 4
, [115], [116].
[2024] SASCA 58
Ibid, [202].
(1995) 66 SASR 274
T46 lines 7 to 10.
(1995) 66 SASR 274
[2024] SASCA 58
Ibid, [170].
Green Gold Energy Pty Ltd
v Corporation of the City of Port Augusta
[2024] SAERDC 17
, [56]-[57].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (371 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter