URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAET/2025/123.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:57:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
George Weston Foods Ltd v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia & Anor [2025] SAET 123 (11 November 2025)
George Weston Foods Ltd v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia
[2025] SAET 123
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNAL
GEORGE WESTON FOODS LTD
TO WORK CORPORATION OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
South Australian Employment Court
– Interlocutory Application
ET-24-02574, ET-24-02575
HEARING DATE:
JUDGMENT OF:
His Honour Deputy President Judge
DELIVERED ON:
11 November
CATCHWORDS:
Application for an extension of time in
which to lodge applications for review - The main reason given by the applicant
employer for
seeking review is qualified by the timing of events but the
employer was not aware that the decisions were reviewable and that is
reason for granting an extension of time – The respondent compensating
authority had contended that it did not advise
the employer that the decisions
in issue would affect the employer’s premiums, but the witnesses to
support that contention
changed their accounts and did not give evidence –
A good reason exists for granting extensions of time – Whilst
there is a theoretical possibility that the worker may may be
disadvantaged if
the decisions are set aside or varied, that possibility does not rise to the
level of unreasonable disadvantage
– Application allowed – Parties
to be heard in relation to orders.
Luke v Department of
Primary Industries and Regions
[2024] SAET 28
Ulowski v Miller
(1968) SASR 277
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v Taylor
[1996] HCA 25
(1996) 186 CLR
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr S
Respondent: Mr P d’Assumpção
Party: Mr M Saies
Solicitors:
Applicant: HWLE
Respondent: Minter Ellison
Other Party: Paul Alvaro
decision concerns an application for an extension of time in which to seek
review of two decisions by the applicant employer,
George Weston Foods Ltd
(GWF). GWF sought review 7 weeks and 5 days out of time.
(RTW Act) provides:
(1) An application may be made to the Tribunal within 1 month after the
applicant receives notice of the reviewable decision unless
the Tribunal allows
an extension of time.
(2) The Tribunal must only allow an extension of time under subsection (1) if
(a) that good reason exists; and
(b) that another party will not be unreasonably disadvantaged because of the
delay in commencing the proceedings.
worker whose claim for lump sum compensation is the subject of the substantive
dispute, Blanca Gonzalez, opposes the application.
respondent compensating authority, Return to Work Corporation of South Australia
(the Corporation), does not consent to the application.
main reason GWF advances in support of an extension of time is that Ammie
Ballard, group workers compensation manager for GWF,
was told by Ms
Gonzalez’ case manager that two decisions dated 21 March 2024 which
awarded lump sum compensation under ss 56
and 58 of the RTW Act would not impact
on GWF’s workers compensation premiums. Contrary to that advice, one of
the decisions
affected those premiums.
to argument, the Corporation’s main witness maintained that she did not
tell Ms Ballard that the determination would not
affect GWF’s premiums.
The witness changed her account just before the hearing commenced. Counsel for
the Corporation described
the change in this way at the outset of the
And that affidavit was prepared in direct response to paragraph 4 of
Ms Ballard’s affidavit. The concession I’m instructed
is that during the meeting referred to in paragraph 4 of Ms Ballard’s
affidavit on the 4th of February, premium, premiums
I should say, may have been
discussed, and it is possible that informal advice was given at a high level
I can’t take it further than that, but that is the upshot of having spoken
more closely with Ms Ballard and in the light of
some material that’s also
been made available to us in the last couple of days. And I don’t propose
to read her affidavit
or call her as a witness and I understand that
that’s an acceptable position to my learned friend, Mr Richter but perhaps
Perhaps (indistinct) respondent’s counsel. That’s the
concession that I’m instructed to make, your Honour.
was also advised that the Corporation did not seek to rely on the affidavit of
its other witness who was going to give evidence
Ballard about the premium impact of the two decisions.
only evidence before the court is that of Ms Ballard and Ms
Ballard’s affidavit states that on 14 February 2024 she was told by an
employee of the Corporation’s claims handling
agent that two lump sum
compensation decisions made in relation to Ms Gonzalez would have no affect on
GWF’s premiums. One
decision concerned injuries sustained in 2019 and the
other concerned injuries sustained in 2021.
13 June 2024 Ms Ballard was told by the Corporation’s claims agent that
one of the decisions would affect the employer’s
premiums. Ms Ballard
said that she had received legal advice on 7 June 2024 that there was a basis to
dispute the lump sum compensation
decisions. Applications for review of each
decision were filed on 14 June 2024.
cross-examination Ms Ballard confirmed her evidence that prior to 13 June
2024, she understood that the decisions under review
would have no commercial
affect on GWF’s premiums.
cross-examination, Ms Ballard was challenged about the timing of some events.
She had deposed that although she was not told that
the decision would have a
financial impact on GWF until 13 June 2024, management approved seeking review
of the decisions on 11 June
2024. It was put to her that the timing meant the
financial impact of one of the decisions could not have motivated the decision
to seek review. Ms Ballard denied that but did not explain the timing issue
was put to Ms Ballard that the employer was arranging to assess
Ms Gonzalez’ work capacity at the time. She agreed but said
employer had concerns about the whole person impairment assessment made by Dr
Suyapto given the inconsistencies in her presentations
to Dr Suyapto and Dr
Munn. Ms Ballard was asked why the employer did not review the decision within
time. She said that she was not
aware she was able to seek review of such a
re-examination Ms Ballard stated that if Dr Munn had made similar findings to Dr
Suyapto she doubted that GWF would have sought
review of the decisions. She
reiterated that the premium impact of one decision was a motivation for seeking
affidavit of Ms Gonzalez was admitted into evidence. Ms Gonzalez was not
cross-examined.
Submissions
for GWF submitted that a cascading series of events led to the decision to seek
review. There was the fitness for work issue,
the discrepancy between the views
of Dr Suyapto and Dr Munn and the erroneous advice about the premium impact of
the decisions. All
those things need to be taken into consideration, as did the
fact that the extension is for a short period of time. Counsel referred
Luke v Department of Primary Industries and
for the Corporation said his client took a neutral position in relation to the
counsel for Ms Gonzalez was not critical of Ms Ballard because she is a national
manager and is not conversant with how lump
sum compensation operates in South
Australia, he said there were inconsistencies in her account. He submitted that
an extension of
time is not warranted in the circumstances.
submitted that the report from Dr Munn dealt entirely with return to work
issues, not permanent impairment or lump sum compensation.
The employer’s
focus was said to be on what duties Ms Gonzalez could perform if she
returned to work. It was said that if there
was a compliance issue or peer
review issue with Dr Suyapto’s report, or if one of the impairment
assessment guidelines had
not been followed, the application would have much
more merit.
acknowledged, properly in my view, that Ms Ballard did not realise the employer
could seek review of the decisions in issue.
pointed out that Ms Gonzalez has expended a significant proportion of the lump
sum compensation on a trip for her and her
mother to visit her grandmother in El
Salvador, and that is a relevant consideration in relation to the prejudice she
may face if
an extension is allowed.
Consideration
, much of the focus was on balancing the competing interests of
litigants within the framework of s 100 of the RTW Act. It was an
exercise because the extension of time required in
was 4 years,
a very long time in the context of a 1 month limitation period.
delay in seeking review in this case is less than 8 weeks. That is still
material in the context of a one month limitation period,
but a very different
proposition to the extension of time required in
100(2) of the RTW Act has two requirements. A ‘good reason’ must
exist to grant an extension of time, and another
party must not be
‘unreasonably disadvantaged’ by an extension being granted..
, Rossi DPJ focussed on what the expression, ‘unreasonably
disadvantaged’ means. His Honour observed that the legislature
word ‘disadvantaged’ rather than the word ‘prejudiced’
Limitation of Actions Act 1936
(SA), a limitation
provision, and in s 30 of the RTW Act to determine whether a claim for
compensation made outside of the prescribed
period of six months operates as a
bar to making a claim.
Ulowski v Miller
described what was required to extend time under
Limitation of
Actions Act 1936
(SA). Whilst the observations made are not directly
relevant, his Honour’s observations remain useful when considering an
...It clearly appears from these cases that five paramount matters to be
considered are the length of the delay, the explanation
for the delay, the
hardship to the plaintiff if the action is dismissed and the cause of action
left statute barred, the prejudice
to the defendant if the action is allowed to
proceed notwithstanding the delay, and the conduct of the defendant in the
litigation.
, Rossi DPJ described how s 100 operates in this
The conditions associated with the exercise of the power are intended to ensure
the Tribunal addresses the matters identified to
ensure a fair trial on the
merits of the case. There cannot be a fair trial on the merits if another party
is unreasonably disadvantaged
because of the delay in commencing the
proceedings. The use of the word “unreasonable” is in the context of
the ordinary
Macquarie Dictionary meaning of “exceeding the bounds of
reason, immoderate, exorbitant”. It recognises that any delay
may produce
some measure of disadvantage. It is where the extent of the disadvantage
operates against the prospects of a fair trial
that an extension of time must
not be allowed...
explanation shows that the unreasonable disadvantage consideration in s 100(2)
is directed to the quality of the evidence being
affected by the passage of time
if an extension of time is granted. There is a palpable deterioration in the
quality of justice when
witnesses are asked to recall events and discussions
that occurred some time ago. Sometimes there is a deterioration in the
recollections
of witnesses in an action brought within the applicable limitation
period. McHugh J observed that the effect of delay on the quality
of justice is
a major reason why limitation periods are necessary in
Brisbane South
Regional Health Authority v
The effect of delay on the quality of justice is no doubt one of the most
important influences motivating a legislature to enact
limitation periods for
commencing actions. But it is not the only one. Courts and commentators have
conceived four broad rationales
for the enactment of limitation periods. First,
as time goes by, relevant evidence is likely to be lost. Second, it is
even “cruel”, to a defendant to allow an action to be
brought long after the circumstances which gave rise to it have
passed. Third,
people should be able to arrange their affairs and utilise their resources on
the basis that claims can no longer
be made against them. Insurers, public
institutions and businesses, particularly limited liability companies, have a
significant
interest in knowing that they have no liabilities beyond a definite
(citations omitted)
is no concern about a deterioration in the quality of justice in the context of
an assessment of permanent impairment made by
a medical expert. In addition, any
concern about Ms Ballard’s evidence that GWF was told there would be no
effect on its premiums
evaporated when the Corporation’s two witnesses
essentially recanted their accounts. It would have been far kinder for all
concerned, and the hearing may have been avoided, if that had happened
for Ms Gonzalez makes the point that approval was given by GWF management to
seek review on 11 June 2024, 2 days before GWF
learned that one of the decisions
in issue would have an impact on its premiums. The point is valid, but GWF had
other concerns,
and workers and employers can seek review of RTW Act decisions
for a very broad range of reasons.
concern about the motivation or
of the application was
resolved during Ms Ballard’s evidence. It became apparent that
Ms Ballard did not appreciate that GWF
was able to seek review of the
decisions. I find that Ms Ballard’s misunderstanding was genuine, as
counsel for Ms Gonzalez
accepted. That consideration provides a good reason for
the review within the meaning of s 100(2)(a).
Gonzalez opposed the application on the basis that she may have to repay monies
if the extension is allowed. The submission was
that would amount to
unreasonable disadvantage in the relevant sense. Whilst that might be a
theoretical outcome of the proceeding,
it is only theoretical, and there is no
disadvantage on the quality of justice.
was a good reason for GWF to seek review. Ms Ballard did not appreciate that she
was able to seek review until 7 weeks after
the limitation period had expired.
The delay is relatively minor and the belated change of account of the
Corporation’s witnesses
warrant the grant of an extension of time. The
potential disadvantage to Ms Gonzalez is not to the quality of the justice that
be delivered. In all the circumstances, the extent of any potential
disadvantage is not unreasonable.
will hear from the parties in chambers about the orders that should be made in
relation to the application and more
Tr 6, 17-30.
[2024] SAET 28.
(1968) SASR 277.
[2024] SAET 28
[1996] HCA 25
(1996) 186 CLR
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (166 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter