URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASC/2025/178.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:05:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MARCHENKO v ADELAIDE PLAINS COUNCIL [2025] SASC 178 (27 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Appeal to a Single Judge)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
MARCHENKO v ADELAIDE PLAINS COUNCIL
[2025] SASC 178
Judgment of the Honourable
Justice B Doyle
27 October 2025
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING - COURTS AND TRIBUNALS WITH ENVIRONMENT
AND ITS PREDECESSORS - RIGHT AND AVAILABILITY OF APPEAL AND REVIEW
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING - ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION - GENERALLY - OFFENCES -
STATUTORY NUISANCE
The respondent has brought proceedings in the Environment, Resources and
Development Court (‘ERD Court’) against the appellant
pursuant to
Local Nuisance and Litter Control Act 2016
(SA) (‘LNLC
Act’). The respondent alleges that the noise associated with roosters
kept by the appellant on land occupied
by him constitutes a ‘local
nuisance’. The appellant has a disability and contends that the roosters
are therapeutic
animals. He disputes that the noise made by the roosters
amounts to a local nuisance.
The appellant sought a permanent stay of the proceedings. The application
was heard and refused by a Commissioner of the ERD Court.
He now appeals
against that decision.
Held, dismissing the appeal:
appellant has not established that the proceedings can clearly be seen to be
foredoomed to fail, nor that the maintenance of the
proceedings is oppressive or
vexatious so as to amount to an abuse of process;
Commissioner did not err in rejecting the various grounds for a permanent stay
relied upon by the appellant.
Criminal Code Act 1995
sch 1 s 274.2;
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
Environment,
Resources and Development Court Act 1993
Equal Opportunity Act
Local Nuisance and Litter Control Act 2016
, sch 1 cls 2, 3, 4, 5;
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
12.1(2)(o);
United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and Optional Protocol,
GA Res 61/106, UN Doc A/RES/61/106 (3
May 2008, adopted 13 December 2006);
United Nations Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
Res 39/46, UN Doc A/RES/39/46 (26 June 1987, adopted 10 December 1984), referred
GLJ v Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the Diocese of Lismore
[2023] HCA 32
(2023) 280 CLR 442
Marmota Ltd v Commissioner of State Taxation
Willmot v Queensland
(2024) 98 ALJR 1407
[2024] HCA 42
Adelaide Plains Council v Marchenko
[2025] SAERDC 17
BRK v Police
[2020] SASC 151
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2016] FCAFC 97
(2016) 242 FCR 153
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Minister for Immigration
and Ethnic Affairs v Teoh
[1995] HCA 20
(1995) 183 CLR 273
Moubarak by his tutor
Coorey v Holt
[2019] NSWCA 102
(2019) 100 NSWLR 218
R v Blackett
[2018] NSWCCA 114
[2024] SASCA 98
(1993) 177 CLR 378, discussed.
MARCHENKO v ADELAIDE PLAINS COUNCIL
[2025] SASC 178
Single judge appeal—civil
The Adelaide Plains Council (‘Council’) has brought
proceedings in the Environment, Resources and Development Court (‘ERD
Court’) against the appellant (‘Mr Marchenko’) pursuant to
Local Nuisance and Litter Control Act 2016
(SA) (‘LNLC
Act’). The Council alleges that noise associated with the keeping of a
number of roosters on land occupied
by Mr Marchenko constitutes a
‘local nuisance’. Mr Marchenko has a disability and contends that
the roosters are therapeutic
animals. He disputes that the noise made by the
roosters amounts to a local nuisance.
Marchenko made an interlocutory application in the ERD Court seeking a permanent
stay of the proceedings. That application was
heard by a Commissioner who, for
clear and comprehensively expressed reasons published on 2 September
dismissed the
application.
Council’s substantive application is now listed for hearing in the
ERD Court over two half days on 19 and 20 November 2025.
a notice of appeal filed on 18 September 2025, Mr Marchenko challenges the ERD
Court’s refusal to grant a permanent stay.
an interlocutory application filed on 23 September 2025, Mr Marchenko
sought an order that the ERD Court proceedings be temporarily
stayed until the
Supreme Court appeal is finally determined. At the first return of that
application, I proposed, as an alternative
to determining whether a temporary
stay should be granted pending the hearing and disposition of the appeal, that
the appeal be expedited
and heard the following week. The parties agreed and
that is what has occurred.
the reasons that follow, the appeal must be dismissed.
ERD Court was empowered on its own initiative or on application to make any
order that it considered appropriate in the interests
of justice, including
ordering a stay of
proceedings.
the majority observed in
GLJ v Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the
grant of a permanent stay to prevent an abuse of process involves an ultimate
decision that permitting a matter to go to trial
and the rendering of a verdict
following trial would be irreconcilable with the administration of justice
through the operation of
the adversarial system. That ultimate decision must be
one of last resort on the basis that no other option is available. This
only an exceptional case justifies the exercise of the power of a court to
permanently stay proceedings. If a court refuses to
exercise its jurisdiction to
hear and decide cases in other than exceptional circumstances and as a last
resort to protect the administration
of justice through the operation of the
adversarial system, that refusal itself will both work injustice and bring the
administration
of justice into disrepute.
Willmot v Queensland
plurality endorsed the following summary of principles relating to a permanent
stay of proceedings given by Bell P in
Moubarak by his tutor Coorey v
(1) the onus of proving that a permanent stay of proceedings should be granted
lies squarely on a defendant ...
(2) a permanent stay should only be ordered in exceptional circumstances
(3) a permanent stay should be granted when the interests of the
administration of justice so demand ...
(4) the categories of cases in which a permanent stay may be ordered are not
(5) one category of case where a permanent stay may be ordered is where the
proceedings or their continuance would be vexatious or
oppressive ...
(6) the continuation of proceedings may be oppressive if that is their
objective effect ...
(7) proceedings may be oppressive where their effect is ‘seriously and
unfairly burdensome, prejudicial or damaging’ ...
(8) proceedings may be stayed on a permanent basis where their continuation
would be manifestly unfair to a party ... , and
(9) proceedings may be stayed on a permanent basis where their continuation
would bring the administration of justice into disrepute
amongst right-thinking
is also accepted that, independently of the propriety of a plaintiff’s
purpose in maintaining proceedings, civil proceedings
may be stayed as an abuse
of process ‘if they can be clearly seen to be foredoomed to
Intermediate
courts of appeal have recognised a similar head of abuse of process in criminal
prosecutions. In order to avoid undue
interference with the prosecutorial
discretion, the exceptionality of the jurisdiction to stay a criminal proceeding
has been framed
in terms of ‘plain beyond argument’, ‘truly
exceptional circumstances’, ‘only in the most exceptional
circumstances’ and ‘sparingly with the utmost
Council’s proceedings are plainly not criminal. Orders are sought under s
33 of the LNLC Act (titled ‘Civil remedies’).
However, when a
Council pursues a matter under s 33 it acts in the interests of the local
community, and just as proceedings by
an individual must be in the public
it can be accepted that
wider public interest considerations are relevant to a proceeding maintained by
a Council or by the Minister.
As well, the availability of many of the remedies
contemplated by s 33(1) is conditioned upon demonstration of contraventions
the LNLC Act.
Council’s proceedings therefore have something of a hybrid regulatory
character. I will proceed on the basis that the
ERD Court had power (and indeed
a duty) to permanently stay proceedings brought pursuant to s 33 of the LNLC
Act, if positively persuaded
that the action could clearly be seen to be
foredoomed to fail and was, for that reason, an abuse of process. I will decide
appeal on that basis (which is favourable to Mr Marchenko) and without
bringing to bear any additional caution that may apply in
criminal proceedings
or, by analogy, in regulatory proceedings.
the focus of a permanent stay application is not solely upon its inevitable
failure but on the oppressive nature of the proceeding
itself, the relevant
inquiry is whether any prospective trial will be unfair or so unfairly and
unjustifiably oppressive as to constitute
an abuse of
relevant approach on appeal
decision to grant or refuse a permanent stay is an evaluative, not
discretionary, decision. Accordingly, assuming a right of appeal
is conferred,
the applicable standard of appellate review is not the deference standard
specified in
House v The
but the correctness
appeal is pursuant to
Environment, Resources and Development
Court Act 1993
(SA). Sub-section 30(2) provides that an appeal lies as of
right on a question of law and with permission on a question of fact.
notice of appeal lists some 11 grounds of appeal. A good number of them raise
what must be questions of law, although they have
not been formulated as the
authorities would contemplate, at least where jurisdiction turns on the
identification of a question of
is convenient to first consider the contentions that may be relevant to whether
the proceedings can clearly be seen to be foredoomed
to fail, before turning to
grounds that concern the conduct or purpose of the Council in pursuing the
proceedings, or the effect
of the maintenance of the proceedings upon
Mr Marchenko.
the course of oral submissions, Mr Marchenko placed most emphasis upon arguments
and the lawfulness of removing
a therapeutic animal from a person suffering from a disability.
respect of the effect of the proceedings upon him, Mr Marchenko’s oral
submissions did not focus upon the absence of any
particular procedural or other
accommodations. He was unreceptive to measures that might alleviate any
difficulties he is encountering
in dealing with the stress of the claim (such as
the appointment of a litigation guardian) short of terminating the proceedings.
His claim of oppression and irreparable harm was to a large extent focused upon
the fact that the proceedings expose him to the
risk of removal of his roosters.
That is at its core a concern about the consequence of the proceedings, if
decided adversely to
him, although, of course, it is generating anxiety on Mr
Marchenko’s part whilst the proceedings remain pending.
obvious reasons, it must be a rare case where a concern about the ultimate
disposition of a proceeding, and consequentially its
impact on a respondent
whilst the proceeding remains undetermined, warrants a permanent stay, as
distinct from an adjournment or
some other accommodation to assist the
respondent in participating effectively in the proceeding.
proceedings, whether civil, criminal or hybrid in nature may often carry with
them the prospect of an outcome that is almost
unbearable for a party to
contemplate. However, as was remarked in
Marmota Ltd v Commissioner of State
confidence in the courts demands the exercise of jurisdiction where disputes are
properly raised, in the absence of anything
less than a conclusion that the
Court would, in the event of continuance, become an instrument of
unfairness.
there was no challenge to (and, to my observation, no reason to doubt) Mr
Marchenko’s contention that he found the process
of making submissions
extremely draining, his demonstrated capacity to make fairly detailed
submissions of law and fact on the appeal
makes it difficult to conclude,
particularly in the absence of cogent and admissible evidence directed to the
particular topic, that
he will be unable meaningfully to defend the matter in
the ERD Court, including by availing himself of such accommodations or
indulgences
as the Court may be expected to extend to a self-represented
litigant with an illness.
Can the proceedings clearly be seen to
be foredoomed to fail?
Council’s Originating Application claims that:
Mr Marchenko is
the occupier of premises at Thompson Beach;
around April
2023, the Council was made aware of a potential noise nuisance originating from
roosters crowing on the premises;
an officer of
the Council with relevant authority under the LNLC Act formed the opinion that
the noise constituted nuisance that unreasonably
interfered with the enjoyment
of the area by persons occupying a place within, or lawfully resorting to, the
area under s 17(1)(a)
of the LNLC Act;
between 3 May
2023 and 17 August 2023, that officer issued and served on Mr Marchenko three
nuisance abatement notices pursuant to
s 30(1)(a) of the LNLC Act, the most
recent of which required him by 31 August 2023 to have all roosters on the
premises relocated
elsewhere and not have any roosters kept on the
the roosters
were not removed as required.
Council contends that Mr Marchenko is responsible for a ‘local
nuisance’ within the meaning of s 17(1)(a) of the
LNLC Act and has failed
to comply with an abatement notice without reasonable excuse contrary to
s 30(9). On that basis it seeks
relief pursuant to s 33 of that Act.
Originating Application is not prescriptive as to the form of relief that may be
sought, and the Council accepted that, in any
event, the wide powers of relief
under s 33(1) are discretionary. That is to say, it is not inevitable that if a
local nuisance
is demonstrated the ERD Court would necessarily order removal of
all of the roosters.
Council accepts that in deciding what relief to grant, if a nuisance is
established, it would not be an irrelevant consideration
that the roosters are
demonstrated to be therapeutically important to Mr Marchenko’s
central argument made by Mr Marchenko is that noise generated by a rooster
crowing between 8 am on weekdays (or 9 am on Sundays)
and midnight cannot, on
the proper construction of the LNLC Act and informed to the extent necessary by
disability discrimination
principles found in international conventions and
domestic legislation, amount to a local nuisance.
turning to those arguments, I set out the important provisions relevant to Mr
Marchenko’s submissions.
5 of the LNLC Act provides that:
5—Interaction with other
(1) Except as specifically provided by this Act, the provisions of this Act
are in addition to, and do not limit, the provisions of
any other law of the
(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), this Act is not
intended to be construed so as to prevent any person from being
prosecuted under
any other enactment for an offence that is also punishable by this Act, or from
being liable under any other law
of the State to any penalty or punishment that
is higher than a penalty or punishment provided by this Act.
(3) Nothing in this Act affects or limits a right or remedy that exists apart
from this Act and compliance with this Act does not
necessarily indicate that a
common law duty of care has been satisfied.
4 of the LNLC Act is headed ‘Offences’. Division 1 is concerned
with ‘Local nuisance’. Section 17
provides as
17—Meaning of local nuisance
(1) For the purposes of this Act, local nuisance is—
(a) any adverse effect on an amenity value of an area that—
(i) is caused by—
(A) noise, odour, smoke, fumes, aerosols or dust; or
(B) animals, whether dead or alive; or
(C) any other agent or class of agent declared by Schedule 1; and
(ii) unreasonably interferes with or is likely to interfere unreasonably with
the enjoyment of the area by persons occupying a place
within, or lawfully
resorting to, the area; or
(b) insanitary conditions on premises that unreasonably interfere with or are
likely to interfere unreasonably with the enjoyment
of premises occupied by
persons in the vicinity; or
(c) unsightly conditions, of a kind declared by Schedule 1, on premises caused
by human activity or a failure to act; or
(d) a contravention of, or failure to comply with a provision of an environment
protection policy, or of any other Act or law, declared
by Schedule 1; or
(e) anything declared by Schedule 1 to constitute local nuisance,
but does not include anything declared by Schedule 1 not to constitute local
Schedule 1 may be added to or amended by regulation—see section
51(2)(a) and (b).
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1)(b), conditions on premises will be
taken to be insanitary if an authorised officer reasonably
believes that—
(a) the premises are so filthy or neglected that there is a risk of infestation
by rodents or other pests; or
(b) offensive material or odours are emitted from the premises.
(3) In this section—
includes insects.
18 creates an offence where a person carries on an activity intentionally or
recklessly and with the knowledge that local
nuisance will result, and a lesser
offence without a mental element. Section 19 identifies a number of exemptions
from the application
of s 18. Section 20 requires that a person must, on
request by an authorised officer, cease an activity, or remove from premises
owned or occupied by the person any substance, material or thing that, in the
opinion of the authorised officer, is causing a local
1 of the LNLC Act is titled ‘Meaning of local nuisance (section
17)’. Part 2 of the Schedule is titled ‘Things
that are local
nuisance’ and Part 3 is titled ‘Things that are not local
nuisance’. Relevantly, they provide as
2—Things that are local nuisance
2—Declared agents (section 17(1)(a))
The following are declared agents for the purposes of section 17(1)(a):
(a) vibration;
3—Unsightly conditions on premises (section 17(1)(c))
For the purposes of section 17(1)(c), the following unsightly conditions are
(a) conditions on premises involving—
(i) excessive or unconstrained rubbish, waste or vegetation; or
(ii) stockpiled, excessive or unconstrained disused or derelict items or
material that a reasonable person would consider to be rubbish
or waste in the
circumstances; or
(iii) graffiti (other than authorised graffiti) that has been left on the
(A) in the case of offensive graffiti—for more than 7 days; or
(B) in any other case—for more than 28 days,
where, in the opinion of an authorised officer, the conditions have had an
adverse effect on the amenity value of the area or caused
the premises to be
significantly out of conformity with the general appearance of neighbouring
premises; or
(b) conditions involving a building on the premises having been left partially
demolished or in a state of disrepair, dilapidation
or damage where, in the
opinion of an authorised officer, the conditions have had an adverse effect on
the amenity value of the area
or caused the premises to be significantly out of
conformity with the general appearance of neighbouring premises.
4—Things declared to constitute local nuisance (section 17(1)(e))
The following are declared to constitute local nuisance for the purposes of
section 17(1)(e):
(a) noise, if an authorised officer forms the opinion—
(A) in the case of fixed machine noise generated on domestic
premises—the noise has travelled from the domestic premises to
a habitable
room, or an outdoor courtyard or entertainment area, on neighbouring premises;
(B) in the case of noise other than fixed machine noise generated on domestic
premises—the noise has travelled from the domestic
premises to
neighbouring premises between the hours of—
8pm and midnight
on any day; or
midnight and 9am
on Sunday; or
midnight and 8am
on any other day; or
(C) in the case of construction
noise—the noise has travelled from the location of the construction
activity to neighbouring
on any Sunday or
public holiday; or
after 7pm or
before 7am on any other day; or
(D) in the case of waste collection
noise—the noise has travelled from the place at which it was generated to
neighbouring premises—
before 9am or
after 7pm on any Sunday or public holiday; or
after 7pm or
before 7am on any other day; or
(DA) in the case of noise from the
operation of refrigeration equipment fitted on or in a vehicle that is parked
and not being operated—the
noise has travelled from the place where the
vehicle is parked to neighbouring domestic premises between the hours of—
8pm and midnight
on any day; or
midnight and 9am
on Sunday; or
midnight and 8am
on any other day; or
(E) in the case of noise from a street or tree
maintenance machine being used in a public place—the noise has travelled
the public place to neighbouring premises—
before 9am or
after 7pm on any Sunday or public holiday; or
after 7pm or
before 7am on any other day; and
(ii) that the level, nature or extent of the noise (including its volume, pitch,
vibrational frequency, prevalence or frequency of
occurrence) is such as to
constitute an unreasonable interference with the enjoyment of the neighbouring
premises by persons occupying
those premises;
(b) odour generated on premises, if an authorised officer forms the opinion
(i) the odour has travelled to neighbouring premises; and
(ii) the nature, intensity or extent of the odour is such as to constitute an
unreasonable interference with the enjoyment of the
neighbouring premises by
persons occupying those premises;
(c) dust generated on premises, if an authorised officer forms the opinion
(i) the dust has travelled to neighbouring premises; and
(ii) the nature, extent, smell, density or texture of the dust is such as to
constitute an unreasonable interference with the enjoyment
of the neighbouring
premises by persons occupying those premises;
(d) smoke generated on premises, if—
(i) an authorised officer forms the opinion that—
(A) the smoke has travelled to neighbouring premises; and
(B) the nature, extent, colour, smell or density of the smoke is such as to
constitute an unreasonable interference with the enjoyment
of the neighbouring
premises by persons occupying those premises; or
(ii) without limiting the generality of subparagraph (i), in the case of smoke
from a solid fuel heater—
(A) a visible plume of smoke extends into the air above neighbouring premises
from the flue or chimney of the heater more than 15
minutes after the heater is
(B) an authorised officer forms the opinion that the nature, extent, colour,
smell or density of the smoke is such as to constitute
an unreasonable
interference with the enjoyment of the neighbouring premises by persons
occupying those premises;
(e) vibration generated on premises, if an authorised officer forms the opinion
(i) the vibration has travelled to neighbouring premises; and
(ii) the nature, intensity or extent of the vibration is such as to constitute
an unreasonable interference with the enjoyment of
the neighbouring premises by
persons occupying those premises;
(ea) light emitted from a place, if an authorised officer forms the opinion
(i) the light has travelled from the place at which it was generated to
neighbouring premises; and
(ii) the nature, intensity, colour, location, direction or extent of the light
is such as to constitute an unreasonable interference
with the enjoyment of the
neighbouring premises by persons occupying those premises;
(f) installation of a fixed machine on domestic premises that, in the opinion of
an authorised officer, when operated or used in
accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions, generates noise of a kind referred to in paragraph
(a)(i)(A), the level, nature
or extent of which is of a kind referred to in
paragraph (a)(ii);
(g) projection of a promotional, obscene or offensive image onto property
without the consent of the owner or occupier of the property;
(h) using an audible bird scaring device otherwise than in accordance with the
Audible Bird Scaring Devices Environmental Noise Guidelines 2007
by the Environment Protection Authority.
Part 3—Things that are not local nuisance
5—Things that are not local nuisance
The following are declared not to constitute local nuisance for the purposes
of section 17(1):
(a) noise or other nuisance from blasting operations carried out as part of a
mining operation within the meaning of the
Mines and Works Inspection Act
Mining Act 1971
(b) noise or other nuisance from any activity carried on in accordance with a
program for environment protection and rehabilitation
that is in force for
mining operations under
Mining Act 1971
(c) noise or other nuisance from the keeping of animals in accordance with a
development authorisation within the meaning of the
Development Act 1993
(ca) noise, odour or waste from animals living in their natural habitat (other
than such animals that have been actively encouraged,
by feeding, to gather in a
particular area);
(d) other than in the case of construction noise or other nuisance from
construction activities carried out in accordance with a
development
authorisation within the meaning of the
Development Act 1993
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
—noise or other
nuisance from any other activity carried on in accordance with an authorisation
(including an approval, consent,
licence, permit, exemption or entitlement)
granted under any other Act (other than this Act), provided that—
(i) the authorisation imposes requirements to control, minimise or eliminate (as
far as reasonably practicable) any noise or other
forms of nuisance likely to
result from the activity; and
(ii) those requirements are complied with;
(e) noise or other nuisance from fireworks displays;
(f) noise or other nuisance from sporting or associated activities at sporting
(g) noise or other nuisance from community events run by or on behalf of a
council (subject to any conditions imposed by the council);
(h) noise, vibration and other nuisance from public infrastructure works
(a) the works are carried out because of an emergency or urgent public need;
(b) the works are carried out in the circumstances in order to avoid or reduce
inconvenience or disruption to traffic or pedestrians
during normal business
(i) subject to Part 2 clause 4(a)(i)(D) and (DA), noise from vehicles (other
than vehicles operating within, or entering or leaving,
business premises);
(j) noise or other nuisance that may be the subject of proceedings under—
Community Titles Act 1996
Strata Titles Act 1988
(k) an activity on, or noise emanating from, licensed premises within the
meaning of the
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
in respect of which a complaint
may be lodged with the Liquor Licensing Commissioner under
section 106
(l) behaviour in respect of which a complaint may be lodged with the Liquor
Licensing Commissioner under
section 106
Liquor Licensing Act
(m) noise principally consisting of music or voices, or both, resulting from an
activity at domestic premises;
(n) noise from activities carried on in the normal course of a school,
kindergarten, child care centre or place of worship, other
than noise consisting
of amplified music;
(o) noise created by a dog barking or otherwise that may be the subject of an
offence under
section 45A(5)
Dog and Cat Management Act 1995
(p) aircraft or railway noise;
(q) noise caused by emergency vehicle sirens;
(r) noise outside of the human audible range;
(s) dust from unsealed public roads;
(t) light emitted by or from the following:
The Schedule limits the noise that may qualify as ‘local
Marchenko contends that s 17(1)(a) of the LNLC Act should be seen as identifying
circumstances, or rather agents, that
amount to a local nuisance, but
that for particular categories of circumstances, the more specific provisions of
Schedule 1 are controlling.
are two aspects to this submission which forms the basis for appeal ground 1.
First, Mr Marchenko contends that noise generated
by his roosters is
‘noise other than fixed machine noise generated on domestic
premises’ and is therefore governed by
cl 4(a)(i)(B) of the Schedule.
Noise can only amount to a nuisance under that provision if it travels from
domestic premises to
neighbouring premises during the specified hours of the
evening and the early morning.
Marchenko’s submission is that because the proceedings against him
essentially concern noise at other times, the noise cannot
amount to a local
nuisance, or cannot properly be dealt with under s 17(1)(a). He contends that
if the Council can allege that noise
of that kind is a local nuisance during the
course of the day, the Council could ‘bypass the carefully crafted
exemptions’
in Schedule 1 and allow s 17(1)(a) to ‘override’
the Schedule.
contrary construction is that, as the heading to cl 4 suggests, it declares
(effectively ‘deems’) particular things
to be a ‘local
nuisance’, as contemplated by s 17(1)(e), without giving rise to any
negative implication (or ‘exemption’)
to the effect that particular
categories of noise dealt with in cl 4 cannot otherwise amount to a local
nuisance by reference to
the criteria set out in s 17(1)(a).
the Council’s approach, whilst the general definition of a local nuisance
in s 17(1)(a) requires proof that the noise ‘unreasonably
interferes with
or is likely to interfere unreasonably with the enjoyment of the area by persons
occupying a place or lawfully resorting
to the area’, the need to
establish an unreasonable interference of that kind falls away if, in the case
of noise, it falls
within one of the enumerated categories in cl 4(a)(i)(A)-(E)
and the result is an unreasonable interference with the enjoyment of
neighbouring premises
by persons occupying those
On that approach,
Part 2 of Schedule 1 can only do the work given to it by s 17(1)(e) of the LNLC
Act, and no provision of the Schedule
can limit what may otherwise amount to a
local nuisance under s 17(1)(a) unless it is a ‘thing declared by
Schedule 1 not to
constitute local nuisance’ within the meaning of the
of s 17(1). The Schedule makes clear that the only things
that are declared by it not to constitute a local nuisance are those set
Part 3. In those circumstances there is no basis for exemptions to be inferred
from the limits of Part 2. The exemptions
are exclusively to be found in Part
order to decide whether a permanent stay was wrongly refused, it is only
necessary to consider whether the Council’s construction
is clearly doomed
to fail. It is not. Indeed, it would appear to reflect an orthodox application
of the principles of statutory
interpretation which direct attention to text,
context and purpose. It results in no absurdity, incongruity or
surplusage.
and in the alternative, Mr Marchenko contends that the reference in cl 5(m)
in Part 3 of the Schedule to ‘noise principally
consisting of music or
voices, or both, resulting from an activity at domestic premises’ extends
to the crowing of a rooster
kept as a domestic animal.
a matter of language, the word ‘voice’ could extend to the noise
made by the vocal chords or syrinx of an animal.
In the context of cl 5(m), for
various reasons, including that animals are treated separately from humans in
cll 5(c) and 5(ca),
that meaning might be thought distinctly unlikely. Contrary
to Mr Marchenko’s submission, the provision is not to be construed
with any particular significance attaching to the fact that Thompson Beach is
‘situated within or associated with an International
Sanctuary’. The essential meaning of the LNLC Act definition cannot be
influenced by such local considerations.
present purposes, it suffices to conclude that the contention that
‘voice’ does not extend to a rooster’s crowing
cannot clearly
be seen to be foredoomed to fail.
International obligations
affect the interpretation or application of LNLC Act
Mr Marchenko relies upon the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities (‘CRPD’) and the Optional
Protocol to the CRPD, as
well as the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Curel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment.
Marchenko accepts, correctly, that international treaties are not direct sources
of individual rights and obligations under the
He relies upon the
proposition that an ambiguous provision of domestic legislation may be
interpreted with a bias towards compliance
with Australia’s international
obligations. Under appeal ground 4 he complains that the Commissioner erred by
failing to proceed
accordingly.
may be doubted that there is a relevant ambiguity in the provisions but, even if
there is, it cannot be said, much less with the
requisite confidence, that the
influence of any international obligations will be such as to render the failure
of the Council’s
originating application inevitable.
Conceivably,
in deciding what remedies if any to grant in the event that the Council
demonstrates a local nuisance, an outcome which
substantially addresses or
mitigates the nuisance whilst accommodating, to the extent possible, any needs
that Mr Marchenko has by
reason of an established disability, would be favoured.
Indeed, it is even conceivable that if a local nuisance can only be eliminated
by causing a more serious harm to others, and that harm cannot reasonably be
avoided, the Court might, after weighing the interests
of those affected by the
local nuisance, withhold relief.
to acknowledge these possibilities is not to conclude that the Council’s
proceedings are clearly to be seen as foredoomed
to fail or otherwise abusive.
And to the extent that there is a prospect that domestic law may ultimately be
applied in a fashion
that might be thought inconsistent with the protection
afforded to those rights by international treaties, this cannot found a
stay. To conclude otherwise would be to give treaties and conventions
a status in substantive and adjectival law domestic that they
do not enjoy.
these circumstances it is not necessary to engage directly with the content of
the conventions, nor to consider whether Mr Marchenko
led evidence that would
establish a satisfactory foundation for the operation of the provisions of any
conventions.
Application of other State or federal
legislation
appeal ground 3, Mr Marchenko contends that whilst the Commissioner rightly
recognised that the ERD Court lacked jurisdiction
to entertain free-standing
claims pursuant to the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
Act’) and the
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
(‘DDA’), she erred by interpreting the ERD Court’s empowering
statute consistently with that legislation.
Reference was also made to
Constitution
may be doubted that s 5(1) of the LNLC Act goes as far as Mr Marchenko
contends. It is true that a Court will, in the case of
two potentially
conflicting State Acts, strive to give them a harmonious application before
deciding whether one must be taken to
override the other. It may also be
accepted that in the event of a genuine inconsistency, any applicable federal
legislation would
render the LNLC Act inoperative to the extent of the
inconsistency.
Mr Marchenko was not able to mount any clear argument that would enable the
conclusion to be reached that, because of the
influence or effect of either the
EO Act or the DDA, the noise made by pets or animals that have a therapeutic
benefit for a person
with a disability cannot amount to a local nuisance within
the meaning of the LNLC Act, such that the Council’s action is foredoomed
The Council is acting for an improper purpose or
otherwise unlawfully
Marchenko’s appeal grounds (most obviously, appeal grounds 6, 7, 9 and 10)
include contentions that the Council has brought
the proceedings for an improper
purpose, or has, by bringing the proceedings contravened anti-discrimination
laws or otherwise acted
unreasonably. He also contends that the Council did not
comply with its duty of disclosure or candour at an
hearing that
resulted in it being given leave to serve a summons upon Mr Marchenko to attend
to answer the proceedings.
the extent that Mr Marchenko’s contentions rest upon an inference that,
because the claim is based upon a manifest misunderstanding
LNLC Act, the Council must be acting for some improper purpose, my
rejection of the proposition that the proceeding is clearly
doomed to fail is
sufficient in itself to preclude the drawing of such an inference.
any event, an inference of that kind is a serious matter, not lightly to be
drawn. There is nothing in the evidence that was
before the Commissioner that
would persuade me that the Council is acting for an improper purpose. The
Commissioner did not err
by reaching the same conclusion (Reasons
[110]-[111]).
complaint relating to the
hearing is not made out. As the
Commissioner found (Reasons [107]), Mr Marchenko has not established that the
Council misled the
Court or concealed vital information, and the contrary
conclusion would not, without more, itself justify a permanent stay.
the extent that Mr Marchenko contends that the Council has engaged in direct or
indirect disability discrimination within the
meaning of the DDA, the
Commissioner was correct in failing to be satisfied that the Council engaged in
conduct of the relevant kind
by the mere fact of bringing and maintaining the
proceedings (Reasons [128]-[139]).
the extent that it is contended that the decision to bring the proceedings is
vitiated by legal unreasonableness, I reject the
contention that the
Council’s conduct can be so characterised, making it unnecessary to
consider whether that contention would,
if made out, avail an applicant for a
permanent stay. The Commissioner made no mistake in disposing of this and
related contentions
(Reasons [126]-[127]).
The impact of the
proceedings upon Mr Marchenko
Marchenko contends that the maintenance of the proceedings is causing and,
unless a permanent stay is granted, will continue to
cause, severe and
potentially irreparable harm to him. Appeal grounds 5 and 9 most obviously
raise these contentions.
also contends that the ERD Court, by allowing the matter to progress towards a
is causing or
permitting torture, contrary to s 274.2 of the
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth) (‘Criminal Code’);
procedural fairness and conducting itself in a way that results in apprehended
is failing to
comply with the obligation owed by the ERD Court under the EO Act to provide
‘special assistance’ to him
as a disabled person.
the ERD Court, Mr Marchenko relied upon a letter from his clinical psychologist,
Mr Tim Upsdell, with whom he has been consulting
intermittently since 2014.
Based on Mr Upsdell’s impressions of Mr Marchenko and his review of
another report (which was not
in evidence), he considered that Mr Marchenko
suffers from very high anxiety, sleeps very poorly and experiences nightmares
cramps. Mr Upsdell considered that Mr Marchenko suffers from complex
PTSD and that his relationship with the roosters is very therapeutic,
their removal will cause considerable distress and aggravation of the complex
letter is not an expert report and it is not sworn evidence. But even taking it
as some evidence of the matters to which it
is addressed, it suggests that one
possible outcome of the proceedings may well be detrimental to
Mr Marchenko’s health. Whilst
an inference might be drawn that the
prospect of that outcome is such that the mere existence of the proceedings is a
source of considerable
stress and anxiety, the opinion expressed falls short of
establishing that Mr Marchenko’s stress or anxiety makes it
for him fairly to participate in and defend the proceedings.
such a conclusion could be reached, so as to sustain a basis for a permanent
stay, it would be necessary to investigate measures
(such as the obtaining of
legal representation, the appointment of a litigation guardian, or other
supports) and conclude that they
are unavailable or would be entirely
ineffective in facilitating meaningful participation by Mr Marchenko in the
proceedings.
Marchenko carries the onus of establishing the facts and circumstances that
warrant the grant of a permanent stay. Neither Mr
Upsdell’s letter, nor
the somewhat conclusory assertions made in Mr Marchenko’s own affidavit,
discharge that onus.
it seemed clear that Mr Marchenko was finding the process of addressing the
Court stressful and extremely draining, the
fact remains that he was able to
prepare comprehensive written submissions and make oral submissions which
conveyed his concerns
Council and which, at a legal level, were comprehensible, even if they
ultimately persuasive.
his arguments for a stay have not been accepted does not mean that many of the
underlying concerns or facts may not be accepted
as relevant to the ERD
Court’s ultimate disposition of the matter. I am unable to conclude that
Mr Marchenko’s complex
PTSD renders it impossible for him to
meaningfully participate in the defence of the Council’s claim.
his difficulties mean that he requires additional time, or adjournments, or
other accommodations, those will be matters which,
no doubt, the ERD Court will
carefully consider.
would reject any contention that the ERD Court’s conduct of the matter to
this point has involved a failure to make appropriate
accommodation for
Mr Marchenko’s condition, or that it has been relevantly unfair. In
that respect, and in rejecting the contention
of apprehended bias, I agree with
the Commissioner (Reasons [118]-[125]).
also unhesitatingly reject any submission that the ERD Court or the Council has
subjected Mr Marchenko to torture, much less that
the Council has committed the
offence of torture within the meaning of s 274.2 of the Schedule to the
Criminal Code. Even if it
were established that Mr Marchenko has, by the
proceedings, suffered severe physical or mental pain or suffering, there is, as
Commissioner held, no evidence capable of establishing that the Council
acted for any of the proscribed purposes in s 274.2(1)(b)
(Reasons [68]).
Other grounds
appeal ground 2, Mr Marchenko contends that the ERD Court erred by failing to
refer questions of statutory interpretation to the
Court of Appeal. He has not
identified any distinct question of statutory interpretation, the resolution of
which would be of such
clear utility that there could be said to be an error in
the exercise of the discretion to make a
Even if he had done,
this would not form a basis for a permanent stay.
appeal grounds 10 and 11, Mr Marchenko complains that the ERD Court otherwise
erred in its assessment of the interests of justice,
and that the
Commissioner’s decision was vitiated by a combination of jurisdictional or
other errors. I do not consider that
these grounds raise any separate basis
upon which it could be found that the decision not to grant a permanent stay was
Disposition
Adelaide Plains Council v
[2025] SAERDC 17
(‘Reasons’).
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
(SA), r 12.1(2)(o).
[2023] HCA 32
(2023) 280 CLR 442
(Kiefel CJ, Gageler and Jagot JJ).
(2024) 98 ALJR 1407
(Gageler CJ, Gordon, Jagot and Beech-Jones JJ).
[2019] NSWCA 102
(2019) 100 NSWLR 218
Walton v Gardiner
(1993) 177 CLR 378 at 393 (Mason CJ, Deane and Dawson JJ), referring,
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner for
Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125.
R v Blackett
(Leeming JA, Button and Fagan JJ relevantly
LNLC Act, s 33(7)(c).
Willmot v Queensland
(2024) 98 ALJR 1407
[2024] HCA 42
(Gageler CJ, Gordon, Jagot and
Beech-Jones JJ). In considering a stay on this basis, where the proceedings are
regulatory in character,
it has been said that the interests of persons who
would be affected by the withholding of a stay are to be weighed against the
of those whose interests are affected by the granting of a stay,
without specific regard to the identity or character of the holder
interest as being significant in itself:
Construction, Forestry, Mining and
Energy Union v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2016] FCAFC 97
(2016) 242 FCR
(Dowsett, Tracey and Bromberg JJ).
(1936) 55 CLR 499.
GLJ v Trustees of the
Roman Catholic Church for the Diocese of Lismore
[2023] HCA 32
(2023) 280 CLR 442
[23] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler and Jagot JJ),
Willmot v Queensland
[2024] HCA 42
(Gageler CJ, Gordon, Jagot and Beech-Jones
Corporation v Wastell
[2024] SASCA 98
, [31]-[33] (Livesey ACJ,
Bleby and David JJA).
[2025] SASCA 11
(Livesey P, S Doyle and Bleby JJA).
There is a separate
question, which need not be resolved, whether, when the matter comes before the
ERD Court, the Court focuses
upon the authorised officer’s opinion (and if
so, inquires whether it was reasonably formed), or whether it looks to the
facts and circumstances. Section 50 of the LNLC Act may bear on that
Minister for Immigration
and Ethnic Affairs v Teoh
[1995] HCA 20
(1995) 183 CLR 273
at 286-287 (Mason CJ and
BRK v Police (No 2)
[2020] SASC 151
(Livesey P).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (439 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter