URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWPRP/2014/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:11:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Business SA v WorkCover [2014] SAWPRP 2 (17 February 2014)
[2014] SAWPRP 2
WORKCOVER PREMIUM REVIEW PANEL
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN EMPLOYERS’ CHAMBER OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY INC. t/as
BUSINESS S.A.
No. E11910604 — file reference 201067679)
(Applicant)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION
OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
Member P.G. Eblen
Deputy Member E.R. Pecorelli
Deputy Member D.A. Black
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED 17 FEBRUARY
Application for review — statutory payment — calculation of
initial premium — claims history of employer —
whether particular
claim should be treated as secondary injury — whether injury of gradual
development — consideration
of medical evidence — “common
sense evaluation of the chain of events” — approach to causation not
to medical practitioners —
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
regulation 13
Workers Rehabilitation
and Compensation Regulations 2010
Cases referred to:
Dibbins v. Dibbins
(1978) 80 LSJS 165
Ivkovic v. Rinaldi and Ivkovic
(1980) 25 SASR 516
WorkCover v. Sherriff
(unreported, Supreme Ct FC, S5831,
Bailey v. GMH
[2013] SAWCT 47
Appearances:
Mr M.R. Keam of counsel, accompanied by Mr P. Allred, Human Resources
Manager, for the applicant employer.
Mr S. Makai, Senior Information Officer, with Ms M. Thede, for the respondent
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
is the determination of an application for review dated 11 October 2012, lodged
by the applicant employer pursuant to section
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
(“the Act”), which
seeks a review of a decision of the respondent WorkCover Corporation of South
Australia (“WorkCover”)
dated 15 August 2012, assessing the
applicant’s statutory payment (“premium”) for the financial
year 2012-2013.
The assessment is based on calculations that take into account a
claims history that includes a claim the applicant contends should
excluded as a secondary injury.
72M provides as
(1) If an employer considers that a decision of the Corporation as
(a) the estimate of remuneration that is to be used for the calculation of a
statutory payment; or
(b) the fixing or assessment of a statutory payment; or
(c) the imposition of penalty interest or a fine; or
(d) the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead to
the remission or imposition of a supplementary payment,
is unreasonable, the board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a
statutory payment, penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined
by the board, by the board itself, or by a committee or
person to whom the board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the board has an
absolute discretion as to whether
it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the board may—
(a) alter an estimate of remuneration;
(b) alter a statutory payment or an assessment;
(c) quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
(d) direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
(e) quash or vary a condition imposed by the Corporation.
(5) An application under this section for review of a decision of the
Corporation—
(a) must, if the decision relates to a class of employers, be made within 4
months after notice of the decision was given; or
(b) must, if the decision relates to an individual employer, be made within
2 months after the employer was given notice of the decision,
unless the board (or its delegate) allows an extension of time for making the
application.
Panel is the Board’s delegate for the purpose of a review under section
WorkCover Premium Review Panel Determination 2012
Australian Government Gazette
, 10 May 2012, p.1617).
reviewable decision of 15 August 2012, a copy of which appears in the book of
documents before us, is a 9-page document purporting
to set out the
applicant’s “initial premium” for the period 1 July 2012 to 30
June 2013, and the method by which
it was calculated. The supplementary book of
documents contains a copy of a further reviewable decision dated 16 August 2013,
to set out the applicant’s “hindsight premium” for
the same period. The working sheets for both show the claims
costs associated
with the contentious claim is the largest single component of the
applicant’s claims history.
is important to understand why the employer’s claims history is
significant in calculating its WorkCover premium. Under the
Act as it stood on
30 June 2012, an employer’s claims history was only relevant if the
employer were being considered for a
remission of levy or a supplementary levy
under the old section 67 (now repealed) in recognition of a claims history that
was significantly
at variance with industry averages. The claims history
excluded “claims of a class excluded ... by regulation”, but no
regulation was ever made. However, secondary disabilities were excluded under a
transitional provision contained in the
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation (Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1995
situation is much more complicated since the commencement of the
Rehabilitation and Compensation (Employer Payments) Amendment Act 2012
Probably because of the familiar situation, both parties seemed simply to assume
that a contentious claim would be excluded from
consideration if it were
established as a secondary injury, but it seems to us that it is necessary to
explore why that is so under
the new provisions. New section 72C is
superficially similar to the old section 67, including the exclusion of
particular classes
of claims by regulation. This time there is a regulation,
regulation 16A, which provides:
For the purposes of section 72C(5)
of the Act, a scheme for the provision or payment of remissions and
supplementary payments will
include matters determined by the Corporation for
the purposes of this regulation and published in the Gazette.
there is no suggestion contained within the reviewable decision that the
applicant is under consideration for the granting
of a remission or imposition
of a supplementary payment. Instead, the reviewable decision indicates that the
premium has been calculated
“in accordance with the
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
and the WorkCover Premium Order
(Experience Rating System).” This appears to be a reference to an
instrument titled
WorkCover Premium Order (Experience Rating System)
, appearing at page 2909 of the
South Australian Government
, 28 June 2012. This instrument appears to be authorised by section
71 of the Act, which
71—Premiums
(1) A premium payable
by an employer in relation to a particular period (other than an employer who is
not liable to pay a premium
under this Division) will be—
(a) determined in
accordance with a WorkCover premium order under this section; or
(b) to the extent that a WorkCover premium order does not apply to the
employer—the aggregate base premiums applying to that
employer in respect
of all classes of industry in which the employer employs workers (subject to any
adjustments or requirements
that apply in the circumstances).
(2) For the purposes
subsection (1)(a)
the Corporation may, after consultation with the Minister and applying any
principle specified by the Minister for the purposes
of this section, fix the
manner in which a premium payable by an employer (or a person who proposes to
become an employer) will be
calculated.
(3) The Corporation must, for the purposes of
subsection (2)
publish an order (or orders) in the Gazette (and any such order will be referred
WorkCover premium order
(4) A WorkCover premium order will take effect from the commencement of a
financial year specified by the order (and will then apply,
including in
relation to a succeeding financial year, until superseded by another WorkCover
premium order).
(5) A WorkCover premium order may—
(a) apply generally or be limited in its application by reference to
specified factors or exceptions; and
(b) apply differently according to—
(i) categories of employers; and
(ii) different factors of a specified kind; and
(c) authorise any matter to be determined, applied or regulated by a
specified person or body,
or may do any combination of these things.
(6) Without limiting
a preceding subsection, a WorkCover premium order may—
(a) apply any principle relevant to the claims experience of a particular
category or class of employer, or the size of an employer
(after applying such
principles or assumptions as the Corporation thinks fit); and
(b) fix and apply
various principles, weights, adjustments, caps, limits (including limits on the
reduction of premiums), assumptions
or exclusions according to specified
factors; and
(c) without limiting any other provision, specify any adjustment or
assumption relating to the remuneration paid to workers over
a particular period
(including a period into the future); and
(d) allow employers
who satisfy any specified criteria, on application and at the discretion of the
Corporation, to pay a premium
determined by the Corporation according to an
alternative set of principles—
(i) specified in the order; or
(ii) specified in another WorkCover premium order that applies in the
circumstances; or
(iii) agreed between the Corporation and the employer; and
(e) require that employers of a specified class must provide a deposit, bond
or guarantee, or some other form of security, specified
in the order; and
(f) make any other provision or impose any other requirement prescribed by
the regulations. ...
subsection (6)(a) makes a reference to the claims experience of an employer, but
that reference is sufficient to make it plain
that a premium order may make
claims history
of a particular category or class of employer
of the calculation.
1 of Part 2 of the Order
that the order applies to medium and large employers. The reader is referred to
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Regulations 2010
another document known as
WorkCover Premium Provisions 2012-13
explanation of these terms. The explanation offered by
regulation 13(2)
illusory than real:
(a) a small employer is an employer—
(i) whose aggregate
base premiums applying to the employer in respect of all classes of industry in
which the employer employs workers
is less than an amount determined by the
Corporation for the purposes of this subparagraph in relation to a particular
premium period;
(ii) whose total
remuneration payable by the employer to all workers in any industry is less than
an amount determined by the Corporation
for the purposes of this subparagraph in
relation to a particular premium period; or
(iii) who satisfies both
subparagraphs (i)
(b) a medium employer
is an employer who is not a small employer and whose aggregate base premiums
applying to the employer in respect
of all classes of industry in which the
employer employs workers is less than an amount determined by the Corporation
for the purposes
of this paragraph in relation to a particular premium period;
(c) a large employer
is an employer whose aggregate base premiums applying to the employer in respect
of all classes of industry in
which the employer employs workers is equal to or
greater than the amount determined by the Corporation for the purposes of
paragraph (b)
in relation to a particular premium period.
1, 2 and 3 of
WorkCover Premium Provisions 2012-13
South Australian Government Gazette
, 10 May 2012, p.1587) provide:
the purposes of
regulation 13(2)(a)(i)
of the Regulations, the amount determined
by the Corporation is $20,000.
the purposes of
regulation 13(2)(a)(ii)
of the Regulations, the amount
determined by the Corporation is $300,000.
the purposes of
regulation 13(2)(b)
of the Regulations, the amount determined by
the Corporation is $500,000.
effect appears to be that for an employer to know whether it is a medium or
large employer to which the
WorkCover Premium Order (Experience Rating
System) 2012-13
applies for the purpose of calculating its premium, it needs
to know already what its premium is in relation to the thresholds. The
circularity, in addition to the complexity, is remarkable.
are further steps. Clause 1 of Part 3 of the
WorkCover Premium Order
(Experience Rating System) 2012-13
provides a mathematical formula for
calculating the premium of an employer to whom the Order applies. One of its
components is EAP,
explained as an “experience adjusted premium” to
be calculated in accordance with another mathematical formula. One of
EAP’s components, in turn, is EP, explained as “the experience
premium, if any, for the employer determined with respect
to the premium period
or part thereof in accordance with Part 5 of this Order.”
1 of Part 5 of the Order gives two alternative formulae for calculating an
Experience Premium, according to whether the premium
being calculated is an
“initial premium” (to be paid, on the basis of estimates, before the
period in question) or a
“hindsight premium” (to be paid on the
basis of reality, after the period, with a credit for the initial payment). The
formulae are as follows:
Part 5—Experience Premium
Experience Premium (EP) for an employer is to be calculated:
1.1. For the purpose of calculating the initial premium payable for a premium
period, in accordance with the following formula:
Initial ECCR
is the base premium calculated in accordance with Part 4 of the
WorkCover Premium Provisions.
Initial ECCR
is the initial Employer’s Claims Cost Rate
calculated using the following formula:
Initial ECCR =
is the initial Industry Claims Cost Rate for a South
Australian WorkCover Industrial Classification (SAWIC) applicable to the
or location for the period to which the premium relates, as published
Government Gazette
1.2. For the purpose of calculating the hindsight premium payable (after the
period for which the premium is to be calculated has
ended), in accordance with
the following formula:
Hindsight ECCR
Hindsight ECCR
is the hindsight Employer’s Claims Cost Rate
calculated using the following formula:
Hindsight ECCR =
is the hindsight Industry Claims Cost Rate for a
SAWIC applicable to the employer or location for the period to which the premium
relates, as published in the
Government Gazette
is the total of the cost of claims for the employer as
defined in Part 6 of this Order in respect of claims with a date of injury
the premium period to which the premium relates.
are respectively the totals of
the cost of claims for the employer as defined in Part 6 of this Order in
respect of claims with a
date of injury in the last and second last periods
before the commencement of the premium period to which the premium relates.
Date of injury
is the date the person sustained the injury, or the
deemed date of injury.
is the total of the remuneration in respect of the
premium period to which the premium relates.
are respectively the totals of
the remuneration in respect of the last and second last periods before the
commencement of the premium
period to which the premium relates. ...
Unfortunately,
are not defined
for the purposes of the formulae in clause 1.1. Presumably, employers are
expected to
that they have corresponding meanings to those given
in relation to the same symbols appearing in the formulae in clause 1.2. For
web of documents so intricately drafted, and with such complexity and
circularity, employers ought not to have to rely on “assumptions”
to the meaning of key elements of key formulae.
refer to the total cost of claims calculated in
accordance with Part 6 of the Order. We set out clauses 1 to 4 of Part 6 in
Part 6—Cost of Claims
of claims means the total of:
1.1 costs paid on, and in respect of, each claim for compensation allocated to
a particular employer (irrespective of whether the
claim for compensation was
withdrawn by the worker, accepted or rejected), and
1.2 the current and most accurate estimate assessed by the Corporation of the
outstanding liability for each claim.
of claims includes payments:
2.1 made under Division 7A of the Act—Special provisions for commencement
of weekly payments after initial notification of
injury (which includes the
Provisional Payments Guidelines); and
2.2 made under Section 32A of the Act—Special provisions for payment of
medical expenses after initial notification of injury.
costs of each claim are the total costs for the claim based on the evidence
available at the time relevant to the premium period:
3.1 Being the beginning of the premium period for an initial premium;
3.2 Being the end of the premium period for a hindsight
from the costs of each claim are:
4.1 Costs associated with claims for unrepresentative and secondary
4.2 Costs associated with successfully prosecuted fraudulent
4.3 Estimated and/or actual recoveries for compulsory third party and common law
actions under Section 54 of the Act
4.4 The first two weeks of income maintenance
4.5 The costs for interpreter services
4.6 Claims costs in excess of $200 000 (large claims
4.1 reveals the reason why it is significant, to an employer to whom the
WorkCover Premium Order (Experience Rating System) 2012-13
whether a particular claim is, or is not, designated as an unrepresentative or,
in this case, a secondary injury. Costs
for a secondary injury claim are
excluded from the employer’s claims costs for the purpose of calculating
its premium liability.
must simply presume that the applicant is in fact an employer to which the Order
applies. We have not been provided with the material
necessary to satisfy
ourselves that is so. Both parties certainly seemed to think the secondary issue
was a live one.
turn to consider the facts to which the application for review
Background facts
statement of agreed facts was prepared by counsel and appears in the
supplementary book of documents before us at page 11. It reads
as follows:
worker (Employee X) was employed with Business SA between 2008 and 2012.
X was required to come into contact with her manager, Employee Y, as part of her
normal duties.
X alleges that she was the subject of certain behaviour by Employee Y that began
to affect her mentally from 2009.
X began seeking out medical advice from 2009, stating that non work related
factors were affecting her mental health (largely
in the nature of medication to
deal with anxiety). She now asserts the medical advice sought was due to her
interactions with Employee
21 October 2011 a specific incident is alleged by Employee X to have occurred
involving Employee Y and herself, following which
time Employee X alleges that
her mental condition deteriorated although she remained at work (and had to
continue working with Employee
Y thereafter).
X took four weeks annual leave between December 2011 and January 2012. Employee
X states that she was feeling better on returning
to work, however says that she
felt anxious and upset as a result of further alleged actions taken by Employee
Y, amongst work related
events, on about 16 January 2012.
X stopped work on 16 January 2012. She lodged a Compensation Claim form on 17
January 2012 stating the mechanism of injury
as the alleged incident on 21
October 2011. Workers Medical Certificates from Dr B from 17 January 2012
onwards state that the worker
was suffering from “Adjustment Disorder with
Anxiety and Depression”, with a date of injury of 21 October 2011.
X made a statement dated 25 January 2012 regarding the events which had occurred
during the course of her employment.
determination dated 27 January 2012 Employers Mutual approved provisional
further investigations the worker’s claim for Adjustment Disorder with
Anxiety and Depression was accepted on 7 June
2012 for ongoing incapacity.
Employer did not dispute the acceptance of the worker’s claim in the
Workers Compensation Tribunal.
statement does not constitute all the Panel knows about this matter. The
worker’s statement of 25 January 2012, consisting
of 15 pages, is before
us and appears at pages 75-89 of the book of documents. To the applicant
employer’s credit, a copy of
it also accompanied the application for
review. We have also been furnished with multiple medical reports.
reasons for the parties’ delicacy about the facts of the claim are
twofold. Firstly, it appears that the incident of 21
October 2011 resulted in
police action against the manager, and it is not known whether the court
proceedings have concluded. Secondly,
the allegations are, frankly, quite
disturbing. Nevertheless, the Panel had to inform the parties that, while we
would endeavour
in our decision to confine ourselves to the agreed statement as
far as possible, we must reserve to ourselves the right to refer
to such further
detail as necessary to make findings that will enable us to do justice between
the parties.
The applicant’s case
essence of the applicant’s case is that the injury claimed by the worker
and accepted by WorkCover
secondary to some other (prior) injury. The amendments that took effect on 1
July 2012 changed the terminology of “disability”
“secondary disability” to “injury” and “secondary
injury”, but did not change the definition
of each term and did not change
the law applying to those definitions.
definition of “injury” is set out in section 3(1) of the Act and
, in relation to a worker, means—
(a) any physical or mental injury including—
(i) loss, deterioration or impairment of a limb, organ or part of the body,
or of a physical, mental or sensory faculty; or
(ii) a disease; or
(iii) disfigurement; or
(b) where the context admits—the death of the worker,
and includes a secondary injury ...
definition of “secondary injury” is:
means an injury that is, or results from, the aggravation,
acceleration, exacerbation, deterioration or recurrence of a prior injury
all of the significant events referred to in the statement of agreed facts took
place before 1 July 2012, it is perhaps strictly
correct to refer to
disabilities and secondary disabilities in this case, but as the premium
assessment was made later and refers
to the 2012-2013 year, we will employ the
new terminology. As we have observed, it makes no difference.
Keam recognised that, to succeed, the applicant had the not inconsiderable task
of identifying the prior injury or disability.
He offered several
he noted that the injury is a mental injury governed by section 30A of the Act,
which deals with injuries “consisting
of an illness or disorder of the
mind” and is headed “Psychiatric injuries”. No suggestion was
made that any of
the disqualifying conditions set out by that section applied,
and in any event the time for making any such suggestion was when the
before the Tribunal.
Keam also noted that the worker was seeing her (then) general practitioner well
before the events of October 2011, but continued
to attend work well after those
events. It was only on 16 January 2012, a few days after she returned from an
overseas Christmas
break, that she went off work for the first time. He
contended that the focus should be on the events of January 2012, with her
injury then claimed seen as secondary to events in October 2011 or
acknowledged that the worker’s relationship with the manager was difficult
as early as 2009. She obtained medication for
anxiety, although telling her
doctor that she was anxious about the flying in small aircraft entailed in the
job. He said the applicant
accepts that it is not unusual for workers to lie
various doctors was otherwise generally consistent.
contended that “voicemails” received by the worker in January 2012
increased her concerns, and several other events
culminated in her leaving work
and seeing her general practitioner, who issued a prescribed medical certificate
of incapacity for
said medical opinion supported the view that her adjustment disorder had been
largely ameliorated by her holiday and aggravated
after her return in January
2012. He said it was a significant aggravation or a whole new adjustment
disorder in January 2012, and
it was not appropriate to argue that it was the
end point of a gradual deterioration. He said that the various events were
and that if section 43 was in play (psychiatric disabilities were
excluded from section 43 in 1993), the date of injury would be
set as 2012.
said the Panel ought to ask itself whether it was satisfied that the worker
suffered from an “illness or disorder of the
mind” or simply
vulnerability and reduced ability to cope.
Discussion and
worker’s (current) treating general practitioner, referred to in the
statement of agreed facts as Dr B, provided the worker’s
solicitors with a
medical report dated 26 April 2012. He prefaced it by saying “[t]he only
assumption I have made is that [the
worker] has been truthful.”
Unfortunately, we have not been supplied with the questions he was asked, but in
most cases the
questions may easily be inferred from the responses, which were
as follows:
“1. 17/01/2012; 31/01/2012; 15/02/2012;
28/02/2012. [
We take it that this was the response to a question about the
dates on which Dr B had seen the worker for her compensable condition.
“2. She fits the criteria for the diagnosis of an Adjustment Disorder
with Anxiety and Depression. I do not have a copy of DSM-IV.
DSM-IV is the
fourth edition of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
published by the American Psychiatric Association in 1994, with a
text revision in 2000. The current edition, DSM-5 (2013) no doubt
adopted by Australian workers compensation authorities in due course.
“3. She presented to me on 17/01/2012 telling me that she had been
sexually assaulted at a work function on 21/10/2011 by one
of her managers. She
said that she had been on leave since soon after the assault and that SAPOL were
investigating the incident
and charges were likely. On clinical assessment she
was clearly depressed and highly anxious and in need of further time off and
“4. On the evidence I have it is the only cause. Their reaction since
the claim has been far from helpful. [
We take it that “their”
refers to the applicant employer.
“5. Her treatment so far has been a referral to ... a clinical
psychologist, and the commencement of Escitalopram, a medication
that has helped
with both her anxiety and depression.
“6. It is my understanding that her assailant has resigned. If Business
SA begins to conduct themselves in a professional manner
in relation to [the
worker] then she is ready for work. Unfortunately I suspect this will not occur
and it is my understanding they
have terminated her employment thus
demonstrating again their complete lack of support for [the worker]. Clearly she
should be severed
from Business SA.
“7. Provided she has her day in court and finds suitable alternative
she will do well. She is resilient and well motivated.
She will always have the
sad and distasteful memories but she will handle them and move on.”
worker’s solicitors referred the worker to Dr C.W.J. Raeside, who
practises as a consultant forensic psychiatrist, for the
purpose of a
medico-legal report. That report is dated 11 May 2012.
the most significant portion of the report, from which Mr Keam sought to draw
comfort, appears under the heading “Effects
“[The worker] was unclear when she thought
that these issues started to affect her, notwithstanding she was clearly
from the beginning [2009]. She said that normally she had been
‘a bit of a worrier’ and initially when the inappropriate
were being made she worried, but did not think it actually affected her. She
would become quite stressed, particularly on
Friday nights after a weekly Friday
meeting at work in which [the manager] would generally ‘bully’ even
apart from sexually
inappropriate comments and behaviour. Although it was
‘hard to pinpoint’ [the worker] stated the onset of the significant
stress from about mid to late-2010 in which she found increasing difficulty
dealing with [the manager].
“However, it was not until after the assault in October 2011 that [the
worker] began to experience significant depressive and
anxiety symptoms. She had
difficulty sleeping, her appetite dropped, and she began to dream about all of
the things that had been
happening at work. Previously she was able to keep
things ‘in the back of my mind’ except for certain occasions that
she found particularly stressful. Her general practitioner had already been
giving her Alprazolam [
previously described in the report as a ‘minor
tranquiliser ... which she used on and off secondary to work stress’
at times when she would get particularly nervous and she seemed to take it more
so on Fridays. She reported significant anxiety
symptoms with ‘butterflies
and I would feel sick, but the medication would make me more relaxed before the
“[The worker] became quite tearful at this point of the interview and
apologetically said she had not spoken about these issues
for a while. In
retrospect she believed that the earlier harassment did not adversely affect her
work performance and she was still
able to perform her job well. However,
between October and December 2011 she was much more significantly affected. She
was reluctant
to go to work at all, had trouble concentrating, and even had
difficulty picking up the phone and calling people. As noted her appetite
dropped and she lost around 5 kg in weight. Although she did not realise it at
the time she now thought she had become increasingly
depressed. It was not until
January/February after she stopped work that she began to experience suicidal
thoughts as well.
“However, [the worker] said that after her employment was terminated in
April she was ‘surprisingly not too bad because
I was so used to it and I
kind of thought I didn’t want to go back there by then anyway’.
“In summary, [the worker] is a 38 year old woman with an unremarkable
past psychiatric history, who reported a breakdown of
her marriage in 2008,
after which she reported being relatively well and enjoying her new position at
work, until she began to experience
inappropriate sexual comments and behaviour
directed towards her by her immediate supervisor. She described a period of
anxiety during 2009 to 2011, in which she tried to ignore the
comments and sought some support amongst her colleagues who also were
victims of such behaviour. She was prescribed a minor tranquiliser for anxiety
symptoms, although the general practitioner
notes make no reference to any
workplace harassment, but rather only to problems flying.
“[The worker] did not prescribe [sic] any specific impairment in her
occupational or social functioning as a result of this
harassment (suggesting
that she did not develop an actual psychiatric disorder at that stage), until
after an incident in October
2011 when she reported being grabbed on the breast
by her supervisor and assaulted. Subsequently his behaviour towards her worsened
and she appears to have developed significant depressive and anxiety symptoms
which did impact on both her occupational and social
functioning. After a four
week period of holiday during which she hoped that things would simply be
better, she found that the situation
was much the same and finally ‘had
enough’ and spoke to her HR manager. She has not worked since and was
later terminated
with a confidential settlement. ...
“Based on the information available to me and from my interview with
[the worker] I could find no evidence that she actually
developed a psychiatric
disorder prior to October 2011, notwithstanding she reported experiencing stress
and anxiety symptoms during
the period 2009 to 2011 as a result of the workplace
difficulties arising out of the harassment from her supervisor.
“Subsequently she appears to have developed an Adjustment Disorder with
Mixed Anxiety and Depressed Mood, essentially a reactive
depressive and anxiety
state. Whilst this can be directly attributed to the sexual/indecent assault
upon her, I believe that this
needs to be seen in the context of significant
underlying vulnerability and decreased resilience due to the ongoing harassment
she received previously, as well as perpetuating and aggravating factors of
further untoward behaviour towards her in the workplace
subsequently. ...”
note that Dr Raeside had the benefit of Dr B’s report (above) and medical
notes from the general practice clinic that the
worker had been attending before
2012 (presumably supplied to him by the worker’s solicitors). However,
those notes seem not
to have been made available to the parties to these
proceedings and are not before us. We also note that the Corporation properly
wrote to the worker’s former general practitioner at that clinic on 24
December 2012 seeking a report, the response to which
“1. [The worker] consistently gave me the same history in her
consultations from 2009-2012, which was that of fear of flying.
As this seemed a
reasonable diagnosis, I gave her prescriptions for a minor tranquilliser without
asking any other questions. At
no time did she mention to me that she was having
sexual harassment issues at work. So yes, it would appear to be part of the same
injury process. She also requested prescriptions for the same drug from two of
my colleagues in 2008, claiming fear of sailing (she
claimed to be going on a
“2. There is nothing in our records which gives any indication of an
injury, let alone a prior one. ...”
the only account of the events at work between 2009 (when she joined the
applicant) and 2012 is the worker’s own,
as related in her own statement
and in the histories she has given to subsequent doctors. No suggestion has been
advanced that these
are not to be believed and, as we have noted, the applicant
accepts that it is not unusual for workers to lie about such matters
harassment to their doctors, making the worker’s account about her fear of
flying in small aircraft to country destinations
an understandable way of
obtaining the minor tranquiliser prescribed for her.
to the worker’s lodging of her claim, the claims agent also referred her
to a consultant psychiatrist for assessment
and report. The report of Dr J.A.
Fry dated 25 May 2012 is largely consistent, in our view, with the reports that
had gone before.
He concluded:
“[The worker] is a 38 year old
woman who gave an account of having felt uncomfortable by sexual remarks made by
[the manager]
since around early 2009. She reported being apprehensive to report
these comments as a result of observing another worker who had
reported them
finding her situation became more difficult leading to her resignation. [The
worker] gave a detailed account in her
statement of a range of sexual comments
and suggestive speech from [the manager] and in particular the incident of 21
October 2011
during which [she] stated [he] had grabbed her breasts and spoken
in a sexual manner to her while on a team night out. [She] described
several occasions in 2010/2011 to obtain anti-anxiety medication to assist her
to cope particularly if she were going away
on business trips with [him]. She
reported being able to switch off from these worries on weekends but feeling
anxious about going
to work on Sunday [sic] mornings. After having had a good
holiday over Christmas and New Year of 2011 which she was able to enjoy
hoped the situation would improve, she was contacted by [him] for a meeting with
him the first thing she got back. This appeared
to contradict her own work
program having a client already booked at that time. After that meeting [the
worker] felt that things
had not really changed, she became more distressed and
saw her HR manager at work and went home. She saw her general practitioner
commenced her on antidepressant medication and referred her to psychology and
she also made a statement to the police regarding
the assault which I understand
is under investigation. I understand from [the worker] that [the manager] was
stood down after her
complaint and had subsequently resigned from Business
“[The worker] has clearly suffered from intermittent anxiety in
relation to her interactions with [the manager] and I consider
she suffers from
an Adjustment Disorder with Depressed and Anxious Mood due to inappropriate
actions on the part of [the manager]
according to her account. There do not
appear to be any other contributing factors to her distress.”
the present proceedings were commenced, WorkCover appropriately sought
additional comments from Dr Raeside concerning the secondary
injury question. In
his supplementary report dated 14 January 2013, he denied “the
aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation,
deterioration or recurrence of a prior
injury” because:
“... I do not think she had a
psychiatric disorder prior to the assault. Rather the prior difficulties arising
out of the harassment
rendered her more vulnerable to the impact of the assault
upon her. In turn this was then exacerbated by the subsequent administrative
difficulties with the HR department, culminating in the termination of her
employment.
“I previously suggested that Dr [B]’s diagnosis of and [sic]
Adjustment Disorder with Mixed Anxiety and Depressed Mood
relates to the impact
of the assault and he provides no evidence that it was present previously.
“I note the psychiatric report of Dr Fry, which contains much the same
account as [the worker] provided to me. Although not
specifically stated he also
seems to indicate that the Adjustment Disorder with Mixed Anxiety and Depressed
Mood commenced after
the indecent assault, with some improvement after her
employment finished. ...
“As noted in my previous report and above it is my opinion that [the
worker] experienced stress in the workplace from 2009-2012,
producing underlying
psychological vulnerability. However, it was not until after the indecent
assault and subsequent administrative
action at work that she developed an
Adjustment Disorder with Mixed Anxiety and Depressed Mood. She might have
developed this anyway
had the earlier harassment not occurred, but I think the
previous harassment was particularly significant in the development of the
psychiatric disorder following the assault. The difficulties with her employer
subsequently further aggravated these problems.”
Panel has the task of drawing conclusions according to law. The opinions of
medical practitioners provide evidence on which those
conclusions may be based,
but do not dictate those conclusions (see Bright J,
(1978) 80 LSJS 165).
It is not to be presumed that medical
practitioners, however eminent in their own fields, understand the intricacies
of the tests
for secondary injuries. Some may, some may not. As Bray CJ said in
Ivkovic v. Rinaldi and Ivkovic
(1980) 25 SASR 516
“It must never be forgotten that, important as expert
medical opinion is, the law entrusts the responsibility of decision not
medical experts but to a judge. In discharging that responsibility a judge has a
great advantage of hearing all the evidence and,
in particular, of having the
veracity of a plaintiff tested in the witness box. He is not entitled to
abdicate the responsibility
of reaching his own conclusion on the whole of the
evidence as to the genuineness of a claim by reliance upon the opinions of
witnesses, however qualified they might be. When a judge has reached his
conclusion in this class of case which depends so much on
the veracity of the
plaintiff, an appellate court, in the absence of demonstrated misapprehension of
the evidence, will rarely intervene.”
the present case, of course, we are not judges. The Panel is an administrative
tribunal with, however, the undoubted obligation
to act judicially. All of the
evidence before us is on paper. There has been no testing of the veracity of
witnesses. However, we
have concessions from both parties, proper concessions in
our respectful opinion, that no challenge is made to the honesty of any
In our view, all of the medical evidence points to the conclusion that there are
no “prior injuries” to which
the worker’s subject mental
injury could be said to be secondary. There was a heightened vulnerability, but
no injury prior
to the incident of 21 October 2011. Even then, the injury
continued to develop and only became fully florid on the day she went off
in January 2012.
approach argued for by Mr Keam, of considering events sequentially and seeking
to identify one impact of the harassment as secondary
to another, seems to us
too artificial to be consistent with the “common sense evaluation of the
chain of events” spoken
of by Lander J, albeit in a slightly different
context, in
WorkCover v. Sherriff
(unreported, Supreme Ct
FC, S5831, 1.10.96)
; see also the
recent case
Bailey v. GMH
[2013] SAWCT 47.
In any event, none of the discrete
events occurring before 21 October 2011, even assuming they can fairly be viewed
discretely, led
to an injury or to contemporaneous incapacity. They were simply
part of a sustained course of conduct (as we find it) by the manager,
totality of which resulted in an injury and incapacity that manifested itself on
16 January 2012. Although the course of conduct
clearly reached its highest
point on 21 October 2012, the medical evidence indicates that the worker did not
suffer an injury that
day and, indeed, may not have done so had it stopped then.
When the conduct resumed after the worker’s return from holiday,
sustained the injury.
emphasise that the standard on which we reach our conclusions is the civil
standard of the
balance of probabilities
, not the standard of
reasonable doubt
that would have to be satisfied in the case of criminal
proceedings arising from the circumstances. For this reason, the result of
prosecution might be different.
acknowledge Dr Raeside’s statement in his supplementary report of 13
January 2013 that “[t]he difficulties with her
employer subsequently
further aggravated these problems”. Perhaps it might be thought the
implication of this statement is
that the worker had a short period of
incapacity attributable to the injury we find she sustained on 16 January 2012,
and that incapacity
thereafter was attributable to a secondary injury manifested
by an aggravation.
in context, in fact, Dr Raeside discusses the possibility of not two, but three
“phases” of the worker’s
“difficulties”:
“...the account she provided to me
indicated that she tried to ignore inappropriate comments from her manager in
2009, but problems
progressed, culminating in the indecent assault in 2011. As
such her account did not suggest two separate phases, but rather a continuation
and escalation of difficulties with her manager. However, she did not make a
formal complaint until after the assault, although she
had discussed the
problems with co-workers, some of whom were also likewise affected.
“[She] did seem to report a separate phase of these difficulties after
she made the complaint. Her manager reacted by making
things more difficult for
her in the workplace ... She referred to a ‘transition’ during the
Christmas break 2011-2012
in which she hoped things would get better. However,
the response from the HR department aggravated her psychological condition.
she was advised her manager had resigned she again was hopeful of improvement,
but things worsened after her employment was
terminated.
“From the foregoing, based on [the worker’s] account, there seem
to be two distinct phases, before and after the assault.
Perhaps there is a
third, following the manager’s resignation and then the termination of her
employment.”
attach no significance to the use by Dr Raeside of the word
“aggravated” from the point of view of establishing a secondary
injury; we think, with respect, that any such argument illustrates the danger we
referred to above (at [
abdicating to medical practitioners the responsibility for drawing legal
conclusions. Dr Raeside does not express a medical
opinion that there were
distinct injuries and his report does not amount to evidence of a secondary
injury subsequent to the claim
the worker completed on 17 January 2012. The
events he describes after that date seem to us to be no more than the
continuation of
a course of conduct by the employer, which seems to have handled
the situation poorly from 2009 onwards. There is no separate claim;
there are no
separate periods of incapacity. And Dr Raeside, properly understood, does not
suggest there were separate injuries,
one secondary to another.
seems unlikely that Parliament would have intended, in enacting the definition
of “secondary injury” in its present
terms, that an employer could
reduce its WorkCover premium by itself aggravating or exacerbating a
worker’s injury subsequent
to its occurrence (not that we should be taken
to find that this is what happened; it simply is not necessary, in our view, for
to make a finding on this topic).
are doubtful that reference to section 113 of the Act is particularly useful in
this case. That section
113—Injuries
that develop gradually
(1) An injury (not being noise induced hearing loss) that develops gradually
or is a disease will be taken to have occurred when
the worker first becomes
totally or partially incapacitated for work by the injury. ...
is a sense in which the worker’s Adjustment Disorder with Anxiety and
Depressed Mood developed gradually. The worker’s
increasing vulnerability
and decreasing resilience during the events of 2009-2011 could be seen as
harbingers of her eventual injury,
but not necessarily chapters in a gradual
development of it. It seems to us that the medical evidence is that, when it
mental injury came quite suddenly, on 16 January 2012. It is that
fact, rather than an application of section 113, that would lead
us to identify
that day as the date of injury, notwithstanding the importance of the events of
21 October 2011.
is no more than comforting that an application of section 113 would lead to the
our opinion, there is no basis for identifying the condition for which the
worker has received compensation as a secondary injury.
Accordingly,
we confirm the decision of WorkCover to include the worker’s claim as part
of the applicant employer’s claims
history and we dismiss the application
for review.
Determination
Pursuant to our delegated powers under section 72M of the Act, we confirm
WorkCover’s reviewable decision dated 15 August 2012.
To the extent that
we need to do so (to “reduce litigation and adversarial contests to the
greatest possible extent”
— see section 2(1)(f) of the Act), we also
confirm the hindsight premium decision dated 16 August 2013, at least insofar as
the issues discussed above are concerned.
Elisa Pecorelli
Deputy Member
Deputy Member
Of the Order’s 29
clauses, nine are numbered 1, necessitating the clumsy and repetitive recitation
of the “Part”
it appears in every time a clause is referred to. It
must be acknowledged the same inefficient drafting style is present in the
WorkCover Premium Review Panel Determination 2012
In fact, accepted by order of
the Workers Compensation Tribunal: the consent order of Conciliation Officer
Wakefield dated 11 December
2012 (page 41-2 of the book of documents) shows
clearly that the claims agent’s decision dated 7 June 2012 was set aside
the claim accepted on slightly different terms (the details of the variation
not being relevant to the matter before this Panel —
but it is worth
noting that the consent order was signed by the employer’s then
solicitor).
Not only is this
case not reported in print, unfortunately it is not available online; if it
were, the medium-neutral citation would
[1996] SASC 5831.
It is not to be
confused with
Sherriff v. WorkCover
[1999] SASC 517
apparently involves another worker with the same surname. Because of the limited
availability of the 1996 decision, we set
out the relevant portion of Lander
J’s judgment (Bollen and Nyland JJ agreeing) from pages 10-11 (emphasis
added by us):
“So also under the Act whether a disability is compensable is a matter
of fact and will be established if the worker proves
to the level of
satisfaction required, that is on the balance of probabilities (s31(1)) that it
arises from employment.
“A disability will not be compensable unless it is established that on
the balance of probabilities it arises from employment
(s31(1)). In some
circumstances the Act provides a presumption in the absence of proof to the
contrary ... In the case where there
is no statutory presumption it will be for
the Review Officer or Tribunal to decide whether the disability ‘arises
the employment in the differing ways predicated by s30 of the
“That evaluation will not commence and proceed as the Review Officer
directed herself
but is a factual inquiry, to be approached by a common sense
evaluation of the chain of events and at all times applying the words
to the medical condition as factually determined, so that the inquiry is
always relevant to a disability, disease or secondary disability
and whether any
of the particular conditions arise from employment.
“In applying that
common sense approach
the Tribunal of fact
will, on occasions, recognise that there is more than one event which might have
‘caused’ the disability.
In those circumstances it will still be a
question of fact whether the disability arises from employment. It is not, on
this legislation,
a question whether the employment was a material, proximate,
real, or an effective cause, but a question as to whether on the facts
the employment was significant enough to still be able to say that the proven
disability, whether a disability, secondary
disability or disease, arises from
that employment. It is sufficient in my opinion to adopt the plain meaning of
the words in the
Act without adding any descriptive adjectives to those words.
To determine a test which requires the proof by the worker that the
was the real cause, the effective cause or the material cause would be to
judicially amend the Act. Questions of causation
are matters of fact that
therefore, no test of causation needs to be propounded except that contained in
the Act itself.
“It will be the case, as Kirby P has predicted [in
Cement v. Bates
(1994) 35 NSWLR 452
10 NSWCCR 796]
, that subsequent
events will occur that break the causal chain between the disability and the
employment such that it can no longer
be said that the disability arises from
employment. When and if that occurs that will be determined as a matter of
“In all cases the tribunal of fact is simply called upon to establish
whether the facts, as established, allow it to be said
as a matter of common
that the disability proved (which includes a disability, secondary
disability or disease) arises from the employment as defined in
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (248 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter