URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCAT/1998/37.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:08:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Pasquale Mastrantone v Workcover Corporation v MMI Workers Compensation (SA) Ltd (Remm Constructions) [1998] SAWCAT 37 (17 December 1998)
WORKERS COMPENSATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
In the matter of an appeal by
PASQUALE MASTRANTONE
the worker, against
the determination of a
REVIEW OFFICER
dated the 6th day of February
1998, which also concerns
WORKCOVER CORPORATION/MMI WORKERS COMPENSATION
(SA) LTD (REMM CONSTRUCTIONS),
the employer.
(No. 11W of 1998)
Her Honour Deputy President Judge Parsons
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED THE 17TH DAY OF DECEMBER, 1998.
Appeal - Whether notional weekly earnings to be calculated based on earnings
at the commencement of the period of incapacity in 1991
or on earnings prior to
the commencement of the last period of incapacity in 1993 - Multiple employers
- Worker medically cleared
to perform same work - No ongoing partial incapacity
for work - Separate period of incapacity - Appeal dismissed -
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
Cases cited:
Philmac Pty. Ltd. v. Asti
(1980) 26 S.A.S.R. 213.
Arnotts Snack Products Pty. Ltd. v. Yacob
[1985] HCA 2
(1985) 155 C.L.R. 171.
Weichman v. Lovering
(1992) 59 S.A.S.R. 203.
(1996) 185 L.S.J.S. 230.
Appearances:
Mr. J. Warren (of counsel) for the Appellant.
Dr. P. Salu (of counsel) for the Respondent.
This is an appeal by the worker Pasquale Mastrantone against the decision of a
Review Officer dated 6 February 1998, whereby the
worker's average weekly
earnings for an incapacity for work commencing 1 December 1993 were set at
$506.50 and then reduced to 80%
or $405.20.
The somewhat long and complex background to the appeal is that the worker
sustained a right hernia injury on or about 15 May 1991
when he was working for
Remm Constructions (S.A.) Pty. Ltd. (`Remm'). He lodged a Notice of Disability
and Claim for Compensation
with the Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
Corporation (`WorkCover') on 28 May 1991. The claim was accepted and he
weekly payments of income maintenance for a period commencing in June
1991 when he underwent a hernia repair. On 30 December 1991
determined that his payments should be discontinued pursuant to
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
') on the basis
that he had ceased to be incapacitated by the compensable disability. The
notice advised that the weekly payments
would come to an end on 24 January
In the meantime, on 2 January 1992, the worker suffered a wound infection and
was certified unfit for work. He made a further claim
for income maintenance
and that claim was accepted for a closed period up to 7 February 1992.
The worker filed an application for review against this closed period
acceptance of his claim complaining in part about the rate
of his weekly
payments. This application for Review did not proceed as an agreement was
reached between the worker's solicitors and
WorkCover that his notional weekly
earnings be set at $804.30 based on his earnings at Remm and this figure was
applied to periods
of total incapacity between about 10 June 1991 to 7 February
As the Remm site closed down in June 1991, when the worker was certified fit
for work he applied for and obtained work elsewhere.
He commenced employment
with Saccardo Bros. where he worked for about 16 months earning $465.00 gross
per week as a general labourer.
In September 1993 he obtained similar work with
Forte Concrete Constructions Pty. Ltd. (`Forte') earning $500 per week.
During the time that he was employed by Forte, as a result of further
difficulties with the site of the hernia, he required further
medical treatment
and time off work from about December 1993. He made a further claim against
Remm on 1 December 1993. By letter
dated 16 March 1994 WorkCover rejected
the claim on the basis that it should have been made against Forte. The worker
filed an application
for Review against this determination. On 23 May 1994
Review Officer Sargent decided that the subject period of incapacity resulted
from the original disability sustained with Remm in May 1991. The parties were
given liberty to apply in relation to the setting
of notional weekly earnings.
At some time thereafter without going back to Review Officer Sargent,
WorkCover commenced making weekly payments of income maintenance
to the worker
at the rate of $465.50 per week. The worker also received a
determination dated 7 December 1994 advising that his new notional weekly
earnings after the reduction required by
section 35(1)(b)
would be $405.20. The
worker lodged an application for Review dated 24 February 1995 asserting that,
what he described as an oral
determination setting his notional weekly earnings
at $465.50 was not conveyed to him pursuant to the
. He also lodged an
application for special review requiring the calculation of his notional weekly
earnings. These matters were listed
before Review Officer Duigan who decided
that there had been no reviewable decision made in relation to the setting of
notional weekly
earnings. As to the application for expedited decision it was
determined that WorkCover should make a decision on this topic within
The determination that there had been no reviewable decision was the subject of
appeal to the Tribunal and by decision dated
22 July 1997 (A.58/1997) the
Tribunal decided that there was a reviewable decision and remitted that matter
and the application for
special review back to the Review Officer for
determination. That was duly done and it is this decision of Review Officer
dated 6 February 1998 setting the average weekly earnings at the rate of
$505.60 per week in respect of the incapacity commencing
in December 1993 which
is now the subject of this appeal.
The Review Officer identified the issue before him as to whether the worker's
average weekly earnings for this period of incapacity
following the recurrence
of December 1993 should be set at the rate previously agreed and applied to
earlier periods of incapacity,
namely $804.30 based on his earnings at Remm, or
at the rate he was earning for the period he was employed by Forte. He found
the subject period of incapacity for work followed a return to work after
the worker was medically cleared to do so, and that he
was back in the labour
market doing the same kind of labouring duties he had previously done. He also
found that the worker's earnings
were less in his employment with Saccardo Bros
and Forte than at Remm because that was what the market was then paying. In
he found that the worker had been a full time active member of the
workforce operating without restriction for nearly 2 years before
recurrence, and that therefore it was inappropriate when computing the quantum
of his average weekly earnings to have regard
`to the amounts that he was
earning in the earlier periods of incapacity' (Appeal Book p.397). He concluded
that `He has returned
to full time work on full duties and as such passed the
tests set in
Philmac v Asti
Arnotts v Yacob'
Pty. Ltd. v. Asti
(1980) 26 S.A.S.R. 213
Arnotts Snack Products Pty.
Ltd. v. Yacob
[1985] HCA 2
(1985) 155 C.L.R. 171).
It was argued by Mr.
, counsel for the worker, that the Review
Officer may have been influenced in this decision by wrongly concluding that
the disability
of December 1993 was a `recurrence' and hence a secondary
disability sustained in the course of his employment with Forte and for
reason applied the average weekly earnings in that employment. The decision of
the Review Officer does contain early reference
to the issue being `whether the
incapacity that arose while Mr. Mastrantone was working with Forte
Constructions resulted from work
with Forte Constructions or whether it was an
incapacity arising from the injury with Remm or whether it was both'. (Appeal
p. 392). That issue of causation was outside the scope of the Review
Officer's determination having already been determined by Review
Weichman v. Lovering (
1992) 59 S.A.S.R. 203).
Be that as it
may, on closer analysis of the Review Officer's ultimate conclusion, that
matter did not assume significance.
did not disagree with the Review Officer's finding that the
worker had returned to work and had essentially been performing normal
labouring duties from 1991 until the onset of the subject period of total
incapacity. However he argued that the Review Officer had
erred in regarding a
incapacity for work. He submitted
that the worker's evidence was capable of
supporting a finding of reduced physical capacity within the meaning of
Arnott v. Yacob
(supra) and that accordingly, on the authority of
(1996) 185 L.S.J.S. 230
, the average weekly
earnings had already been set. Furthermore he submitted that Dr.
the respondent's counsel at review, had conceded an ongoing partial incapacity
for work. Having considered the passages appearing
at pages 256-260 of the
Appeal Book, in the context of the argument presented by Dr.
not consider that there was a clear concession upon which the Review Officer
could act. As a consequence he was required to
proceed to determine the issues
on the basis of the evidence.
Once the worker made a claim for income maintenance in relation to the period
of total incapacity commencing in December 1993,
that the quantum of those weekly payments be determined. The payments are to be
equal to the worker's notional weekly earnings.
such earnings to be the worker's `average weekly earnings'. This expression is
to be `the average amount that the worker could
reasonably be expected to have earned for a week's work if the worker had not
disabled'. Although this is a prospective enquiry the
provides some
guidance as to how the amount of average weekly earnings may be determined.
Section 4(2)(b)(i)
provides that:-
`... the actual weekly earnings of the worker over a period of up to 12 months
before the relevant date may be taken into account'
The above reference to `the relevant date' is
`... a reference to the date of the commencement of the period of the worker's
incapacity for work or, where the worker has been
incapacitated for work as a
result of the same disability for a number of separate periods, a reference to
the date of the commencement
of the last such period of incapacity.'
(supra) the Chief Justice adopted the meaning
of incapacity contained in
(supra) as that referred
`... it refers to a physical incapacity for doing work, a reduced ability by
reason of a physical deficiency to sell work for wages
or a reduction of
saleability of labour (these are some of the expressions found in the
authorities) but recognises that a worker
may be working yet incapacitated for
His Honour spoke of a worker being able to earn an amount
`... such that the provisions under which weekly payments are calculated
produce no entitlement for a time, but there may remain
an underlying
incapacity for work." (supra p. 7)
If the worker here continued to be partially incapacitated for work from the
compensable disability throughout the time since 1991,
then the relevant date
for the purposes of calculating his weekly payments pursuant to
section 4(2)
would be May 1991. If however the worker had recovered from the incapacity at
some past point in time such that this latest period
of total incapacity is a
separate period then the relevant date for the setting of his weekly payments
would be 12 months prior to
the commencement of the last such period in
December 1993.
Whether the worker remained partially incapacitated from the compensable
disability sustained in May 1991 is a question of fact.
The Review Officer
turned his mind to this issue and applied
Yacob's Case
conclude that the worker had not continued to be partially incapacitated for
work by the compensable disability up to
December 1993, but rather that this
was a separate period of incapacity. He therefore set average weekly earnings
by applying the
worker's actual earnings for the 12 months preceding December
This conclusion is consistent with the evidence given by the worker that at
Saccardo Bros. and Forte he performed normal labouring
and concrete finishing
work on commercial building sites as he had previously done with Remm. He
described pain on certain movements
but did not give evidence of being
prevented by pain from carrying out any of the physical requirements of his job
with Saccardo
or Forte until the situation worsened in December 1993 when he
took time off work. His evidence of obtaining employment with two
builders performing this kind of work between mid-1992 and December 1993 also
supports a finding that he was not precluded
by any physical deficiency in the
kind of work he could accept in the labour market. Whilst there was a medical
certificate of his
general practitioner dated 1 March 1993 stating that he
was unable to continue with his present occupation as a labourer and suggesting
that he be given non-manual work, this was not consistent with the oral
evidence of the worker. Nor was it consistent with the medical
report of Dr.
Guirguis, dated 10 December 1993, that although the worker at times
modified the way in which he performed his duties,
he was not incapacitated for
It was essential to the decision in
(supra) that, although the
worker had returned to work, it was not his usual work and he had continued to
provide certificates of
incapacity in respect of the period of return to work.
There, it was said, that the return to work `merely masked' the continuance
an incapacity for work. The facts here do not support such a conclusion. The
Review Officer's decision was open to him on the
evidence and formed a proper
basis for the setting of notional weekly earnings as at the commencement of the
period of incapacity
for work in December 1993. It is not therefore necessary
for me to deal with the other arguments put by Mr.
I would therefore dismiss the appeal and confirm the decision of the Review
In accordance with the requirements of section 93 of the
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
the parties are notified that if a
party wishes to apply to the Full Supreme Court for leave to appeal against any
part of this decision
which raises a question of law, such appeal must be
instituted within one month after a party who is entitled to appeal receives
notice of this decision.
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are respectfully requested to note the provisions of the Supreme Court
Rules 96.04(a) and 97.05 which require that in the
event of an appeal a copy of
the Notice of Appeal filed in the Supreme Court is to be served upon `the
proper officer of the Court
or Tribunal below'.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (19.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter